SCHOOL OF WISDOM: OR, AMERICAN MONITOR. CONTAINING A COPIOUS COLLECTION OF
SUBLIME AND ELEGANT EXTRACTS, FROM THE MOST EMINENT WRITERS, ON MORALS,
RELIGION and GOVERNMENT.

We frequently fall into error and folly, not because the true principles of
action are not known, but because, for a time, they are not remembered. He may
therefore justly be numbered among the benefactors of mankind, who contracts
the great rules of life into short sentences, that may be easily impressed on
the memory, and taught by frequent recollection to recur habitually to the
mind. RAMBLER. PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED FOR MATTHEW CAREY, No. 118, MARKET-STREET.
1800. [ Copy-right secured.]

PREFACE.
THE selections of lessons for reading in schools now in use, are numerous, and
many of them contain excellent essays of various kinds. But in general, those
essays are too long, to be read at once; and when they are divided into parts,
and read at different times, it is obvious that the connection is entirely
broken, and that a great part of the advantages proposed to be derived from
reading are lost.

To obviate this objection, the volume now offered to the public, is
principally composed of short passages, each complete in itself, and
independent of the rest. When children read in classes, each may have an entire
subject.

To some of the extracts, it may perhaps be objected, that they are above the
understanding of youth: But it is believed their capacities are too frequently
under-rated; and that it often happens, through such a pernicious mistake, that
they spend their time in reading idle tales and stories, when they might be
employed in treasuring up a store of useful maxims to guide them through the
thorny path of life with safety and honor to themselves and advantage to the
community.

In making the selection, considerable pains have been taken. Many of the works
of the most celebrated writers have been carefully examined -- and numerous
passages adorn the work from Shakespeare, Dryden, Milton, Pope, Young, Watts,
Row, Addison, Swift, Brook, Fielding, Hervey, Johnson, Price, Montesquieu and
others of equal reputation. To familiarize the rising generation with the
perusal of such illustrious writers, can hardly fail to prove salutary.

The introduction of political sentiments into a work intended principally for
youth, will probably be censured by some persons. It may not therefore be
improper to offer the reasons that led to the adoption of this plan.

In countries where the established form of government is monarchy, most of the
elementary books used to instruct children in their native language, are
calculated to impress on their youthful minds, a prejudice in favor of the
existing order of things. National glory, (which means the spreading havoc and
destruction among other nations), the splendour of monarchy, and the advantages
of conquest, are displayed in the most captivating and glowing colors. This
system is the result of profound policy. An early bias is thus given to the
mind, which in most cases "grows with its growth," and often retains its
influence to the last stage of decrepitude.

And is not such a system at least as proper and necessary in this country as
elsewhere? Should not endeavors be used to impress on the rising generation, a
respect and reverence for the forms of government under which we live? Our
constitutions are all grounded on the rights of the citizens to liberty and the
security of property, and on the grand principle, that the officers of
government, legislative as well as executive, are all the agents of the people,
deputed to perform for them those functions which they cannot execute
themselves. In every one of them are recognized those grand and sublime truths,
the defense of which has rendered so many men illustrious in the English annals
-- those principles for which a Hampden struggled, and a Sydney bled --
those principles, in fine, which are to be found in a greater or less degree,
through the writings of the best men of all ages and nations.

On this ground, it is presumed that vast advantages must accrue from
subjecting to the perusal of youth, such a variety of elegant passages, tending
to show in the strongest light the advantages of liberty, of peace, of good
order -- the dignity of human nature -- to inspire an abhorrence of war -- and
to display its tremendous consequences, in all their native deformity, stripped
of the imposing gloss which artful and interested men have spread over them.

The names of the writers are generally given, partly as a tribute of gratitude
toward those whose writings have served to complete this work -- partly to
facilitate a comparison between the sentiments of men in different ages -- and
partly with a view of exciting the reader's curiosity to search into their
works complete. It is not pretended that a sublime truth can receive any
corroboration from the celebrity of the man who wrote it. The sentiment, that
The purest treasure mortal times afford,
Is spotless reputation. That away,
Men are but gilded loam or painted clay,
is an eternal axiom, and, whether sanctioned with the name of a Shakespeare or
a Dennis, must carry conviction to every correct mind. In like manner, the
position in page 240, -- No man is better born than another, unless he is born
with better abilities, and a more amiable disposition, needs not the prop of
Seneca's name to command assent.

With these few remarks this small work is submitted to the candor and
indulgence of the public, whose decision on its utility shall be acquiesced in
by the editor. He may have estimated too high the probable beneficial effects
of his labors. This is so common an error as to be perhaps a venial one. But
whatever may be its tendency or its success, he can never be deprived of the
solid satisfaction arising from a perfect consciousness of having used his most
earnest endeavors to promote the best interests of his fellow men.

M. C.
December 1, 1800.
CONTENTS.
AMBITION, Otway, Mallet, Spectator, Fielding, 27 Age, Dryden, Goldsmith,
Spectator, 30 Age and Youth, Johnson, 32 Actions, Francis, Spectator, 33
Advice, Sedley, Rambler, Spectator, 34 Affection, Young, 36 Anatomy, Spectator,
ib. Astonishment, Shakespeare, 37 Authority, Jephson, 38 Animals, Spectator,
ib. Author, Rambler, ib. Anger, Rambler, Watts, 39 AEtna, Dryden, 40 Astronomy,
Guardian, 41 Appearances, Rambler, 42 Avarice and Luxury, Spectator, 43
Avarice, Dryden, ib. Apothecary, Shakespeare, 44 Attachment, Goldsmith, ib.
Arrangement of Ideas, Watts, 45 Abstinence, Spectator, ib. Adulation,
Goldsmith, 46 Aristocracy and Despotism, Burke, 47 Adversity, Spectator,
Fielding ib. Affection, Tribute of Stern, 48 Affectation, Spectator, Fielding,
49 Admiration, Fielding, 50 Attention, Watts, ib. Agreeable Man, Spectator, 51
Agreeable in Company, Spectator, 52 Ass, the dead Stern, 53 Apprehensions,
Spectator, 55 Beggar, Johnson, 56 Birds, Beckingham, ib. Benevolence, Fielding,
57 Bees and Butterflies, Watts, ib. Beneficence, Fielding, ib. Bees, Dryden, 58
Blindness, Tate, 59 Beauty, Dryden, Sedley, Otway, Gay, Lisle, Shakespeare,
Stern, ib. Boar, Otway, Blackmore, Dryden, 61 Brave, Row, Martyn, Mallet,
Pope, 63 Blush, Dryden, ib. Birth, Johnson, Hill, Francis, Whitehead, Young,
ib. Blind Boy, Cibber, 65 Building, Young, ib. Clown, Dryden, 66 Camp, Glover,
ib. Cato, Addison, 67 Cleanliness, Spectator, ib. Character, Fielding, 68
Custom, Idler, Watts, Fielding, ib. Complaint, Johnson, 69 Churchyard, Watts,
Gray, 70 Country Life, Cowley, Cowper, 71 Country Maiden, Roscommon, 72
Contempt, Fielding, Johnson, 73 Congress of 1774, Barlow, ib. Care, Otway, 75
Censoriousness, Haywood, 76 Conversation, Guardian, Watts, 77 Clemency, Jones,
78 Compassion, Row, Tate, ib. Curiosity, Watts, Rambler, ib. Cruelty, Watts,
79 Conscience, Johnson, Fielding, ib. Content, Dryden, Blackmore, Stern,
Rambler, Spectator, Jacob, 80 Continence of Scipio, Thomson, 83 Courage,
Brook, Whitehead, 84 Court, Row, Mason, Montesquieu, Bolingbroke, Swift,
Churchill, 85 Coward, Shakespeare, Dryden, Hudibras, 87 Croisade, Thomson, ib.
Crown, Shakespeare, 88 Credulity, Watts, Idler, ib. Charitable Judgment, Watts.
90 Charity, Fielding, Guardian, 91 Confidence, Rambler, Idler, 92 Censure,
Spectator, ib. Complaisance, Rambler, Guardian. ib. Consolation, Rambler, 94
Criticism, Idler, ib. Cheerfulness, Spectator, 94 Cunning, Idler, 95 Causes of
War, Swift, Voltaire, Churchill, 96 Conquest, Churchill, Milton, 98 Conquerors,
Mercier, 99 Clergyman, Cowper, 101 Courts of Justice, Constitution of New
Hampshire, 102 Crimes and Punishments, ib. ib. Death, Irene, Rambler, Beaumont,
Dryden, Young, 103 Defamation, Stern, Shakespeare, 104 Dependence, Rambler,
105 Dogmatism, Watts, ib. Diffidence, Rambler, 106 Despotism, Montesquieu,
Helvetius, Bible, Knight, Gibbon, Cowper, Spirit of Despotism, ib. Dullness,
Life of Pope, 111 Dog, Goldsmith, 112 Duty, Prince of Abyssinia, ib. Duty and
Happiness, Barlow, ib. Delay, Rambler, 113 Drunkenness, Fielding, ib.
Deception, Rambler, 114 Despair, Fielding, Gay, ib. Dishonesty, Beller, 115
Distress, Wandesford, ib. Domestic Happiness, Cowper, Rambler, ib. Dissentions,
Burke, 117 Equality of Mankind, Constitutions, Fenelon, Dryden, Swift,
Rousseau, ib. Empire, Johnson, 119 Exercise, Rambler, ib. Education, Dryden,
Rambler, Spectator, 120 Error, Rambler, 121 Freedom, Gordon, Burke, Cowper,
Watts, Freneau, ib. Fly, Anonymous, 124 Frailty, Stern, ib. Fasting,
Anonymous, ib. Freeman, Cowper, 125 First Pair, Dwight, ib. 125 Frugality,
Rambler, 127 Favor, Fielding, ib. Forgiveness, Stern, Rambler, ib. Fame,
Shakespeare, Johnson, 128 Fate, Shakespeare, Dryden, ib. Fight, Howard, ib.
Flattery, Johnson, Marsh, Rambler, ib. Fortitude, Shakespeare, Dryden, Row,
Philips, 130 Fortune, Havard, Buckingham, Hudibras, Johnson, 131 Faction,
Spirit of Despotism, 133 Friend, Wandesford, Frowde, ib. Friendship, Savage,
Tracy, Havard, Fielding, Rambler, Idler, Goldsmith, 134 Filial Piety, Thomson,
Stern, 137 Fashion, Rambler, Young, ib. Fair of America, Humphreys, 138 False
Alarms, Spirit of Despotism, 139 Gentleness of Address, Watts, 140 Gallantry,
Kelly, 141 Gentleman, Johnson, ib. Glory, Savage, Thomson, ib. Good-Breeding,
Fielding, 142 God, Shakespeare, Chapman, Murphy, Row, Thomson, ib. Gaming,
Fielding, 145 Gratitude, Frowde, Lyllo, ib. Goodnature, Fielding, ib.
Government, Johnson, Rambler, Burke, Spirit of Despotism, Chipman, 146 Grave,
Martyn, 153 Greatness, Shakespeare, Tourneur, Beaumont, Tracy, Mallet, Young,
Rambler, Idler, 154 Gravity, Shakespeare, Young, 153 Great Ones, Spirit of
Despotism, 156 Grief, Addison, 157 Guilt, Haywood, Wandesford, Griffith, 158
Good Sense, Johnson, ib. Good Humor, Pope, Rambler, ib. Gaiety, Rambler,
Cowper, 160 Gypsies, Cowper, ib. Honesty, Martyn, Mallet, 161 Honor,
Shakespeare, Massinger, Otway, Halifax, Johnson, Pope, 162 Handsome and
deformed Leg, Franklin, 164 Happiness, Dryden, Row, Havard, Fielding, Johnson,
Idler, Goldsmith, 166 Husband, Fielding, 168 Heaven, Shirley, ib. Hope, Dryden,
Havard, Glover, Goldsmith, ib. Humility, Davenant, Derham, 169 Hypocrisy,
Stern, Fielding, Rambler, 170 Human Degradation, Barlow, ib. Health, Keate,
171 Human Life, Anonymous, ib. Hiring Soldiers, Spirit of Despotism, 172
Hereditary Power, Constitutions, 173 Human Nature, Spectator, ib Idleness,
Shakespeare, Rambler, Idler, 174 Improvement of reasoning Faculty, Watts, 175
Imprecation, Miller, 177 Intercourse with Mankind, Watts, 175 Imprisonment,
Shirley, 177 Ingratitude, Dryden, Madden, 178 Injustice, Havard, Fielding, ib.
Innocence, Shakespeare, Trap, Roscommon, Johnson, tb. Independence, Churchill,
Addison, Thomson, 179 Instruction of the People, Spirit of Despotism, 181
Informers, Burke, 182 Insult, Rambler, 183 Inveterate Abuses, Burke, ib.
Ill-breeding, Fielding, ib. 183 Integrity, Johnson, 183 Indian, Pope, 184
Ignorance, Johnson, Goldsmith, ib. Judge, Shakespeare, Nabb, 184 Juryman,
Cook, 185 Justice, Waller, Guardian, ib. Judgment, Rambler, 187 Jealousy of
Tyranny, Lee, ib. King, Shakespeare, Webster, Fountain, Hopkins, Row, Hill,
Dryden, Bolingbroke, Churchill, Burke, Cowper, Spirit of Despotism,
Montesquieu, Swift, Fenelon, Mirabeau, 188 Liberty of Conscience, De Thou,
Temple, Watts, Constitutions, Price, Mansfield, Godwin, Jefferson, Franklin,
Penn, 198 Liberty and Property, Hervey, 208 Liberty, Dryden, Addison, Thomson,
Havard, Hill, Brook, Cowper, Spirit of Despotism, Hume, ib. Life, Drydon,
Havard, 211 Lords, Cumberland, Goldsmith, Raynal, Burke, Bacon, Churchill,
Dryden, 212 Love, Dryden, Row, 215 Licentiousness, Spirit of Despotism, Price,
219 Luxury, Merry, Cowper, 217 Law, Hudibras, 219 Laws, Rousseau, Bacon, Burke,
Johnson, ib. Laws, ex post facto, Constitutions, 220 Liberty of the Press,
Constitutions, Gordon, Hume, 221 Men, Dryden, Pope, Stern, Barlow, Spectator,
223 Mediocrity, Otway, Cowley, 228 Mercy, Shakespeare, Stern, ib. Monarch,
Cibber, 230 Magnanimity, ib. Manners, Johnson, Burke, ib. Militia,
Constitutions, Washington, 231 Military Power, Spirit of Despotism,
Constitutions, Washington, 233 Modesty, Mercier, 235 Magistrates, Spirit of
Despotism, Constitutions, ib. Ministers of State, Swift, Godwin, Mandeville,
Montesquieu, Sewell, 236 Nobility, Row, Stephenson, Dryden, Seneca, Spirit of
Despotism, 23^ Nature and Art, Pope, 242 Negligence, Johnson, ib. Natural
Aristocracy, Spirit of Despotism, ib. Non resistance, Constitutions, 243
Nature, Spectator, ib. Oppression, Burke, 244 Oaths, Bible, Shakespeare,
Raynal, ib. 244 Old Soldier, Fentham, 246 Primogeniture, Spirit of Despotism,
ib. Passion, Barford, 247 Patience, Mallet, Rambler, ib. Patriotism, Whitehead,
Burke, 248 Peace, Thomson, Burke, Pope, 249 Persecution, Row, Blackmore,
Burke, 251 Pity, Johnson, Stern, Rambler, 252 Poverty, Rambler, Idler, 253
Pride, Pope, 254 Providence, Gowper, 255 Philosophy, Johnson, Spirit of
Despotism, ib. Physic, Dryden, 257 Promises, Fielding, 258 Pride, Stern,
Fielding, Young, ib. Partiality, Fielding, 259 Patronage, Idler, 260
Profession, Fielding, ib. Praise, Rambler, Life of Pope, ib. Prudence,
Fielding, ib. Peevishness, Rambler, 261 Prodigality, Johnson, ib. Politeness,
Rambler, ib. Private Vices, Barlow, 262 Population, Barlow, ib Political
Discussion, Spirit of Despotism, 263 Religion, Miller, Young, Blackmore, 264
Resolution, Rambler, 266 Riches, Fielding, Rambler, Idler, Young, ib. Raillery,
Fielding, 269 Reputation, Shakespeare, ib. Resignation, Brown, Fielding, ib.
Ridicule, Rambler, 270 Recruiting, Spirit of Despotism, ib. Rotation of Office,
Constitutions, 271 Rustic Felicity, Stern, ib. Rights of Man, Raynal,
Constitutions, 272 Rich and Poor, Paley, Burke, Godwin, Crabbe, 276
Reformation, Burke, 280 Rose, Watts, 281 Rule of Life, Daddridge, ib.
Retrospect of Life, 282 Riots, Spirit of Despotism, ib. Scandal, Havard,
Stern, Fielding, 283 Shame and Disgrace, Stern, 284 Self Importance, Johnson,
Spirit of Despotism, 285 Secrets, Rambler, ib. Society, Burke, 286 Seduction,
Rambler, 287 Secker, ib. Suspicion, Rambler, ib. Spies, Spirit of Despotism,
ib. Tyranny, Burke, 289 Tyrant, Row, Burke, ib. Time Past, Idler, 290 Titles,
Spirit of Despotism, Spectator, 291 Trifles, Rambler, ib. Taxation, Burke, 292
Truth, Idler, ib. Toleration, Burke, ib. Tenderness to Animals, Cowper, ib.
Today and tomorrow, 294 Virtue, Rambler, 295 Vanity, Young, ib. Vice, Pope,
296 Usurper, Hudibras, ib. War, Johnson, Fenelon, Voltaire, Young, Porteus,
Machiavel, Swift, ib. Whistle, Franklin, 300 Wisdom, Fielding, 302 Want,
Dryden, 303 Wit, Young, ib. Youth, Porteus, Rambler, 304
American Monitor.
OF ELOCUTION.
ELOCUTION is a branch of oratory, the power and importance of which is greater
than is generally thought; insomuch that eloquence takes its name from it.
Eloquentia ab eloqui. I use the word Elocution here in its common and vulgar
sense, to signify utterance, delivery, or pronunciation, in which sense we
frequently use it in the English language, and which its Latin etymology very
well justifies; though I know some good writers apply to it a different idea, in
conformity to the sense in which the Latin orators used the word elocutio. But
it is no uncommon thing for derivative words in one language to be taken in a
different sense from that, in which the words they are derived from are taken
in another.


It was much cultivated by Quintilian, and before him by Cicero, and before him
by M. Antonius; but before his time, it was too much neglected by the Roman
orators: Which made him say, "he had seen many men famous for eloquence, but
not one of them that understood elocution."

But what stress was laid upon it by the Greek orators, appears from that
celebrated saying of Demosthenes; who being asked, what was the first principal
thing in oratory? answered, Pronunciation; being asked again, what was the
second? replied, Pronunciation. And what was the third? Pronunciation. Denoting
that in his judgment the whole art, spirit, and power of oratory consisted in
this.

Cicero, and after him Quintilian, divided oratory into five parts: 1.
Invention -- by which we provide ourselves with suitable and sufficient
materials for a discourse. 2. Disposition -- by which they meant the division
of their subject into parts and sentences, according to the most natural order;
and consequently the proper distribution and arrangement of their ideas. 3.
Elocution -- by which they always meant, what we call Diction; which consists
in suiting our words to our ideas, and the style to the subject. 4. Memory, or
a faculty of clearly discerning and retaining our ideas, and of calling to mind
the properest words by which to express them. 5. Pronunciation; or the art of
managing the voice and gesture in speaking.

So that by pronunciation, the ancients understood both Elocution and Action;
and comprehended in it the right management of the voice, looks, and gesture.
To the former of these, viz. the right management of the voice in reading or
speaking; which is indifferently called by us, Elocution and Pronunciation, I
shall here confine myself.

The great design and end of a good pronunciation is, to make the ideas seem to
come from the heart; and then they will not fail to excite the attention and
affections of those that hear us: from which the great benefit and usefulness
of this too much neglected art may be seen.

OF BAD PRONUNCIATION.
The several faults of pronunciation are these following:

1. When the voice is too loud.

This is very disagreeable to the hearer, and very inconvenient to the speaker.

It will be very disagreeable to the hearers, if they be persons of good taste:
who will always look upon it to be the effect either of ignorance or
affectation.

Some will impute it to your ignorance, and suppose that you were never
instructed better since you left the reading school; where children generally
get a habit of reading in a high-pitched key, or a uniform elevated voice,
without any regard to emphasis, cadence, or a graceful elocution.

Others will impute it to affectation; or a design to work upon their passions;
which will immediately defeat the design, if you had it. For if you would
effectually move the passions, you must carefully conceal your intention so to
do; for as soon as the mind perceives you have such a design upon it, it will
be upon its guard. However, none but the most low, weak, and mechanical minds
will be affected with mere dint of sound and noise. And the passions so raised,
leave no lasting or valuable effects upon the mind, and answer no good purpose
or end; because the understanding has nothing to do with such impressions, and
the memory no handle by which to retain or recall them. Not to say, it often
answers a bad end; affects the mind in a wrong place, and gives it a false
bias. However this may be thought to become the stage or the bar, it least of
all befits the pulpit; where all ought to be solemn, serious, rational, and
grave as the subjects there treated of.

It is false oratory then to seek to persuade or affect by mere vehemence of
voice. A thing that has been often attempted by men of mean furniture, low
genius, or bad taste, among the ancients as well as the moderns. A practice
which formerly gave the judicious Quintilian great offense; who calls it not
only clamouring, but furious bellowing; not vehemence, but downright violence.

Besides, an overstrained voice is very inconvenient to the speaker, as well as
disgustful to judicious hearers. It exhausts his spirits to no purpose; and
takes from him the proper management and modulation of his voice according to
the sense of his subject; and, what is worst of all, it naturally leads him
into a tone.

Every man's voice indeed should fill the place where (...) ^eaks; but if it
exceed its natural key, it will be (...) sweet nor soft, nor agreeable, because
he will not be able to give every word its proper and distinguishing sound.

2. Another fault in pronunciation is when the voice is too low.

This is not so inconvenient to the speaker, but is as disagreeable to the
hearer, as the other extreme. And inde^^ to the generality of hearers a too low
voice is much more displeasing than a too loud one; especially to those who are
troubled with an impediment in hearing, and those who are best pleased with a
lively and pathetic address, as most are. It is always offensive to an audience
to observe any thing in the reader or speaker that looks like indolence or
inattention. The hearer will never be affected whilst he sees the speaker
indifferent.

The art of governing the voice consists a good deal in dexterously avoiding
these two extremes: at least, this ought to be first minded. And for a general
rule to direct you herein, I know of none better than this -- carefully to
preserve the key, that is, the command of your voice; and at the same time, to
adapt the elevation and strength of it to the condition and number of the
persons you speak to, and the nature of the place you speak in. -- It would be
altogether as ridiculous in a general who is haranguing an army to speak in a
low and languid voice, as in a person who reads a chapter in a family to speak
in a loud and eager one.

3. Another fault in pronunciation is a thick, hasty, cluttering voice.

This is, when a person mumbles, or clips, or swallows his words, that is,
leaves out some syllables in the long words, and never pronounces some of the
short ones at all; but hurries on without any care to be heard distinctly, or
to give his words their full sound, or his hearers the full sense of them.

This is often owing to a defect in the organs of speech, or a too great
flutter of the animal spirits; but oftener to a bad habit uncorrected.

Demosthenes, the greatest orator Greece ever produced, had, it is said,
nevertheless, three natural impediments in pronunciation; all which he
conquered by invincible labor and perseverance. One was a weakness of voice;
which he cured by frequently declaiming on the seashore, amidst the noise of
the waves. Another was a shortness of breath; which he mended by repeating his
orations as he walked up a hill. And the other was the fault I am speaking of;
a thick mumbling way of speaking; which he broke himself of by declaiming with
pebbles in his mouth.

4. Another fault in pronunciation is when persons speak too quick.

There is scarce any fault more common than this, especially among young
persons, who imagine they can read very well, and are not afraid of being
stopped in their carreer by the unexpected intervention of any hard word. And
scarce any bad habit of the voice is conquered with more difficulty; though one
would imagine nothing is more easy.

This manner of reading may do well enough when we are examining leases;
perusing indentures; or reciting acts of parliament, where there is always a
great superfluity of words; or in reading a newspaper, where there is but
little matter that deserves our attention; but is very improper in reading
books of devotion and instruction, and especially the sacred scriptures, where
the solemnity of the subject or the weight of the sense demands a particular
regard. But it is most of all inexcusable to read forms of prayer in this
manner as acts of devotion.

The great disadvantage which attends this manner of pronunciation, is, that
the hearer loses the benefit of more than half the good things he hears, and
would fain remember, but cannot. And a speaker should always have a regard to
the memory, as well as the understanding, of his hearers.

5. It is also a fault to speak too slow.

Some are apt to read in a heavy, droning, sleepy way; and through mere
carelessness make pauses at improper places. This is very disagreeable. But to
hem, hauk, sneeze, yawn, or cough, between the periods, is vastly more so.

A too slow elocution is most faulty in reading trifles that do not require
attention. It then becomes tedious. A person that is addicted to this slow way
of speaking should always take care to reward the hearer's patience with
importan^ sentiments, and compensate the want of words by a weight of thoughts;
and give his discourse its proper quantity of solid sense, that, as we say,
what it wants in length it may make out in breadth.

But a too slow elocution is a fault very rarely to be found, unless in aged
people, and those who naturally speak so in common conversation. And in these,
if the pronunciation be in all other respects just, decent, and proper; and
especially if the subject be weighty or intricate, it is very excusable.

6. An irregular or uneven voice, is a great fault in reading.

That is, when the voice rises and falls by fits and starts, or when it is
elevated and depressed unnaturally, or unseasonably, without regard to sense or
stops; or always beginning a sentence with a high voice, and concluding it with
a low one, or vice versa; or always beginning and concluding it with the same
key. Opposite to this is.

7. A flat, dull, uniform tone of voice, without emphasis or cadence, or any
regard to the sense or subject of what is read.

This is a habit, which children who have been used to read their lessons by
way of task, are very apt to fall into, and retain as they grow up, such a
monotony as attorney's clerks read in, when they examine an engrossed deed.
This is a great infelicity when it becomes habitual; because it deprives the
hearer of the greatest part of the benefit or advantage he might receive by a
close attention to the most weighty and interesting parts of the subject, which
should always be distinguished or pointed out by the pronunciation -- For a
just pronunciation is a good commentary.

Lastly, the greatest and most common fault of all is reading with a tone.

No habit is more easy to be contracted than this, or more hard to be
conquered. This unnatural tone in reading and speaking is very various; but
whatever it be, it is always disgustful to persons of delicacy and judgment.

Some have a womanish squeaking tone; which, persons whose voices are shrill
and weak, and overstrained, are very apt to fall into.

Some have a singing or canting tone, which Enthusiastic speakers generally
much affect, and by which their hearers are often much affected. Others affect
a high, swelling, theatrical tone; who being ambitious of the fame of fine
orators, lay too much emphasis on every sentence, and thereby transgress the
rules of true oratory.

Others affect an awful and striking tone, attended with solemn grimace, as if
they would move you with every word, whether the weight of the subject bear
them out or not. This is what persons of a gloomy or melancholy cast of mind
are most apt to give into.

Some have a set uniform tone of voice; which I have already taken notice of.
-- Others, an odd, whimsical, whining tone, peculiar to themselves, and not to
be described -- only that it is laying the emphasis on words which do not
require or deserve it.

It must be acknowledged, there are some kinds of tone which, though unnatural,
yet, as managed by the speakers, are not very disagreeable -- and the mind must
be much on its guard that can remain unmoved thereby.

When I have been affected with hearing orators deliver common or obscure
sentiments in such a striking tone, I have endeavored carefully to examine
into the true reason of that emotion, or what it was that excited that
affection in my mind; and have found that it could not arise from the mere tone
of the speaker -- which of itself was unnatural and disagreeable -- nor from
the weight of the subject -- which was no more than common -- but from the
earnestness, life and solemnity with which he spoke, and his appearing himself
to be much affected with what he delivered; which two things will never fail to
move an audience. And why they may not be as well observed and practiced
without a tone as with one, I cannot conceive. And without these a tone itself
would have no power to move; as it has no other subserviency to raise the
passions than as it solemnizes the subject, and seems to show the speaker's
heart engaged. Pity that those two ends (...) not be answered by a better
means! and that a bad habit in the speaker, indulging a false taste in the
hearers, should secure one great end of oratory by that which is the greatest
abuse of it!

Our next enquiry is

HOW TO AVOID A BAD PRONUNCIATION.
To this end the few following rules may be of service.

1. If you would not read in too loud or too low a voice, consider whether your
voice be naturally too low or loud; and correct it accordingly in your ordinary
conversation: by which means you will be better able to correct it in reading.
If it be too low, converse with those that are deaf; if too loud, with those
whose voices are low. Begin your periods with an even moderate voice, that you
may have the command of it, to raise or fall it as the subject requires.

2. To cure a thick confused cluttering voice, accustom yourself, both in
conversation and reading, to pronounce every word distinct and clear. Observe
with what delib^ration some converse and read, and how full a sound they give
to every word; and imitate them. Do not affect to contract your words, as some
do, or run two into one. This may do very well in conversation, or in reading
familiar dialogues, but is not so decent in grave and solemn subjects;
especially in reading the sacred scriptures.

It appears from Demosthenes's case, that this fault of pronunciation cannot be
cured without much difficulty, nor will you find his remedy effectual without
pains and perseverance.

3. To break a habit of reading too fast, attend diligently to the sense,
weight, and propriety of every sentence you read, and of every emphatical word
in it. This will not only be an advantage to yourself, but a double one to your
hearers; for it will at once give them time to do the same, and excite their
attention when they see yours is fixed. A solemn pause after a weighty thought
is very beautiful and striking. A well timed stop gives as much grace to speech
as it does to music. Imagine that you are speaking to persons of slow and
unready conceptions; and measure not your hearer's apprehension by your own. If
you do, you may possibly outrun it. And as in reading you are not at liberty
to repeat your words and sentences, that should engage you to be very
deliberate in pronouncing them, that their sense may not be lost. The ease and
advantage that will arise both to the speaker and hearer, by a free, full, and
deliberate pronunciation is hardly to be imagined.

I need lay down no rules to avoid a too slow pronunciation; that being a fault
which few are guilty of.

4. To cure an uneven, desultory voice, take care that you do not begin your
periods either in too high or too low a key; for that will necessarily lead you
to an unnatural and improper variation of it. Have a careful regard to the
nature and quantity of your points, and the length of your periods; and keep
your mind intent on the sense, subject, and spirit of your author.

The same directions are necessary to avoid a monotony in pronunciation, or a
dull, set, uniform tone of voice. For if your mind be but attentive to the
sense of your subject, you will naturally manage and modulate your voice
according to the nature and importance of it.

Lastly, To avoid all kinds of unnatural and disagreeable tones, the only rule
is to endeavor to speak with the same ease and freedom as you would do on the
same subject in private conversation. You hear no body converse in a tone;
unless they have the uncouth accent of some other country, or have (...) into a
habit of altering the natural key of their voice when they are talking of some
serious subject in religion. But I can see no reason in the world, that when in
common conversation we speak in a natural voice with proper accent and
emphasis, yet as soon as we begin to read, or talk of religion, or speak in
public, we should immediately assume a stiff, awkward, unnatural tone. If we
are indeed deeply affected with the subject we read or talk of, the voice will
naturally vary according to the passion excited; but if we vary it unnaturally,
only to seem affected, or with a design to affect others, it then becomes a
tone, and is offensive.

In reading then attend to your subject, and deliver it just in such a manner
as you would do if you were talking of it. This is the great, general and most
important rule of all; which, if carefully observed, will correct not only this
but almost all the other faults of a bad pronunciation; and give you an easy,
decent, graceful delivery, agreeable to all the rules of a right elocution. For
however apt we are to transgress them in reading, we follow them naturally and
easily enough in conversation. And children will tell a story with all the
natural graces and beauties of pronunciation, however aukwardly they may read
the same out of a book.

OF GOOD PRONUNCIATION.
A good pronunciation in reading, is the art of managing and governing the
voice so as to express the full sense and spirit of your author in that just,
decent and graceful manner, which will not only instruct but affect the
hearers; and will not only raise in them the same ideas he intended to convey,
but the same passions he really felt. This is the great end of reading to
others, and this end can only be attained by a proper and just pronunciation.

And hence we may learn wherein a good pronunciation in speaking consists;
which is nothing but a natural, easy, and graceful variation of the voice,
suitable to the nature and importance of the sentiments we deliver.

A good pronunciation in both these respects is more easily attained by some
than others; as some can more readily enter into the sense and sentiments of an
author, and more easily deliver their own, than others can; and at the same
time have a more happy facility of expressing all the proper variations and
modulations of the voice than others have. Thus persons of a quick
apprehension, and a brisk flow of animal spirits (setting aside all impediments
of the organs) have generally a more lively, just, and natural elocution than
persons of a slow perception and a flegmatic cast. However, it may in a good
degree be attained by every one that will carefully attend to and practice
those rules that are proper to acquire it. Which leads me therefore to consider

HOW A GOOD PRONUNCIATION IS TO BE ATTAINED.
To this end the observation of the following rules is necessary.

Have a particular regard to Pauses, Emphasis, and Cadence.

OF PAUSES.
WITH respect to pauses, you will in a great measure in reading be directed by
the common stops or points, viz. Comma (,) -- Semi-colon (;) -- Colon (:) --
Period (.) -- Interrogation (?) -- and Admiration (!).

These points serve two purposes -- to distinguish the sense of the author, and
-- to direct the pronunciation of the reader. -- A comma stops the voice, while
we may privately tell one -- a semi-colon, two -- a colon, three -- and a
period, four.

To break a habit of taking breath too often in reading, accustom yourself to
read long periods, such as the sixteen first lines in Milton's Paradise Lost.

After some weighty and important sentiment, it will be proper to make a longer
pause than ordinary; and especially toward the close or application of a
discourse: -- these long pauses are very proper; as they at once compose and
affect the mind, and give it time to think. It will also be very helpful to the
speaker's voice; and give his pronunciation the advantage of variety, which
(...) always pleasing to the hearers.

OF EMPHASIS.
THE next thing to be regarded in reading is the Emphasis; and to see that it
be always laid on the emphatical word.

When we distinguish any particular syllable in a word with a strong voice, it
is called Accent; when we thus distinguish any particular word in a sentence,
it is called Emphasis; and the word to distinguished the Emphatical word. And
the emphatical words (for there are often more than one) in a sentence, are
those which carry a weight or importance in themselves, or those on which the
sense of the rest depends; and these must always be distinguished by a fuller
and stronger sound of voice, wherever they are found, whether in the beginning,
middle, or end of a sentence. Take for instance those words of the satirist.
Get place and wealth, if possible, with grace,
If not, by any means get wealth and place.
POPE. In these lines the emphatical words are accented; and which they are,
the sense will always discover.

Some sentences are so full and comprehensive, that almost every word is
emphatical: For instance, that pathetic expostulation in the prophecy of
Ezekiel, Why will ye die! In this short sentence, every word is emphatical, and
on which ever word you lay the emphasis, whether the first, second, third, or
fourth, it strikes out a different sense, and opens a new subject of moving
expostulation.

Some sentences are equivocal, as well as some words; that is, contain in them
more senses than one; and which is the sense intended can only be known by
observing on what word the emphasis is laid. For instance -- "Will you ride to
town today?" -- This question is capable of being taken in four different
senses, according to the different words on which you lay the emphasis. If it
be laid on the word you, -- the answer may be -- "No, but I intend to send my
servant in my stead." -- If the emphasis be laid on the word ride -- the proper
answer might be -- "No, I intend to walk it." -- If you place the emphasis on
the word town -- it is a different question; and the answer may be -- "No, for
I design to ride into the country" -- And if the emphasis be laid upon the
words today -- the sense is still something different from all these; and the
proper answer may be -- "No, but I shall tomorrow" -- Of such importance
oftentimes is a right emphasis, in order to determine the proper sense of what
we read or speak.

The voice must also express, as near as may be, the very sense or idea
designed to be conveyed by the emphatical word; by a strong, rough, and
violent, or a soft, smooth, and tender sound.

Thus the different passions of the mind are to be expressed by a different
sound or tone of voice. Love, by a soft, smooth, languishing voice; -- Anger,
by a strong, vehement, and elevated voice; -- Joy, by a quick, sweet, and clear
voice; -- Sorrow, by a low, flexible, interrupted voice; -- Fear, by a
dejected, tremulous, hesitating voice; -- Courage has a full, bold, and loud
voice; -- and Perplexity, a grave, steady, and earnest one. In Exordiums the
voice should be low; -- in Narrations, distinct; -- in Reasoning, slow; -- in
Persuasion, strong; it should thunder in Anger -- soften in Sorrow -- tremble
in Fear -- and melt in Love.

The variation of the emphasis must not only distinguish the various passions
described, but the several forms and figures of speech in which they are
expressed.

In a Prosopopae^a, we must change the voice as the person introduced would.

In an Antithesis, one contrary must be pronounced louder than the other.

In a Climax, the voice should always rise with it.

In Dialogues, it should alter with the parts.

In Repetitions, it should be loudest in the second place.

Words of quality and distinction, or of praise or dispraise, must be
pronounced with a strong emphasis.

No emphasis, is better than a wrong or misplaced one. For that only perplexes;
this always misleads the mind of the hearer.

OF CADENCE.
THIS is directly opposite to emphasis. Emphasis is raising the voice, cadence
is falling it; and when rightly managed is very musical. Beside cadence of
voice, there is cadence of style -- That is, when the sense being almost
expressed and perfectly discerned by the reader, the remaining words, which are
only necessary to complete the period, gently fall of themselves, without any
emphatical word among them. If our author's language be pure and elegant, his
cadence of style will naturally direct the cadence of voice.

Cadence generally takes place at the end of a sentence; unless it closes with
an emphatical word.

Every parenthesis is to be pronounced in cadence; that is, with a low voice,
and quicker than ordinary; that it may not take off the attention too much from
the sense of the period it interrupts. But all apostrophes and prosopopaeias
are to be pronounced in emphasis.

OBSERVATIONS.
IF you would acquire a just pronunciation in reading, you must not only take
in the full sense, but enter into the spirit of your author: For you can never
convey the force and fullness of his ideas to another, till you feel them
yourself. No man can read an author he does not perfectly understand and taste.
The great rule which the masters of rhetoric so much press, can never enough be
remembered; that to make a man speak well, and pronounce with a right emphasis,
he ought thoroughly to understand all that he says, be fully persuaded of it,
and bring himself to have those affections which he desires to infuse into
others. He that is inwardly persuaded of the truth of what he says, and that
has a concern about it in his mind, will pronounce with a natural vehemence
that is far more lovely than all the strains that art can lead him to. An
orator must endeavor to feel what he says, and then he will speak so as to make
others feel it.


The same rules are to be observed in reading poetry and prose: Neither the
rhyme nor the numbers should take off the attention from the sense and spirit
of the author. It is this only that must direct the pronunciation in poetry as
well as prose. When you read verse, you must not at all favor the measure or
rhyme; that often obscures the sense and spoils the pronunciation: For the
great end of pronunciation is to elucidate and heighten the sense; that is, to
represent it not only in a clear, but a strong light. Whatever then obstructs
this is carefully to be avoided, both in verse and prose. Nay, this ought to be
more carefully observed in reading verse than prose; because the author, by a
constant attention to his measure and rhyme, and the exaltation of his
language, is often very apt to obscure his sense; which therefore requires the
more care in the reader to discover and distinguish it by the pronunciation.
And if when you read verse with proper pause, emphasis, and cadence, and a
pronunciation varied and governed by the sense, it be not harmonious and
beautiful, the fault is not in the reader but the author. And if the verse be
good, to read it thus will improve its harmony; because it will take off that
uniformity of sound and accent which tires the ear, and makes the numbers heavy
and disagreeable.

Another important rule to be observed in elocution is -- study Nature. -- By
this I mean your own natural dispositions and affections. And those subjects
that are most suitable to them, you will easily pronounce with a beautiful
propriety: and to heighten the pronunciation, the natural warmth of the mind
should be permitted to have its course under a proper rein and regulation.

Study the natural dispositions and affections of others. For some are much
more easily impressed and moved one way, and some another. And an orator should
be acquainted with all the avenues to the heart.

Study the most easy and natural way of expressing yourself, both as to the
tone of voice and the mode of speech. And this is best learned by observations
on common conversation -- where all is free, natural, and easy -- where we are
only intent on making ourselves understood, and conveying our ideas in a
strong, plain, and lively manner, by the most natural language, pronunciation
and action. And the nearer our pronunciation in public comes to the freedom and
ease of that we use in common discourse -- provided we keep up the dignity of
the subject, and preserve a propriety of expression -- the more just, natural,
and agreeable it will generally be.

Above all things, then, study nature -- avoid affectation -- never use art, if
you have not the art to conceal it. For whatever does not appear natural, can
never be agreeable, much less persuasive.

Endeavor to keep your mind collected and composed -- Guard against that
flatter and timidity of spirit, which is the common infelicity of young, and
especially bashful persons, when they first begin to speak or read in public.
This is a great hindrance both to their pronunciation and invention; and at
once gives both themselves and their hearers an unnecessary pain. It will by
constant opposition wear off -- and the best way to give the mind a proper
degree of assurance and self-command at such a time, is to ^e entire master of
the subject -- and a consciousness that you deliver to your audience nothing
but what is well worth their hearing, will give you a strong degree of courage.

Endeavor to be wholly engaged in your subject; and when the mind is intent
upon and warmed with it, it will forget that awful deference it before paid to
the audience, which was so apt to disconcert it.

If the sight of your hearers, or any of them discompose you, keep your eyes
from them.

Be sure to keep up a life, spirit, and energy in the expression; and let the
voice naturally vary according to the variation of the style and subject.

Whatever be the subject, it will never be pleasing, if the style be low and
flat; nor will the beauty of the style be discovered, if the pronunciation be
so.

Cicero observes there must be a glow in our style if we (...) warm our
hearers. And who does not observe how ridiculous it is to pronounce the ardens
verbum in a cold lifeless tone? -- The transition of the voice must always
correspond with that of the subject, and the passions it was intended to excite.

To attain a just and graceful pronunciation, you should accustom yourselves
frequently to hear those who excel in it, whether at the bar or in the pulpit
-- where you will see all the sore-mentioned rules exemplified, and be able to
account for all those graces and beauties of pronunciation which always pleased
you, but you did not know why.

Indeed, the Art of Pronunciation, like all others, is better learned by
imitation than rule: But to be first acquainted with the rules of it, will make
the imitation more easy. You will observe a certain agreeableness of manner in
some orators, that is natural to them, not to be reduced to any rule, and to be
learnt by imitation only; nor by that, unless it be in some degree natural to
you.

You should frequently exercise yourself to read aloud according to the
foregoing rules. -- It is practice only that must give you the faculty of an
elegant pronunciation. This, like other habits, is only to be attained by often
repeated acts.

Orators, as well as poets, must be born so, or they will never excel in their
respective arts: But that part of oratory which consists in a decent and
graceful pronunciation, provided there be no defect in the organs of speech,
may be attained by rule, imitation, and practice; and, when attained, will give
a beauty to speech, a force to thoughts, and a pleasure to the hearers, not to
be expressed; and which all will admire, but none can imitate, unless they are
first prepared for it by art and nature -- In short, the great advantage of a
just pronunciation is, that it will please all, whether they have no taste, a
bad taste, or a good taste.

OF ACTION.
THE action should be as easy and as natural as the elocution; and, like that,
must be varied and directed by the passions.

An affected violence of motion is as disgustful as an affected vehement of
voice; and no action, as bad as no emphasis -- when two faults commonly go
together, as do the other two, just before mentioned.

Those parts of the body that are to be principally employed in oratorical
action, are the head, the face, the eyes, the hands, and the upper part of the
whole body.

THE HEAD.
THIS should generally be in an erect posture; turning sometimes on one side,
and sometimes on the other, that the voice may be heard by the whole audience,
and a regard paid to the several parts of it.

It should always be on the same side with the action of the hands and body,
except when we express an abhorrence, or a refusal of any thing, which is done
by rejecting it with the right hand, and turning away the head to the left.

THE COUNTENANCE.
IN this is the seat of the soul and the very life of action. Every passion,
whilst uttered with the tongue should be painted in the face. There is often
more eloquence in a look than any words can express. By this we are awed,
charmed, incensed, softened, grieved, rejoiced, raised, or dejected, according
as we catch the fire of the speaker's passion from his face. -- There is no end
in recounting the force and effects of this dumb oratory; which nature only
teaches, and which persons of low passions lose all the advantages of. Look
well upon a good piece of painting where the passions are stongly expressed,
and you will conceive the power of it.

THE EYES.
THESE should be carried from one part of the audience to another, with a
modest and decent respect; which will tend to recall and fix their attention,
and animate your own spirit by observing their attention fixed. But if their
affections be strongly moved, and the observing it be a means of raising your
own too high, it will be necessary then to keep the eye from off them -- For
though an orator should always be animated, he should never be overcome by his
passions.

In all appeals to heaven, and sometimes at the solemn mention of the name of
the great God, the eyes and the head should be turned upwards.

In adoration, the hands and eyes should be lifted up, and the head and body
bowing down.

In solemn vows, exclamations and appeals to heaven, the hands, head, and eyes
should all be lifted up; but in humiliation and confession bowed down.

The language of the eye is inexpressible. It is the window of the soul -- from
which sometimes the whole heart looks out at once, and speaks more feelingly
than all the warmest strains of oratory; and comes effectually in aid of it,
when the passion is too strong to be uttered.

THE HANDS
THE left hand should never be used alone, unless it be to attend the motion of
the head and eyes in an address to the audience on the left side.

The right hand may be often used alone.

When you speak of the body, you may point to it with the middle finger of the
right hand.

When you speak of the soul or conscience, you may lay the right hand gently on
the breast. -- It should be often displayed with an easy motion to favor an
emphasis; but seldom or never be quite extended. -- All its motions should be
from the left to the right.

Both the hands displayed, and the arms extended, is violent action, and never
just or decent unless the audience be noisy, and part of them at a distance
from the speaker, and he is laboring to be heard; and then they should never
be extended higher than the head, unless pointing at something above the
audience. See Raphael's cartoon, representing St. Paul preaching at Athens.


The motion of the hand should always correspond with those of the head and
eyes; as they should with the passions expressed.

In deliberate proof or argumentation, no action is more proper or natural than
gently to lay the first finger of the right hand on the palm of the left.

Of what great use the proper motion of the hand is in assisting pronunciation,
and how many passions may be strongly indicated thereby, when attended with
that of the head and eyes, is not easy to be described, but is soon observed in
common conversation.

THE POSTURE OF THE BODY.
THIS should be usually erect; not continually changing, nor always motionless;
declining in acts of humiliation; in acts of praise and thanksgiving, raised.

It should always accompany the motion of the hands, head, and eyes, when they
are directed to any particular part of the audience; but never so far as to ^et
the back be turned to any part of it.

But let it suffice just to hint at these things. They who desire to see them
more largely treated of, may consult Quintilian.

But after all, with regard to action, the great rule is the same as in
pronunciation -- to follow nature, and avoid affectation. -- The action of the
body, and the several parts of it, must correspond with the pronunciation, as
that does with the style, and the style with the subject. A perfect harmony of
all these completes the orator.

Lessons in Elocution.
AMBITION.
-- Ambition is at a distance
A goodly prospect, tempting to the view;
The height delights us, and the mountain top
Looks beautiful, because it is nigh to heaven:
But we never think how sandy's the foundation,
What storms will batter, and what tempests shake it.
OTWAY. -- Ambition! deadly tyrant!
Inexorable master! what alarms,
What anxious hours, what agonies of heart
Are the sure portion of thy gandy slaves!
Cruel condition! could the toiling hind,
The shivering beggar, whom no roof receives,
Wet with the mountain shower and crouching low
Beneath the naked cliff, his only home;
Could he but read the statesman's secret breast;
But see the horrors there, the wounds, the stabs
From furious passions and avenging guilt,
He would not change his rags and wretchedness
For gilded domes and greatness!
MALLET. There are but few men who are not ambitious of distinguishing
themselves in the nation or country where they live, and of growing
considerable among those with whom they converse. There is a kind of grandeur
and respect which the meanest and most insignificant part of mankind endeavor
to procure in the little circle of their friends and acquaintance. The poorest
mechanic, the man who lives upon common arms, gets him his set of admirers, and
delights in that superiority which he enjoys over those who are in some respect
beneath him. This ambition, which is natural to the soul of man, might methinks
receive a very happy turn; and, if it were rightly directed, contribute as much
to a person's advantage, as it generally does to his uneasiness and disquiet.

SPECTATOR. If we look abroad upon the great multitude of mankind, and endeavor
to trace out the principles of action in every individual, it will, I think,
seem highly probable, that ambition runs through the whole species, and that
every man, in proportion to the vigor of his complexion, is more or less
actuated by it. It is indeed no uncommon thing to meet with men, who by the
natural bent of their inclinations, and without the discipline of philosophy,
aspire not to the heights of power and grandeur; who never set their hearts
upon a numerous train of clients and dependencies, nor other gay appendages of
greatness; who are contented with a competency, and will not molest their
tranquillity to gain an abundance. But it is not therefore to be concluded, that
such a man is not ambitious. His desires may cut out another channel, and
determine him to other pursuits; the motive may be, however, still the same;
and in those cases, likewise, the man may be equally pushed on with the desire
of distinction.

Though the pure consciousness of worthy actions, abstracted from the views of
popular applause, be to a generous mind an ample reward; yet the desire of
distinction was doubtless implanted in our natures as an additional incentive
to exert ourselves in virtuous excellence.

This passion, like all others, is frequently perverted to evil and ignoble
purposes; so that we may account for many of the excellencies and follies of
life upon the same innate principles; to wit, the desire of being remarkable.
For this, as it has been differently cultivated by education, study, and
converse, will bring forth suitable effects, as it falls in with an ingenious
companion, or a corrupt mind: it does also express itself in acts of
magnanimity or selfish cunning, as it meets with a good or weak understanding.
As it has been employed in embellishing the mind, or adorning the outside, it
renders the man eminently praiseworthy or ridiculous. Ambition, therefore, is
not to be confined only to one passion or pursuit; for as the same humors, in
constitutions otherwise different, affect the body after different manners, so
the same aspiring principle within us sometimes breaks forth upon one object,
sometimes upon another.

It cannot de doubted, but that there is as great a desire of glory in a ring
of wrestlers or cudgel-players, as in any other more refined competition for
superiority. No man, that could avoid it, would ever suffer his head to be
broken, but out of a principle of honor.

ibid.

Ambition raises a secret tumult in the soul; it inflames the mind, and puts it
into a violent hurry of thought. It is still reaching after an empty imaginary
good, that has not in it the power to abate or satisfy it. Most other things we
long for can allay the cravings of their proper sense, and for a while set the
appetite at rest: but same is a (...) so wholly foreign to our nature, that we
have no faculty in the soul adapted to it, nor any organ in the body to relish
it; an object of desire placed out of the possibility of fruition.

ibid.

There is scarce a man living, who is not actuated by ambition. When this
principle meets with an honest mind and great abilities, it does infinite
service to the world; on the contrary, when a man only thinks of distinguishing
himself, without being thus qualified for it, he becomes a very pernicious or a
very ridiculous creature.

Ibid. The great are deceived if they imagine they have appropriated ambition
and vanity to themselves. These noble qualities flourish as notably in a
country church, or churchyard, as in the drawing room, or in the closet. --
Schemes have been laid in a vestry, which would hardly disgrace a conclave. --
Here is a ministry, and here is an opposition -- here are plots and
circumventions, parties and factions, equal to those which are to be found in
courts.

FIELDING. AGE.
Some few, by temperance taught, approaching slow
To distant fate, by easy journeys go:
Gently they lay them down, as evening sheep
On their own woolly fleeces softly sleep.
So noiseless would I live such death to find;
Like timely fruit, not shaken by the wind,
But ripely dropping from the sapless bough;
And, dying, nothing to myself would owe:
Thus daily changing, with a duller taste
Of lessening joys, I by degrees would waste:
Still quitting ground by unperceived decay,
And steal myself from life, and melt away.
DRYDEN. Age, that lessens the enjoyment of life, increases our desire of
living. Those dangers, which in the vigor of youth we had learned to despise,
assume new terrors as we grow old. Our caution increasing as our years
increase, fear becomes at last the prevailing passion of the mind; and the
small remainder of life is taken up in useless efforts to keep off our end, or
provide for a continued existence.

GOLDSMITH.

Of all the impertinent wishes which we hear expressed in conversation, there
is not one more unworthy a gentleman, or a man of liberal education, than that
of wishing one's self younger. It is a certain sign of a foolish or a dissolute
mind, if we want our youth again only for the strength of bones and sinews
which we once were masters of. It is as absurd in an old man to wish for the
strength of a youth, as it would be in a young man to wish for the strength of
a bull or a horse. These wishes are both equally out of nature, which should
direct in all things that are not contradictory to justice, law, and reason.

Age in a virtuous person of either sex carries in it an authority, which makes
it preferable to all the pleasures of youth. If to be saluted, attended, and
consulted with deference, are instances of pleasure, they are such as never
fail a virtuous old age. In the enumeration of the imperfections and advantages
of the younger and later years of man, they are so near in their condition,
that methinks it should be incredible we see so little commerce of kindness
between them.

If we consider youth and age with Tusly, regarding the affinity to death,
youth has many more chances to be nearer it than age; what youth can say, more
than an old man, "I shall live till night?" Youth catches distempers more
easily, its sickness is more violent, and its recovery more doubtful. The
youth, indeed, hopes for many more days; so cannot the old man. The youth's
hopes are ill grounded; for what is more foolish than to place any confidence
upon an uncertainty? But the old man has not room so much as for hope; he is
still happier than the youth; he has already enjoyed what the other does but
hope for: one wishes to live long, the other has lived long. But, alas, is
there any thing in human life, the duration of which can be called long? There
is nothing, which must end to be valued for its continuance. It hours, days,
months, and years, pass away, it is no matter what hour, what day, what month,
or what year we die. The applause of a good actor is due to him at whatever
scene of the play he makes his Exit. It is thus in the life of a man of sense;
a short life is sufficient to manifest himself a man of honor and virtue; when
he ceases to be such, he has lived too long; and, while he is such, it is of no
consequence to him how long he shall be so, provided he is so to his life's end.

SPECTATOR. An old age unsupported with matter for discourse and meditation, is
much to be dreaded. No state can be more destitute than that of him, who, when
the delights of sense forsake him, has no pleasures of the mind.

Notes upon SHAKESPEARE. AGE AND YOUTH.
He that would pass the latter part of his life with honor and decency, must,
when he is young, consider that he shall one day be old; and remember, when he
is old, that he has once been young.

JOHNSON. The notions of the old and young are like liquors of different
gravity and texture, which never can unite.

In youth it is common to measure right and wrong by the opinion of the world,
and in age to act without any measure but interest, and to lose shame without
substituting virtue.

Such is the condition of life that something is always wanting to happiness.
In youth we have warm hopes, which are soon blasted by rashness and negligence;
and great designs, which are defeated by inexperience. In age we have knowledge
and prudence, without spirit to exert, or motives to prompt them: we are able
to plan schemes and regulate measures, but have not time remaining to bring
them to completion.

Ibid. ACTIONS.
Our actions are our own; their consequence
Belongs to Heaven. The secret consciousness
Of duty well performed; the public voice
Of praise that honors virtue and rewards it,
All these are yours. --
FRANCIS. We should cast all our actions under the division of such as are in
themselves good, bad, or indifferent; and to direct them in such a manner, that
every thing we do, may turn to account at that great day when every thing we
have done will be set before us.

A good intention, joined to a good action, gives it its proper force and
efficacy; joined to an evil action, extenuates its malignity, and in some cases
may take it wholly away; and joined to an indifferent action, turns it into a
virtue, and makes it meritorious, as far as human actions can be so.

In the next place, to consider in the same manner the influence of an evil
intention upon our actions. An evil intention perverts the best of actions, and
makes them in reality what the fathers have termed the virtues of the heathen
world, so many shining sins. It destroys the innocence of an indifferent
action; and gives an evil action all possible blackness and horror, or, in the
emphatical language of holy writ, makes sin exceeding sinful.

It is then of unspeakable advantage to possess our minds with an habitual good
intention, and to aim all our thoughts, words, and actions at some laudable
end, whether it be the glory of our maker, the good of mankind, or the benefit
of our own souls.

SPECTATOR. ADVICE.
When things go ill, each fool presumes to advise,
And if more happy, thinks himself more wise;
All wretchedly deplore the present state,
And that advice seems best which comes too late.
SEDLEY. The chief rule to be observed in the exercise of this dangerous office
of giving ADVICE, is to preserve it pure from all mixture of interest or
vanity; to forbear admonition or reproof when our consciences tell us that they
are incited, not by the hopes of reforming faults, but the desire of showing
our discernment, or gratifying our own pride by the mortification of another.
It is not indeed certain that the most refined caution will find a proper time
for bringing a man to the knowledge of his own failings, or the most zealous
benevolence reconcile him to that judgment by which they are detected. But he
who endeavors only the happiness of him whom he reproves, will always have
either the satisfaction of obtaining or deserving kindness: if he succeeds, he
benefits his friend; and if he fails, he has at least the consciousness that he
suffers for only doing well.

RAMBLER. Advice, as it always gives a temporary appearance of superiority, can
never be very grateful, even when it is most necessary, or most judicious; but,
for the same reason, every one is eager to instruct his neighbors. To be wise
or to be virtuous, is to buy dignity and importance at a high price: but when
nothing is necessary to elevation but detection of the follies or the faults of
others, no man is so insensible to the voice of fame as to linger on the ground.

Ibid. There is nothing which we receive with so much reluctance as advice. We
look upon the man who gives it us, as offering an affront to our understanding,
and treating us like children or idiots. There is nothing so difficult as the
art of making advice agreeable: the pens of the ancients and moderns have been
exercised upon this occasion. How many devices have been made use of to render
this bitter potion palatable! Some convey their instruction to us in the best
chosen words; others in the most harmonious numbers; some in points of wit, and
others in short proverbs.

But among all the different ways of giving counsel, that which pleases the
most universally, is fable: it excels all others, because it is the least
shocking, and therefore the most delicate. This will appear, if we reflect,
that upon the reading of a fable we are made to believe we advise ourselves. We
peruse the author for the sake of the story, and consider the precepts rather
as our own conclusions than his instructions. This is confirmed by the examples
of the wise men of old, who chose to give council to their princes in this
method; an instance of which we have in a Turkish tale, which informs us, that
the Sultan Mahamoud, by his perpetual wars abroad, and his tyranny at home, had
filled his dominions with ruin and desolation, and half unpeopled the Persian
empire. The Vizier to this cruel Sultan pretended to have learned of a certain
Dervise, to understand the language of birds; so that there was not a bird that
could open his mouth, but the Vizier knew what it said. As he was one evening
with the Emperor, in their return from hunting, they saw a couple of owls upon
a tree that grew near an old wall out of a heap of rubbish. I would fain know,
says the Sultan, what these two owls are saying to one another; listen to their
discourse, and give me an account of it. The Vizier approached the tree,
pretending to be very attentive to the two owls. Upon his return to the Sultan,
Sir, says he, I have heard part of their conversation, but dare not tell you
what it is. The Sultan would not be satisfied with such an answer, but forced
him to repeat, word for word, every thing the owls had said. You must know
then, said the Vizier, that one of these owls has a son, and the other a
daughter, between whom they are now upon a treaty of marriage. The father of
the son said to the father of the daughter, in my hearing: Brother, I consent
to this marriage, provided you will settle upon your daughter fifty ruined
villages for her portion. To which the father of the daughter replied; instead
of fifty, I will give her five hundred, if you please. God grant a long life to
Sultan Mahamoud; whilst he reigns over us, we shall never want ruined villages.

The story says, the Sultan was so touched with the fable, that he rebuilt the
towns and villages which had been destroyed, and from that time forward
consulted the good of his people.

SPECTATOR. AFFECTION.
Fathers alone, a father's heart can know
What secret tides of still enjoyment flow,
When brothers love: But if their hate succeeds,
They wage the war; but it is the father bleeds.
YOUNG. ANATOMY.
Those who were skilled in anatomy among the ancients, concluded, from the
outward and inward make of a human body, that it was the work of a being
transcendently wise and powerful. As the world grew more enlightened in this
art, their discoveries gave them fresh opportunities of admiring the conduct of
providence in the formation of a human body. Galen was converted by his
dissections; and could not but own a Supreme Being, upon a survey of this his
handiwork. There were, indeed, many parts, of which the old anatomists did not
know the certain use: but as they saw that most of those which they examined,
were adapted with admirable art to their several functions, they did not
question but those, whose uses they could not determine, were contrived with
the same wisdom for their respective ends and purposes. Since the circulation
of the blood has been found out, and many other great discoveries have been
made by our modern anatomists, we see new wonders in the human frame; and
discern several important uses for those parts which the ancients knew nothing
of. In short, the body of man is such a subject, as stands the utmost test of
examination. Though it appears formed with the nicest wisdom, upon the most
superficial survey of it, it still mends upon the search, and produces our
surprise and amazement in proportion as we pry into it. What I have here said
of a human body, may be applied to the body of every animal, which has been the
subject of anatomical observations.

SPECTATOR. ASTONISHMENT.
I could a tale unfold, whose lightest word
Would harrow up thy soul, freeze thy young blood,
Make thy two eyes, like stars, start from their spheres,
Thy knotty and combined locks to part,
And each particular hair to stand on end,
Like quills upon the fretful porcupine.
SHAKESPEARE. AUTHORITY.
-- Authority!
Thy worshipped symbols round a villain's trunk
Provoke men's mockery, not their reverence.
JEPHSON. ANIMALS.
It is astonishing to consider the different degrees of care that descend from
the parent to the young, so far ^s is absolutely necessary for the leaving a
posterity. Some creatures cast their eggs as chance directs them, and think of
them no farther; as insects and several kinds of fish. Others of a nicer frame,
find out proper beds to deposit them in, and there leave them; as the serpent,
the crocodile, and ostrich. Others hatch their eggs, and tend the birth till it
is able to shift for itself.

What can we call the principle which directs every kind of bird to observe a
particular plan in the structure of its nest, and directs all of the same
species to work after the same model? It cannot be imitation; for though you
hatch a crow under a hen, and never let it see any of the works of its own
kind, the nest it makes shall be the same, to the laying of a stick, with all
other nests of the same species. It cannot be reason; for were animals endued
with it to as great a degree as man, their buildings would be as different as
ours, according to the different conveniences that they would propose to
themselves.

SPECTATOR. AUTHOR.
The wickedness of a loose or profane author, in his writings, is more
atrocious than that of the giddy libertine, or drunken ravisher; not only
because it extends its effects wider (as a pestilence, that taints the air, is
more destructive than poison infused in a draught) but because is is committed
with cool deliberation. By the instantaneous violence of desire, a good man may
sometimes be surprised before reflection can come to his rescue: when the
appetites have strengthened their influence by habit, they are not easily
resisted or suppressed; but for the frigid villainy of studious lewdness, for
the calm malignity of labored impiety, what apology can be invented? What
punishment can be adequate to the crime of him who retires to solitude, for the
refinement of debauchery; who tortures his fancy, and ransacks his memory, only
that he may leave the world less virtuous than he found it; that he may
intercept the hopes of the rising generation, and spread snares for the soul
with more dexterity?

RAMBLER. ANGER.
Men of a passionate temper are sometimes not without understanding or virtue;
and are therefore not always treated with the severity which their neglect of
the ease of all about them might justly provoke. They have obtained a kind of
prescription for their folly, and are considered by their companions as under a
predominant influence that leaves them not master of their conduct or language.
-- as acting without consciousness, and rushing into mischief with a mist
before their eyes. They are therefore pitied rather than censured; and their
sallies are passed over as the involuntary blows of a man agitated by the
spasms of a convulsion.

It is surely not to be observed without indignation, that men may be found, of
minds mean enough to be satisfied with this treatment; (...) who are proud to
obtain the privilege of madmen, and can, without shame, and without regret,
consider themselves as receiving hourly pardons from their companions, and
giving them continual opportunities of exercising their patience and boasting
their clemency.

RAMBLER. Nothing is more despicable, or more miserable, than the old age of a
passionate man. When the vigor of youth fails him, and his amusements pall with
frequent repetition, his occasional rage sinks, by decay of strength, into
peevishness; that peevishness, for want of novelty and variety, becomes
habitual; the world falls off from around him; and he is left, as Homer
expresses it, to devour his own heart in solitude and contempt.

Ibid. Our natures are so perverse and corrupt, that it is very hard for us to
give a loose to any angry passion against men, without running into some
sentiments of malice or revenge, and thereby sinning against God. Our anger is
very apt to kindle about trifles, or upon mere suspicion, without just cause;
or sometimes rises, too high where the cause may be just; or it continues too
long, and turns into hatred: and in either of these three cases it becomes
sinful.

It is therefore with the utmost caution that this passion should ever be
suffered to arise; and unless we quickly suppress it again, we shall be in
great danger of bringing guilt upon our souls. The blessed apostle therefore
connects the permission, the caution, and restraint together, Ephesians. (...). 26.
"Be angry, and sin not: "let not the sun go down upon your wrath."

WATTS. AETNA.
Mount AEtna thence we spy,
Known by the smoaky flames that cloud the sky:
By turns a pitchy cloud she rolls on high;
By turns hot embers from her entrails fly,
And flakes of mounting flames that lick the sky.
Often from her bowels massy rocks are thrown,
And, shivered by the force, come piecemeal down:
Often liquid lakes of burning sulphur flow,
Fed from the fiery springs that boil below.
Enceladus, they say, transfixed by Jove,
With blasted wings came tumbling from above;
And where he fell the avenging father drew
This flaming hill, and on his body threw:
As often as he turns his weary sides,
He shakes the solid isle, and smoke the heavens hides.
DRYDEN. ASTRONOMY.
In fair weather when my heart is cheered, and I feel that exaltation of
spirits which results from light and warmth, joined with a beautiful prospect
of nature, I regard myself as one placed by the hand of God in the midst of an
ample theater, in which the sun, moon, and stars, the fruits also, and
vegetables of the earth, perpetually changing their positions or their aspects,
exhibit an elegant entertainment to the understanding as well as to the eye.

Thunder and lightning, rain and hail, the painted bow, and the glaring comets,
are decorations of this mighty theater: and the sable hemisphere, studded with
spangles, the blue vault at noon, the glorious gildings and rich colors in the
horizon, I look on as so many successive scenes.

When I consider things in this light, methinks it is a sort of impiety to have
no attention to the course of nature, and the revolutions of the heavenly
bodies. To be regardless of those ph^^nomena that are placed within our view,
on purpose to entertain our faculties, and display the wisdom and power of
their creator, is an affront to providence of the same kind. (I hope it is not
impious to make such a simile) as it would be (...) a good poet, to fit out his
play without minding the plot or beauties of it.

And yet how few are there who attend to the drama of nature, its artificial
structure, and those admirable machines, whereby the passions of a philosopher
are gratefully agitated, and his soul affected with the sweet emotions of joy
and surprise!

How many are to be found who are ignorant that they have all this while lived
on a planet, that the sun is several thousand times bigger than the earth; and
that there are several other worlds within our view, greater and more glorious
than our own! Ay, but says some illiterate fellow, I enjoy the world, and leave
others to contemplate it. Yes, you eat and drink, and run about it; that is,
you enjoy it as a brute: but to enjoy it as a rational being, is to know it, to
be sensible of its greatness and beauty, to be delighted with its harmony, and
by these reflections to obtain just sentiments of the Almighty mind that framed
it.

The man who, unembarrassed with vulgar cares, leisurely attends to the flux of
things in heaven and on earth, and observes the laws by which they are
governed, has secured to himself an easy and convenient seat, where he beholds
with pleasure all that passes on the stage of nature; while those about him
are, some fast asleep, and others struggling for the highest places, or turning
their eyes from the entertainment prepared by providence, to play at push-pin
with one another.

Within this ample circumference of the world, the glorious lights that are
hung on high, the meteors in the middle region, the various livery of the
earth, and the profusion of good things that distinguish the seasons, yield a
prospect which annihilates all human grandeur.

GUARDIAN. APPEARANCES.
In the condition of men, it frequently happens that grief and anxiety lie hid
under the golden robes of prosperity; and the gloom of calamity is cheered by
secret radiations of hope and comfort; as in the works of nature, the bog is
sometimes covered with flowers, and the mine concealed in the barren crags.

RAMBLER. AVARICE AND LUXURY.
When a government flourishes in conquests, and is secure from foreign attacks,
it naturally falls into all the pleasures of luxury; and as these pleasures are
very expensive, they put those who are addicted to them upon raising fresh
supplies of money, by all the methods of rapaciousness and corruption; so that
avarice and luxury often become one complicated principle of action, in those
whose hearts are wholly set upon ease, magnificence and pleasure. The most
elegant and correct of all the Latin historians observes, that in his time,
when the most formidable states in the world were subdued by the Romans, the
republic sunk into those two vices, of a quite different nature, luxury and
avarice; and accordingly describes Ca^iline as one who coveted the wealth of
other men, at the same time that he squandered away his own. This observation
on the commonwealth, when it was in the height of power and riches, holds good
in all governments that are settled in a state of ease and prosperity. At such
times, men naturally endeavor to outshine one another in pomp and splendour;
and having no fears to alarm them from abroad, indulge themselves in the
enjoyment of all they can get in their possession; which naturally produces
avarice, and an immoderate pursuit after wealth and riches.

SPECTATOR. AVERNUS.
Deep was the cave; and, downward as it went
From the wide mouth, a rocky rough descent.
And here the access a gloomy grove defends,
And there the unnavigable lake extends,
Over whose unhappy waters, void of light,
No bird presumes to steer his airy flight:
Such deadly stenches from the depth arise,
And steaming sulphur that infects the skies.
From hence the Grecian bards their legends make,
And give the name Avernus to the lake.
DRYDEN. APOTHECARY.
I do remember an apothecary,
In tattered weeds, with overwhelming brows,
Culling of simples. Meagre were his looks;
Sharp misery had worn him to the bones;
And in his needy shop a tortoise hung,
An alligator stuffed, and other skins
Of ill-shap'd fishes; and about his shelves
A beggarly account of empty boxes,
Green earthen pots, bladders, and musty seeds,
Remnants of pack-thread; and old cakes of roses,
Were thinly scattered, to make up a show.
SHAKESPEARE. ATTACHMENT.
Our attachment to every object around us, increases, in general, from the
length of our acquaintance with it. I would not choose, says a French
philosopher, to see an old post pulled up, with which I had been long
acquainted. A mind long habituated to a certain set of objects, insensibly
becomes fond of seeing them; visits them from habit, and parts from them with
reluctance. From hence proceeds the avarice of the old in every kind of
possession. They love the world, and all that it produces; they love life, and
all its advantages; not because it gives them pleasure, but because they have
known it long.

GOLDSMITH. ARRANGEMENT OF IDEAS.
As a trader, who never places his goods in his (...) or warehouse in a regular
order, nor keeps the accounts of his buying and selling, paying and receiving,
in a just method, is in the utmost danger of plunging all his affairs into
confusion and ruin; so a student, who is in search of truth, or an author or
teacher, who communicates knowledge to others, will very much obstruct his
design, and confound his own mind, or the minds of his hearers, unless he range
his ideas in just order. If we would, therefore, become successful learners or
teachers, we must not conceive things in a confused heap, but dispose our ideas
in some certain method, which may be most easy and useful both for the
understanding and memory.

WATTS.

ABSTINENCE.
The best preservative of health is temperance, which has those particular
advantages above all other means to attain it, that it may be practiced by all
ranks and conditions, at any season, or in any place. It is a kind of regimen,
into which every man may put himself without interruption to business, expense
of money, or loss of time. If exercise throw off all the superfluities,
temperance prevents them: if exercise clear the vessels, temperance neither
satiates nor overstrains them: if exercise raise proper ferments in the
humors, and promote the circulation of the blood, temperance gives nature her
full play, and enables her to exert herself in all her force and vigor: if
exercise dissipate a growing distemper, temperance starves it.

Nature delights in the most plain and simple diet: every animal but man keeps
to one dish. Herbs are the food of this species, fish of that, and flesh of the
third. Man falls upon every thing that comes in his way; not the smallest fruit
or excrescence of the earth, scarce a berry or a mushroom, can escape him. I
would copy the following rules of a very eminent physician Make your whole
repast out of one dish; if you indulge in a second, avoid drinking any thing
strong till you have finished your meal: At the same time abstain from al^
sauces, at least such as are not the most plain and simple. And in the article
of drinking, observe Sir William Temple's method, viz. The first glass for
myself, the second for my friend, the third for good humor, and the fourth for
mine enemies.

It is observed by two or three ancient authors, that Socrates, notwithstanding
he lived in Athens during the great plague, which has made so much noise
throughout all ages, and has been celebrated at different times by such eminent
hands, notwithstanding he lived in the time of this devouring pestilence, never
caught the least infection; which these writers unanimously ascribe to that
uninterrupted temperance which he always observed.

SPECTATOR. ADULATION.
The man who is constantly served up with adulation, must be a first-rate
philosopher, if he can listen without contracting new affections. The opinion
we form of ourselves, is generally measured by what we hear from others; and
when they conspire to deceive, we too readily concur in the delusion Among the
number of much applauded men in the circle of our own friends, we can recollect
but few that have heads quite strong enough to bear a loud acclamation of
public praise in their favor; among the whole list, we shall scarce find one
that has not thus been made, on some side of his character, a coxcomb.

GOLDSMITH.

ARISTOCRACY AND DESPOTISM.
It is now found, by abundant experience, that an aristocracy and a despotism
differ but in name; and that a people who are in general excluded from any
share of the legislative, are to all intents and purposes, as much slaves, when
twenty, independent of them, govern, as when but one domineers. The tyranny is
even more felt; as every individual of the nobles has the haughtiness of a
sultan; the people are more miserable, as they seem on the verge of liberty,
from which they are forever debarred. This fallacious idea of liberty, whilst
it presents a vain shadow of happiness to the subject, binds faster the chains
of his subjection. What is left undone, by the natural avarice and pride of
those who are raised above the others is completed by their suspicions, and
their dread of losing an authority, which has no support in the common utility
of the nation.

BURKE.

ADVERSITY.
Plato lays it down as a principle, that whatever is permitted to befall a just
man, whether poverty, sickness or any of those things which seem to be evils,
shall either in life or death conduce to his good. My reader will observe how
agreeable this maxim is to what we find delivered by a greater authority.
Seneca has written a discourse purposely on this subject, in which he takes
pains, after the doctrine of the Stoics, to show that adversity is not in
itself an evil; and mentions a noble saying of Demetrius, that nothing would be
more unhappy than a man who had never known affliction: he compares prosperity
to the indulgence of a fond mother to a child, which proves its ruin; but the
affection of the divine Being, to that of a wise father who would have his sons
exercised with hard labor, disappointment, and pain, that they may gather
strength and improve their fortitude. On this occasion, the philosopher rises
into that celebrated sentiment, that there is not on earth a spectacle more
worthy the regard of a creator intent on his works, than a brave man superior
to his sufferings; to which he adds, that it must be a pleasure to the Deity
himself, to look down from heaven, and see Cato amidst the ruins of his country
preserving his integrity.

SPECTATOR. He that can heroically endure adversity, will bear prosperity with
equal greatness of soul; for the mind that cannot be dejected by the former is
not likely to be transported with the latter.

FIELDING.

There are two considerations, which, by properly fixing our thoughts upon
them, will greatly support us under all adversities. The one is the brevity of
life, which, even at its longest duration, the wisest of men has compared to
the short dimension of a span. And the second, the uncertainty of it. Could the
most worldly men see this in the light in which they examine all other matters,
they would soon feel and acknowledge the force of this way of reasoning. For
which of them would give any price for an estate, from which they are liable to
be immediately ejected; or would they not laugh at him as a madman, who
accounted himself rich from such an uncertain possession?

Ibid.

TRIBUTE OF AFFECTION.
My heart stops me to pay thee, my dear uncle Toby, once for all the tribute I
owe thy goodness; here let me thrust my chair aside, and kneel down upon the
ground, whilst I am pouring forth the warmest sentiments of love for thee, and
veneration for the excellency of thy character, that ever virtue and nature
kindled in a nephew's bosom. -- Peace and comfort rest for ever more upon thy
head! -- Thou enviedst no man's comforts, insultedst no man's opinions. -- Thou
blackenedst no man's character, -- devouredst no man's bread: gently, with
faithful Trim behind thee, did thou amble round the little circle of thy
pleasures, jostling no creature in the way: -- for each one's sorrows thou
had a tear, -- for each man's need thou had a shilling. Whilst I am worth
one, to pay a weeder, -- the path from thy door to thy bowling-green shall
never be grown up -- Whilst there is a rood and a half of land in the Shandy
family, thy fortifications, my dear uncle Toby, shall never be demolished.

STERN. AFFECTATION.
The great misfortune of affectation is, that men not only lose a good quality,
but also contract a bad one. They not only are unfit for what they were
designed, but they assign themselves to what they are unfit for; and, instead
of making a very good figure one way, make a very ridiculous one another. If
Semanthe would have been satisfied with her natural complexion, she might still
have been celebrated by the name of the Olive-Beauty; but Semanthe has taken up
an affectation to white and red, and is now distinguished by the character of
the lady that paints well. In a word, could the world be reformed to the
obedience of that famed dictate, follow nature, which the oracle of Delphos
pronounced to Cicero, when he consulted what course of studies he should
pursue, we should see almost every man as eminent in his proper sphere, as
Tully was in his; and should in a very short time find impertinence and
affectation banished from among the women, and coxcombs and false characters
from among the men. For my part, I could never consider this preposterous
repugnancy to nature any otherwise, than not only as the greatest folly, but
also one of the most heinous crimes, since it is a direct opposition to the
dispensation of providence, and (as Tully expresses it) like the sin of the
giants, an actual rebellion against heaven.

SPECTATOR. Affectation proceeds from one of these two causes -- vanity or
hypocrisy; for as vanity puts us on affecting false characters, in order to
purchase applause; so hypocrisy sets us on an endeavor to avoid censure, by
concealing our vices under an appearance of their opposite virtues.

FIELDING. ADMIRATION
He who proposes the satisfaction of his own pride from the admiration of
others, and will not lower himself to those who cannot rise to him, will never
gain his point equal to him who accommodates his talents to times and
occasions. In the company of the former, every one is rendered uneasy, laments
his own want of knowledge, and longs for the end of the dull assembly. With the
latter, all are pleased and contented with themselves, in their knowledge of
matters which they find worthy the consideration of a man of sense. Admiration
is involuntarily paid the former; to the latter it is given joyfully. The
former receives it with envy and hatred; the latter enjoys it, as the sweet
fruit of good will. The former is shunned, the latter courted by all.

FIELDING. ATTENTION.
A student should labor by all proper methods to acquire a steady fixation of
thought. Attention is a very necessary thing in order to improve our minds. The
evidence of truth does not always appear immediately, nor strike the soul at
first sight. It Is by long attention and inspection that we arrive at evidence,
and it is for want of it we judge falsely of many things, We make haste to
judge and determine upon a flight and sudden view; we confirm our guesses which
arise from a glance; we pass a judgment while we have but a confused or obscure
perception, and thus plunge ourselves into mistakes. This is like a man, who,
walking in a mist, or being at a great distance from any visible object,
(suppose a tree, a man, a horse, or a church) judges much amiss of the figure
and situation and colors of it, and sometimes takes one for the other; whereas
if he would but withhold his judgment, till he come nearer to it, or stay till
clearer light comes, and then would fix his eyes longer upon it, he would
secure himself from those mistakes.

WATTS. Mathematical studies have a strange influence toward fixing the
attention of the mind, and giving a steadiness to a wandering disposition,
because they deal much in lines, figures and numbers, which affect and please
the sense and imagination. Histories have a strong tendency the same way; for
they engage the soul by a variety of sensible occurrences; when it has begun,
it knows not how to leave off; it longs to know the final event, through a
natural curiosity that belongs to mankind. Voyages and travels and accounts of
strange countries and strange appearances will assist in this work. This fort
of study detains the mind by the perpetual occurrence and expectation of
something new, and that which may gratefully strike the imagination.

Ibid.

AGREEABLE MAN.
The desire of pleasing makes a man agreeable or unwelcome to those with whom
he converses, according to the motive from which that inclination appears to
flow. If your concern for pleasing others arise from innate benevolence, it
never fails of success; if from a vanity to excel, its disappointment is no
less certain. What we call an agreeable man, is he who is endowed with the
natural bent to do acceptable things, from a delight he takes in them merely as
such; and the affectation of that character is what constitutes a fop. Under
these leaders one may draw up all those who make any manner of figure, except
in dumb show. A rational and select conversation is composed of persons who
have the talent of pleasing with delicacy of sentiments, flowing from habitual
chastity of thought. Now and then you meet with a man so exactly formed for
pleasing, that will make him gain upon every body who hears or beholds him.
This felicity is not the gift of nature only, but must be attended with happy
circumstances, which add a dignity to the familiar behavior which
distinguishes him whom we call the agreeable man. It is from this that every
body loves and esteems Polycarpus. He is in the vigor of his age, and the
gaiety of his life; but has passed through very conspicuous scenes in it:
though no soldier, he has shared the danger, and acted with great gallantry and
generosity, in a decisive day of battle. To have those qualities which only
make other men conspicuous in the world, as it were supernumerary to him, is a
circumstance which gives weight to his most indifferent actions; for as a known
credit is ready cash to a trader, so is acknowledged merit immediate
distinction, and serves in the place of equipage to a gentleman. This renders
Polycarpus graceful in mirth, important in business, and regarded with love in
every ordinary occurrence.

SPECTATOR. AGREEABLE IN COMPANY.
The true art of being agreeable in company (but there can be no such thing as
art in it) is to appear well pleased with those you are engaged with, and
rather to seem well entertained, than to bring entertainment to others. A man
thus disposed, is not indeed what we ordinarily call a good companion, but
essentially is such, and in all parts of his conversation has something
friendly in his behavior, which conciliates men's minds more than the highest
sallies of wit or starts of humor can possibly do. The feebleness of age, in a
man of this turn, has something which should be treated with respect even in a
man no otherwise venerable. The forwardness of youth, when it proceeds from
alacrity, and not insolence, has also its allowances. The companion who is
formed for such by nature, gives to every character in life its due regard, and
is ready to account for their imperfections, and receive their accomplishments,
as if they were his own. It must appear that you receive saw from, and not give
it to, your company, to make you agreeable.

SPECTATOR. THE DEAD ASS.
And this, said he, putting the remains of a crust into his wallet -- and this
should have been thy portion, said he, had thou been alive to have shared it
with me. I thought by the accent, it had been an apostrophe to his child; but
'twa to his ass, and to the very ass we had seen dead on the road, which had
occasioned La Fleur's misadventure. The man seemed to lament it much; and it
instantly brought into my mind Sancho's lamentation for his; but he did it with
more true touches of nature.

The mourner was sitting on a stone bench at the door, with the ass's panel
and its bridle on one side, which he took up from time to time -- then laid
them down -- looked at them -- and shook his head He then took the crust of
bread out of his wallet again, as if to eat it; held it some time in his hand
-- then laid it upon the bit of his ass's bridle -- looked wistfully at the
little arrangement he had made -- and then gave a sigh.

The simplicity of his grief drew numbers about him, and La Fleur among the
rest, whilst the horses were getting ready; as I continued sitting in the
post-chaise, I could see and hear over their heads.

-- He said he had come last from Spain, where he had been from the furthest
borders of Franconia; and had got so far on his return home, when his ass died.
Every one seemed desirous to know what business could have taken so old and
poor a man so far a journey from his own home.

It had pleased heaven, he said, to bless him with three sons, the finest lads
in all Germany: but having in one week lost two of them by the smallpox, and
the youngest falling ill of the same distemper, he was afraid of being bereft
of them all; and made a vow, if Heaven would not take him from him also, he
would go in gratitude to St. Jago, in Spain.

When the mourner got thus far on his story, he stopped to pay nature her
tribute -- and wept bitterly.

He said Heaven had accepted the conditions, and that he had set out from his
cottage, with this poor creature, who had been a patient partner of his journey
-- that it had eat the same bread with him all the way, and was unto him as a
friend.

Every body who stood about, heard the poor fellow with concern -- La Fleur
offered him money -- the mourner said he did not want it -- it was not the
value of the ass -- but the loss of him -- The ass, he said, he was assured,
loved him, -- and upon this, told them a long story of a mischance upon their
passage over the Pyrenean mountains, which had separated them from each other
three days: during which time the ass had sought him as much as he had sought
the ass, and they had scarce eat or drank till they met.

Thou have one comfort, friend, said I, at least, in the loss of the poor
beast; I Am sure thou have been a merciful master to him. -- Alas! said the
mourner, I thought so when he was alive -- but now he is dead, I think
otherwise. -- I fear the weight of myself and my afflictions together have been
too much for him -- they have shortened the poor creature's days, and I fear I
have them to answer for. -- Shame on the world! said I to myself -- Did we love
each other but as this poor soul loved his ass -- 'twould be something.

STERN. APPREHENSIONS, (Rules for Moderating.)
First, What we fear may not come to pass. No human scheme can be so accurately
projected, but some little circumstance intervening may spoil it. He who
directs the heart of man at his pleasure, and understands the thoughts long
before, may, by ten thousand accidents, or an immediate change in the
inclinations of men, disconcert the most subtle project, and turn it to the
benefit of his own servants.

In the next place, we should consider, though the evil we imagine, should come
to pass, it may be much more supportable than it appeared to be. As there is no
prosperous state of life without its calamities, so there is no adversity
without its benefits. Ask the great and powerful, if they do not feel the pangs
of envy and ambition. Enquire of the poor and needy, if they have not tasted
the sweets of quiet and contentment. Even under the pains of body, the
infidelity of friends, or the misconstructions put upon our laudable actions,
our minds (when for some time accustomed to these pressures) are sensible of
secret flowings of comfort, the present reward of a pious resignation. The
evils of this life appear like rocks and precipices, rugged and barren at a
distance; but at our nearer approach we find little fruitful spots and
refreshing springs, mixed with the harshness and deformities of nature.

In the last place, we may comfort ourselves with this consideration, that, as
the thing feared may not reach us, so we may not reach what we fear. Our lives
may not extend to that dreadful point which we have in view. He who knows all
our fallings, and will not suffer us to be tempted beyond our strength, is
often pleased, in his tender severity, to separate the soul from its body and
miseries together.

If we look forward to him for help, we shall never be in danger of falling
down those precipices, which our imagination is apt to create. Like those who
walk upon a line, if we keep our eye fixed upon one point, we may step forward
securely; whereas an imprudent or cowardly glance on either side will
infallibly destroy us.

SPECTATOR. BEGGAR.
Art thou a man, and sham'st thou not to beg?
To practice such a servile kind of life?
Why, were thy education never so mean,
Having thy limbs, a thousand fairer courses
Offer themselves to thy election.
Either the wars might still supply thy wants,
Or service of some virtuous gentleman,
Or honest labor: nay, what can I name,
But would become thee better than to beg?
But men of thy condition feed on sloth,
As does the beetle on the dung she breeds in;
Not caring how the metal of your minds
Is eaten with the rust of idleness.
Now, after me; whatever he be, that should
Relieve a person of thy quality,
While thou insist in this loose desperate course,
I would esteem the sin, not thine but his.
BEN JOHNSON. BIRDS.
Thus when the big impending clouds appear,
And struggling winds proclaim some tempest near,
The trembling birds the coming danger fly,
And seek for shelter from the lowering sky,
In wild confusion and affright divide,
The mournful mate is severed from his bride;
But when the gloom is cleared, the storm over past,
Each seeks his consort, with impatient haste;
Grieves till she is found; when found, the joyful pair,
With warbling transports, charm the listening air.
BECKINGHAM. BENEVOLENCE.
There cannot be a more glorious object in creation, than a human being,
replete with benevolence, meditating in what manner he might render himself
most acceptable to his Creator, by doing most good to his creatures.

FIELDING. BENEFICENCE.
It seems rather extraordinary, that pride, which is constantly struggling, and
often imposing on itself, to gain some little pre-eminence, should so seldom
hint to us the only certain, as well as laudable way, of setting ourselves
above another man, and that is, by becoming his benefactor.

FIELDING. A tender hearted and compassionate disposition, which inclines men
to pity and feel the misfortunes of others, and which is, even for its own
sake, incapable of involving any man in ruin and misery, is of all tempers of
mind the most amiable; and though it seldom receives much honor, is worthy of
the highest.

Ibid. BEES AND BUTTERFLIES.
The bees, are a nation of chemists! to whom nature has communicated the rare
and valuable secret of enriching themselves, without impoverishing others; who
extract the most delicious syrup from every fragrant herb, without wounding its
substance, or diminishing its odours. -- I take the more notice of these
ingenious operators, because I would willingly make them my pattern. While the
gay butterfly flutters her painted wings, and sips a little fantastic delight,
only for the present moment; while the gloomy spider, worse than idly busied,
is preparing his insidious nets for destruction, or sucking venom, even from
the most wholesome plant; this frugal community are wisely employed in
providing for futurity, and collecting a copious stock of the most balmy
treasures.

HERVEY. BEES.
What various wonders may observers see
In a small insect, the sagacious be!
Mark how the little untaught builders square
Their rooms, and in the dark their lodgings rear;
Nature's mechanics they unwearied strive,
And fill, with curious labyrinths, the hive.
See what bright strokes of architecture shine
Through the whole frame, what beauty, what design!
Each odoriferous cell, and waxen tower,
The yellow pillage of the rifled flower,
Has twice three sides, the only figure fit
To which the lab'rers may their stores commit,
Without the loss of matter, or of room,
In all the wondrous structure of the comb
Next view, spectator, with admiring eyes,
In what just order all the apartments rise!
So regular their equal sides cohere,
The adapted angles so each other bear,
That by mechanic rules, refined and bold,
They are at once upheld, at once uphold.
Does not this skill even vie with reason's reach?
Can Euclid more, can more Palladio teach?
Each verdant hill the industrious chemists climb,
Extract the riches of the blooming thyme;
And provident of winter long before,
They stock their caves, and hoard their flowery store.
In peace they rule their state with prudent care,
Wisely defend, or wage offensive war.
Maro, these wonders offered to his thought,
Felt his known ardor, and the rapture caught;
Then raised his voice, and in immortal lays,
Did high as heaven the insect nation raise.
DRYDEN. BLINDNESS.
All dark and comfortless!
Where are those various objects that but now
Employed my busy eyes; where are those eyes?
Dead are their piercing rays that lately shot
Over flowery vales to distant sunny hills,
And drew with joy the vast horizon in.
These groping hands are now my only guides,
And feeling all my sight.
Shut from the living while among the living!
Dark as the grave amidst the bustling world!
At once from business and from pleasure barred!
No more to view the beauty of the spring!
Nor see the face of kindred or of friend!
TATE. BEAUTY.
Beauty, like ice, our footing does betray;
Who can tread sure on the smooth slippery way?
Pleased with the passage, we glide swiftly on,
And see the dangers which we cannot shun.
DRYDEN. Beauty, thou art a fair but fading flower;
The tender prey of every coming hour.
In youth, thou, comet-like, art gazed upon;
But art portentous to thyself alone:
Unpunished thou to few were ever given,
Nor art a blessing, but a mark from heaven
SEDLEY. Angels were painted fair to look like you;
There Is in you all that we believe of heaven,
Amazing brightness, purity and truth,
Eternal joy, and everlasting peace.
OTWAY. My love is fairer than the snowy breast
Of the tall swan, whose proudly swelling chest
Divides the waves. Her tresses loose behind,
Play on her neck, and wanton in the wind:
The rising blushes which her cheek overspread,
Are opening roses in the lilly's bed.
GAY. Arrayed in all her charms, appeared the fair;
Tall was her stature, unconfined her air;
Proportion decked her limbs, and in her face
Lay love inshrin'd, lay sweet attractive grace;
Temp'ring the awful beams her eyes conveyed,
And, like a lambent flame, around her played.
No foreign aids by mortal ladies worn,
From shells and rocks her artless charms adorn;
For grant that beauty were by gems increased,
It Is rendered more suspected at the least,
And foul defects, that would escape the sight,
Start from the piece, and take a stronger light:
Her chestnut hair, in careless ringlets, round
Her temples waved, with pinks and jes'mine crowned.
And, gathered in a silken cord behind,
Curled to the waist, and floated in the wind.
Over these a veil of yellow gauze she wore,
With amaranths and gold embroidered, over
Her snowy neck, half naked to the view,
Gracefully fell, a robe of purple hue.
Hung loosely over her tender shape, and tried
To shade those beauties that it could not hide.
The damsels of her train with mirth and song
Frolic behind, and laugh and sport along.
LISLE. Beauty is but a vain, a fleeting good,
A shining (...) that fades suddenly;
A flower that dies when almost in the bud,
A brittle glass that breaks presently.
A fleeting good, a gloss, a glass, a flower,
Lost, faded, broken, dead within an hour.
As goods when lost, we know, are seldom found,
As fading gloss no rubbing can excite;
As flowers, when dead, are trampled on the ground,
As broken glass no cement can unite;
So beauty, blemished once, is ever lost,
In spite of physic, painting, pains, and cost.
SHAKESPEARE. Beauty has so many charms, one knows not how to speak against it;
and when it happens that a graceful figure is the habitation of a virtuous
soul, when the beauty of the face speaks out the modesty and humility of the
mind, and the justness of the proportion raises our thoughts up to the heart
and wisdom of the great Creator, something may be allowed it, -- and something
to the embellishments which set it off; and yet, when the whole apology is
read, -- it will be found at last, that beauty, like truth, never is so
glorious as when it goes the plainest.

STERN. BOAR.
Forth from the thicket rushed another boar,
So large he seemed the tyrant of the woods,
With all his dreadful bristles raised up high,
They seemed a grove of spears upon his back.
Foaming he came at me, where I was posted,
Whetting his huge long tusks, and gaping wide,
As he already had me for his prey:
Till brandishing my well-pois'd javelin high,
With this bold executing arm I struck
The ugly brindled monster to the heart.
OTWAY. So when surrounding huntsmen cast a shower
Of hissing spears against some mighty boar,
The grisly beast, provoked with every wound.
Rages, and casts his threatening looks around.
High on his back his furious bristles rise,
And lightning flashes from his raging eyes:
He tosses clouds of foam amidst the air,
And, brandishing his fangs, invites the war.
BLACKMORE. His eye balls glare with fire, suffus'd with blood,
His neck shoots up a thick-set thorny wood.
His bristled back a trench impaled appears,
And stands erected like a field of spears.
Froth fills his chaps, he sends a grunting sound,
And part he churns, and part befoams the ground.
For tusks, with Indian elephants he strove,
And Jove's own thunder from his mouth he drove.
He suffers not the corn its yellow beards to rear,
But tramples down the spikes, and intercepts the year.
In vain the barns expect their promised load,
Nor barns at home, nor ricks are heaped abroad.
In vain the hinds the threshing floor prepare,
And exercise their arms in empty air.
With olives ever green the ground is strewn,
And grapes ungather'd shed their generous blood.
Amid the fold he rages, nor the sheep
Their shepherds, nor the grooms their bulls can keep.
DRYDEN. BRAVE.
The brave do never shun the light;
Just are their thoughts, and open are their tempers;
Freely without disguise they love or hate:
Still are they found in the fair face of day,
And Heaven and men are judges of their actions.
ROW, * * * * * * The brave are ever tender
And feel the miseries of suffering virtue.
MARTYN. The human race are sons of sorrow born:
And each must have his portion. Vulgar minds
Refuse, or crouch beneath their load: the brave
Bear theirs without repining.
MALLET. On valor's side the odds of combat lie;
The brave live glorious, or lamented die:
The wretch who trembles in the field of fame,
Meets death, or, worse than death, eternal shame.
POPE. BLUSH.
A crimson blush her beauteous face overspread,
Varying her cheeks by turns with white and red,
The driving colors, never at a stay,
Run here and there, and flush and fade away.
Delightful change! thus Indian ivory shows,
Which with the bord'ring paint of purple glows;
Or lilies damask'd by the neighboring rose.
DRYDEN. BIRTH.
Did thou never read, in difference of good,
It Is more to shine in virtue than in blood?
JOHNSON. Birth is a shadow. Courage, self-sustain'd,
Out-lords succession's phlegm -- and needs no ancestors.
I am above descent; and prize no blood.
HILL. Among the titled great ones of the world,
Do they not spring from some proud monarch's flatterer,
Some favorite mistress, or ambitious minister,
The ruin of his country, while their blood
Rolls down through many a fool, through many a villain,
To its now proud possessors?
FRANCIS. * * * * * * * * Thy birth?
Did I not early teach thee to despise
A casual good? Thou art thyself, Ilyssus.
Inform me, youth, would thou be what thou art
Thus fair, thus brave, thus sensibly alive
To glory's finest feel; or give up all
To be descended from a line of kings,
The tenth perhaps from Jove? -- I see thy cheek
Glows a repentant blush. -- Our greatest heroes,
Who Have been on earth, the friends of human-kind,
Whose great examples I would set before thee,
Were once unknown like thee. --
WHITEHEAD. -- Who first the catalogue shall grace?
To quality belongs the highest place.
My lord comes forward; forward let him come!
Ye vulgar! at your peril give him room;
He stands for fame on his forefathers' feet,
By heraldry proved valiant or discreet.
With what a decent pride he throws his eyes
Above the man by three descents less wise!
It virtues at his noble hand you crave,
You bid him raise his fathers from the grave.
Men should press forward in fame's glorious chase:
Nobles look backward, and so lose the race.
Let high birth triumph! What can be more great?
Nothing -- but merit in a low estate.
To virtue's humblest son let none prefer
Vice, though descended from the conqueror.
Shall men, like figures, pass for high or base,
Slight or important, only by their place?
Titles are marks of honest men, and wise;
The fool or knave that wears a title, lies.
They that on glorious ancestors enlarge,
Produce their debt, instead of their discharge.
*****, let those who proudly boast their line,
Like thee, in worth hereditary shine.
YOUNG. BLIND BOY.
O say, what is that thing called light,
Which I must never enjoy?
What are the blessings of the sight?
O tell your poor blind boy!
You talk of wondrous things you see,
You say, the sun shines bright;
I feel him warm; but how can be
Or make it day or night?
My day or night myself I make,
When'er I sleep or play;
And could I ever keep awake,
With me 'twere always day.
With heavy sighs I often hear
You mourn my hapless woe;
But sure with patience I can bear
A loss I never can know.
Then let not what I cannot have
My cheer of mind destroy;
Whilst thus I sing, I am a king,
Although a poor blind boy.
COLLEY CIBBER. BUILDING.
The man who builds, and wants wherewith to pay,
Provides a home, from which to run away.
In Britain what is many a lordly seat,
But a discharge in full for an estate?
YOUNG. CLOWN.
A clownish mien, a voice with rustic sound,
And stupid eyes, that ever loved the ground;
The ruling rod, the father's forming care,
Were exercised in vain on wit's despair;
The more informed, the less he understood,
And deeper sunk by flound'ring in the mud.
His corn and cattle were his only care;
And his supreme delight a country fair.
A quarter-staff, which he never could forsake,
Hung half before, and half behind his back.
He trudged along, unknowing what he sought,
And whistled, as he went, for want of thought.
DRYDEN. CAMP.
I have been led by solitary care
To yon dark branches, spreading over the brook,
Which murmurs through the camp; this mighty camp,
Where once two hundred thousand sons of war,
With restless dins awaked the midnight hour.
Now horrid stillness in the vacant tents
Sits undisturbed; and these incessant rills,
Whose pebbled channel breaks their shallow stream,
Fill with their melancholy sounds my ears
As if I wandered like a lonely hind,
Over some dead fallow, far from all resort:
Unless that ever and anon a groan
Bursts from a soldier, pillow'd on his shield
In torment, or expiring with his wounds,
And turns my fixed attention into horror.
GLOVER. CATO.
-- Turn up thy eyes to Cato,
There may thou see to what a god like height
The Roman virtues list up mortal man.
While good, and just, and anxious for his friends,
He Is still severely bent against himself;
Renouncing sleep, and food, and rest, and ease;
He strives with thirst and hunger, toil and heat;
And when his fortune sets before him all
The pomps and pleasures that his soul can wish,
His rigid virtue will accept of none.
ADDISON. CLEANLINESS
Is a mark of politeness. It is universally agreed upon, that no one, unadorned
with this virtue, can go into company without giving a manifest offense. The
easier or higher any one's fortune is, this duty rises proportionably. The
different nations of the world are as much distinguished by their cleanliness,
as by their arts and sciences. The more any country is civilized, the more they
consult this part of politeness. We need but compare our ideas of a female
Hottentot and an English beauty, to be satisfied of the truth of what has been
advanced.

In the next place, cleanliness may be said to be the foster mother of love.
Beauty indeed most commonly produces that passion in the mind, but cleanliness
preserves it. An indifferent face and person, kept in perpetual neatness, has
won many a heart from a pretty slattern. Age itself is not unamiable, while it
is preserved clean and unsullied: like a piece of metal constantly kept smooth
and bright, we look on it with more pleasure than on a new vessel which is
cankered with rust.

I might observe farther, that, as cleanliness renders us agreeable to others,
so it makes us easy to ourselves; that it is an excellent preservative of
health; and that several vices destructive both to mind and body, are
inconsistent with the habit of it. But these reflections I shall leave to the
leisure of my readers, and shall observe in the third place, that it bears a
great analogy with purity of mind, and naturally inspires refined sentiments
and passions.

SPECTATOR. CHARACTER.
We should not be too hasty in bestowing either our praise or censure on
mankind, since we shall often find such a mixture of good and evil in the same
character, that it may require a very accurate judgment, and a very elaborate
enquiry, to determine on which side the balance turns.

FIELDING. The first impressions which mankind receive of us, will be ever
after difficult to eradicate. How unhappy, therefore, must it be to fix our
characters in life, before we can possibly know the value, or weigh the
consequences of those actions which are to establish our future reputation.

Ibid. CUSTOM.
Custom is commonly too strong for the most resolute resolver, though furnished
for the assault with all the weapons of philosophy. "He that endeavors to free
himself from an ill habit (says Bacon) must not change too much at a time, lest
he should be discouraged by difficulty; nor too little, for then he will make
but slow advances.

IDLER. Suppose we have freed ourselves from the younger prejudices of our
education, yet we are in danger of having our mind turned aside from truth by
the influence of general custom. Our opinion of meats and drinks, of garments
and forms of salutation, are influenced more by custom, than by the eye, the
ear, or the taste. Custom prevails even over sense itself; and therefore no
wonder if it prevail over reason too. What is it but custom, that renders many
of the mixtures of food and sauces elegant in Britain, which would be awkward
and nauseous to the inhabitants of China, and indeed were nauseous to us when
we first tasted them? what but custom could make those salutations polite in
Muscovy, which are ridiculous in France and England? We call ourselves indeed
the politer nations: but it is we who judge thus of ourselves; and that fancied
politeness is oftentimes more owing to custom than reason. Why are the forms of
our present garments counted beautiful, and those fashions of our ancestors the
matter of scoff and contempt, which in their days, were all decent and genteel?
It is custom that forms our opinion of dress, and reconciles us by degrees to
those habits which at first seemed very odd and monstrous. It must be granted,
there are some garments and habits which have a natural congruity or
incongruity, modesty or immodesty, gaudiness or gravity; though for the most
part there is but little reason in these affairs; but what little there is of
reason, or natural decency, custom triumphs over it all. It is almost
impossible to persuade a young lady that any thing can be decent which is out
of fashion.

WATTS. Custom may lead a man into many errors; but it justifies none.

FIELDING. COMPLAINT.
What cannot be repaired is not to be regretted.

The usual fortune of complaint, is to excite contempt more than pity.

JOHNSON. To hear complaints with patience, even when complaints are vain, is
one of the duties of friendship: and though it must be allowed, that he suffers
most like a hero who hides his grief in silence, yet it cannot be denied, that
he who complains, acts like a man -- like a social being, who looks for help
from his fellow creatures.

Ibid. THE CHURCHYARD.
What a number of hillocks of death appear all round us! What are the
tomb-stones, but memorials of the inhabitants of that town, to inform us of the
period of all their lives, and to point out the day when it was said to each of
them, Your time shall be no longer. O, may I readily learn this important
lesson, that my turn is hastening too; such a little hillock shall shortly
arise for me in some unknown spot of ground; it shall cover this flesh and
these bones of mine in darkness, and shall hide them from the light of the sun,
and from the sight of man till the heavens be no more.

WATTS. Perhaps in this neglected spot is laid
Some heart once pregnant with celestial fire:
Hands that the rod of empire might have swayed,
Or waked to ecstasy the living lyre.
But knowledge to their eyes her ample page,
Rich with the spoils of time, did never unroll;
Chill penury repressed their noble rage,
And froze the genial current of the soul.
Full many a gem, of purest ray serene,
The dark unfathomed caves of ocean bear;
Full many a flower is born to blush unseen,
And waste its sweetness on the desert air.
Some village-Hampden, that with dauntless breast
The little tyrant of his fields withstood;
Some mute inglorious Milton here may rest;
Some Cromwell guiltless of his country's blood.
GRAY. COUNTRY-LIFE.
Happy the man, whom bounteous gods allow
With his own hands paternal grounds to plough!
Like the first golden mortals happy he,
From business and the cares of money free!
No human storms break off at land his sleep,
No loud alarms of nature on the deep:
From all the cheats of law he lives secure,
Nor does th'affronts of palaces endure.
Sometimes the beauteous marriageable vine
He to the lusty bridegroom elm does join;
Sometimes he lops the barren trees around,
And grafts new life into the fruitful wound;
Sometimes he shears his flock, and sometimes he
Stores up the golden treasures of the be,
He sees the lowing herds walk over the plain,
While neighboring hills low back to them again.
And when the season, rich as well as gay,
All her autumnal bounty does display,
How is he pleased the increasing use to see
Of his well trusted labors bend the tree!
Of which large stores, on the glad sacred days,
He gives to friends, and to the gods repays.
With how much joy does he beneath some shade,
By aged trees' reverend embraces made,
His careless head on the fresh green recline,
His head uncharg'd with fear, or with design!
COWLEY. God made the country, and man made the town:
What wonder then, that health and virtue, gifts
That can alone make sweet the bitter draught
That life holds out to all, should most abound
And least be threatened in the fields and groves?
Possess ye, therefore, ye who, borne about
In chariots and sedans, know no fatigue
But that of idleness, and taste no scenes
But such as art contrives -- possess ye still
Your element; there only can ye shine,
There only minds like yours can do no harm.
Our groves were planted to console at noon
The pensive wanderer in their shades. At eve
The moon beam sliding softly in between
The sleeping leaves, is all the light they wish,
Birds warb'ling all the music. We can spare
The splendour of your lamps, they but eclipse
Our softer satellite. Your songs confound
Our more harmonious notes. The thrush departs
Scared, and the offended nightingale is mute;
There is a public mischief in your mirth,
It plagues your country. Folly such as yours
Graced with a sword, and worthier of a fan,
Has made, what enemies could never have done,
Our arch of empire, steadfast but for you,
A mutilated structure soon to fall.
COWPER. COUNTRY-MAIDEN.
How happy is the harmless country-maid,
Who, rich by nature, scorns superfluous aid!
Whose modest clothes no wanton eyes invite,
But, like her soul, preserve the native white.
Whose little store her well-taught mind does please;
Not pinched with want, nor cloyed with wanton ease.
Who, free from storms which on the great ones fall,
Makes but few wishes, and enjoys them all.
No care, but love, can discompose her breast,
Love, of all cares, the sweetest and the best!
ROSCOMMON. CONTEMPT.
Contempt of others is the truest symptom of a base and bad heart -- while it
suggests itself to the mean and the vile, and tickles their little fancy on
every occasion, it never enters the great and good mind, but on the strongest
motives: nor is it then a welcome guest; affording only an uneasy sensation,
and brings always with it a mixture of concern and compassion.

FIELDING. There is not in human nature a more odious disposition than a
proneness to contempt, which is a mixture of pride and ill nature. Nor is there
any which more certainly denotes a bad mind; for in a good and benign temper
there can be no room for this sensation. That which constitutes an object of
contempt to the malevolent, becomes the object of other passions to a worthy
and good-natured man; for in such a person, wickedness and vice must raise
hatred and abhorrence; and weakness and folly will be sure to excite
compassion; so that he will find no object of his contempt in all the actions
of m^n.

Ibid. The basest and meanest of all human beings, are generally the most
forward to despise others. So that the most contemptible are generally the most
contemptuous.

Ibid. Contempt is a kind of gangrene, which, if it seizes one part of a
character, corrupts all the rest by degrees.

JOHNSON. CONGRESS OF 1774. (A vision.)
High on the foremost seat, in living light,
Majestic Randolph caught the hero's sight:
Fair on his head the civic crown was placed,
And the first dignity his scepter graced.
He opes the cause, and points in prospect far,
Through all the toils that wait the impending war --
But, hapless sage, thy reign must soon be over,
To lend thy luster and to shine no more.
So the bright morning star, from shades of even,
Leads up the dawn, and lights the front of heaven,
Points to the waking world the sun's broad way,
Then veils his own, and shines above the day.
And see great Washington behind thee rise,
Thy following sun, to gild our morning skies;
Over shadowy climes to pour the enlivening flame,
The charms of freedom, and the fire of fame.
The ascending chief adorned his splendid seat,
Like Randolph, ensign'd with a crown of state;
Where the green patriot bay beheld, with pride,
The hero's laurel springing by its side;
His sword hung useless, on his graceful thigh,
On Britain still he cast a filial eye;
But sovereign fortitude his visage bore,
To meet their legions on the invaded shore.
Sage Franklin next arose, in awful mien,
And smiled, unruffled, over the approaching scene;
High, on his locks of age, a wreath was braced,
Palm of all arts, that ever a mortal graced;
Beneath him lies the scepter kings have borne,
And crowns and laurels from their temples torn.
Nash, Rutledge, Jefferson, in council great,
And Jay and Laurens opened the rolls of fate.
The Livingstons, fair freedom's generous band,
The Lees, the Houstons, fathers of the land,
Over climes and kingdoms turned their ardent eyes,
Bade all the oppressed to speedy vengeance rise;
All powers of state, in their extended plan,
Rise from consent to shield the rights of man.
Bold Wolcott urged the all-important cause;
With steady hand the solemn scene he draws;
Undaunted firmness with his wisdom joined,
Nor kings nor worlds could warp his steadfast mind.
Now, graceful rising from his purple throne,
In radiant robes, immortal Hosmer shone;
Myrtles and bays his learned temples bound,
The statesman's wreath, the poet's garland crowned:
Morals and laws expand his liberal soul,
Beam from his eyes, and in his accents roll.
But lo! an unseen hand the curtain drew,
And snatched the patriot from the hero's view;
Wrapped in the shroud of death, he sees descend
The guide of nations and the muses' friend.
Columbus dropped a tear. The angel's eye
Traced the freed spirit mounting through the sky.
Adams, enraged, a broken charter bore,
And lawless acts of ministeria' power;
Some injured right in each loose leaf appears
A king in terrors and a land in tears;
From all the guileful plots the veil he drew,
With eye retortive looked creation through;
Opened the wide range of nature's boundless plan,
Traced all the steps of liberty and man;
Crowds rose to vengeance while his accents rung,
And Independence thundered from his tongue.
BARLOW. CARE.
What, in this life, which soon must end,
Can all our vain designs intend?
From shore to shore why should we run,
When none his tiresome self can shun?
For baneful care will still prevail,
And overtake us under fail:
'Twill dodge the great man's train behind,
Outrun the do, out-fly the wind.
If then thy soul rejoice today
Drive far tomorrow cares away;
In calm content let all be drowned;
No perfect good is to be found.
OTWAY. CENSORIOUSNESS.
O that the too-censorious world would learn
This wholesome rule, and with each other bear!
But man, as if a foe to his own species,
Takes pleasure to report his neighbor's faults,
Judging with rigor every small offense,
And prides himself in scandal Few there are
Who, injured, take the part of the transgressor,
And plead his pardon, ere he deigns to ask it.
E. HAYWOOD. CONVERSATION.
The conversation of most men is disagreeable, not so much for want of wit and
learning, as of good-breeding and discretion.

If you resolve to please, never speak to gratify any particular vanity or
passion of your own, but always with a design either to divert or inform the
company. A man who only aims at one of these, is always easy in his discourse.
He is never out of humor at being interrupted, because he considers that those
who hear him, are the best judges whether what he was saying could either
divert or inform them.

A modest person seldom fails to gain the good will of those he converses with,
because nobody envies a man who does not appear to be pleased with himself.

We should talk extremely little of ourselves. Indeed what can we say? It would
be as imprudent to discover our faults, as ridiculous to count over our fancied
virtues. Our private and domestic affairs are no less improper to be introduced
in conversation. What does it concern the company how many horses you keep in
your stables? Or whether your servant is most knave or fool?

A man may equally affront the company he is in by engrossing all the talk, or
observing a contemptuous silence.

Before you tell a story, it may be generally not amiss to draw a short
character, and give the company a true idea of the principal persons concerned
in it; the beauty of most things consisting not so much in their being said or
done, as in their being said or done by such a particular person, or on such a
particular occasion.

Notwithstanding all the advantages of youth, few young people please in
conversation; the reason is, that want of experience makes them positive, and
what they say is rather with a design to please themselves than any one else.

It is certain that age itself shall make many things pass well enough, which
would have been laughed at in the mouth of one much younger.

Nothing, however, is more insupportable to men of sense, than an empty formal
man who speaks in proverbs, and decides all controversies with a short
sentence. This piece of stupidity is the more insufferable, as it puts on the
air of wisdom.

Whenever you commend, add your reasons for doing so: it is this which
distinguishes the approbation of a man of sense from the flattery of
sycophants, and admiration of fools.

Raillery is no longer agreeable than while the whole company is pleased with
it. I would least of all be understood to except the person rallied.

GUARDIAN. Observe this rule in general; whenever it lies in your power to
lead the conversation, let it be directed to some profitable point of knowledge
or practice, so far as may be done with decency; and let not the discourse and
the hours be suffered to run loose without aim or design, and when a subject is
started, pass not hastily to another, before you have brought the present theme
of discourse to some tolerable issue, or a joint consent to drop it.

WATTS. CLEMENCY.
-- Yet no attribute
So well befits the exalted seat supreme,
And power's disposing hand, as clemency.
Each crime must from its quality be judged;
And pity there should interpose, where malice
Is not the aggressor. --
JONES. COMPASSION.
When most my heart was lifted with delight,
If I withheld the morsel from the hungry,
Forgot the widow's want and orphan's cry.
It I have known a good they have not shared,
Nor called the poor to take his portion with me,
Let my reproachful enemies stand forth, and now
Deny the succor which I gave not them.
ROW. How few, like thee, enquire the wretched out,
And court the offices of soft humanity!
Like thee, reserve their raiment for the naked,
Reach out their bread to feed the crying orphan,
Or mix the pitying tears with those that weep!
Ibid. Compassion proper to mankind appears,
Which nature witnessed when she lent us tears.
Of tender sentiments we only give
Those proofs: to weep is our prerogative;
To show by pitying looks and melting eves,
How with a suffering friend we sympathize.
Who can all sense of others' ills escape,
Is but a brute at best in human shape.
TATE. CURIOSITY.
Restrain your needless curiosity, and all solicitous enquiries into things
which were better unknown. How many plentiful springs of fear, sorrow, anger,
and hatred, have been found out and broken up by this laborious digging? Have a
care of an overcurious search into such things as might have safely remained
for ever secret, and the ignorance of them had prevented many foolish and
hurtful passions. A fond solicitude to know all that our friends or our foes
say of us is often recompensed with vexing disquietude and anguish of soul.

WATTS. Curiosity is one of the permament and certain characteristics of a
vigorous intellect. Every advance into knowledge opens new prospects, and
produces new incitements to further progress.

RAMBLER. CRUELTY.
Children should never be allowed to practice those diversions that carry an
idea of barbarity and cruelty in them, though it be but to brute creatures They
should not set up cocks to be tormented with cudgels thrown at them about
Shrovetide; nor delight in giving a tedious lingering death to a young litter
of dogs or cats, that may be appointed to be destroyed and drowned, lest they
multiply too much in a house: nor should they take pleasure in pricking,
cutting or mangling young birds which they have caught, nor using any savage
and bloody practices toward any creatures whatsoever; lest their hearts grow
hard and unrelenting, and they learn in time to practice these cruelties on
their own kind, and to murder and torture their fellow-mortals; or at least to
be indifferent to their pain and distress, so as to occasion it without remorse.

WATTS. CONSCIENCE.
In vain affected raptures flush the cheek,
And songs of pleasure warble from the tongue,
When fear and anguish labor in the break,
And all within is darkness and confusion.
Thus on deceitful AEtna's flowery side
Unfading verdure glads the roving eye,
While secret flames, with unextinguish'd rage
Insatiate on her wasted entrails prey,
And melt her treacherous beauties into ruins.
JOHNSON. The good or evil we confer on others, very often, I believe, recoils
on ourselves; for as men of a benign disposition enjoy their own acts of
beneficence equally with those to whom they are, done; so there are scarce any
natures so entirely diabolical, as to be capable of doing injuries without
paying themselves some pangs for the ruin which they bring on their
fellow creatures.

FIELDING. CONTENT.
Content is wealth, the riches of the mind;
And happy he who can that treasure find!
But the base miser starves amidst his store,
Broods on his gold; and, griping still at more,
Sits sadly pining, and believes he is poor.
DRYDEN. Content alone can all their wrongs redress,
Content, that other name for happiness;
It Is equal if our fortunes should augment,
And stretch themselves to the same vast extent
With our desires; or those desires abate,
Shrink and contract themselves to fit our state.
The unhappy man, slave to his wild desire,
By feeding it, foments the raging fire:
His gains augment his unextinguish'd thirst,
With plenty poor, and with abundance cursed,
BLACKMORE. There is scarce any lot so low, but there is something in it to
satisfy the man whom it has befallen; Providence having so ordered things, that
in every man's cup, how bitter soever, there are some cordial drops -- some
good circumstances, which, if wisely extracted, are sufficient for the purpose
he wants them -- that is, to make him contented, and, if not happy, at least
resigned.

STERN. There are thousands so extravagant in their ideas of contentment, as
to imagine that it must consist in having every thing in this world turn out
the way they wish -- that they are to sit down in happiness, and feel
themselves so at ease at all points, as to desire nothing better and nothing
more. I own there are instances of some, who seem to pass through the world as
if all their paths had been strewed with rose buds of delight; -- but a little
experience will convince us, it is a fatal expectation to go upon. -- We are
born to trouble; and we may depend upon it whilst we live in this world we
shall have it, though with intermissions -- that is, in whatever state we are,
we shall find a mixture of good and evil; and therefore the true way to
contentment is to know how to receive these certain vicissitudes of life, --
the returns of good and evil, so as neither to be exalted by the one, or
overthrown by the other, but to bear ourselves toward every thing which
happens with such ease and indifference of mind, as to hazard as little as may
be. This is the true temperate climate fitted for us by nature, and in which
every wise man would with to live.

Ibid. The foundation of content must spring up in a man's own mind; and he who
has so little knowledge of human nature as to seek happiness by changing any
thing but his own disposition, will waste his life in fruitless efforts, and
multiply the griefs which he purposes to remove.

RAMBLER. Enquiries after happiness, and rules for attaining it, are not so
necessary and useful to mankind as the arts of consolation, and supporting
one's self under affliction. The utmost we can hope for in this world, is
contentment; if we aim at any thing higher, we shall meet with nothing but
grief and disappointment A man should direct all his studies and endeavors at
making himself easy now, and happy hereafter.

The truth of it is, if all the happiness that is dispersed through the whole
race of mankind in this world were drawn together, and put into the possession
of any single man, it would not make a very happy being: though, on the
contrary, if the miseries of the whole species were fixed in a single person,
they would make a very miserable one.

SPECTATOR. A man should always consider how much he has more than he wants. I
am wonderfully pleased with the reply which Aristippus made to one who condoled
him upon the loss of a farm: Why, said he, I have three farms still, and you
have but one; so that I ought rather to be afflicted for you than you for me.
On the contrary, foolish men are more apt to consider what they have lost than
what they possess; and to fix their eyes upon those who are richer than
themselves, rather than on those who are under greater difficulties. All the
real pleasures and conveniences of life lie in a narrow compass; but it is the
humor of mankind to be always looking forward, and straining after one who has
got the start of them in wealth and honor.

Ibid. I envy not the mighty great,
Those powerful rulers of the state,
Who settle nations as they please,
And govern at the expense of ease.
Far happier the shepherd swain,
Who daily drudges on the plain,
And nightly in some humble shed
On rushy pillows lays his head.
No cursed ambition breaks his rest,
No factious wars divide his breast:
His flock, his pipe, and artless fair,
Are all his hope, and all his care.
HILDEBRAND JACOB. CONTINENCE OF SCIPIO.
-- What with admiration
Struck every heart was this. -- A noble virgin,
Conspicuous far over all the captive dames,
Was marked the general's prize. She wept and blushed,
Young, fresh, and blooming like the morn. An eye
As when the blue sky trembles through a cloud
Of purest white. A secret charm combined
Her features and infused enchantment through them.
Her shape was harmony. -- But eloquence
Beneath her beauty fails; which seemed on purpose,
By nature lavished on her, that mankind
Might see the virtue of a hero tried
Almost beyond the stretch of human force.
Soft as she passed along, with down cast eyes,
Where gentle sorrow swelled, and now and then
Dropped over her modest cheek a trickling tear.
The Roman legions languish'd, and hard war
Felt more than pity. Even their chief himself
As on his high tribunal raised he sat,
Turned from the dangerous sight, and chiding asked
His officers, if by this gift they meant
To cloud his virtue in its very dawn.
She, questioned of her birth, in trembling accents,
With tears and blushes broken, told her tale,
But when he found her royally descended,
Of her old captive parents the sole joy;
And that a hapless Celtiberian prince,
Her lover and beloved, forgot his chains,
His lost dominions, and for her alone
Wept out his tender soul; sudden the heart
Of this young, conquering, loving, god-like Roman
Felt all the great divinity of virtue.
His wishing youth stood checked, his tempting power
Restrained by kind humanity. -- At once
He for her parents and her lover called.
The various scene imagine: how his troops
Looked dubious on, and wondered what he meant:
While stretched below the trembling suppliants lay,
Racked by a thousand mingling passions, fear
Hope, Jealousy, disdain, submission, grief,
Anxiety and love in every shape.
To these as different sentiments succeeded,
As mixed emotions, when the man divine
Thus the dread silence to the lover broke.
" We both are young, both charmed. The right of war
" Has put thy beauteous mistress in my power;
" With whom I could in the most sacred ties
" Live out a happy life: but know, that Romans
" Their hearts, as well as enemies can conquer.
" Then take her to thy soul; and with her take
" Thy liberty and kingdom. In return
" I ask but this. When you behold these eyes,
" These charms, with transport; be a friend to Rome.
THOMSON. COURAGE.
True courage but from opposition grows;
And what are fifty, what a thousand slaves
Matched to the sinew of a single arm
That strikes for liberty.
BROOK. This is true courage, not the brutal force
Of vulgar heroes, but the firm resolve
Of virtue and of reason. He who thinks
Without their aid to shine in deeds of arms,
Builds on a sandy basis his renown;
A dream, a vapor, or an ague fit
May make a coward of him --
WHITEHEAD. COURT.
Would you be happy, leave this fatal place;
Fly from the court's pernicious neighborhood,
Where innocence is shunned, and blushing modesty
Is made the scorner's jest; where hate, deceit,
And deadly ruin, wear the masks of beauty,
And draw deluded fools with shows of pleasure.
ROW. -- The noblest proof of love
That Athelwold can give, is still to guard
Your tender beauties from the blasting taint
Of courtly gales. The delicate soft tints
Of snowy innocence, the crimson glow
Of blushing modesty, there all fly off,
And leave the faded face no nobler boast
Than well-rang'd, lifeless features. Ah, Elfrida,
Should you be doomed, which happier fate forbid!
To drag your hours through all that nauseous scene
Of pageantry and vice; your purer breast,
True to its virtuous relish, soon would heave
A fervent sigh for innocence and Harewood.
MASON. Let us compare what the historians of all ages have said concerning the
courts of monarchs, let us recollect the conversation and sentiments of people
of all countries, in respect to the wretched character of courtiers; and we
shall find, that these are not mere airy speculations, but things confirmed by
a sa^ and melancholy experience.

Ambition joined to idleness, and business to pride; a desire of obtaining
riches without labor, and an aversion to truth; flattery, treachery, perfidy,
violation of engagements, contempt of civil duties, fear of the prince's
virtues, hope from his weakness, but, above all, a perpetual ridicule cast upon
virtue, are, I think, the characteristics by which most courtiers in all ages
and countries have been constantly distinguished.

MONTESQUIEU. All the prostitutes who set themselves to sale, all the locusts
who devour the land, with crowds of spies, parasues, and sycophants, and whose
swarms of little, noisome, nameless insects, will hum and buz in every corner
of the court. -- A sort of men too low to be much regarded, and too high to be
quite neglected, the lumber of every administration, the furniture of every
court. These gil^ carved things are seldom answerable for more than the men on
a chess board, who are moved about at will, and on whom the conduct of the game
is not to be charged Some of these every prince must have about him. The
pageantry of a court requires that he should.

BOLINGBROKE. I have known courts these thirty-six years, and know they differ;
but in some things they are extremely constant. First in the true-old maxim of
a minister's never forgiving those he has injured. Secondly, in the
insincerity of those who would be thought the best friends. Thirdly, in the
love of fawning, cringing, and tale-bearing. Fourthly, in sacrificing those,
whom we really with well, to a point of interest or intrigue. Fifthly, in
keeping every thing worth taking, for those who can do service or disservice.

SWIFT. God help the man, condemned by cruel fate
To court the seeming, or the real great.
Much sorrow shall he feel, and suffer more
Than any slave that labors at the oar.
By slavish methods must he learn to please,
By smooth tongued flattery, that cursed court disease,
Supple to every way ward mood strike sail,
And shift with shifting humour's peevish gale.
To nature dead, he must adopt v^le art,
And wear a smile with anguish in his heart.
A sense of honor would destroy his schemes,
And conscience never must speak unless in dreams.
CHURCHILL. COWARD.
Cowards die many times before their death:
The valiant never taste of death but once.
Of all the wonders that I yet have heard,
It seems to me most strange, that man should fear;
Seeing that death, a necessary end,
Will come when it will come.
SHAKESPEARE. Cowards have courage when they see not death,
And fearful hares that skulk in forms all day,
Yet fight their feeble quarrels by the moonlight;
-- But valiant men
Still love the sun should witness what they do.
DRYDEN. As cheats to play with those still aim,
That do not understand the game;
So cowards never use their might,
But against such as will not fight.
HUDIBRAS. CROISADE.
* * * * Sure I am, it is madness,
Inhuman madness, thus, from half the world
To drain its blood and treasure, to neglect
Each art of peace, each care of government;
And all for what? By spreading desolation,
Rapine and slaughter over the other half,
To gain a conquest we can never hold.
I venerate this land. Those sacred hills,
Those vales, those cities, trod by saints and prophets,
By God himself, the scenes of heavenly wonders,
Inspire me with a certain awful joy.
But the same God, my friend, pervades, sustains,
Surrounds and fills this universal frame;
And every land, where spreads his vital presence,
His all-enliv'ning breath, to me is holy.
Excuse me, Theald, if I go too far:
I meant alone to say, I think these wars
A kind of persecution. And when ever
That most absurd and cruel of all vices,
Is once begun, where shall it find an end?
Each in his turn, or has, or claims a right
To (...) its dagger, to return its furies;
And first or last they fall upon ourselves.
THOMSON. CROWN.
O polished perturbation! golden care!
That keep'st the ports of slumber open wide,
To many a watchful night: sleep with it now:
But not so sound, and half so deeply sweet,
As he whose brow, with homely biggen bound,
Snores out the watch of night. O majesty!
When thou do pinch thy bearer, thou do sit
Like a rich armor, worn in heat of day,
That scalds with safety.
SHAKESPEARE. CREDULITY.
The credulous man is ready to receive every thing for truth, that has but the
shadow of evidence; every new book that he reads, and every ingenious man with
whom he converses, has power enough to draw him into the sentiments of the
speaker or writer. He has so much complaisance in him, or weakness of soul,
that he is ready to resign his own opinion to the first objection which he
hears, and to receive any sentiments of another that are asserted with a
positive air and much assurance. Thus he is under a kind of necessity, through
the indulgence of this credulous humor, either to be often changing his
opinions, or to believe inconsistencies.

The man of contradiction stands ready to oppose every thing that is said: he
gives but a slight attention to the reasons of other men, from an inward
scornful presumption, that they have no strength in them. When he reads or
hears a discourse different from his own sentiments, he does not give himself
leave to consider, whether that discourse may be true; but employs all his
powers immediately to confute it. Your great disputers, and your men of
controversy, are in continual danger of this sort of prejudice: they contend
often for victory, and will maintain whatsoever they have asserted, while truth
is lost in the noise and tumult of reciprocal contradictions; and it frequently
happens, that a debate about opinions is turned into a mutual reproach of
persons.

WATTS. The prejudice of credulity may in some measure be cured, by learning to
set a high value upon truth, and by taking more pains to attain it; remembering
that truth often lies dark and deep, and requires us to dig for it as hidden
treasure; and that falsehood often puts on a fair disguise, and therefore we
should not yield up our judgment to every plausible appearance. It is no part
of civility or good breeding to part with truth, but to maintain it with
decency and candor.

A spirit of contradiction is so pedantic and hateful, that a man should take
much pains with himself to watch against every instance of it: he should learn
so much good humor, at least, as never to oppose any thing without just and
solid reason for it: he should abate some degrees of pride and moroseness,
which are never-failing ingredients in this sort of temper, and should seek
after so much honesty and conscience, as never to contend for conquest or
triumph; but to review his own reasons, and to read the arguments of his
opponents, if possible, with an equal indifferency, be glad to spy a truth, and
to submit to it, though it appear on the opposite side.

Ibid. Of all kinds of credulity, the most obstinate and wonderful is that of
political zealots; of men who being numbered, they know not how, or why, in any
of the parties that divide a state, resign the use of their own eyes and ears,
and resolve to believe nothing that does not favor those whom they profess to
follow.

IDLER. CHARITABLE JUDGMENT.
Let us take a survey of the world, and see what a mixture there is of amiable
and hateful qualities among the children of men. There is beauty and
comeliness; there is vigor and vivacity; there is good humor and compassion;
there is wit, and judgment, and industry, even among those that are profligate
and abandoned to many vices. There is sobriety, and love, and honesty, and
justice, and decency amongst men that "know not" God, and believe not the
gospel of our "Lord Jesus." There are very few of the sons and daughters (...)
Adam, but are possessed of something good and agreeable, either by nature or
acquirement; therefore when there is a necessary occasion to mention the vices
of any man, we should not speak evil of him in the gross, nor heap reproaches
on him by wholesale. It is very disingenuous to talk scandal in superlatives,
as though every man who was a sinner, was a perfect villain, the very worst of
men, all over hateful and abominable.

WATTS. CHARITY.
Though the goodness of a man's heart did not incline him to acts of charity,
one would think the desire of honor should. For as building fine houses,
purchasing fine clothes, pictures and other such like articles of expense,
shows nothing more than an ambition to be respected above other people: would
not one great act of charity, one instance of redeeming a poor family from all
the miseries of poverty, or restoring an unfortunate tradesman to the means of
procuring a livelihood by his industry, acquire more real respect and more
lasting-honour? The former are the works of other people's hands -- the latter
the acts of his own heart.

FIELDING. Though we may sometimes unintentionally bestow our beneficence on
the unworthy, it does not take from the merit of the act. For charity does not
adopt the vices of its objects.

Ibid. Charity is a virtue of the heart, and not of the hands, says an old
writer. Gifts and alms are the expressions, not the essence of this virtue. A
man may bestow great sums on the poor and indigent without being charitable,
and may be charitable when he is not able to bestow any thing. Charity
therefore is a habit of good will or benevolence in the soul, which disposes us
to the love, assistance, and relief of mankind, especially of those who stand
in need of it. The poor man who has this excellent frame of mind, is no less
entitled to the reward of this virtue, than the man who founds a college. For
my own part, I am charitable to an extravagance this way: I never saw an
indigent person in my life, without reaching out to him some of this imaginary
relief. I cannot but sympathise with every one I meet that is in affliction,
and if my abilities were equal to my wishes, there should be neither pain nor
(...) in the world.

GUARDIAN. CONFIDENCE.
Self-confidence is the first requisite to great undertakings; yet he who forms
his opinion of himself, without knowing the powers of other men, is very liable
to error.

LIFE OF POPE. There would be few enterprises of great labor or hazard
undertaken, if we had not the power of magnifying the advantages which we
persuade ourselves to expect from them.

RAMBLER. Nothing is more fatal to happiness or virtue than that confidence
which flatters us with an opinion of our own strength, and by assuring us of
the power of retreat, precipitates us into hazard.

IDLER. CENSURE.
A good conscience is to the soul, what health is to the body; it preserves a
constant case and serenity within us, and more than countervails all the
calamities and afflictions which can possibly befall us. I know nothing so hard
for a generous mind to get over, as calumny and reproach; and cannot find any
method of quieting the soul under them, besides this single one; of our being
conscious to ourselves that we do not deserve them.

SPECTATOR. COMPLAISANCE.
There are many arts of graciousness and conciliation which are to be practiced
without expense, and by which those may be made our friends, who have never
received from us any real benefit. Such arts, when they include neither guilt
nor meanness, it is surely reasonable to learn; for who would want that love
which is so easily to be gained?

RAMBLER. The universal (...) in which an complaisance is included, and from
which flow all the formalities which custom has established in civilized
nations, is, "That no man should give any preference to himself," a rule so
comprehensive and certain, that perhaps it is not easy for the mind to imagine
an incivility without supposing it to be broken.

Ibid. Wisdom and virtue are by no means sufficient, without the supplemental
laws of good breeding, to secure freedom from degenerating into rudeness, or
self-esteem from swelling into insolence. A thousand incivilities may be
committed, and a thousand offices neglected, without any remorse of conscience,
or reproach from reason.

Ibid. Complaisance renders a superior amiable, an equal agreeable, and an
inferior acceptable. It smooths distinction, sweetens conversation, and makes
every one in the company pleased with himself. It produces goodnature and
mutual benevolence, encourages the timorous, soothes the turbulent, humanizes
the fierce, and distinguishes the society of civilized persons from a confusion
of savages. In a word, complaisance is a virtue that blends all orders of men
together in a friendly intercourse of words and actions, and is suited to that
equality in human nature which every one ought to consider, so far as is
consistent with the order and economy of the world.

If we could look into the secret anguish and affliction of every man's heart,
we should often find, that more of it arises from little imaginary distresses,
such as checks, frowns, contradictions, expressions of contempt, and (what
Shakespeare reckons among other evils under the Sun) -- The proud man's
contumely,
The insolence of office, and the spurns
That patient merit of the unworthy takes,
than from the more real pains and calamities of life. The only method to
remove these imaginary distresses as much as possible out of human life, would
be the universal practice of such an ingenuous complaisance as I have been here
describing, which, as it is a virtue, may be defined to be, a constant
endeavor to please those whom we converse with, so far as we may do it
innocently.

GUARDIAN. CONSOLATION.
No one ought to remind another of misfortunes of which the sufferer does not
complain, and which there are no means proposed of alleviating. We have no
right to excite thoughts which necessarily give pain, whenever they return, and
which perhaps might not have revived but by absurd and unseasonable compassion.

RAMBLER. Nothing is more offensive to a mind convinced that its distress is
without a remedy, and preparing to submit quietly to irresistible calamity,
than those petty and conjectured comforts which unskilful officiousness thinks
it virtue to administer.

Notes upon SHAKESPEARE. CRITICISM.
He who is taught by a critic to dislike that which pleased him in its natural
state, has the same reason to complain of his instructor, as the madman to rail
at his doctor, who, when he thought himself master of Peru, physicked him to
poverty.

IDLER. CHEERFULNESS.
If we consider cheerfulness in three lights, with regard to ourselves, to
those we converse with, and to the great author of our being, it will not a
little recommend itself on each of these accounts. The man who is possessed of
this excellent frame of mind is not only easy in his thoughts, but a perfect
master of all the powers and faculties of his soul* his imagination is always
clear, and his judgment undisturbed: his temper is even and unruffled, whether
in action or in solitude. He comes with a relish to all those goods which
nature has provided for him, tastes all the pleasures of the creation which are
poured about him, and (...) not feel the full weight of those accidental evils
which may befall him.

If we consider him in relation to the persons whom he converses with, it
naturally produces love and goodwill toward him. A cheerful mind is not only
disposed to be affable and obliging, but raises the same good humor in those
who come within its influence. A man finds himself pleased, he does not know
why, with the cheerfulness of his companion. It is like a sudden sunshine that
awakens a secret delight in the mind, without her attending to it. The heart
rejoices of its own accord, and naturally flows out into friendship and
benevolence toward the person who has so kindly an effect upon it.

When I consider this cheerful state of mind in its third relation, I cannot
but look upon it as a constant habitual gratitude to the great author of
nature. An inward cheerfulness is an implicit praise and thanksgiving to
providence under all its dispensations. It is a kind of acquiescence in the
state wherein we are placed, and a secret approbation of the divine will in his
conduct toward man.

SPECTATOR. CUNNING.
Cunning differs from wisdom as twilight from open day. He that walks in the
sunshine, goes boldly forward by the nearest way; he sees that when the path
is strait and even, he may proceed in security, and when it is rough and
crooked, he easily complies with the turns, and avoids the obstructions. But
the traveller in the dusk, fears more as he sees less; he knows there may (...)
and therefore suspects that he is never safe, tries every step before he fixes
his foot, and shrinks at every noise, lest violence should approach him.
Cunning discovers little at a time, and has no other means of certainty than
multiplication of stratagems, and superfluity of suspicion. Yet men thus narrow
by nature and mean by art, are sometimes able to rise by the miscarriages of
bravery and the openness of integrity; and by watching failures, and snatching
opportunities, obtain advantages which belong properly to higher characters.

IDLER. CAUSES OF WAR.
Sometimes the quarrel between two princes is to decide which of them shall
dispossess a third of his dominions, where neither of them pretend to any
right. Sometimes one prince quarreleth with another, for fear the other should
quarrel with him. Sometimes a war is entered upon because the enemy is too
strong; and sometimes because he is too weak. Sometimes our neighbors want the
things which we have, or have the things which we want; and we both fight till
they take ours, or give us theirs. It is a very justifiable cause of war, to
invade a country after the people have been wasted by famine, destroyed by
pestilence, or embroiled by factions among themselves. It is justifiable to
enter into a war against our nearest ally, when one of his towns lie convenient
for us, or a territory of land, that would render our dominions round and
compact. If a prince sends forces into a nation, where the people are poor and
ignorant, he may lawfully put half of them to death, and make slaves of the
rest, in order to civilize and reduce them from their barbarous way of living.

It is a very kingly, honorable, and frequent practice, when one prince
desires the assistance of another to secure him against an invasion, that the
assistant, when he has driven out the invader, should seize on the dominions
himself, and kill, imprison, or banish the prince he came to relieve. Alliance
by blood or marriage is a frequent cause of war between princes; and the nearer
the kindred is, the greater is their disposition to quarrel. There is likewise
a kind of beggarly princes in Europe, not able to make war by themselves, who
hire out their troops to richer nations, for so much a day to each man, of
which they keep three fourths to themselves, and it is the best part of their
maintenance.

SWIFT. A genealogist sets forth to a prince that he is descended in a direct
line from a count, whose kindred, three or four hundred years ago, had made a
family compact with a house, the memory of which is extinguished. That house
had some distant claim to a province, the last proprietor of which died of an
apoplexy. The prince and his council instantly resolve that this province
belongs to him of divine right. The province, which is some hundred leagues
from him, protests that it does not so much as know him; that it is not
disposed to be governed by him; that before prescribing laws to them, their
consent at least was necessary: these allegations do not so much as reach the
prince's ears; it is insisted on that his right is incontestible. He instantly
picks up a multitude, who have nothing to do and nothing to lose; clothes them
with coarse blue cloth; puts on them hats bound with coarse white worsted;
makes them turn to the right and left; and thus marches away with them to glory.

Other princes, on this armament, take part in it to the best of their ability,
and soon cover a small extent of country with more hireling murderers, than
Gengis Kan, Tamerlane and Bajazet had at their heels.

People at no small distance, on hearing that fighting is going forward, and
that if they would make one, there are five or six sous a day for them,
immediately divide into two bands, like reapers, and go and sell their services
to the best bidder.

These multitudes furiously butcher one another not only without having any
concern in the quarrel, but without so much as knowing what it is about.

Sometimes five or six powers are engaged, three against three, two against
four, sometimes even one against five, all equally detesting one another, and
friends and foes by turns, agreeing only in one thing, to do all the mischief
possible.

VOLTAIRE. Perplexed with trifles through the vale of life,
Man strives against man, without a cause for strife;
Armies embattled meet, and thousands bleed,
For some vile spot where fifty cannot feed.
Squirrels for nuts contend, and wrong or right,
For the world's empire kings ambitious fight.
What odds! -- to us it is all the self same thing,
A nut, a world, a squirrel, and a king.
CHURCHILL. CONQUEST.
Stripped of her gaudy plumes and vain disguise,
See where Ambition, mean and loathsome lies;
Reflection with relentless hand pulls down
The tyrant's bloody wreath and ravished crown.
In vain he tells of battles bravely won,
Of nations conquered and of worlds undone:
Triumphs like these but ill with mankind suit,
And sink the conqueror beneath the brute
CHURCHILL. They err who count it glorious to subdue
By conquest far and wide; to overrun
Large countries, and in field great battles win,
Great cities by assault: what do these worthies
But rob, and spoil, burn, slaughter, and enslave
Peaceable nations? neighboring or remote,
Made captive, yet deserving freedom more
Than those their conquerors, who leave behind
Nothing but ruin whereso'er they rove;
And all the flourishing works of peace destroy;
Then swell with pride, and must be titled gods,
Great benefactors of mankind, deliverers,
Worshipped with temple, priest, and sacrifice:
One is the son of Jove, Mars the other,
'Till conquerror death discovers them scarce men,
Rolling in brutish sin. --
Violent or shameful death their due reward.
MILTON. CONQUERORS. (A vision.)
Oppressed with gloomy melancholy, I threw myself on my bed, in order to forget
what I had seen, and still more what I had read. Sleep soon invaded my senses.
Eternal Justice appeared in the sky to judge the sons of men. The skeleton of
Alexander, of Macedon, and that of a robber and murderer, were summoned to
appear. -- "Look, Alexander," said Justice, Look upon thy competitor; -- this
robber wanted only power and strength to equal thee, and he would have made use
of the same means as thou to ravage the world. His courage was as great as
thine; but being constrained by obstacles, he was obliged to murder his
fellow creatures by night. Those who attend to see my laws put in execution,
were fortunately able to bring him to the scaffold; there he confessed his
crimes, and acknowledged he deserved the most shameful punishment.

Wretch! where is the difference between this robber and thee? It is a pity the
chastisement did not fall on thy head. Power supported thy iron arm, that
crushed mankind; thou destroyedst my laws by firing of towns; thou did oblige
terrified mortals to erect altars to thee; thou did stab the bosom of
friendship; the scandal of thy victories has led kings astray, who, taking
example by thee, have been unjust. Approach, cruel Caesar, thou who wept before
the statue of this murderer, ambitious of deserving such another. Nothing could
stop thy career, neither the genius of Rome, nor the tears of thy country.
Armed with a poniard, thou stabbedst her whilst she invited thee to her arms.
Thou destroyedst the wisdom of six ages of glory, in order to establish on
their ruins horrible despotism. Get thee gone, thy name begins to be as
detestable as those of Tamerlane, Attila, Charles the XIIth, and Gengiskan. --
Wise men have proscribed their odious and destructive genius; it is only the
blind multitude who are still seduced, and who, in their low ideas, cannot
discriminate between the powerful criminal who escapes punishment, and the
obscure guilty who suffers justly.

Princes, conquerors, generals, warriors, whatever pompous titles you bear,
vile ambitious wretches, bloody men, shudder! -- You have accustomed mankind to
destroy each other; you have made war an habitual scourge, and ever growing
trade; you have dared to embellish murder with the pompous name of glory; it is
you, undoubtedly, will be answerable for the crimes you have made them commit;
-- but who ever comes to offer you the hand stained with blood, he that could
put a stop to cruelty, or avoid being an accomplice in it, or has been a
volunteer to serve your wrathful purposes for base interest; he, I say, will be
as guilty as yourselves. By what authority dare a mortal inflict death? Does
not his existence belong to God who created him? Destruction is an outrage
against the Divine Being. Shudder, cruel murderers, in my presence! nothing can
excuse you; the blood of your brethren cries aloud for vengeance. Even he who
is stained with only one bloody spot, shall be tormented several ages by the
devouring fire of repentance. You will still even sob with sorrow, when the
clemency of a merciful God will vouchsafe to absolve you; for I must tell you,
that stain is indelible.

Your motive was to merit the admiration of future ages. Well, you are
condemned to suffer until that happy period when an enlightened people will
execrate war and those who light the horrible torch. Alexander! thy name must
be held in detestation over all that country where thou would be deified; all
those who followed thy example must be ranked among the profligate villains
before thou can expect any forgiveness. -- May this time not be so distant as
the reparation of thy crimes would require! -- Suffer patiently; you already
begin to be detestable; thy exploits already begin to be looked upon as
barbarous and unjust; wise men have stamped with disgrace thy impious imitators.

MERCIER. CLERGYMAN.
Would I describe a preacher, such as Paul,
Were he on earth, would hear, approve, and (...)
Paul should himself direct me. I would tra^^
His master strokes, and draw from his design.
I would express him simple, grave, sincere;
In doctrine incorrupt; in language plain;
And plain in manner. Decent, solemn, chaste,
And natural in jesture. Much impressed
Himself, as conscious of his awful charge,
And anxious mainly that the flock he feeds
May feel it too. Affectionate in look,
And tender in address, as well becomes
A messenger of grace to guilty men.
COWPER. COURTS OF JUSTICE.
It is essential to the preservation of the rights of every individual, his
life, liberty, property, and character, that there be an impartial
interpretation of the laws and administration of justice. It is the right of
every citizen to be tried by judges as impartial as the lot of humanity will
admit. It is therefore not only the best policy, but for the security of the
rights of the people, that the judges of the Supreme Judicial Court should hold
their offices so long as they behave well; subject however to such limitations
on account of age, as may be provided by the constitution of the state; and
that they should have honorable salaries ascertained and established by
standing laws.

CONSTITUTION OF NEW HAMPSHIRE. CRIMES AND PUNISHMENTS.
In criminal prosecutions, the trial of facts, in the vicinity where they
happen, is so essential to the security of the life, liberty, and estate of the
citizen, that no crime or offense ought to be tried in any other county than
that in which it is committed: except in cases (...) ^^neral insurrection in
any particular county, when it shall appear to the judges of the superior
court, that an impartial trial cannot be had in the county where the offense
may be committed; and upon their report, the legislature shall think proper to
direct the trial in the nearest county in which an impartial trial can be
obtained.

All penalties ought to be proportioned to the nature of the offense. No wise
legislature will affix the same punishment to the crimes of theft, forger and
the like, which they do to those of murder and treason; where the same
undistinguishing severity is exerted against all offenses, the people are led
to forget the real distinction in the crimes themselves, and to commit the most
flagrant with as little compunction as they do the lightest offenses: for the
same reason, a multitude of sanguinary laws is both impolitic and unjust; the
true design of all punishments being to reform, not to exterminate mankind.

Ibid. DEATH.
Reflect that life and death, affecting sounds!
Are only varied modes of endless being:
Reflect that life, like every other blessing,
Derives its value from its use alone:
Not for itself, -- but for a nobler end,
The Eternal gave it, and that end is virtue!
When inconsistent with a greater good,
Reason commands to cast the less away:
Thus life, with loss of wealth, is well preserved,
And virtue cheaply saved with loss of life.
IRENE. It was perhaps ordained by Providence, to hinder us from tyrannising
over one another, that no individual should be of such importance, as to cause,
by his retirement or death, any chasm in the world.

RAMBLER. To neglect at any time preparation for (...), is to sleep on our post
at a siege; but to omit it in old age, is to sleep at an attack.

Ibid. Nothing more certain than to die, but when
Is most uncertain: if so, every hour
We should prepare us for the journey, which
Is not to be put off. I must submit
To the divine decree, not argue it,
And cheerfully welcome it.
BEAUMONT. Now death draws near, a strange perplexity
Creeps coldly on me, like a fear to die.
Courage uncertain dangers may abate,
But who can bear the approach of certain fate?
The wisest and the best some fear may show,
And wish to stay, though they resolve to go.
As some saint pilgrim standing on the shore,
First views the torrent he would venture over,
And then his inn upon the farther ground,
Loath to wade through, and lother to go round;
Then dipping in his staff, does trial make
How deep it is, and sighing pulls it back;
Sometimes resolved to fetch his leap, and then
Runs to the bank, but there stops short again:
So I at once
Both heavenly faith and human fear obey,
And feel before me in an unknown way.
DRYDEN. This vast, this solid earth, that blazing sun,
Those skies through which it rolls, must all have end.
What then is man, the smallest part of nothing?
Day buries day, month month, and year the year;
Our life is but a chain of many deaths:
Can then death's self be feared? our life much rather:
Life is the desert, life the solitude;
Death joins us to the majority;
It Is to be born to Platos and Timoleons,
It Is to be great for ever!
It Is pleasure, it is ambition then to die.
YOUNG. DEFAMATION.
Does humanity clothe and educate the unknown orphan? -- Poverty, thou have no
genealogies: -- See! is he not the father of the child? Thus do we rob heroes
of the best part of their glory -- their virtue. Take away the motive of the
act, you take away all that is worth having in it; -- wrest it to ungenerous
ends, you load the virtuous man who did it with infamy: -- undo it all -- I
beseech you, give him back his honor, -- restore the jewel you have taken from
him -- replace him in the eye of the world --

It is too late.

STERN. Good name in man or woman, dear my lord,
Is the immediate jewel of their souls;
Who steals my purse, steals trash; it is something, nothing,
'T was mine, it is his, and has been slave to thousands;
But he that filches from me my good name,
Robs me of that, which not enriches him,
And makes me poor indeed.
SHAKESPEARE. DEPENDENCE.
There is no state more contrary to the dignity of wisdom, than perpetual and
unlimited dependence, in which the understanding lies useless, and every motion
is received from external impulse. Reason is the great distinction of human
nature, the faculty by which we approach to some degree of association with
celestial intelligences; but as the excellence of every power appears only in
its operations, not to have reason, and to have it useless and unemployed, is
nearly the same.

RAMBLER. DOGMATISM.
Maintain a constant watch at all times against a (...) spirit: fix not your
assent to any proposition in (...) and unalterable manner till you have some
firm and unalterable ground for it, and till you have arrived at some clear and
sure evidence; till you have turned the proposition on all sides, (...)
searched the matter through and through, so that you cannot be mistaken. And
even where you think you have full grounds of assurance, be not too early, nor
too frequent, in expressing this assurance in too peremptory and positive a
manner, remembering that human nature is always liable to mistake in this
corrupt and feeble state.

WATTS. DIFFIDENCE.
Diffidence may check resolution and obstruct performance, but compensates its
embarrassments by more important advantages: it conciliates the proud, and
softens the severe; averts envy from excellence, and censure from miscarriage.

RAMBLER. DESPOTISM.
I am not of your opinion, with regard to despotism and despots. It appears to
me horrible and absurd to the last degree, that a whole people should blindly
subject themselves to the caprice of one man, even if he were an angel. For my
own part, I would not live under him a single day. This angel may become in a
moment a monster thirsting after blood. Despotism is to me the most abominable
and disgustful of all bad governments; man is perpetually crushed, debased and
degraded by it. Look into history, ancient and modern, and see if ever there
was one upon earth that was not an insult on mankind, and the disgrace of human
nature.

MONTESQUIEU. The most formidable enemy of the public (...) is not riot or
sedition, but despotism: it changes the character of a nation, and always for
the worse: it produces nothing but vices. Whatever might be the power of an
Indian sultan, he could never form magnanimous subjects; he would never find
among his slaves the virtues of freemen. Chemistry can extract no more gold
from a mixed body than is included in it; and the most arbitrary power can draw
nothing from a slave but the baseness he contains. --

What is arbitrary power? The seed of calamities, that, sown in the bosom of a
state, springs up to bear the fruit of misery and devastation.

HELVETIUS. Then all the elders of Israel gathered themselves together, and
came to Samuel unto Ramah,

And said unto him, Behold thou art old, and thy sons walk not in thy ways: now
make unto us a king to judge us like all the nations.

But the thing displeased Samuel, when they said, Give us a king to judge us;
and Samuel prayed unto the Lord.

And the Lord said unto Samuel, Hearken unto the voice of the people in all
that they say unto thee; for they have not rejected thee, but they have
rejected me that I should not reign over them.

Now therefore hearken to their voice: howbeit, yet solemnly protest unto them,
and show them the manner of the king that shall reign over them.

And Samuel told all the words of the Lord unto the people that asked of him a
king.

And he said, this shall be the manner of the king that shall reign over you:
he will take your sons, and appoint them for himself, for his chariots, and to
be his horsemen, and some shall run before his chariot.

And he will take your daughters to be confectioners, and to be cooks, and to
be bakers.

And he will take your fields, and your vineyards, and your olive-yards, even
the best of them, and give them to his servants.

And he will take the tenth of your seed, and of your vineyards, and give to
his officers and to his servants.

And he will take your men servants and your maid servants, and your goodliest
young men, and your asses, and put them to his work.

He will take the tenth of your sheep; and ye shall be his servants.

And ye shall cry out in that day, because of your king; and the Lord will not
hear you in that day.

Samuel, b. i. chap. viii. -- Lord supreme over all this formal race,
The cedar claims pre-eminence of place;
Like some great eastern king, it stands alone,
Nor lets the ignoble crowd approach its throne,
Spreads out its haughty boughs that scorn to bend,
And bids its shade over spacious fields extend;
While in the compass of its wide domain,
Heaven sheds its soft prolific showers in vain:
Secure and sheltered every subject lies;
But robbed of moisture, sickens, droops, and dies.
O image apt of man's despotic power,
Which guards and shelters only to devour,
Lifts high in air the splendours of its head,
And bids its radiance over the nations spread;
While round its feet in silent anguish lie
Hunger, despair, and meagre misery!
R. P. KNIGHT. The lives and labors of millions are devoted to the service of
a despotic prince, whose laws are blindly obeyed, and whose wishes are
instantly gratified. Our imagination is dazzled by the splendid picture; and
whatever may be the cool dictates of reason, there are few among us who would
obstinately refuse a trial of the comforts and cares of royalty. It may
therefore be of some use to borrow the experience of Abdal Rahman, whose
magnificence has perhaps excited our admiration and envy, and to transcribe an
authentic memorial which was found in the closet of the deceased caliph. I have
now reigned above fifty years in victory or peace; beloved by my subjects,
dreaded by my enemies, and respected by my allies. Riches and honors, power and
pleasure, have waited on my call, nor does any earthly blessing appear to have
been wanting to my felicity. In this situation I have diligently numbered the
days of pure and genuine happiness, which have fallen to my lot: they amount to
fourteen.

GIBBON. Such dupes are men to custom, and so prone
To reverence what is ancient, and can plead
A course of long observance for its use,
That even servitude, the worst of ills
Because delivered down from sire to son,
Is kept and guarded as a sacred thing.
But is it fit, or can it bear the shock
Of rational discussion, that a man
Compounded and made up, like other men,
Of elements tumultuous, in whom lust
And folly in as ample measure meet,
As in the bosoms of the slaves he rules,
Should be a despot absolute, and boast
Himself the only freeman of his land?
Should, when he pleases, and on whom he will,
Wage war, with any, or with no pretense
Of provocation given, or wrong sustained,
And force the beggarly last doit, by means
That his own humor dictates, from the clutch
Of poverty, that thus he may procure
His thousands, weary of penurious life,
A splendid opportunity to die?
Say ye, who (with less prudence than of of old,
Jotham ascribed to his assembled trees
In politic convention) put your trust
IN the shadow of a bramble, and reclined
In fancied peace beneath his dangerous branch,
Rejoice in him, and celebrate his sway,
Where find ye passive fortitude? Whence springs,
Your self denying zeal, that holds it good
To stroke the prickly grievance, and to hang
His thorns with streamers of continual praise?
COWPER. Despotism delights in war. It is its element. As the bull knows, by
instinct, that his strength is in his horns, and the eagle trusts in his
talons; so the despot feels his puissance most, when surrounded by his soldiery
arrayed for battle. With the sword in his hand, and his artillery around him,
he rejoices in his might, and glories in his greatness. Blood must mark his
path; and his triumph is incomplete, till death and destruction stalk over the
land, the harbingers of his triumphant cavalcade.

Spirit of DESPOTISM. What are the chief considerations with despots,
previously to going to war, and at its conclusion? Evidently the expense of
money. Little is said or thought of the lives lost, or devoted to be lost,
except as matters of pecuniary value. Humanity, indeed, weeps in silence and
solitude, in the sequestered shade of private life; but is a single tear shed
in courts, and camps, and cabiners? When men high in command, men of fortune
and family, fall, their deeds are blazoned, and they figure in history; but
who, save the poor widow and the orphan, enquire after the very names of the
rank and file? There they lie, a mass of human flesh, not so much regretted by
the despots as the horses they rode, or the arms they bore. While ships often
go down to the bottom, struck by the iron thunderbolts of war, and not a life
is saved; the national loss is estimated by the despot, according to the weight
of metal wasted, and the magnitude and expense of the wooden castle.

Ibid. Despotism! I would laugh at all thy extravagancies, thy solemn mummery,
thy baby baubles, thy airs of insolence, thy finery and slippery, thy impotent
insults over virtue, genius, and all personal merit, thy strutting,
self-pleasing mien and language! I would consider them all with the eye of a
Democritus, as (...) a constant farce, an inexhaustible fund of merriment, did
they not lead to the malevolent passions, which, in their effects, forge chains
for men born free, plunder the poor of their property, and shed the blood of
innocence.

Ibid. Where God caused the sun to shine gaily, and scattered plenty over the
land, despots diffused famine and solitude. The valley which laughed with
scorn, they watered with the tear of artificial hunger and distress; the plain
that was bright with verdure, and gay with flowre^s, they dyed red with gore.
They operated on the world as the blast of an east wind, as a pestilence, as a
deluge, as a conflagration. And have they yet ceased from the earth? Cast your
eyes over the plains of Russia, Poland, a great part of Europe, the wilds of
Africa, and the gardens of Asia; European despotism has united with oriental,
to unparadise the provinces of India.

Ibid. Despotism is the grand source of human misfortune, the Pandora's box out
of which every curse has issued, and scarcely lest even hope behind. Despotism,
in its extreme, is fatal to human happiness, and, in all its degrees and
modifications, injurious. The spirit of it ought therefore to be suppressed on
the first and slightest appearance. It should be the endeavor of every good
man, as far as his best abilities will extend, to extirpate all arbitrary
government from the globe. It should be swept from the earth, or trampled under
foot, from China to Peru.

Ibid. DULLNESS.
Dullness or deformity are not culpable in themselves, but may be very justly
reproached when they pretend to the honor of wit or the influence of beauty.

Life of POPE. DOG.
Of all the beasts that graze the lawn, or hunt the forest, a dog is the only
animal, that, leaving his fellows, attempts to cultivate the friendship of man;
to man he looks, in all his necessities, with a speaking eye, for assistance;
exerts for him all the little service in his power, with cheerfulness and
pleasure; for him bears famine and fatigue with patience and resignation: no
injuries can abate his fidelity; no distress induce him to forsake his
benefactor; studious to please and fearing to offend, he is still an humble,
steadfast dependant; and in him alone fawning is not flattery. How unkind, then,
to torture this faithful creature, who has left the forest to claim the
protection of man! How ungrateful a return to the trusty animal for all its
services!

GOLDSMITH. DUTY.
When we act according to our duty, we commit the event to him by whose laws
our actions are governed, and who will suffer none to be finally punished for
obedience. But when in prospect of some good, whether natural or moral, we
break the rules prescribed to us, we withdraw from the direction of superior
wisdom, and take all the consequences upon ourselves.

Prince of Abyssinia. DUTY AND HAPPINESS.
It is an undoubted truth, that our duty is inseparably connected with our
happiness. And why should we despair of convincing every member of society of a
truth so important for him to know? Should any person object, by saying, that
nothing like this, has ever yet been done; I answer, that nothing like this has
ever yet been tried. Society has hitherto been cursed with governments, whose
existence depended on the extinction of truth. Every moral light has been
smothered under the bushel of perpetual imposition; from whence it emits but
faint and glimmering rays, always insufficient to form any luminous system on
any of the civil concerns of men. But these covers are crumbling to the dust,
with the governments which they support; and the probability becomes more
apparent, the more it is considered, that society is capable of curing all the
evils to which it has given birth.

BARLOW. DELAY.
The folly of allowing ourselves to delay what we know cannot be finally
escaped, is one of the general weaknesses which, in spite of the instruction of
moralists, and the remonstrances of reason, prevail to a greater or less degree
in every mind: even they who most steadily withstand it, find it, if not the
most violent, the most pertinacious of their passions, always renewing its
attacks, and, though often vanquished, never destroyed.

RAMBLER. DRUNKENNESS.
Nothing is more erroneous than the common observation, that men who are
ill-natured and quarrelsome when they are drunk, are very worthy persons when
they are sober; for drink in reality does not reverse nature, or create
passions in men which did not exist in them before.

FIELDING. There is not perhaps a more excellent institution than that of
Pittacus, mentioned by Aristotle in his politics, by which a blow given by a
drunken man was more severely punished, than if it had been given by one that
was sober; for Pittacus (says Aristotle) considered the utility of the public,
(as drunken men are more apt to strike) and not the excuse which might
otherwise be allowed to their drunkenness.

Ibid. DECEPTION.
Deceit and falsehood, whatever conveniences they may for a time promise or
produce, are, in the sum of life, obstacles to happiness. Those who profit by
the cheat distrust the deceiver; and the act by which kindness was sought, puts
an end to confidence.

RAMBLER. DESPAIR.
Considering the unforeseen events of this world, we should be taught that no
human condition should inspire men with absolute despair.

FIELDING. Unhappy man! with storms of passion tossed,
When first he learnt his vagrant child was lost,
On the cold floor his trembling limbs he flung,
And with thick blows his hollow bosom rung;
Then up he started, and with fixed surprise,
Upon her picture threw his frantic eyes,
While thus he cried, "In her my life was bound,
" Warm in each feature is her mother found:
" Perhaps despair has been her fatal guide,
" And now she floats upon the weeping tide,
" Or on the willow hung with head reclined,
" All pale and cold she wavers in the wind;
" Did I not force her hence by harsh commands?
" Did not her soul abhor the nuptial bands?"
Teach not, ye sires, your daughters to rebel,
By counsel rein their wills, but never compel.
GAY. DISHONESTY.
Dishonest minds, just like the jaundic'd sight,
See honest deeds in a dishonest light:
Through clouds of guilt, the innocent they view,
And stain each virtue with some vicious hue.
The just and good look with a different eye,
By generous hearts they generous actions try:
Governed by honor, honor they revere,
And think each virtue, like their own, sincere.
BELLER. DISTRESS.
Has pity lost its mighty power to move,
That all my mournful sorrows cannot incline you,
To weigh my sufferings with my real deserts?
Can you then see me with a broken heart,
Wretched, wandering, and forsook by all,
Except the insulting rabble at my heels:
And as pinching need or thirst or hunger,
Shall make me seek relief from door to door,
Perhaps receive harsh language and reproach,
Instead of succor to supply my wants.
Then after all the mis'ries of the day,
Soon as the unwholesome night brings on its dews,
Under some dropping eve, or leafless hedge,
Shivering and almost starved with piercing cold,
Repose my weary limbs, with toil fatigued.
WANDESFORD. DOMESTIC HAPPINESS.
Domestic happiness, thou only bliss
Of Paradise that has survived the fall!
Though few now taste thee unimpair'd and pure,
Or, tasting, long enjoy thee; too infirm
Or too incautious to preserve thy sweets
Unmixt with drops of bitter, which neglect
Or temper sheds into thy crystal cup.
Thou art the nurse of virtue. In thine arms,
She smiles, appearing, as in truth she is,
Heaven born, and destined to the skies again.
Thou art not known where pleasure is adored,
That reeling goddess, with the zoneless waist,
And wandering eyes, still leaning on the arm
Of novelty, her fickle frail support;
For thou art meek and constant, hating change,
And finding in the calm of truth-tried love,
Joys that her stormy raptures never yield.
COWPER. The great end of prudence is to give cheerfulness to those hours which
splendour cannot gild, and acclamation cannot exhilirate. Those soft intervals
of unbended amusement, in which a man shrinks to his natural dimensions, and
throws aside the ornaments or disguises which he feels, in privacy, to be
useless encumbrances, and to lose all effect when they become familiar. To be
happy at home is the ultimate result of all ambition; the end to which every
enterprise and labor tends, and of which every desire prompts the prosecution.
It is indeed at home that every man must be known, by those who would make a
just estimate either of his virtue or felicity; for smiles and embroidery are
alike occasional, and the mind is often dressed for show in painted honor, and
fictitious benevolence.

RAMBLER. The highest panegyric that domestic virtue can receive, is the praise
of servants; for however vanity or insolence may look down with contempt on the
suffrage of men undignified with wealth, and unenlightened by education, it
very seldom happens that they commend or blame without justice.

Ibid. DISSENTIONS.
In all disputes between the people and their rulers, the presumption is at
least upon a par in favor of the people. Experience may perhaps justify me in
going farther. Where popular discontents have been very prevalent, it may well
be affirmed and supported, that there has been generally something found amiss
in the constitution or in the conduct of government. The people have no
interest in disorder. When they do wrong, it is their error and not their
crime. But with the governing party of the state it is far otherwise. They
certainly may act ill by design as well as by mistake. The revolutions which
occur in great states, are not the effect of chance or the caprice of the
people. Nothing disgusts the grandees of a kingdom so much as a weak or
deranged government. But the people never revolt through a thirst of
innovation, but through impatience of suffering. These are the words of a great
man; of a minister of state [Sully] and a zealous asserter of monarchy. What he
says of revolutions is equally true of all great disturbances.

BURKE. EQUALITY OF MANKIND.
All men are created equal,

Declaration of INDEPENDENCE.

All men are born equally free and independent; therefore all government of
right originates from the people, is sounded in consent, and instituted for the
general good.

Constitution of NEW HAMPSHIRE.

All men are born free and equal, and have certain natural, essential, and
unalienable rights; among which may be reckoned the right of enjoying and
defending their lives and liberties; that of acquiring, possessing, and
protecting property; in fine, that of seeking and obtaining their safety and
happiness.

Constitution of MASSACHUSETTS. All men are born equally free and independent,
and have certain natural, inherent, and unalienable rights; amongst which are,
the enjoying and defending life and liberty -- acquiring, possessing and
protecting property -- and pursuing and obtaining happiness and safety.

Constitution of VERMONT. What is the race of mankind but one family, widely
scattered upon the face of the earth? all men by nature are brothers.

FENELON. -- Search we the secret springs,
And backwards trace the principles of things;
There shall we find, that when the world began,
One common mass composed the mould of man;
One paste of flesh on all degrees bestowed,
And kneaded up alike with moist'ning blood.
The same almighty power inspired the frame
With kindled life, and formed the souls the same.
The faculties of intellect and will,
Dispensed with equal hand, disposed with equal skill,
Like liberty indulged with choice of good or ill.
Thus born alike, from virtue first began
The difference that distinguished man from man:
He claimed no title from descent of blood,
But that which made him noble made him good.
DRYDEN. There is no more inward value in the greatest emperor than in the
meanest of his subjects. His body is composed of the same substance, the same
parts, and with the same or greater infirmities: his education is generally
worse, by flattery, idleness, and luxury, and those evil dispositions that
early power is apt to give. It is therefore against common sense, that his
private personal interest, or pleasure, should be put in the balance with the
safety of millions, every one of which is his equal by nature.

SWIFT. Men are not naturally opulent, courtiers, nobles, or kings. We come
into the world naked and poor: we are all subject to the miseries of life.

The rich have not better appetites than the poor, nor quicker digestion: the
master has not longer arms or stronger than the servant; a great man is no
taller than the meanest artizan.

ROUSEAU. EMPIRE.
Extended empire, like expanded gold,
Exchanges solid strength for feeble splendour.
JOHNSON. EXERCISE.
Such is the constitution of man, that labor may be styled its own reward: nor
will any external incitements be requisite, if it be considered how much
happiness is gained, and how much misery escaped, by frequent and violent
agitation of the body.

RAMBLER. Exercise cannot secure us from that dissolution to which we are
decreed; but, while the soul and body continue united, it can make the
association pleasing, and give probable hopes that they shall be disjoined by
an easy separation. It was a principle among the ancients, that acute diseases
are from heaven, and chronic, from ourselves: the dart of death, indeed, falls
from heaven; but we poison it by our own misconduct.

Ibid. EDUCATION.
Children, like tender Oziers, take the bow,
And as they first are fashioned, always grow:
For what we learn in youth, to that alone
In age we are by second nature prone.
DRYDEN. Physical knowledge is of such rare emergence, that one man may know
another half his life without being able to estimate his skill in hydrostatics
or astronomy; but his moral and prudential character immediately appears. Those
authors, therefore, are to be read at school, that supply most axioms of
prudence, most principles of moral truth, and most materials for conversation;
and these purposes are best served by poets, orators, and historians.

Life of MILTON. It ought always to be steadily inculcated, that virtue is the
highest proof of understanding, and the only solid basis of greatness; and that
vice is the natural consequence of narrow thoughts; that it begins in mistake,
and ends in ignominy.

RAMBLER. I consider an human soul without education, like marble in the
quarry, which shows none of its inherent beauties, till the skill of the
polisher fetches out the colors, make the surface shine, and discovers every
ornamental clould, spot, and vein that runs through the body of it. Education,
after the same manner, when it works upon a noble mind, draws out to view every
latent virtue and perfection, which, without such helps, are never able to make
their appearance.

SPECTATOR. ERROR.
It is incumbent on every man who consults his own dignity, to retract his
error as soon as he discovers it, without fearing any censure so much as that
of his own mind. As justice requires that all injuries should be repaired, it
is the duty of him who has seduced others by bad practices, or false notions,
to endeavor that such as have adopted his errors should know his retractation,
and that those who have learned vice by his example, should, by his example, be
taught amendment.

RAMBLER. FREEDOM.
Countries are generally peopled in proportion as they are free, and are
certainly happy in that proportion; and upon the same tract of land that would
maintain a hundred thousand freemen in plenty, five thousand slaves would
starve. Liberty naturally draws new people to it, as well as increases the
old-stock; and men as naturally run, when they dare, from slavery and
wretchedness. Hence great cities, losing their liberties, become deserts; and
little towns by liberty grow great cities.

GORDON. Civil freedom is not, as many have endeavored to persuade us, a thing
that lies hid in the depth of abstruse science. It is a blessing and a benefit,
not an abstract speculation; and all the just reasoning that can be upon it, is
of so coarse a texture, as perfectly to suit the ordinary capacities of those
who are to enjoy, and of those who are to defend it. Far from any resemblance
to those propositions in geometry and metaphysics, which admit no medium, but
must be true or false in all their latitude; social and civil freedom, like all
other things in common life, are variously mixed and modified, enjoyed in very
different degrees, and shaped into an infinite diversity of forms, according to
the temper and circumstances of every community. The extreme of liberty (which
is its abstract perfection, but its real fault) obtains no where, nor ought to
obtain any where. Because extremes, as we all know, in every point which
relates either to our duties or satisfactions in life, are destructive both to
virtue and enjoyment. Liberty too must be limited in order to be possessed. The
degree of restraint it is impossible in any case to settle precisely. But it
ought to be the constant aim of every wise public counsel, to find out by
cautious experiments, and rational, cool endeavors, with how little, not how
much of this restraint, the community can subsist.

BURKE. Whose freedom is by suff'rance, and at will
Of a superior, he is never free.
Who lives, and is not weary of a life
Exposed to manacles, deserves them well.
The state that strives for liberty, though foiled,
And forced to abandon what she bravely ^ought,
Deserves at least applause for her attempt,
And pity for her loss. But that is a cause
Not often unsuccessful; power usurped,
Is weakness when opposed; conscious of wrong,
It Is pusillanimous, and prone to flight.
But slaves, that once conceive the glowing thought
Of freedom, in that hope itself possess
All that the contest calls for; spirit, strength,
The scorn of danger, and united hearts,
The surest presage of the good they seek.
COWPER. Tempt me no more. My soul can never comport
With the gay slaveries of a court;
I Have an aversion to those charms,
And hug dear liberty in both mine arms.
Go, vassal-souls, go, cringe and wait,
And dance attendance at Honorio's gate;
Then run in troops before him to compose his state:
Move, as he moves; and, when he loiters, stand;
You're but the shadows of a man.
Bend when he speaks; and kiss the ground:
Go, catch the impertinence of sound:
Adore the follies of the great:
Wait till he smiles: but lo, the idol frowned,
And drove them to their fate.
Thus base-born minds. But as for me,
I can and will be free:
Like a strong mountain, or some stately tree,
My soul grows firm upright,
And as I stand, and as I go,
It keeps my body so;
No, I can never part with my creation-right:
Let slaves and asses stoop and bow,
I cannot make this iron knee
Bend to a meaner power than that which formed it free.
WATTS. When God from chaos gave this world to be,
Man then he formed, and formed him to be free,
In his own image stamped the favorite race --
How dare thou, tyrant, the fair stamp deface!
When on mankind you fix your abject chains,
No more the image of that God remains;
Over a dark scene a darker shade is drawn,
His work dishonored, and our glory gone!
FRENEAU. One truth is clear from nature, constant still,
Kings hold not worlds, or empires at their will: --
Nor rebels they, who native freedom claim,
Conquest alone can ratify the name --
But great the task, resistance to control
When genuine virtue fires the stubborn soul;
The warlike beast, in Lybian deserts placed
To reign the master of the sunburned waste,
Not tamely yields to wear a servile chain:
Force may attempt it, and attempt in vain --
Nervous and bold, by native valor led:
His prowess strikes the proud invader dead,
By force nor fraud from freedom's charms beguiled,
He reigns secure the monarch of the wild.
Ibid. FLY.
Busy, curious, thirsty fly,
Drink with me, and drink as I:
Freely welcome to my cup,
Could thou sip, and sip it up.
Make the most of life you may,
Life is short, and wears away,
Both alike are mine and thine,
Hastening quick to their decline:
Thine's a summer, mine no more,
Though repeated to threescore;
Threescore summers, when they are gone,
Will appear as short as one.
FASTING.
The miser fasts, because he will not eat;
The poor man fasts, because he has no meat;
The rich man fasts, with greedy mind to spare;
The glutton fasts, to eat the greater share,
The hypocrite, he fasts, to seem more holy;
The righteous man, to punish sin and folly.
FRAILTY.
The best of men appear sometimes to be strange compounds of contradictory
qualities: and, were the accidental oversights and folly of the wisest man, --
the failings and imperfections of a religious man, -- the hasty acts and
passionate words of a meek man; were they to rise up in judgment against them,
-- and an ill -- natured judge be suffered to mark, in this manner, what has
been done amiss -- what character so unexceptionable as to be able to stand
before him?

STERN. FREEMAN.
He is the freeman whom the truth makes free,
And all are slaves beside. There Is not a chain
That hellish foes confed'rate for his harm
Can wind around him, but he casts it off
With as much ease as Samson his green withes.
He looks abroad into the varied field
Of Nature, and though poor, perhaps, compared
With those whose mansions glitter in his sight,
Calls the delightful scenery all his own.
His are the mountains, and the valleys his,
And the resplendent rivers; his to enjoy
With a propriety that none can feel,
But who, with filial confidence inspired,
Can lift to Heaven an unpresumptuous eye,
And smiling say -- My Father made them all:
Are they not his by a peculiar right;
And by an emphasis of interest his,
Whose eye they fill with tears of holy joy,
Whose heart with praise, and whose exalted mind
With worthy thoughts of that unwearied love
That planned and built, and still upholds a world,
So clothed, with beauty, for rebellious man?
COWPER. FIRST PAIR.
The wide earth finished, from his western throne,
In splendid beauty looked the gladsome sun;
Calm were the skies; the fields with luster crowned,
And nature's incense fili'd the etherial round.
Enshrined in sacred light, the Maker stood,
Complacent smiled, and owned the work was good.
Then from his hand, in silent glory, came
A nobler form, and man his destined name;
Erect, and tall, in solemn pomp he stood,
And living virtue in his visage glowed.
Then, too, a fairer being showed her charms;
Young beauty wantoned in her snowy arms;
The heavens around her bade their graces fly,
And love sat blooming in her gentle eye.
O pair divine! superior to your kind;
To virtue fashioned, and for bliss designed!
He, born to rule, with calm uplifted brow,
Looked down majestic on the world below;
To heaven, his mansion, turned his thoughts sublime,
Or roved far onward through the scenes of time;
Over nature's kingdom cast a searching eye,
And dared to trace the secrets of the sky;
On fancy's pinions scanned the bright abode,
And claimed his friend, an angel, or a God.
Her he indu'd with nature more refined,
A lovelier image, and a softer mind.
To her he gave to kindle sweet desire,
To rouse great thoughts, and fan the heroic fire;
At pity's gentle call to bend his ear;
To prompt for woe the unaffected tear;
In scenes refined his softening soul improve,
And tune his wishes with the hand of love.
To her he gave with sweetness to obey,
Inspire the friend, and charm the lord away;
Each bleeding grief with balmy hand to heal,
And teach his rending sinews not to seel;
Each joy to improve, the pious wish to raise,
And add new raptures to his languid praise.
To this loved pair a blessed retreat was given,
A seat for angels, and an humbler heaven;
Fair Eden named: in swift succession, there
Glad scenes of rapture led the vernal year;
Round the green garden, living beauty played;
In gay profusion earth her treasures spread;
The air breathed fragrance: streams harmonious rung,
And love, and transport, tuned the aerial song.
DWIGHT. FRUGALITY.
Frugality may be termed the daughter of prudence, the sister of temperance,
and the parent of liberty. He that is extravagant, will quickly become poor,
and poverty will enforce dependence, and invite corruption. It will almost
always produce a passive compliance with the wickedness of others, and there
are (...) who do not learn by degrees to practice those crimes (...) they cease
to censure.

RAMBLER. Though in every age there are some who, by bold adventures or by
favorable accidents, rise suddenly into riches, the bulk of mankind must owe
their affluence to small and gradual profits, below which their expense must be
resolutely reduced.

Ibid. FAVOR.
Bestowing one favor on some men they think is giving them a right to ask a
second -- the first they look upon as a gift -- the rest are payments.

FIELDING. FORGIVENESS.
The brave only know how to forgive; -- it is the most refined and generous
pitch of virtue human nature can arrive at. Cowards have done good and kind
actions, -- cowards have even fought, nay sometimes, even conquered; but a
coward never forgave. -- It is not in his nature; -- the power of doing it
flows only from a strength and greatness of soul, conscious of its own force
and security, and above the little temptations of resenting every fruitless
attempt to interrupt its happiness.

STERN. Whoever considers the weakness both of himself and (...) ^ill not long
want persuasives to forgiveness. (...) not to what degree of malignity any
injury is to be (...), or how much its guilt, if we were to inspect (...) of
him that committed it, would be extenuated by mistake, precipitance, or
negligence. We cannot be certain how much more we feel than was intended, or
how much we increase the mischief to ourselves by voluntary aggravations. We
may charge to design the effects of accident. We may think the blow violent,
only because we have made ourselves delicate and tender; we are, on every side,
(...) danger of error and guilt, which we are certain to avoid only by speedy
forgiveness.

RAMBLER. FAME.
The evil that men do, lives after them;
The good is often interred with their bones,
SHAKESPEARE. Ill shall we judge, if from the mouth of fame
We mark the characters of vice and virtue,
Here pageants rise, made by tradition heroes,
Formed by the poet or the loose historian;
There you behold imaginary gods,
Raised by the venal breath of slaves to heaven,
Swollen with the praise of fools, ignobly great,
By lust, ambition, tyranny or rapine;
While the good prince, whose soft indulgent nature
Delights in peace, and blesses all with plenty
Who smile beneath him, is reviled and censured,
As an inactive, useless, idle drone.
C. JOHNSON. FATE.
There is a tide in the affairs of men,
Which, taken at the flood, leads on to fortune;
Omitted, all the voyage of their life
Is bound in shallows, and in miseries.
On such a full sea are we now afloat,
And we must take the current when it serves,
Or lose our ventures.
SHAKESPEARE. Man makes his fate according to his mind:
The weak low spirit fortune makes her slave,
But she is a drudge when hectored by the brave.
If fate weave common thread, he will change the doom,
And with new purple spread a nobler loom.
DRYDEN. Heaven has to all allotted, soon or late,
Some lucky revolution of their fate;
Whose motions if we watch and guide with skill,
(For human good depends on human will)
Our fortune rolls as from a smooth descent,
And from the first impression takes its bent;
But if unseiz'd, she glides away like wind,
And leaves repenting folly far behind;
Now, now she meets you with a glorious prize,
And spreads her locks before her as she flies.
Ibid. FIGHT (for native Country.)
-- To fight, Aemilius,
In a just cause, and for our country's safety,
Is the best office of the best of men;
And to decline it when these motives urge,
Is infamy beneath a coward's baseness.
HAVARD. FLATTERY.
Of all wild beasts, preserve me from a tyrant,
And of all tame, a flatterer.
JOHNSON. -- Cease, cease this flattery!
It Is a mean, vicious habit those contract,
Who hide the settled purpose of their souls
Under its smooth and glittering ornaments,
As they disdained the honest company
Of plain and native truth.
MARSH. He that is much flattered, soon learns to flatter himself. We are
commonly taught our duty by fear or shame; and how can they act upon the man
who hears nothing but his own praises?

Life of SWIFT. Neither our virtues or vices are all our own. If there were no
cowardice, there would be little insolence. Pride cannot rise to any great
degree, but by the concurrence of blandishment, or the sufferance of tameness.
The wretch who would shrink and crouch before one who should dart his eyes upon
him with the spirit of natural equality, becomes capricious and tyrannical when
he sees himself approached with a downcast look, and hears the soft addresses
of awe and servility. To those who are willing to purchase favor by cringes and
compliance, is to be imputed the haughtiness that leaves nothing to hoped by
firmness and integrity.

RAMBLER. FORTITUDE.
-- In struggling with misfortunes
Lies the true proof of virtue. On smooth seas
How many bauble boats dare set their sails,
And make an equal way with firmer vessels:
But let the tempest once enrage the sea,
And then behold the strong-ribb'd argosie
Bounding between the ocean and the air,
Like Perseus mounted on his Pegasus;
Then where are those weak rivals of the main?
Or to avoid the tempest, fled to port,
Or made a prey to Neptune. Even thus
Do empty show and true-priz'd worth divide
In storms of fortune.
SHAKESPEARE. Let fortune empty her whole quiver on me.
I have a soul, that, like an ample shield,
Can take in all, and verge enough for more:
Fate was not mine, nor am I Fate's,
Souls know no conquerors.
DRYDEN. With such unshaken temper of the soul
To bear the swelling tide of prosperous fortune,
Is to deserve that fortune. In adversity
The mind grows rough by buffeting the tempest;
But in success dissolving, sinks to ease,
And loses all her firmness.
ROW. Though plunged in ills, and exercised in care,
Yet never let the noble mind despair:
When pressed by dangers, and beset with foes,
The heavens their timely succor interpose;
And when our virtue sinks, overwhelmed with grief,
By unforeseen expedients bring relief.
A. PHILLIPS. FORTUNE.
Fortune sometimes assumes a rugged brow,
But to endear her smiles, and make the turn
More welcome to us, as it is unexpected --
How sweet is rest after a toilsome day!
How pleasant light after a length of darkness!
How relishing good fortune after ill!
HAVARD. Fortune! Made up of toys and impudence,
Thou common jade, that have not common sense!
But, fond of business, insolently dares
Pretend to rule, and spoil the world's affairs.
She fluttering up and down, her favors throws
On the next met, not minding what she does,
Nor why, nor whom she helps or injures, knows,
Sometimes she smiles, then like a fury raves,
^
^
^
But if she offer once to move her wings,
I Will fling her back all her vain geugaw things;
And armed with virtue, will more glorious stand,
Than if the wanton bowed at my command.
BUCKINGHAM. Ay me! what perils do environ
The man that meddles with cold iron?
What plaguey mischiefs and mis-haps
Do dog him still with after-claps!
For though Dame Fortune seemed to smile,
And leer upon him for a while:
She Will after show him, in the nick
Of all his honors a dog-trick.
For Hudibras, who thought he would won
The field as certain as a gun;
And, having routed the whole troop,
With victory was cock-a-hoop:
Found in few minutes to his cost,
He did but count without his host;
And that a turn-stile is more certain,
Than in events of war Dame Fortune.
HUDIBRAS. Examples need not be sought at any great distance, to prove that
superiority of fortune has a natural tendency to kindle pride, and that pride
seldom fails to exert itself in contempt and insult. This is often the effect
of hereditary wealth, and of honors only enjoyed by the merit of others.

JOHNSON. FACTION.
From faction and violence (...) the cause of liberty, which disgrace the cause
itself, and give advantage to the favorers of (...), I meet anxiously dissuade
all who love mankind and their country. Faction and violence are despotic in
the extreme. They bring all the evils of tyranny, without any consolation, but
that they are usually transient; whereas tyranny is durable. They destroy
themselves, or, are destroyed by force in the hands of a superior power. In
either case, much is lost to the cause of liberty; because the persons who have
been betrayed by their passions into excesses, were probably sincere; and if
they had been also discreet and moderate, would have been effectual as well as
zealous promoters of the public good. It is certain, that very honest men are
very apt to be betrayed into violence by their warmth of temper. They mean good
and do ill. They become the instruments of dispassionate knaves; and are often
led into extravagances by the very party against whom they act, in order that
they may be exposed, and become obnoxious to censure.

Wisdom is gentle, deliberate, cautious. Nothing violent is durable. I hope the
lovers of liberty will show the sincerity of their attachment by the wisdom of
their conduct. Tumultuary proceedings always exhibit some appearance of
insanity. A blow struck with blind violence may inflict a wound or a bruise,
but it may fall in the wrong place; it may even injure the hand that gives it,
by its own ill-directed force.

Spirit of DESPOTISM. FRIEND.
As fire and water are of common uses,
An in their kinds essential for support:
So is a friend, just such a friend as you;
The joys of life are heightened by a friend;
The woes of life are lessen^d by a friend;
In all the cares of life, we by a friend
Assistance find -- Who'd be without a friend?
WANDESFORD. Thou think me, sure, that abject slave thou art,
A stranger to the sacred laws of friendship,
Whom generous sentiments could never warm.
Shall I, because the waves begin to swell,
And gathering clouds portend the rising storm,
Desert my friend and poorly fly to shore?
Let them come on, and rattle over my head:
To the full tempest's rage exposed together,
Safe in the bark of innocence we'll ride,
Outbrave the billows, and deride their tumult.
FROWDE. FRIENDSHIP.
Friendship's dear ties for generous souls were made,
When they relax, black woes our peace invade:
Friendship from every ill can life defend,
Our guardian angel's but a faithful friend.
SAVAGE. Friendship, thou greatest happiness below!
The world would be a desert, but for thee;
And man himself, a nobler sort of brute:
Wherefore did Heaven our god-like reason give?
To make the charms of conversation sweet;
To open and unbosom all our woes:
For life's sure medicine is a faithful friend.
TRACY. The two firm rocks on which all friendships stand,
Are love of freedom, and our country's glory;
Piety, valor, and paternal love
Form the arising pile: the other virtues
Candor, beneficence, and moral trust,
Are superstructures, and adorn the dome.
HAVARD. A treacherous friend is the most dangerous enemy; and both religion
and virtue have received more real discredit from hypocrites, than the wittiest
profligates, or infidels could ever cast upon them; nay, farther, as these two
in their purity, are rightly called the bands of civil society, and are indeed
the greatest of blessings; so when poisoned and corrupted with fraud, pretense,
and affectation, they have become the worst of civil curses, and have enabled
men to perpetrate the most cruel mischiefs to their own species.

FIELDING. The firmness and constancy of a true friend is a circumstance so
extremely delightful to persons in any kind of distress, that the distress
itself, (if it be only temporary, and admit of relief) is more than
compensated, by bringing this comfort with it.

Ibid. So many qualities are necessary to the possibility of friendship, and so
many accidents must concur to its rise and its continuance, that the greatest
part of mankind content themselves without it, and supply its place as they can
with interest and dependence.

RAMBLER. Many have talked in very exalted language of the perpetuity of
friendship: of invincible constancy and unalienable kindness; and some examples
have been seen of men who have continued faithful to their earliest choice, and
whose affections have predominated over changes of fortune and contrariety of
opinion. But these instances are memorable, because they are rare. The
friendship which is to be practiced or expected by common mortals, must take
its rise from mutual pleasure, and must end when the power ceases of delighting
each other.

IDLER. The most fatal disease of friendship is gradual decay, or dislike
hourly increased by causes too slender for complaint, and too numerous for
removal. Those who are angry may be reconciled. Those who have been injured may
receive a recompense; but when the desire of pleasing, and willingness to be
pleased, is silently diminished, the renovation of friendship is hopeless; as
when the vital powers sink into languor, there is no longer any use of the
physician.

Ibid. There are few subjects which have been more written upon, and less
understood, than that of friendship. To follow the dictates of some, this
virtue, instead of being the assuager of pain, becomes the source of every
inconvenience. Such speculatists, by expecting too much from friendship,
dissolve the connection, and, by drawing the bands too closely, at length break
them. Almost all our romance and novel-writers are of this kind; they persuade
us to friendships, which we find impossible to sustain to the last; so that
this sweetner of life, under proper regulations, is by their means, rendered
inaccessible or uneasy. It is certain, the best method to cultivate this virtue
is by letting it, in some measure, make itself; a similitude of minds or
studies, and even sometimes a diversity of pursuits, will produce all the
pleasures that arise from it. The current of tenderness widens, as it proceeds;
and two men imperceptibly find their hearts warm with goodnature for each
other, when they were at first only in pursuit of mirth or relaxation.

Friendship is like a debt of honor; the moment it is talked of, it loses its
real name, and assumes the more ungrateful form of obligation. From hence we
find, that those who regularly undertake to cultivate friendship, find
ingratitude generally repays their endeavors. That circle of beings, which
dependence gathers round us, is almost ever unfriendly: they secretly wish the
term of their connexions more nearly equal; and, where they even have the most
virtue, are prepared to reserve all their affections for their patron, only in
the hour of this decline. Increasing the obligations which are laid upon such
minds, only increases their burden; they feel themselves unable to repay the
immensity of their debt, and their bankrupt hearts are taught a latent
resentment at the hand that is stretched out with offers of service and relief.

GOLDSMITH. FILIAL PIETY.
Have I then no tears for thee, my father!
Can I forget thy cares, from helpless years
Thy tenderness for me? An eye still beamed
With love? A brow that never knew a frown?
Nor a harsh word thy tongue? Shall I for these
Repay thy stooping venerable age
With shame, disquiet, anguish and dishonor?
It must not be? -- Thou first of angels! Come
Sweet Filial Piety, and firm my breast!
Yes, let one daughter to her fate submit,
Be nobly wretched, but her father happy.
THOMSON. -- Pr'ythee, Trim, quoth my father, -- What do thou mean, by "
honoring thy father and thy mother?"

Allowing them, an't please your honor, three halfpence a day out of my pay
when they grow old. -- And did thou do that, Trim? said Yorick. -- He did,
indeed, replied my uncle Toby. -- Then, Trim, said Yorick, springing out of his
chair, and taking the Corporal by the hand, thou art the best commentator upon
that part of the Decalogue; and I honor thee more for it, Corporal Trim, than
if thou had a hand in the Talmud itself.

STERN. FASHION.
There are few enterprises so hopeless as contests with the fashion, in which
the opponents are not only made confident by their numbers, and strong by their
union, but are hardened by contempt of their antagonist, whom they always look
upon as a wretch of low notions, contracted views, mean conversation, and
narrow fortune; who envies the elevations which he cannot reach; who would
gladly embitter the happiness which his inelegance or indigence deny him to
partake; and who has no other end in his advice than to revenge his own
mortification, by hindering those whom their birth and taste have set above
him, from the enjoyment of their superiority, and bringing them down to a level
with himself.

RAMBLER. Nothing exceeds in ridicule, no doubt,
A fool in fashion, but a fool that is out;
His passion for absurdity's so strong,
He cannot bear a rival in the wrong:
Though wrong the mode, comply; more sense is shown
In wearing others' follies than your own.
If what is out of fashion most you prize,
Methinks you should endeavor to be wise.
YOUNG. FAIR OF AMERICA.
Ye blooming daughters of the western world,
Whose graceful locks by artless hands are curled,
Whose limbs of symmetry, and snowy breast,
Allure (...) love, in simple neatness dressed;
Beneath the veil of modesty, who hide
The boast of nature and of virgin pride --
(For beauty needs no meretricious art
To find a passage to the opening heart)
Oh make your charms even in my song admired,
My song immortal by your charms inspired.
Though lavish nature sheds each various grace,
That forms the figure, or that decks the face --
Though health, with innocence, and glee, the while
Dance in their eye, and wanton in their smile --
Though mid the lilly's white, unfolds the rose,
As on their cheek the bud of beauty blows,
Spontaneous blossom of the transient flush.
Which glows and reddens to a scarlet blush,
What time the maid, unread in flames and darts,
First feels of love the palpitating starts,
Feels from the heart, life's quickened currents glide,
Her bosom heaving with the bounding tide --
Though sweet their lips, their features more than fair --
Though curls luxuriant of untortur'd hair
Grow long, and add unutterable charms,
While every look enraptures and alarms;
Yet something still beyond the exterior form,
With goodness fraught, with animation warm,
Inspires their actions; dignifies their mien;
Gilds every hour; and beautifies each scene.
It Is those perfections of superior kind,
The moral beauties which adorn the mind:
It Is those enchanting sounds mellifluous hung,
In words of truth and kindness on their tongue --
It Is delicacy gives their charms new worth,
And calls the loveliness of beauty forth;
It Is the mild influence beaming from their eyes,
Like vernal sunbeams, round coe^ulian skies;
Bright emanations of the spotless soul,
Which warm, and cheer, and vivify the whole
HUMPHREYS. FALSE ALARMS.
The proud supporters of tyranny, in which they hope to partake, have always
used false alarms, false plots, cunningly-contrived nicknames and watchwords,
to set the unthinking people against those who were promoting their greatest
good.

When Christ began to preach, we read, in the seventh chapter of St. Luke, that
the multitude and the publicans heard him; but (...) and the pharisees rejected
the counsel of God toward them. They, like all persons of similar temper and
rank, flourishing by abuses, could not bear innovation.

The most powerful argument they used against him was this question: -- Have
any of the rulers and the pharisees believed in him? In modern times the
question would have been, have any persons of fashion and distinction given
countenance to him? Does my lord -- or my lady -- or Sir Harry go to hear him
preach? -- Or is he somebody whom nobody knows? -- Such is the language of the
spirit of despotism, in all times and countries.

Spirit of DESPOTISM. GENTLENESS OF ADDRESS.
The softest and gentlest address to the erroneous, is the best way to convince
them of their mistake. Sometimes ^is necessary to represent to your opponent,
that he is not far off from the truth, and that you would fain draw him a
little nearer to it; commend and establish whatever he says that is just and
true, as our blessed Savior treated the young scribe, when he answered well
concerning the two great commandments; "Thou art not far; says our Lord, from
the "kingdom of heaven," Mark xii. 34. Imitate the mildness and conduct of the
blessed Jesus.

Come as near to your opponent as you can in all your propositions, and yield
to him as much as you dare, in a consistence with truth and justice.

It Is a very great and fatal mistake in persons who attempt to convince or
reconcile others to their party, when they make the difference appear as wide
as possible: this is shocking to any person who is to be convinced, he will
choose rather to keep and maintain his own opinions, if he cannot come into
yours without renouncing and abandoning every thing that he believed before.
Human nature must be flattered a little as well as reasoned with, that so the
argument may be able to come at his understanding, which otherwise will be
thrust off at a distance. If you charge a man with nonsense and absurdities,
with heresy and self-contradiction, you take a very wrong step toward
convincing him,

Remember that error is not to be rooted out of the mind of man by reproachings
and railings, by flashes of wit and biting jests, by loud exclamations or sharp
ridicule: long declamations and triumph over our neighbor's mistake, will not
prove the way to convince him; these are signs either of a bad cause, or of
want of arguments or capacity for the defense of a good one.

WATTS. GALLANTRY.
Gallantry, though a fashionable crime, is a very detestable one; and the
wretch who pilfers from us in the hour of distress, is an innocent character
compared to the plunderer who wantonly robs us of happiness and reputation.

KELLY. GENTLEMAN.
Nor stand so much on your gentility,
Which is an airy, and mere borrowed thing,
From dead men's dust and bones: and none of yours,
Except you make, or hold it.
B. JOHNSON. GLORY.
-- There Is not a homely peasant,
If graced with innocence, though nursed in toil,
But boasts more glory than a tainted grandeur.
SAVAGE. -- Real glory
Springs from the silent conquest of ourselves;
And without that the conqueror is naught
But the (...) slave.
THOMSON. GOOD BREEDING
Is not confined to externals, much less to any particular dress or attitude of
the body; it is the art of pleasing, or contributing as much as possible to the
ease and happiness of those with whom you converse.

FIELDING. Perhaps the summary of good breeding may be reduced to this rule,
"behave unto all men, as you would they should behave unto you." -- This will
^ost certainly oblige us to treat all mankind with the utmost civility and
respect, there being nothing which we desire more, than to be treated so by
them. The ambitious, the covetous, the proud, the vain, the angry, the
debauchee, the glutton, are all lost in the character of the well bred man; or
if nature should now and then venture to peep forth, she withdraws in an
instant, and does not show enough of herself to become ridiculous.

Ibid. GOD.
It is not so with him that all things knows
As it is with us, that square our guess by shows:
But most it is presumption in us, when
The help of Heaven we count the act of men.
SHAKESPEARE. Though all the doors are sure, and all our servants
As sure bound with their sleeps, yet there is one
That wakes above, whose eye no sleep can bind.
He sees through doors and darkness, and our thoughts;
And therefore as we should avoid with fear,
To think amiss ourselves before his search,
So should we be as cautious to shun
All cause, that others think not ill of us.
CHAPMAN. That mind must surely err, whose narrow scope
Confines religion to a place or clime;
A power unknown, that actuates the world,
Whose eye is just, whose every thought is wisdom,
Regards alone the tribute of the heart;
Pride in his awful sight shrinks back appalled;
Humility is eldest born of Virtue,
And claims her birthright at the throne of Heaven.
MURPHY. Thou did, O mighty God! exist
Ere time began its race;
Before the ample elements
Filled up the void of space:
Before the ponderous earthly globe
In fluid air was stayed;
Before the ocean's mighty springs
Their liquid stores displayed:
Ere through the gloom of ancient night
The streaks of light appeared;
Before the high celestial arch
On starry poles was reared:
Before the loud melodious spheres
Their tuneful round begun;
Before the shining roads of heaven
Were measured by the sun:
Ere through the empyrean courts
One hallelujah rung;
Or to their harp^ the sons of light
Ecstatic anthems sung:
Ere men adored, or angels knew,
Or praised thy wondrous name;
Thy bliss, O sacred Spring of life;
Thy glory, was the same.
And when the pillars of the world
With sudden ruin break,
And all this vast and goodly frame
Sinks in the mighty wreck;
When from her orb the moon shall start,
The astonished sun roll back,
And all the trembling starry lamps
Their ancient course forsake;
For ever permanent and fixed,
From agitation free,
Unchanged in everlasting years,
Shall thy existence be.
Mrs. ROW. Should fate command me to the farthest verge
Of the green earth, to distant barbarous climes,
Rivers unknown to song; where first the sun
Gilds Indian mountains, or his setting beam
Flames on the Atlantic isles, it is naught to me;
Since God is ever present, ever felt,
In the void waste as in the city full;
And where He vital spreads, there must be joy.
When even at last the solemn hour shall come,
And wing my mystic flight to future worlds,
I cheerful will obey; there with new powers,
Will rising wonders sing! I cannot go
Where universal love not smiles around,
Sustaining all yon orbs, and all their suns:
From seeming evil still educing good,
And better thence again, and better still,
In infinite progression. -- But I lose
Myself in Him, in light ineffable!
Come then, expressive silence, muse his praise.
THOMSON. GAMING.
The votaries to gaming should be such as want helps for conversation; and none
should have always cards in their hands, but those who have nothing but the
weather in their mouths; thus gaming would be of service to the republic of
wit, by taking away the encouragers of nonsense.

FIELDING. Gaming is a vice the more dangerous as it is deceitful; and,
contrary to every other species of luxury, flatters its votaries with the hopes
of increasing their wealth; so that avarice itself is so far from (...) us
against its temptations, that it often betrays the more thoughtless and giddy
part of mankind into them, promising riches without bounds, and those to be
acquired by the most sudden, as well as easy, and indeed pleasant means.

Ibid.

GRATITUDE.
The wretch whom gratitude once fails to bind,
To truth or honor let him lay no claim;
But stand confessed the brute disguised in man.
And when we would, with utmost detestation,
Single some monster from the traitor-herd,
It Is but to say, ingratitude's his crime.
FROWDE. When gratitude overflows the swelling heart,
And breathes in free and uncorrupted praise
For benefits received: propitious heaven
Takes such acknowledgment as fragrant incense,
And doubles all its blessings.
LYLLO. GOODNATURE.
Goodnature is that benevolent and amiable temper of mind, which disposes us
to feel the misfortunes, and enjoy the happiness of others; and consequently
pushes us on to promote the latter, and prevent the former, and that without
abstract contemplation on the beauty of virtue, and without the allurements or
terrors of religion.

FIELDING. GOVERNMENT.
To hinder insurrection by driving away the people, and to govern peaceably, by
having no subjects, is an expedient that argues no great profundity of
politics. To soften the obdurate, to convince the mistaken, to mollify the
resentful, are worthy of a statesman; but it affords a legislator little
self-applause to consider, that where there was formerly an insurrection, there
is now a wilderness.

JOHNSON. The general story of mankind will evince, that lawful and settled
authority is very seldom resisted when it is well employed. Gross corruption or
evident imbecility, is necessary to the suppression of that reverence, with
which the majority of mankind look upon their governors, or those whom they see
surrounded by splendour, and fortified by power.

RAMBLER. All government, indeed every human benefit and enjoyment, every
virtue, and every prudent act, is founded on compromise and barter. We balance
inconveniences; we give and take; we remit some rights, that we may enjoy
others; and, we choose rather to be happy citizens, than subtle disputants. As
we must give away some natural liberty, to enjoy civil advantages; so we must
sacrifice some civil liberties, for the advantages to be derived from the
communion and fellowship of a great empire. But in all fair dealings, the thing
bought, must bear some proportion to the purchase paid. None will barter away
the immediate jewel of his soul.

BURKE. To meliorate the condition of human nature, can be the only rational
end of government. It cannot be designed to favor one description of men, a
minority, at the expense of all others; who, having received life from him who
alone can give it, received at the same time a right to enjoy it in liberty and
security. This was the charter of God and nature; which no mortal, however
elevated by conquest or inheritance, can annul or violate without impiety. All
government which makes not the advancement of human happiness, and the comfort
of the individuals who are subject to its control, the prime purpose of its
operations, partakes of despotism.

Spirit of DESPOTISM. The majority of men are poor and obscure. To them all
party attachments to names and families, little known as public benefactors,
must appear at once absurd and injurious. They are the persons who stand in
most need of protection and assistance from the powerful. The rich under all
governments, have a thousand means of procuring either comfort or defense. It
is the mass, the poor and middling ranks, unknown to, and unknowing courts or
kings, who require all the alleviation which men enlightened by knowledge,
furnished with opulence, elevated by rank, can afford to lessen the natural
evils of life, aggravated by the moral and artificial. Government possesses the
power of alleviating, and sometimes of removing, that moral and physical evil
which embitters existence. How deplorable, when government becomes so
perverted, as to increase the evil it was designed to cure. Yet this has been,
and is now the case on a great part of the globe; insomuch that the learned and
judicious Dr. Prideaux, whose integrity is as well known as his ability, used
to say, "that it was a doubt with him, whether the benefit which the world
receives from government, was sufficient to make amends for the calamities
which it suffers from the follies, mistakes, and mal-administration of those
who manage it."

Ibid. Few and evil are our days, even when they proceed to their natural
extent, and are attended with the common portion of health and prosperity. Yet,
as if a superfluity of years and happiness were lavished on men, the chief
business of the greatest part of governments on the whole earth has been to
abbreviate life, to poison and embitter its sweetest pleasures, and add new
pungency to its anguish. Yet see the false glitter of happiness, the pomp and
parade which such governments assume; observe the gravity and insolence of
superiority which their ministers, their statesmen, and their warriors, assume,
and you would imagine them a commissioned regency, lord lieutenants sent by
heaven to rule this lower world, and to rectify all disorders which had escaped
the vigilance of the Deity. The time has been when they have actually claimed
the title of God's vicegerents, and have been literally worshipped as gods by
the servile crew of courtiers; men gradually bowed down by despotism from the
erect port of native dignity, and driven by fear to crouch under the most
degrading of all superstition, the political idolatry of a base fellow creature.

Ibid. I lay it down as an incontrovertible axiom, that all who are born into
the world have a right to be as happy in it as the unavoidable evils of nature,
and their own disordered passions, will allow. The grand object of all good
government, of all government that is not an usurpation, must be to promote
this happiness, to assist every individual in its attainment and security. A
government chiefly anxious about the emoluments of office, chiefly employed in
augmenting its own power and aggrandizing its obsequious instruments, while it
neglects the comfort and safety of individuals in middle or low life, is
despotic and a nuisance. It is founded on folly as well as wickedness, and,
like the freaks of insanity, deals mischief and misery around, without being
able to ascertain or limit its extent and duration. If it should not be
punished as criminal, let it be coerced as dangerous. Let the straight
waistcoat be applied; but let men, judging fellow men, always spare the axe.

For what rational purpose could we enter into life? To vex, torment, and slay
each other with the sword? To be and to make miserable? No, I firmly believe,
that the great King of kings, intended every son and daughter of Adam to be as
happy as the eternal laws of nature, under his control, permit them to be in
this sublunary state. Execrated and exploded be all those politics, with
Machiavel, or the Evil Being, their author, which introduce systems of
government and manners among the great, inconsistent with the happiness of the
majority. Must real tragedies be forever acting on the stage of human life?
Must men go on forever to be tormentors and executioners of men? Is the world
never to profit by the experience of ages? Must not even attempts be made to
improve the happiness of life, to improve government, though all arts and
sciences are encouraged in their progress to perfection? Must the grand art,
the sublimest science, that of meliorating the condition of human nature, be
stationary? No; forbid it reason, virtue, benevolence, religion! Let the world
be made more and more comfortable, to all who are allowed the glorious
privilege of seeing the sun and breathing the liberal air.

Ibid. The principal objects of all rational government, such as is intended to
promote human happiness, are two; to preserve peace, and to diffuse plenty.
Such government will seldom tax the necessaries of life. It will avoid wars;
and, by such humane and wise policy, render taxes on necessaries totally
superfluous. Taxes on necessaries are usually caused by war. The poor, however,
are not easily excited to insurrection. It is a base calumny which accuses
them. They are naturally quiescent; inclined to submission by their habits, and
willing to reverence all their superiors who behave to them justly and kindly.
They deserve to be used well. They deserve confidence. But oppression and
persecution may teach them to lift their gigantic arm, and then vain will be
resistance. Let not wars then be wantonly undertaken, which, besides their
injustice and inhumanity, tend more than any thing else, by increasing taxes,
to compel insurrection. The poor man hears great praises bestowed on the
government he lives under, and perpetual panegyrics on the constitution. He
knows little of general politics. He judges from the effects he feels.

Ibid. Care must always be taken to guard against all independence in the
rulers, on the sentiments of the people, and to provide, that they shall
administer, not their own power, but the powers of government.

CHIPMAN'S Principles of Government. By the force of habit, and inveterate
national prejudices, abuses are rendered sacred, and not unfrequently, come to
be considered as rightful privileges; and those institutions, which were the
offspring of chance or violence, to be extolled as the most perfect productions
of reason, sounded in the original and unalterable principles of nature. Such
was the British government, and such has been the force of habitual prejudice
upon the people of that kingdom. That government has, indeed, received many
improvements, with the improvements of the age; but they have generally been
wrested by force from the reigning powers, or interposed in a revolution of the
crown. Many respectable characters long considered them as so many violations
of the most sacred rights. The greater part of the nation appear fully
persuaded, that all farther improvements are impracticable, and that because
their government was once the best, perhaps, which existed in the world, it
must, through all the progressive advances in knowledge, in morals, and in
manners, continue the best, a pattern of unchanging perfection, though, in its
principles, it is much too limited for the present state. It is probable that
all improvements in the government, will be opposed and prevented by those in
power, who are interested in the present order of things, till the improvements
of an enlightened age, shall produce a violent concussion in the combat with
ancient prejudices, and struggle through a scene of tumult, outrage, and
perhaps civil war, to arrive at some inconsiderable amelioration, in their
constitution.

Ibid. The government of the United States of America exhibits a new scene in
the political history of the world; a number of integral republics, each
claiming and exercising all the powers of internal sovereignty, within the
limits of their respective jurisdictions, formed into one general government,
with powers of legislation for all national purposes, and the power of
executing all their laws, within the several states, on the individual
citizens, and that independently of the local authority. The experiment was
new, and the success has, hitherto, exceeded the most sanguine expectation of
its advocates. A situation so complicated, so different from that of simple
governments, which have been the subject of these sketches, will have an
effect, if not upon the laws of nature, from which the general principles are
ultimately derived, yet to give a different modification to those principles,
owing to the different combinations and relative circumstances of the
constituent parts; and will have an influence on its organization, and the
execution of its laws.

Ibid. That government, that constitution of society, the principles of which
dictate those laws, and those only, which are adapted to the present-state of
men and manners, and tend to social improvement, which are influenced by a
sense of moral obligation, and sanctioned by the laws of nature, not of savage
solitary nature, but of social nature, in its improved and improvable state, is
incontrovertibly good. So far as it deviates, it is clearly faulty. Upon a
candid examination, upon a fair comparison, it will be found, that a democratic
republic is alone capable of this pre-eminence of principle.

Ibid. Guarantee to every man, the full enjoyment of his natural rights. Banish
all exclusive privileges; all perpetuities of riches and honors. Leave free the
acquisition and disposal of property to supply the occasions of the owner, and
to answer all claims of right, both of the society, and of individuals. To give
a stimulus to industry, to provide solace and assistance, in the last helpless
stages of life, and a reward for the attentions of humanity, confirm to the
owner the power of directing who shall succeed to his right of property, after
his death; but let it be without any limitation, or restraint upon the future
use, or disposal. Divert not the consequences of actions, as to the individual
actors, from their proper course. Let no preference be given to any one in
government, but what his conduct can secure, from the sentiments of his fellow
citizens. Of property, left to the disposal of the law, let a descent from
parents to children, in equal proportions, be held a sacred principle of the
constitution. Secure but these, and every thing will flow in the channel
intended by nature. The operation of the equal laws of nature, tend to exclude,
or correct every dangerous excess.

Ibid. GRAVE.
What will they then avail him in the grave?
His various policies, refined devices,
His subtle wit, his quick capacious thought?
Will they go with him to the grave? No, no!
Why then should he be proud?
MARTYN. GRAVITY.
-- I tell thee what, Antonio,
There is a sort of men whose visages
Do cream and mantle like a standing pond,
And do a willful stilness entertain
With purpose to be dressed in an opinion
Of wisdom, gravity, profound conceit;
As who should say, I am Sir Oracle;
And when I open my lips, let no dog bark.
Oh, my Antonio! I do know of those,
That therefore only are reputed wise,
For saying nothing.
SHAKESPEARE. Yet subtle wights (so blind are mortal men,
Though satire couch them with her keenest pen)
For ever will hang out a solemn face,
To put off nonsense with a better grace,
As pedlars with some hero's head make bold,
Illustrious mark! where pins are to be sold.
What Is the bent brow, or neck in thought reclined?
The body's wisdom to conceal the mind.
A man of sense can artifice disdain,
As men of wealth may venture to go plain;
And be this truth eternal never forgot,
Solemnity's a cover for a sot.
I find the fool, when I behold the screen;
For it is the wise man's interest to be seen.
YOUNG. GREATNESS.
-- Could great men thunder,
As Jove himself does, Jove would never be quiet;
For every pelting petty officer
Would use his heaven for thunder:
Nothing but thunder. Merciful Heaven!
Thou rather with thy sharp and sulfurous bolt
Split'st the unwedgeable and gnarled oak,
Than the soft myrtle: O, but man! proud man!
Dressed in a little brief authority,
(Most ignorant of what lies most assured,
His glassy essence,) like an angry ape,
Plays such fantastic tricks before high heaven,
As make the angels weep: who with our spleens
Would all themselves laugh mortal.
SHAKESPEARE. Farewell, a long farewell to all my greatness!
This is the state of man; to day he puts forth
The tender leaves of hope; tomorrow blossoms,
And bears his blushing honors thick upon him,
The third day comes a frost, a killing frost;
And when he thinks, good easy man, full surely
His greatness is a ripening, nips his root;
And then he falls as I do. I have ventured,
Like little wanton boys that swim on bladders,
These many summers in a sea of glory;
But far beyond my depth: my high-blown pride
At length broke under me, and now has left me,
Weary and old with service, to the mercy
Of a rude stream, that must forever hide me.
Vain pomp and glory of this world, I hate ye!
I feel my heart new opened.
Ibid. -- Since by your greatness, you
Are nearer heaven in place, be nearer it
In goodness. Rich men should transcend the poor
As clouds the earth; raised by the comfort of
The sun, to water dry and barren grounds.
TOURNEUR. They that are great and worthy to be so,
Hide not their rays from meanest plants that grow.
Why is the sun set on a throne so high,
But to give light to each inferior eye?
His radiant eyes distribute lively grace
To all according to their worth and place;
And from the humble ground these vapors drain,
Which are sent down in fruitful drops of rain.
Sir JOHN BEAUMONT. Oh greatness! bane of virtue and honor!
Sure great and good can never meet in one.
Who would not rather wish in homely cells,
Or meanest cottages to lead his life,
Where dwells content, inestimable prize!
TRACY. -- What a scene
Of solemn mockery is all human grandeur?
Thus worshipped, thus exalted by the breath
Of adulation, are my passions soothed?
My secret pangs asswag'd? The peasant-hind
Who drives his camel over the burning waste,
With heat and hunger smote, knows happier days,
And sounder nights than I.
MALLET. Thrice happy they, who sleep in humble life,
Beneath the storm ambition blows. It Is meet
The great should have the fame of happiness,
The consolation of a little envy;
It Is all their pay, for those superior cares,
Those pangs of heart, their vassals never can feel.
YOUNG. He that becomes acquainted and is invested with authority and
influence, will in a short time be convinced, that, in proportion as the power
of doing well is enlarged, the temptations to do ill are multiplied and
enforced.

RAMBLER. The awe which great actions or abilities impress, will be inevitably
diminished by acquaintance, though nothing either mean or criminal should be
found; because we do not easily consider him as great whom our own eyes show us
to be little; nor labor to keep present to our thoughts the latent
excellencies of him who shares with us all our weaknesses and many of our
follies; who, like us, is delighted with slight amusements, busied with
trifling employments, and disturbed by little vexations.

IDLER.

GREAT ONES.
There is nothing which I can so reluctantly pardon in the great ones of this
world, as the little value they entertain for the life of a man. Property, if
seized or lost, may be restored; and without property, man may enjoy a thousand
delightful pleasures of existence. The sun shines as warmly on the poor as on
the rich; and the gale of health breathes its balsam into the cottage casement
on the heath, no less sweetly and salubriously than into the portals of the
palace. But can the lords of this world, who are so lavish of the lives of
their inferiors, with all their boasted power, give the cold heart to beat
again, or relume the light of the eye once dimmed by the shades of death!
Accursed despots, show me your authority for taking away that which ye never
gave, and cannot give; for undoing the work of God, and extinguishing the lamp
of life which was illuminated with a ray from heaven. Where is your charter to
privilege murder? You do the work of Satan, who was a destroyer; and your
right, if you possess any, must have originated from the father of mischief and
misery.

Spirit of DESPOTISM. "The common people," says a sensible author, "generally
think that great men have great minds, and scorn base actions; which judgment
is so false, that the basest and worst of actions have been done by those
called great men. They have often disturbed, deceived and pillaged the world;
and he who is capable of the highest mischief is capable of the meanest. He who
plunders a country of a million of money would, in suitable circumstances,
steal a silver spoon; and a conqueror, who stands and pillages a kingdom,
would, in an humbler situation, rifle a portmanteau." I should not, therefore,
choose to expose my watch or purse in a crowd, to those men who have plundered
Poland, if, instead of possessing a crown of jewels, and the pocket of
submissive nations, they had been in the circumstances of a Barrington. Nor,
though men should be called honorable, will it be safe to trust our liberties
to their honor, without some collateral security.

Ibid. GRIEF.
But know, young prince, that valor soars above
What the world calls misfortune and affliction;
These are not ills, else they would never fall
On heaven's first favorites, and the best of men.
Heaven in bounty works up storms about us,
That give mankind occasion to exert
Their hidden strength, and throw out into practice
Virtues that shun the day, and lie concealed
In the smooth seasons and the calms of life.
ADDISON. Let us not, Lucia, aggravate our sorrows,
But to kind heaven permit the event of things:
Our lives discolor'd with the present woes,
May still grow bright and smile with happier hours.
So the pure limpid stream, when foul with stains
Of rushing torrents, and descending rains,
Works itself clear, and as it runs refines,
Till by degrees the floating mirror shines;
Reflects each flower that on the border grows,
And a new heaven in its fair bosom shows.
Ibid. GUILT.
The guilty ever are most hard to pardon;
Vice makes them stubborn, haughty, and remorseless;
And as their views all center in self-love,
Soon hate what once controuls that darling passion.
E. HAYWOOD. As by degrees from long, though gentle rains,
Great floods arise, and overflow the plains;
So men from little faults to great proceed,
Guilt grows on guilt, and crimes do crimes succeed.
WANDESFORD. Fear of detection, what a curse art thou! O, could the young and
artless mind but know the agonies that dwell with guilt, it would prefer the
humblest lot with peace, to all that splendid vice can ever bestow.

GRIFFITH. GOOD SENSE.
Good-sense is a sedate and quiescent quality, which manages its possessions
well, but does not increase them; it collects few materials for its own
operations, and preserves safety, but never gains supremacy.

JOHNSON. GOOD HUMOR.
Trust not too much your now resistless charms,
Those, age or sickness, soon or late, disarms;
Good humor only teaches charms to last,
Still makes new conquests, and maintains the past:
Love raised on beauty will like that decay,
Our hearts may bear its slender chain a day,
As flowery bands in wantonness are worn;
A morning's pleasure, and at evening torn:
This binds in ties more easy yet more strong
The willing heart, and only holds it long.
POPE. Good Humor may be defined, a habit of being pleased; a constant and
perennial softness of manner, easiness of approach, and suavity of disposition;
like that which every one perceives in himself, when the first transports of
new felicity have subsided, and his thoughts are only kept in motion by a slow
succession of soft impulses.

RAMBLER. Surely nothing can be more unreasonable than to lose the will to
please, when we are conscious of the power, or show more cruelty than to choose
any kind of influence before that of kindness and good humor. He that regards
the welfare of others, should make his virtue approachable, that it may be
loved and copied; and he that considers the wants which every man feels, or
will feel, of external assistance, must rather wish to be surrounded by those
that love him, than by those that admire his excellencies or solicit his
favors; for admiration ceases with novelty, and interest gains its end and
retires. A man whose great qualities want the ornament of superficial
attractions, is like a naked mountain with mines of gold, which will be
frequented only till the treasure is exhausted.

Ibid. Nothing can more show the value of good humor, than that it recommends
those who are destitute of all other excellencies, and procures regard to the
trifling, friendship to the worthless, and affection to the dull.

Ibid. GAIETY.
Gaiety is to good humor as animal perfumes to vegetable fragrance. The one
overpowers weak spirits, the other recreates and revives them. Gaiety seldom
fails to give some pain; the hearers either strain their faculties to accompany
its towerings, or are left behind in envy or despair. Good Humor boasts no
faculties, which every one does not believe in his own power, and pleases
principally by not offending.

RAMBLER. Whom call we gay? That honor has been long
The boast of mere pretenders to the name,
The innocent are gay -- the lark is gay
That dries his feathers saturate with dew
Beneath the rosy cloud, while yet the beams
Of dayspring overshoot his humble nest.
The peasant too, a witness of his song,
Himself a songster, is as gay as he.
But save me from the gaiety of those
Whose head-achs nail them to a noonday bed;
And save me too from theirs whose haggard eyes
Flash desperation, and betray their pangs
For property stripped off by cruel chance;
From gaiety that fills the bones with pain,
The mouth with blasphemy, the heart with woe.
COWPER. GYPSIES.
I see a column of slow rising smoke
O'ertop the lofty wood that skirts the wild.
A vagabond useless tribe there eat
Their miserable meal. A kettle slung
Between two poles upon a stick transverse,
Receives the morsel; flesh obscene of dog,
Or vermin, or at best, of cock purloin'd
From his accustomed perch. Hard faring race;
They pick their fuel out of every hedge,
Which, kindled with dry leaves, just saves unquench'd
The spark of life. The sportive wind blows wide
Their fluttering rags, and shows a tawny skin,
The vellum of the pedigree they claim.
Great skill have they in palmistry, and more
To conjure clean away the gold they touch,
Conveying worthless dross into its place,
Loud when they beg, dumb only when they steal.
Strange! that a creature rational, and cast
In human mould, should brutalize by choice
His nature, and though capable of arts
By which the world might profit and himself,
Self banished from society, prefer
Such squalid sloth to honorable toil.
Yet even these, though feigning sickness often
They swathe the forehead, drag the limping limb
And vex their flesh with artificial sores,
Can change their whine into a mirthful note
When safe occasion offers, and with dance
And music of the bladder and the bag
Beguile their woes, and make the woods resound.
Such health and gaiety of heart enjoy
The houseless rovers of thy sylvan world;
And breathing wholesome air, and wandering much,
Need other physic none to heal the effects
Of loathsome diet, penury, and cold.
Ibid. HONESTY.
The man who pauses on his honesty
Wants little of the villain.
MARTYN. Be honesty our riches. Are we mean
And humbly born? the true heart makes us noble.
These hands can toil, can sow the ground and reap
For thee and thy sweet babes; our daily labor
Is daily wealth, it finds us bread and raiment.
Could Danish gold do more?
MALLET HONOR.
Let none presume
To wear an undeserved dignity:
O that estates, degrees, and offices,
Were not derived corruptly; that clear honor
Were purchased by the merit of the wearer!
How many then should cover, that stand bare?
How many be commanded, that command?
How much low peasantry would then be gleaned
From the true seed of honor? How much honor
Picked from the chaff and ruin of the times,
To be new vann'd?
SHAKESPEARE. Mine honor is my life, both grow in one;
Take honor from me, and my life is done.
Then, dear my liege, mine honor let me try;
In that I live, and for that will I die.
Ibid. A. Speak the height of honor.
B. No man to offend,
Never to reveal the secrets of a friend;
Rather to suffer than to do a wrong:
To make the heart no stranger to the tongue:
Provoked, not to betray an enemy;
Nor eat his meat, I choke with flattery;
Blushless to tell wherefore I wear my scars,
Or for my conscience, or my country's wars:
To aim at just things. If we have wildly run
Into offenses, wish them all undone.
It Is poor in grief, for a wrong done, to die:
Honor to dare to live, and satisfy.
MASSING -- He was a man
That lived up to the standard of his honor,
And prized that jewel more than mines of wealth:
He Would not have done a shameful thing but once;
Though kept in darkness from the world, and hidden,
He could not have forgiven it to himself.
OTWAY. Not all the threats or favors of a crown,
A prince's whisper, or a tyrant's frown,
Can awe the spirit, or allure the mind
Of him who to strict honor is inclined.
Though all the pomp and pleasure that does wait
On public places and affairs of state,
Should fondly court him to be base and great:
With even passions and with settled face,
He would remove the harlot's false embrace,
Though all the storms and tempests should arise,
That church-Magicians in their cells devise,
And from their settled basis nations tear,
He would unmoved the mighty ruin bear,
Secure in innocence, contemn them all,
And decently arrayed in honor fall.
EARL OF HALIFAX. Among the Symerons, or fugitive negroes in the South Seas,
being a nation that does not set them above continual cares for the immediate
necessaries of life, he that can temper iron best, is among them most esteemed:
and, perhaps, it would be happy for every nation, if honors and applauses were
as justly distributed, and he were most distinguished whose abilities were most
useful to society. How many chimerical titles to precedence, how many false
pretenses to respect, would this rule bring to the ground!

JOHNSON. Honor and shame from no condition rise:
Act well your part, there all the honor lies.
Fortune in men has some small difference made,
One flaunts in rags, one flutters in brocade;
The cobbler apron'd, and the parson gown'd,
The friar hooded, and the monarch crowned.
" What differ more (you cry) than crown and cowl!"
I Will tell you, friend! a wise man and a fool.
You Will find, if once the monarch acts the monk,
Or, cobler-like, the parson will be drunk,
Worth makes the man, and want of it the fellow;
The rest is all but leather and prunella.
POPE. The HANDSOME and DEFORMED LEG.
There are two ^orts of people in the world, who with equal degrees of health
and wealth, and the other comforts of life, become the one happy, and the other
miserable. This arises very much from the different views in which they
consider things, persons, and events; and the effect of those different views
upon their own minds.

In whatever situation men can be placed, they may find conveniences and
inconveniences: in whatever company, they may find persons and conversation
more or less pleasing: at whatever table, they may meet with meats and drinks
of better and worse taste, dishes better and worse dressed: in whatever
climate, they will find good and bad weather: under whatever government, they
may find good and bad laws, and good and bad administration of those laws: in
whatever poem, or work of genius, they may see faults and beauties: in almost
every face, and every person, they may discover fine features and defects, good
and bad qualities.

Under these circumstances, the two sorts of people abovementioned, fix their
attention -- those who are disposed to be happy, on the conveniences of
things, the pleasant parts of conversation, the well dressed dishes, the
goodness of the wines, the fine weather, etc. and enjoy all with cheerfulness.
Those who are to be unhappy, think and speak only of the contraries. Hence they
are continually discontented themselves, and, by their remarks, four the
pleasures of society; offend personally many people, and make themselves every
where disagreeable. If this turn of mind was founded in nature, such unhappy
persons would be the more to be pitied. But as the disposition to criticize,
and to be disgusted, is perhaps taken up originally by imitation, and is,
unawares, grown into a habit, which, though at present strong, may nevertheless
be cured, when those who have it are convinced of its bad effects on their
felicity: I hope this little admonition may be of service to them, and put them
on changing a habit, which, though in the exercise it is chiefly an act of
imagination, yet has serious consequences in life, as it brings on real griefs
and misfortunes. For as many are offended by, and nobody loves this sort of
people; no one shows them more than the most common civility and respect, and
scarcely that; and this frequently puts them out of humor, and draws them into
disputes and contentions. If they aim at obtaining some advantage in rank or
fortune, nobody wishes them success, or will stir a step, or speak a word to
favor their pretensions. If they incur public censure or disgrace, no one will
defend or excuse, and many join to aggravate their misconduct, and render them
completely odious: if these people will not change this bad habit, and
condescend to be pleased with what is pleasing, without fretting themselves and
others about the contraries, it is good for others to avoid an acquaintance
with them; which is always disagreeable, and sometimes very inconvenient,
especially when one finds one's self entangled in their quarrels.

An old philosophical friend of mine was grown from experience, very cautious
in this particular, and carefully avoided any intimacy with such people. He
had, like other philosophers, a thermometer to show him the heat of the
weather; and a barometer, to mark when it was likely to prove good or bad; but
there being no instrument invented to discover, at first sight, this unpleasing
disposition in a person, he, for that purpose, made use of his legs; one of
which was remarkably handsome, the other, by some accident, crooked and
deformed. If a stranger, at the first interview, regarded his ugly leg more
than his handsome one, he doubted him. If he spoke of it, and took no notice of
the handsome leg, that was sufficient to determine my philosopher to have no
further acquaintance with him. Every body has not this two legged instrument;
but every one, with a little attention, may observe signs of that carping,
fault-finding disposition, and take the same resolution of avoiding the
acquaintance of those infected with it. I therefore advise those critical,
querulous, discontented, unhappy people, that if they wish to be respected and
beloved by others, and happy in themselves, they should leave off looking at
the ugly leg.

FRANKLIN. HAPPINESS.
No happiness can be where is no rest,
The unknown, untalk'd-of man, is only blessed,
He, as in some safe cliff, his cell does keep,
From thence he views the labor of the deep:
The gold-fraught vessel, which mad tempests beat,
He sees now vainly make to his retreat;
And when from far the tenth wave does appear,
Shrinks up in silent joy he is not there.
DRYDEN. -- To be good is to be happy: Angels
Are happier than men, because they are better.
Guilt is the source of sorrow; it is the fiend,
The avenging fiend that follows us behind
With whips and stings: the blessed know none of this,
But rest in everlasting peace of mind,
And find the height of all their heaven is goodness.
ROW. What art thou, happiness, so sought by all,
So greatly envied, yet so seldom found?
Of what strange nature is thy composition,
When gold and grandeur sue to thee in vain?
The prince who leads embattled thousands forth,
And with a nod commands the universe,
Knows not the language to make thee obey;
Though he with armies strew the hostile plain,
And hew out avenues of death, he still
Loses his way to thee, because content
Appears not on the road, to light him to thee: --
Content and happiness are then the same; --
And they are seldom found, but in the bed
Where unmolested innocence resides.
HAVARD. There is nothing more difficult than to lay down any fixed and certain
rules for happiness, or indeed to judge with any precision of the happiness of
others from the knowledge of external circumstances. There is sometimes a
little speck of black in the brightest and gayest colors of fortune, which
contaminates and deadens the whole. On the contrary, when all without looks
dark and dismal, there is often a secret ray of light within the mind which
turns every thing to real joy and gladness.

FIELDING. All natural, and almost all political evils, are incident alike to
the bad or good. They are confounded in the misery of a famine, and not much
distinguished in the fury of a faction. They sink together in a tempest, and
are driven together from their country by invaders. All that virtue can afford
is quietness of conscience, a steady prospect of a happier state, which will
enable us to endure every calamity with patience.

JOHNSON. The happiness of the generality of people is nothing if it is not
known, and very little if it is not envied.

IDLER. It is impossible to form a philosophic system of happiness which is
adapted to every condition in life; since every person who travels in this
great pursuit, takes a separate road. The different colors which suit
different complexions, are not more various than the different pleasures
appropriated to particular minds. The various sects who have pretended to give
lessons to instruct men in happiness, have described their own particular
sensations without considering ours, have only loaded their disciples with
constraint, without adding to their real felicity.

GOLDSMITH. HUSBAND.
The silliest fellows are in general the worst of husbands: and it may be
asserted as a fact, that a man of sense rarely behaves very ill to a wife who
deserves very well.

FIELDING. HEAVEN.
What a poor value do men set on heaven?
Heaven, the perfection of all that can
Be said, or thought, riches, delight, or harmony,
Health, beauty; and all these not subject to
The waste of time; but in their height eternal;
Lost for a pension, or poor spot of earth,
Favor of greatness, or an hour's faint pleasure;
As men, in scorn of a true flame that is near,
Should run to light their taper at a glowworm.
SHIRLEY. HOPE.
Hope, with a goodly prospect feeds the eye,
Shows from a rising ground possession nigh;
Shortens the distance, or o'erlooks it quite,
So easy it is to travel with the sight.
DRYDEN. Call up your better reason to your aid,
And hope the best: that friendly beam is left
To cheer the wretch, and lighten through his sorrows;
Nor can he sink so low, but hope will find him:
The pleasing prospect of a better day
Shines through the gloom of life, and shortens pain.
HAVARD. O Hope! sweet flatt'rer! whose delusive touch
Sheds on afflicted minds the balm of comfort,
Relieves the load of poverty, sustains
The captive, bending with the weight of bonds,
And smooths the pillow of disease and pain,
Send back the exploring messenger with joy
And let me hail thee from that friendly grove.
GLOVER. The wretch condemned with life to part,
Still, still on hope relies;
And every pang that rends the heart
Bids expectation rise.
Hope, like the glimmering taper's light,
Adorns and cheers the way;
And still, as darker grows the night,
Emits a brighter ray.
GOLDSMITH. HUMILITY.
Would I had trod the humble path, and made
My industry less ambitious: the shrub
Securely grows, the tallest tree stands most
In the wind; and thus we distinguish the
Noble from the base: the noble find their
Lives and deaths still troublesome:
But humility does sleep, whilst the storm
Grows hoarse with scolding.
DAVENANT. There are some that use
Humility to serve their pride, and seem
Humble upon their way, to be prouder
At their wished journey's end.
DENHAM. HYPOCRISY.
Look out of your door, -- take notice of that man: see what disquieting,
intriguing and shifting, he is content to go through, merely to be thought a
man of plain-dealing: -- three grains of honesty would save him all this
trouble -- alas! he has them not. --

STERN. A hypocrite in society lives in the same apprehension with a thief,
who lies concealed in the midst of the family he is to rob; for this fancies
himself perceived when he is least so; every motion alarms him; he fears he is
discovered, and is suspicious that every one who enters the room knows where he
is hid, and is coming to seize him. And thus, as nothing hates more violently
than fear, many an innocent person, who suspects no evil intended him, is
detested by him who intends it.

FIELDING. The hypocrite shows the excellency of virtue by the necessity he
thinks himself under of seeming to be virtuous.

RAMBLER. HUMAN DEGRADATION.
I see the noble nature of man so cruelly debased, -- I see the horse and the
dog in so many instances raised to a rank far superior to beings whom I must
acknowledge as my fellow creatures, and whom my heart cannot but embrace with a
fraternal affection which must increase with the insults I see them suffer, --
I see the pride of power and of rank mounted to so ungovernable a height in
those whom accident has called to direct the affairs of nations, -- I see the
faculty of reason so completely dormant in both these classes, and morality,
the indispensible bond of union among men, so effectually banished by the
unnatural combinations, which in Europe are called society, that I have been
almost determined to relinquish the disagreeable task which I had prescribed to
myself in the first part of this work, and returning to my country, endeavor in
the new world to forget the miseries of the old.

BARLOW. HEALTH.
-- How sweet is thy return, O health! thou rosy cherub! -- my soul leaps
forward to meet thee, whose true value thy absence can only teach us! -- When
thou come, with healing on thy wings; when every part, and nerve, and artery,
are obedient to their office; and when this complicated machine is so perfectly
harmonized, that we perceive not that we have any part, or nerve, or artery,
belonging to us, how sweetly is the mind then attuned to receive pleasure from
every inlet of sense!

-- God of my life! who numberest my days, teach me to meet with gratitude, or
patience, the good or ill, which in the tide of time shall float down with
them! but never withdraw from me those native spirits, which have been the
cheering companions of my existence, and have spread a gilding upon every thing
around me! -- that I may continue to view with rapture, the inexhaustible
volume of nature that is thrown open before me; on every page of which is
charactered the impression of thy omnipotent hand!

KEATE. HUMAN LIFE.
Like as a damask rose you see,
Or like the blossom on the tree;
Or like the dainty flower in May,
Or like the morning to the day;
Or like the sun, or like the shade,
Or like the gourd which Jonah had;
Even such is man, whose thread is spun,
Drawn out, and cut, and so is done;
Withers the rose, the blossom blasts,
The flower fades, the morning hastes;
The sun does set, the shadows fly,
The ground consumes, and mortals die.
Like to the grass that is newly sprung,
Or like a tale that is new begun;
Or like a bird that is hero today,
Or like the pearled dew of May;
Or like an hour, or like a span,
Or like the singing of a swan:
Even such is man, who lives by breath,
Is here, now there, in life and death;
The grass decays, the tale does end,
The bird is flown, the dews ascend;
The hour is short, the span not long,
The swan's near death, man's life is done.
Like to the bubble in the brook,
Or in a glass much like a look;
Or like the shuttle in the hand,
Or like the writing in the sand;
Or like a thought, or like a dream,
Or like the gliding of the stream;
Even such is man, who lives by breath,
Is here, now there, in life and death;
The bubble's burst, the look's forgot,
The shuttle's flung, the writing's blot;
The thought is past, the dream is gone,
The water glides, man's life is done.
HIRING SOLDIERS.
God, we read, made man in his own image; and our Savior taught us that he was
the heir of immortality. God made no distinction of persons; but behold a
being, born to a scepter, though a poor, puny, shivering mortal like the rest,
presumes to sell, and let out for hire, these images of God, to do the work of
butchers, in any cause, and for any play master, on any number of unoffending
fellow creatures, who are standing up in defense of their hearths, their
altars, their wives, their children, and their liberty. Great numbers of men,
trained to the trade of human butchery, are constantly ready to be let to hire,
to carry on the work of despotism, and to support, by the money they earn in
this hellish employment, the luxurious vices of the wretch who calls them his
property. Can that state of human affairs be right and proper, which permits a
miscreant, scarcely worthy the name of a man, sunk in effeminacy, the slave of
vice, often the most abominable kind of vice, ignorant and illiterate,
debilitated with disease, weak in body as in mind, to have such dominion over
hundreds of thousands, his superiors by nature, as to let them out for pay, to
murder the innocent stranger in cold blood?

Spirit of DESPOTISM. HEREDITARY POWER.
No office or place whatsoever in government, shall be hereditary -- the
abilities and integrity requisite in all, not being transmissible to posterity
or relations.

Constitution of NEW HAMPSHIRE. HUMAN NATURE.
There is nothing which I contemplate with greater pleasure than the dignity of
human nature, which often shows itself in all conditions of life: for
notwithstanding the degeneracy and meanness that is crept into it, there are a
thousand occasions in which it breaks through its original corruption, and
shows what it once was, and what it will be hereafter. I consider the soul of
man as a ruin of a glorious pile of building; where, amidst great heaps of
rubbish, you meet with noble fragments of sculpture, broken pillars and
obelisks, and a magnificence in confusion. Virtue and wisdom are continually
employed in clearing the ruins, removing these disorderly heaps, recovering the
noble pieces that lie buried under them, and adjusting them as well as possible
according to their ancient symmetry and beauty. A happy education, conversation
with the finest spirits, looking abroad into the works of nature, and
observations upon mankind, are the great assistances to this necessary and
glorious work. But even a-among those who have never had the happiness of any
of these advantages, there are sometimes such exertions of the greatness that
is natural to the mind of man, as show capacities and abilities, which only
want these accidental helps to fetch them out, and show them in a proper light.

SPECTATOR. IDLENESS.
-- What is man,
If his chief good, and market of his time
Be but to sleep and feed? A beast -- no more.
Sure he that made us with such large discourse,
Looking before and after, gave us not
That capability and god-like reason
To rust in us unused.
SHAKESPEARE. It is in vain to put wealth within the reach of him who will not
stretch out his hand to take it.

JOHNSON. Indolence is one of those vices from which those whom it once infects
are seldom reformed.

RAMBLER. As pride is sometimes hid under humility, idleness is often covered
by turbulence and hurry. He that neglects his known duty, and real employment,
naturally endeavors to crowd his mind with something that may bar out the
remembrance of his own folly, and does any thing but what he ought to do, with
eager diligence, that he may keep himself in his own favor.

IDLER. Perhaps every man may date the predominance of those desires that
disturb his life, and contaminate his conscience, from some unhappy hour when
too much leisure exposed him to their incursions; for he has lived with little
observation, either on himself, or others, who does not know that to be idle is
to be vicious.

RAMBLER. No man is so much open to conviction as the idler; but there is none
on whom it operates so little.

IDLER. Idleness can never secure tranquillity; the call of reason and of
conscience will pierce the closest pavilion of the sluggard, and, though it may
not have force to drive him from his down, will be loud enough to binder him
from sleep. Those moments which he cannot resolve to make useful, by devoting
them to the great business of his being, will still be usurped by powers that
will not leave them to his disposal; remorse and vexation will seize upon them,
and forbid him to enjoy what he is so desirous to appropriate.

RAMBLER. IMPROVEMENT OF OUR REASONING FACULTY.
Accustom yourself to clear and distinct ideas, to evident propositions, to
strong and convincing arguments. Converse much with those men, and those books,
and those parts of learning, where you meet with the greatest clearness of
thought, and force of reasoning. The mathematical sciences, and particularly
arithmetic, geometry, and mechanics, abound with these advantages: and if there
were nothing valuable in them for the uses of human life, yet the very
speculative parts of this sort of learning are well worth our study; for by
perpetual examples they teach us to conceive with clearness, to connect our
ideas and propositions in a train of dependence, to reason with strength and
demonstration, and to distinguish between truth and falsehood. Something of
these sciences should be studied by every man who pretends to learning, and
that, as Mr. Lock expresses it, "not so much to make us mathematicians, "as to
make us reasonable creatures."

WATTS.

INTERCOURSE WITH MANKIND.
Confine not yourself always to one sort of company, or to persons of the same
party or opinion, either in matters of learning, religion, or civil life, lest,
if you should happen to be nursed up or educated in early mistake, you should
be confirmed and established in the same mistake, by conversing only with
persons of the same sentiments. A free and general conversation with men of
various countries, and of different parties, opinions and practices (so far as
may be done safely) is of excellent use to undeceive us in many wrong judgments
which we may have framed, and to lead us into juster thoughts. It is said, when
the king of S^am, near China, first conversed with some European merchants who
sought the favor of trading on his coast, he enquired of them some of the
common appearances of summer and winter in their country; and when they told
him of water growing so hard in their rivers, that men and horses, and laden
carriages passed over it, and that rain sometimes fell down as white and light
as ^eathers, and sometimes almost as hard as stones, he could not believe a
syllable they said; for ice, snow and hail, were names and things utterly
unknown to him, and to his subjects in that hot climate: he therefore renounced
all traffic with such shameful liars, and would not suffer them to trade with
his people. See here the natural effects of gross ignorance.

Conversation with foreigners on various occasions has a happy influence to
enlarge our minds, and set them free from many errors and gross prejudices we
are ready to imbibe concerning them.

WATTS. IMPRECATION.
If, ye powers divine!
Ye mark the movements of this nether world,
And bring them to account, crush, crush those vipers,
Who, singled out by a community,
To guard their rights, shall, for a grasp of air,
Or paltry office, sell them to the foe.
MILLER. IMPRISONMENT.
Why should we murmur to be circumscrb'd,
As if it were a new thing to wear fetters?
When the whole world was meant but to confine us;
Wherein, who walks from one clime to another,
Has but a greater freedom of the prison:
Our soul was the first captive, born to inherit
But her own chains; nor can it be discharged,
Till nature tire with its own weight, and then
We are but more undone, to be at liberty.
SHIRLEY. INGRATITUDE.
He has profaned the sacred name of friend
And worn it into vileness:
With how secure a brow, and specious form,
He gilds the secret villain! Sure that face
Was meant for honesty, but heaven mismatch'd it;
And furnished treason out with nature's pomp,
To make its work more easy.
See how he sets his countenance for deceit,
And promises a lie before he speaks.
DRYDEN. -- Where Ingratitude, that sin of upstarts,
And vice of cowards, once takes root, a thousand
Base, groveling crimes cling round its monstrous growth,
Like ivy to old oaks, to hide its rottenness.
MADDEN. INJUSTICE.
The man who wears injustice by his side,
Though powerful millions follow him to war,
Combats against the odds -- against high heaven.
HAVARD. We upbraid the son whose father was hanged; whereas many a man who
deserves to be hanged, was never upbraided in his whole life.

FIELDING. INNOCENCE.
What stronger breast plate than a heart untainted?
Thrice is he armed that has his quarrel just;
And he but naked, though locked up in steel,
Whose conscience with injustice is corrupted.
SHAKESPEARE. We only who with innocence unshaken,
Have stood the assaults of fortune, now are happy:
For though the worst of men, by high permission,
A while may flourish, and the best endure
The sharpest trials of exploring misery,
Yet let mankind from these examples learn,
That powerful villainy at last shall mourn,
And injured virtue triumph in its turn.
TRAP. Virtue, dear friend, needs no defense;
The surest guard is innocence:
None knew, till guilt created fear,
What darts or poisoned arrows were.
Integrity undaunted goes
Through Libyan sands and Scythian snows,
Or where Hydaspe's wealthy side
Pays tribute to the Persian pride.
ROSCOMMON. There are some reasoners who frequently confound innocence with the
mere incapacity of guilt; but he that never saw, or heard, or thought of strong
liquors, cannot be proposed as a pattern of sobriety.

JOHNSON.

INDEPENDENCE.
-- Could men but know
The blessings which from Independence flow,
Could they but have a short and transient gleam
Of liberty, though 'twas but in a dream,
They would no more in bondage bend their knee,
But, once made freemen, would be always free.
Bred in a cage, far from the feathered throng,
The bird repays his keeper with his song;
But, if some playful child sets wide the door,
Abroad he flies, and thinks of home no more;
With love of liberty begins to burn,
And rather starves than to his cage return.
Hail independence! -- though thy name's scarce known,
Though thou, alas! art out of fashion grown,
Though all despise thee, I will not despise,
Nor live one moment longer than I prize
Thy presence, and enjoy; by angry fare
Bowed down, and almost crushed, thou came, though late,
Thou came upon me, like a second birth,
And made me know what life was truly worth.
Hail independence! -- never may my cot,
Till I forget thee, be by thee forgot.
CHURCHIL. -- What is life?
It Is not to stalk about, and draw fresh air,
From time to time, or gaze upon the sun;
It Is to be free. When liberty is gone,
Life grows insipid, and has lost its relish.
A day, an hour of virtuous liberty,
Is worth a whole eternity of bondage.
ADDISON. Hail! independence, hail! heaven's next best gift,
To that of life and an immortal soul!
The life of life! that to the banquet high
And sober meal gives taste; to the bowed roof
Fair-dream'd repose, and to the cottage charms.
Of public freedom, hail, thou secret source!
Whose streams, from every quarter confluent, form
My better Nile, that nurses human life.
By rills from thee deduced, irriguous, fed,
The private field looks gay, with nature's wealth
Abundant flows, and blooms with each delight
That nature craves. Its happy master there,
The only freeman, walks his pleasing round:
Sweet-featur'd peace attending; fearless truth;
Firm resolution; goodness, blessing all
That can rejoice; contentment, surest friend;
And, still fresh stores from Nature's book derived,
Philosophy, companion ever-new.
These cheer his rural, and sustain or fire,
When into action called, his busy hours.
Mean-time true-judging moderate desires,
Economy and taste, combined direct
His clear affairs, and from debauching fiends
Secure his little kingdom. Nor can those
Whom fortune heaps, without these virtues, reach
That truce with pain, that animated ease,
That self-enjoyment springing from within;
That independence, active, or retired,
Which make the soundest bliss of man below;
But, lost beneath the rubbish of their means,
And drained by wants to nature all unknown,
A wandering, tasteless, gayly-wretched train,
Though rich are beggars, and though noble, slaves.
My friends! be firm! nor let corruption fly
Twine round your heart indissoluble chains!
The steel of Brutus burst the grosser bonds
By Caesar cast over Rome; but still remained
The soft enchanting fetters of the mind,
And other Caesar's rose. Determined, hold
Your independence; for, that once destroyed,
Unfounded, freedom is a morning dream,
That flits aerial from the spreading eye.
THOMSON. INSTRUCTION OF THE PEOPLE.
The people should be tinctured with philosophy and religion; and learn, under
their divine instruction, not to consider titular distinction and enormous
riches as the chief good, and indispensably requisite to the happiness of life.
A noble spirit of personal virtue should be encouraged in the rising race. They
should be taught to seek and find resources in themselves, in an honest
independence, in the possession of knowledge, in conscious integrity, in
manliness of sentiment, in contemplation and study, in every thing which adds
vigor to the nerves of the mind, and teaches it to deem all honors disgraceful,
and all profits vile, which accrue, as the reward of base compliance, and of a
dastardly desertion from the upright standard of truth, the unspotted banner of
justice.

Spirit of DESPOTISM. INFORMERS.
A mercenary informer knows no (...). -- Under such a system, the obnoxious
people (...) slaves, not only to the government, but they live at the mercy of
every individual; they are at once the slaves of the whole community, and of
every part of it; and the worst and most unmerciful men are those on whose
goodness they most depend.

In this situation, men not only shrink from the frowns of the stern
magistrate, but they are obliged to fly from their very places. The seeds of
destruction are sown in civil intercourse, in social habitudes. The blood of
wholesome kindred is infected; their tables and beds are surrounded with
snares; all the means given by providence to make life safe and comfortable,
are perverted into instruments of terror and torment. This species of universal
subserviency, that makes the very servant who waits behind your chair the
arbiter of your life and fortune, has such a tendency to degrade and debase
mankind, and to deprive him of that assured and liberal state of mind, which
alone can make us what we ought to be, that I vow to God I would sooner bring
myself to put a man to immediate death for opinions I disliked, and so to get
rid of the man and his opinions at once, than to fret him with a feverish
being, tainted with the jail distemper of (...) contagious servitude, to keep
him above ground, an animated mass of putrefaction, corrupted himself, and
corrupting all about him.

BURKE. INSULT.
There are innumerable modes of insult, and tokens of contempt, for which it is
not easy to find a name, which vanish to nothing in an attempt to describe
them, and yet may, by continual repetition, make day pass after day in sorrow
and in terror.

RAMBLER. INVETERATE ABUSES.
But there is a time, when men will not suffer bad things because their
ancestors have suffered worse. There is a time when the hoary head of
inveterate abuse will neither draw reverence nor obtain protection. --

BURKE. ILL BREEDING.
Ill breeding, says the abbe Bellegarde, is not a single defect, it is the
result of many. It is sometimes a gross ignorance of decorum, or a stupid
indolence, which prevents us from giving to others what is due to them. It is a
peevish malignity, which inclines us to oppose the inclinations of those with
whom we converse. It is the consequence of a foolish vanity, which has no
complaisance for any other person; the effect of a proud and whimsical humor,
which soars above all the rules of civility; or lastly, it is produced by a
melancholy turn of mind, which pampers itself with a rude and disobliging
behavior.

FIELDING. INTEGRITY.
Integrity without knowledge is weak, and generally useless; and knowledge
without integrity is dangerous and dreadful.

JOHNSON. INDIAN.
Lo, the poor Indian! whose untutored mind
Sees God in clouds, or hears him in the wind;
His soul, proud science never taught to stray
Far as the solar walk, or milky way;
Yet simple nature to his hope has given,
Behind the cloud top; hill, an humbler heaven;
Some safer world in depth of woods embraced,
Some happier island in the watery waste,
Where slaves once more their native land behold,
No fiends for (...) no Christians thirst for gold.
To be, contents his natural desire,
He asks no angel's wing, no seraph's fire:
But thinks, admitted to that equal sky,
His faithful dog shall bear him company.
POPE. IGNORANCE.
The man who feels himself ignorant, should, at least, be modest.

JOHNSON. Assuming ignorance is, of all dispositions, the most ridiculous; for,
in the same proportion as the real man of wisdom is preferable to the
unlettered rustic, so much is the rustic superior to him, who without learning
imagines himself learned. It were better that such a man had never read; for
then he might have been conscious of his weakness: but the half-learned man,
relying upon his strength, seldom perceives his wants till he finds his
deception past a cure.

GOLDSMITH. JUDGE.
May one be pardoned, and retain the offense
In the corrupted currents of this world,
Offence's gilded hand may shove by justice:
And often it is seen, the wicked prize itself
Buys out the law; but it is not so above:
There, is no shuffling; there, the action lies
In his true nature, and we ourselves compelled,
Even to the teeth and forehead of our faults,
To give in evidence.
SHAKESPEARE. -- For in a government
The offense is greatest in the instrument
That has the power to punish; and in laws
The author's trespass makes the foulest cause.
NAB^. JURYMAN.
An office that requires the purest mind!
They whom their country choose for such a trust,
Upon whose verdict, as on fate, depend
Our properties, our lives, and liberties,
Should to the awful seat of justice bring
An ear that is deaf to the deceiver's voice,
A breast untainted, and a hand unstained,
And he that fills the solemn judgment seat
Should not too rashly pass the dreadful sentence
On the accused, but weigh each circumstance
'Till not a single doubt's left in she scale;
Then judge with reason, and decree with truth.
COOK. JUSTICE.
Of all the virtues, justice is the best;
Valor, without it, is a common pest:
Pirates and thieves, too often with courage graced,
Show us how ill that virtue may be placed:
It Is our complexion makes us chaste or brave;
Justice from reason, and from Heaven we have:
All other virtues dwell but in the blood;
That in the soul, and gives the name of good:
Justice the queen of virtues!
WALLER. There is no virtue so truly great and god-like as justice. Most of the
other virtues are the virtues of created beings, or accommodated to our nature
as we are men. Justice is that which is practiced by God himself, and to be
practiced in its perfection by none but him. Omniscience and Omnipotence are
requisite for the full exertion of it. The one to discover every degree of
uprightness in thoughts, words, and actions. The other, to measure out and
impart suitable rewards and punishments.

As, to be perfectly just is an attribute in the divine nature, to be so to the
utmost of our abilities is the glory of man. Such a one who has the public
administration in his hands, acts like the representative of his maker, in
recompensing the virtuous, and punishing the offender.

When a nation once loses its regard to justice; when they do not look upon it
as something venerable, holy, and inviolable; when any of them dare presume to
lessen, affront or terrify those who have the distribution of it in their
hands; when a judge is capable of being influenced by any thing but law, or a
cause may be recommended by any thing that is foreign to its own merits, we may
venture to pronounce that such a nation is hastening to its ruin.

I always rejoice when I see a tribunal filled with a man of an upright and
inflexible temper, who, in the execution of his country's laws, can overcome
all private fear, resentment, solicitation, and even pity itself. Whenever
passion enters into a sentence or decision, so far will there be in it a
tincture of injustice. In short, justice discards party, friendship, kindred,
and is therefore always represented as (...), that we may suppose her thoughts
are wholly intent on the equity of a cause, without being diverted or
prejudiced by objects foreign to it.

GUARDIAN. JUDGMENT.
Nothing is more unjust than to judge of a man by too short an acquaintance,
and too slight inspection; for it often happens, that in the loose and
thoughtless, and dissipated, there is a secret radical worth, which may shoot
out by proper cultivation. That the spark of heaven, though dimmed and
obstructed, is yet not extinguished, but may, by the breath of counsel and
exhortation be kindled into a flame. To imagine that every one who is not
completely good, is irrevocably abandoned, is to suppose that all are capable
of the same degree of excellence; it is, indeed, to exact from all, that
perfection which none ever can attain. And since the purest virtue is
consistent with some vice, and the virtue of the greatest number, with almost
an equal proportion of contrary qualities, let none too hastily conclude that
all goodness is lost, though it may for a time be clouded and overwhelmed; for
most minds are the slaves of external circumstances; and conform to any hand
that undertakes to mould them, roll down any torrent of custom in which they
happen to be caught, or bend to any importunity that bears hard against them.

RAMBLER. JEALOUSY OF TYRANNY.
It may be said, that a too great jealousy of liberty is equally dangerous with
a too great confidence; that as the latter may plunge us into slavery, the
former may into anarchy: I should allow some weight to this objection, if in
the whole course of our history, a resutation, in a single instance, could be
produced of these positions; that the spirit of liberty is slow to act, even
against the worst princes, and exerts itself in favor of the best with more
effect than any other spirit whatsoever. I must therefore repeat that the
keeping alive the jealous spirit of liberty is a common cause; that a
detestation of tyrants, or even of those who lean to tyranny, is inseparable
from this spirit; that Charles the First was a tyrant in principle and in
action; that those who labor to reconcile us to his conduct and character,
would destroy the spirit of liberty, and ultimately establish the principle of
non-resistance; that a junto of mercenaries and court retainers do labor to
these purposes; that it is, therefore, the duty of every common citizen, who
has the interest of his country at heart, to exert continually whatever force
he has to defeat their purposes; or, at least, weaken their influence; for in
mechanics, the smallest force continually applied will overcome the most
violent motions communicated to bodies.

Genesis LEE. KING.
It is the curse of kings to be attended
By slaves, that take their humors for a warrant,
To break into the bloody house of strife;
And, on the winking of authority
To understand a law, to know the meaning
Of dangerous majesty: when perchance it frowns
More upon honor than advised respect.
SHAKESPEARE. Some would think the souls
Of princes were brought forth by some more weighty
Cause than those of meaner persons: they are
Deceived; there is the same hand to them; the like
Passions sway them; the same reason that makes
A vicar go to law for a tithe pig,
And undo his neighbors, makes them spoil
A whole province, and batter down goodly
Cities with their cannon.
WEBSTER. The studies of princes seldom produce great effects; for princes
draw, with meaner mortals, the lot of understanding; and since of many students
not more than one can be hoped to advance to perfection, it is scarce to be
expected to find that one a prince.

JOHNSON. To enlarge dominions, has been the boast of many princes; to diffuse
happiness and security through wide regions has been granted to few.

Ibid. Monarchs are always surrounded with refined spirits, so penetrating,
that they frequently discover in their masters great qualities, invisible to
vulgar eyes, and which, did not they publish them to mankind, would be
unobserved for ever.

Ibid. What poor things are kings!
What poorer things are nations to obey
Him, whom a petty passion does command?
Fate, why was man made so ridiculous?
Oh! I am mortal. Men bat flatter me.
Oh, Fate! why were not kings made more than men?
Or why will people have us to be more?
Alas! we govern others, but ourselves
We cannot rule; as our eyes that do see
All other things, but cannot see themselves.
FOUNTAIN. -- Kings are like other misers,
Greedy of more: they use not what they have,
As merchants vent'ring on the faithless seas
For needless wealth, are driven by sudden storms
On banks of sands, or dashed against the rocks;
And all they have is sunk, and lost at once!
Kings rush to wars, more faithless than the seas;
Where more inconstant fortune waits their arms;
Where, in a moment, one unhappy blow
Ruins the progress of an age before.
HOPKINS. Unbounded power and height of greatness give
To kings that luster which we think divine;
The wise who know 'em, know they are but men,
Nay, sometimes, weak ones too. The crowd indeed,
Who kneel before the image, not the god,
Worship the deity their hands have made.
ROW. We view the outward glories of a crown;
But dazzl'd with the luster, cannot see
The thorns which line it, and whose painful prickings
Embitter all the pompous sweets of empire,
Happier the wretch, who at his daily toils,
Sweats for his homely dinner, than a king
In all the dangerous pomp of royalty!
He knows no fears of state to damp his joys;
No treason shakes the humble bed he lies on;
Nor dreads he poison in his peaceful bowls:
He sleeps contented in the guiltless arms
Of his unjealous consort: -- Frightful dreams
Break not his slumbers, with the shocking sight
Of bloody daggers, and ideal murders.
True, he is a stranger to the power of kings;
But then again, he is as much a stranger
To kingly cares and miseries.
HILL. Some kings the name of conquerors assumed
Some to be great, some to be gods presumed,
But boundless power and arbitrary lust,
Made tyrants still abhor the name of just:
They shunned the praise this God-like virtue gives,
And feared a title than reproached their lives.
DRYDEN. Kings who have weak understandings, bad hearts, and strong prejudices,
and all these, as it often happens, inflamed by their passions, and rendered
incurable by their self-conceit and presumption; such kings are apt to imagine,
and they conduct themselves so as to make many of their subject; imagine, that
the king and the people in free governments are rival powers, who stand in
competition with one another, who have different interests, and must of course
have different views: that the rights and privileges of the people are so many
spoils taken from the rights and prerogative of the crown; and that the rules
and laws, made for the exercise and security of the former, are so many
diminutions of their dignity, and restraints on their power. A patriot king
will see all this in a far different and much truer light. He will make one and
but one distinction between his rights and those of the people: he will look on
his to be a trust, and theirs a property; and that his people who had an
original right to the whole by the law of nature, can have the sole
indefeasible right to any part. --

As well might we say that a ship is built, and loaded, and manned, for the
sake of any particular pilot, instead of acknowledging that the pilot is made
for the sake of the ship, her lading and her crew, who are always the owners in
the political vessel, as to say that kingdoms were instituted for kings, not
kings for kingdoms. To carry our allusion higher, majesty is not an inherent,
but a reflected right.

BOLINGBROKE. How much do they mistake, how little know
Of kings, of kingdoms, and the pains which flow
From royalty, who fancy that a crown,
Because it glistens, must be lined with down.
With outside show, and vain appearance caught,
They look no farther, and by folly taught,
Prize high the toys of thrones, but never find
One of the many cares which lurk behind
The gem they worship, which a crown adorns,
Nor once suspect that crown is lined with thorns.
O might reflection folly's place supply
Would we one moment use her piercing eye,
Then should we learn what woe from grandeur springs,
And learn to pity not to envy kings!
CHURCHILL. The king -- with anxious cares oppressed,
His bosom labors and admits no rest.
A glorious wretch, he sweats beneath the weight
Of majesty, and gives up ease for state.
Even when his smiles, which, by the fools of pride,
Are treasured and preserved, from side to side,
Fly round the court, even when, compelled by form,
He seems most calm, his soul is in a storm!
Care, like a spectre, seen by him alone,
With all her nest of vipers, round his throne
By day crawls full in view; when night bids sleep,
Sweet nurse of nature, over the senses creep,
When misery herself no more complains,
And slaves, if possible, forget their chains,
Though his sense weakens, though his eyes grow dim,
That rest which comes to all, comes not to him.
Even at that hour, care, tyrant care, forbids
The dew of sleep to fall upon his lids;
From night to night she watches at his bed;
Now, as one mop'd, sits brooding over his head,
Anon she starts, and, borne on raven's wings,
Croaks forth aloud -- Sleep was not made for kings!
Ibid. Kings are naturally lovers of low company. -- They are so elevated above
all the rest of mankind, that they must look upon all their subjects as on a
level. They are rather apt to hate than to love their nobility, on account of
the occasional resistance to their will, which will be made by their virtue,
their petulance, or their pride. It must indeed be admitted, that many of the
nobility are as perfectly willing to act the part of flatterers, tale-bearers,
parasites, pimps, and buffoons, as any of the lowest and vilest of mankind can
possibly be. But they are not properly qualified for this object of their
ambition. The want of a regular education, and early habits, and some lurking
remains of their dignity, will never permit them to become a match for an
Italian eunuch, a mountebank, a fiddler, a player, or any regular practitioner
of that tribe. The Roman Emperors, almost from the beginning, threw themselves
into such hands, and the mischief increased every day till the decline and
final ruin of the empire.

BURKE. Great princes have great playthings. Some have played
At hewing mountains into men, and some
At building human wonders mountains high.
Some have amused the dull sad years of life
(Life spent in indolence, and therefore sad.)
With schemes of monumental fame, and sought
By pyramids, and mausoleum pomp,
Short lived themselves, to immortalize their bones.
Some seek diversion in the tented field,
And make the sorrows of mankind their sport*
But war's a game, which were their subjects wise
Kings would not play at. Nations would do well
TO extort their truncheons from the puny hands
Of heroes, whose infirm and baby minds
Are gratified with mischief, and who spoil,
Because men suffer it, their toy, the world.
COWPER. If kings were republicans in the proper sense, all the people would be
royalists. But when brilliant honors and ministerial employments are bestowed
on fools and knaves, because they were begotten by ancestors whom they
disgrace, or possess riches which they abuse, government becomes a nuisance,
and the people feel an aristocracy to be little better than an automaton
machine, for promoting the purposes of royal or ministerial despotism.

Spirit of DESPOTISM. Instead of wondering that so many kings, unfit and
unworthy to be trusted with the government of mankind, appear in the world, I
have been tempted to wonder that there are any tolerable, when I have
considered the flattery that environs them most commonly from the cradle, and
the tendency of all those false notions that are instilled into them by precept
and by example, by the habits of courts, and by the interested selfish views of
courtiers. They are bred to esteem themselves of a distinct and superior
species among men, as men are among animals.

Louis the Fourteenth was a strong instance of the effect of this education,
which trains up kings to be tyrants, without knowing that they are so. That
oppression under which he kept his people, during the whole course of a long
reign, might proceed, in some degree, from the natural haughtiness of his
temper; but it proceeded, in a greater degree, from the principles and habits
of his education. By this he had been brought to look on his kingdom as a
patrimony that descended to him from his ancestors, and that was to be
considered in no other light: so that when a very considerable man had
discoursed to him at large of the miserable condition to which his people was
reduced, and had frequently used this word, l'etat, [the state;] though the
king approved the stubstance of all he had said, yet he was shocked at the
frequent repetition of this word, and complained of it as of a kind of
indecency to himself.

This capital error, in which almost every prince is confirmed by his
education, has so great extent and so general influence, that a right to do
every thing iniquitous in government may be derived from it. But, as if this
was not enough, the characters of princes are spoiled many more ways by their
education.

BOLINGBROKE. I am not at all surprised that in monarchies, especially in our
own, there should be so few princes worthy of esteem. Incircled by corrupters,
knaves, and hypocrites, they accustom themselves to look upon their fellow
creatures with disdain, and to set no value on any but the sycophants, who
caress their vices, and live in perpetual inactivity and idleness. Such is
generally the condition of a monarch. Great men are always scarce, and great
kings still more so.

MONTESQUIEU. Louis XIV. at once the greatest and meanest of mankind, would
have excelled all the monarchs in the universe, if he had not been corrupted in
his youth by base and ambitious flatterers. A slave during his whole life to
pride and vain glory, he never in reality loved his subjects even for a moment;
yet expected at the same time, like a true despotic prince, that they should
sacrifice themselves to his will and pleasure. Intoxicated with power and
grandeur, he imagined the whole world was created solely to promote his
happiness. He was seared, obeyed, idolized, hated, mortified, and abandoned. He
lived like a sultan, and died like a woman.

It is therefore impossible there should ever be a great man among our kings,
who are made brutes and fools of all their lives, by a set of infamous wretches
who surround and beset them from the cradle to the grave.

Ibid. Princes in their infancy, childhood, and youth, are said to discover
prodigious parts and wit, to speak things that surprise and astonish: strange,
so many hopeful princes, and so many shameful kings! If they happen to die
young, they would have been prodigies of wisdom and virtue; if they live, they
are often prodigies indeed, but of another sort.

SWIFT. How dangerous a situation is royalty, in which the wisest are often the
tools of deceit! A throne is surrounded by the train of subtlety and
self-interest: integrity retires, because she will not be introduced by
importunity or flattery: virtue, conscious of her own dignity, (...) at a
distance till she is sought, and princes seldom know where she may be found;
but vice and her attendants are impudent and fraudful, insinuating and
officious, skilful in dissimulation, and ready to renounce all principles, and
to violate every tie when it becomes necessary to the gratification of the
appetites of a prince. How wretched is the man who is thus perpetually exposed
to the attempts of guilt, by which he must inevitably perish, if he do not
renounce the music of adulation, and learn not to be offended by the plainness
of truth!

FENELON. The least fault a king commits produces infinite mischief; for it
diffuses misery through a whole people, and sometimes for many generations.

Ibid. Kings are generally mistrustful and indolent: mistrustful, by
perpetually experiencing the artifices of the designing and corrupt; and
indolent, by the pleasures that solicit them, and a habit of leaving all
business to others, without taking the trouble so much as to think for
themselves.

Ibid. To princes who have been spoiled by flattery, every thing that is
sincere and honest appears to be ungracious and austere. Such princes are even
weak enough to suspect a want of zeal for their service and respect for their
authority, where they do not find a servility that is ready to flatter them in
the abuse of their power. They are offended at all freedom of speech, all
generosity of sentiment, which they consider as pride, censoriousness, and
sedition; and they contract a false delicacy, which every thing short of
flattery disappoints and disgusts.

Ibid. Such princes are a terror to mankind and mankind a terror to them. They
retire from the public eye and immure themselves in the palace. They love
darkness, and disguise their characters, which however are perfectly known; the
malignant curiosity of their subjects penetrates every veil and investigates
every secret; but he that is thus known by all, knows nobody. The
self-interested wretches that surround him rejoice to perceive that he is
inaccessible; and a prince that is inaccessible to men is inaccessible to
truth. Those who avail themselves of his blindness are busy to calumniate or to
banish all that would open his eyes. He lives in a kind of savage and
unsociable magnificence, always the dupe of that imposition which he at once
dreads and deserves. He that converses only with a small number of men, almost
necessarily adopts their passions and their prejudices: and from passions and
prejudices the best are not free. He must also receive his knowledge by report,
and therefore lie at the mercy of tale-bearers, a despicable and detestable
race, who are nourished by the poison that destroys others; who make what is
little great, and what is blameless criminal, who, rather than not impute evil,
invent it; and who to answer their own purposes, play upon the causeless
suspicion and unworthy curiosity of a weak and jealous prince.

Ibid. From the lips of your courtiers you have heard, and hereafter you will
much oftener hear, the grossest flattery. Should you do that which the son of
your slave could at any time have done better than yourself, they will affirm
that you have performed a most extraordinary act. Should you obey your
passions, they will affirm, you have done well. Should you pour forth the blood
of your subjects as a river does its waters, they will pronounce, you have done
well. Should you tax the free air, they will assert you have done well. Should
you, powerful as you are, become revengeful, still would they proclaim, you had
done well. So they told the intoxicated Alexander, when he plunged his dagger
into the bosom of his friend. Thus they addressed Nero, when he assassinated
his mother.

MIRABEAU. Memorial to the King of Prussia. LIBERTY OF CONSCIENCE.
Experience teaches that the sword, the faggot, exile, and proscriptions, are
better calculated to irritate than to heal a disease, which, having its source
in the mind, cannot be relieved by remedies that act only on the body. The most
efficacious means are sound doctrines and repeated instructions, which make a
ready impression when inculcated with mildness. Every thing else bows to the
sovereign authority of the magistrates and the prince; but religion alone is
not to be commanded.

What the stoics have so vauntingly ascribed to their philosophy, religion has
a higher claim to. Torments appear trivial to those who are animated by
religious zeal: the firmness with which it inspires them, deadens the sentiment
of pain; nothing they are obliged to suffer for its sake, however aggravated,
occasions them surprise; the knowledge of their own strength enables them to
bear every thing, while they are persuaded that the grace of God supports them.
Though the executioner appear before them, and exhibit to their view the sword
and the stake, their minds are undaunted; and regardless of the sufferings that
are preparing for them, they are attentive solely to their duty: all their
happiness is in themselves, and external objects make upon them but a feeble
impression.

If Epicurus, whose system has been so much decried by other philosophers, has
said of the sage, that if he were shut up in the brazen bull of Phalaris, he
would not fail to declare: "this fire affects me not, it is not I that burn:"
do we imagine that less courage was conspicuous in those who by various
torments were put to death a century ago, or that less will be displayed by
future martyrs, if persecution be continued? What was said and done by one of
them, when he was fastened to the stake in order to be burned, is worthy our
notice. Being upon his knees, he began to sing a psalm, which the smoke and the
flame could scarcely interrupt; and as the executioner, for fear of terrifying
him, lighted the fire behind, he turned and said: "come and kindle it before
me: if fire could have terrified me, I should not be here; it depended on
myself alone to avoid it"

DE THOU. Whosoever designs the change of religion in a country or government,
by any other means than that of a general conversion of the people, or the
greatest part of them, designs all the mischiefs to a nation that use to usher
in or attend the two greatest distempers of a state, civil war or tyranny;
which are violence, oppressions, cruelty, rapine, intemperance, injustice; and,
in short, the miserable effusion of human blood, and the confusion of all laws,
orders and virtues among men. Such consequences as these, I doubt, are
something more than the disputed opinions of any man or any particular assembly
of men, can be worth.

SIR WILLIAM TEMPLE. A christian church allows all its members the most perfect
liberty of men and christians. It is inconsistent with persecution for
conscience sake: for it leaves all civil rewards and punishments to kingdoms,
and states, and the governors of this world. It pretends to no power over
conscience, to compel men to obedience; no prisons, no axes, fire, nor sword.
It gives its ministers power and authority to command nothing but what is found
in the bible.

WATTS. Every individual has a natural and unalienable right to worship God
according to the dictates of his own conscience and reason; and no subject
shall be hurt, molested, or restrained, in his person, liberty, or estate, for
worshipping God in the manner and season most agreeable to the dictates of his
own conscience, or for his religious profession, sentiments, or persuasion;
provided he does not disturb the public peace or disturb others in their
religious worship.

Constitution of NEW HAMPSHIRE. All men have a natural and indefeasible right
to worship Almighty God, according to the dictates of their own consciences; no
man can, of right, be compelled to attend, erect, or support any place of
worship, or to maintain any ministry, against his consent; no human authority
can, in any case whatever, control or interfere with the rights of conscience;
and no preference shall ever be given, by law, to any religious establishments
or modes of worship.

Constitution of PENNSYLVANIA. All men have a natural and unalienable right to
worship Almighty God according to the dictates of their own consciences and
understanding; and no man ought, or of right can be compelled to attend any
religious worship, or maintain any ministry, contrary to, or against his own
free will and consent; and no authority can or ought to be vested in, or
assumed by, any power whatever, that shall in any case interfere with, or in
any manner control the right of conscience, in the free exercise of religious
worship.

Constitution of DELAWARE. As it is the duty of every man to worship God in
such manner as he thinks most acceptable to him; all persons, professing the
christian religion, are equally entitled to protection in their religious
liberty; wherefore no person ought by any law to be molested in his person or
estate on account of his religious persuasion or profession, or for his
religious practice; unless, under color of religion, any man shall disturb the
good order, peace or safety of the state, or shall infringe the laws of
morality, or injure others, in their natural, civil, or religious rights; nor
ought any person to be compelled to frequent or maintain, or contribute, unless
on contract, to maintain any particular place of worship, or any particular
ministry.

Constitution of MARYLAND. All men have a natural and unalienable right to
worship Almighty God according to the dictates of their own consciences.

Constitution of NORTH CAROLINA. All men have a natural and indefeasible right
to worship Almighty God according to the dictates of their own consciences; no
man of right can be compelled to attend, erect, or support any place of
worship, or to maintain any ministry against his consent; no human authority
can in any case whatever control or interfere with the rights of conscience;
and no preference shall ever be given by law to any religious societies or
modes of worship.

Constitution of KENTUCKY. The civil rights, privileges or capacities of any
citizen shall in no ways be diminished or enlarged on account of his religion.

Ibid. Civil governors go miserably out of their proper province whenever they
take upon them the care of truth, or the support of any doctrinal points. They
are not judges of truth, and if they pretend to decide about it, they will
decide wrong. It is superstition, idolatry, and nonsense, that civil power at
present supports almost every where, under the idea of supporting sacred truth,
and opposing dangerous error.

All the experience of past time proves that the consequence of allowing civil
power to judge of the nature and tendency of doctrines, must be making it a
hindrance to the progress of truth, and an enemy to the improvement of the
world. -- Anaxagoras was tried and condemned in Greece for teaching that the
sun and stars were not deities, but masses of corruptible matter. Accusations
of the like kind contributed to the death of Socrates. The threats of bigots,
and the fear of persecution, prevented Copernicus from publishing, during his
lifetime, his discovery of the true system of the world. Galileo was obliged to
renounce the doctrine of the motion of the earth, and suffered a year's
imprisonment for having asserted it.

PRICE. Governments, no more than individual men, are infallible. The cabinets
of princes, and the parliaments of kingdoms, are often less likely to be right
in their conclusions than the theorist in his closet. What system of religion
or government has not in its turn been patronized by national authority? The
consequence therefore of admitting this authority is, not merely attributing to
government a right to impose some, but any or all opinions upon the community.
Are Paganism and christianity, the religions of Mahomet, Zoroaster, and
Confucius, are monarchy and aristocracy in all their forms equally worthy to be
perpetuated among mankind? Is it quite certain that the greatest of all human
calamities is change? Has no revolution in government, and no reformation in
religion, been productive of more benefit than disadvantage? There is no
species of reasoning in defense of the suppression of heresy which may not be
brought back to this monstrous principle, that the knowledge of truth, and the
introduction of right principles of policy, are circumstances altogether
indifferent to the welfare of mankind.

GODWIN. What bloodshed and confusion have been occasioned from the reign of
Henry IV. when the first penal statutes were enacted, down to the revolution in
England, by laws made to force conscience! There is nothing certainly more
unreasonable, more inconsistent with the rights of human nature, more contrary
to the spirit and precepts of the christian religion, more iniquitous and
unjust, more impolitic, than persecution. It is against natural religion,
revealed religion, and sound policy.

Sad experience, and a large mind, taught that great man, the president de
Thou, this doctrine. Let any man read the many admirable things, which he has
dared to advance upon this subject, in the dedication of his history to Henry
IV. of France, (which I never read without rapture) and he will be fully
convinced, not only how cruel, but how impolitic it is to persecute for
religious opinions.

Lord MANSFIELD. The error seems not sufficiently eradicated, that the
operations of the mind, as well as the acts of the body, are subject to the
coercion of the laws. But our rulers can have authority over such natural
rights only as we have submitted to them. The rights of conscience we never
submitted, we could not submit. We are answerable for them to our God. The
legitimate powers of government extend to such acts only as are injurious to
others.

Constraint may make a man worse by making him a hypocrite, but it will never
make him a truer man. It may fix him obstinately in his errors, but will not
cure them. Reason and free inquiry are the only effectual agents against error.
Give a loose to them, they will support the true religion, by bringing every
false one to their tribunal, to the test of their investigation. They are the
natural enemies of error, and of error only.

JEFFERSON. Reason and experiment have been indulged, and error has fled before
them. It is error alone which needs the support of government. Truth can stand
by itself. Subject opinion to coercion: whom will you make your inquisitors?
Fallible men; men governed by bad passions, by private as well as public
reasons. And why subject it to coercion? To produce uniformity. But is
uniformity of opinion desirable? No more than of face and stature. Introduce
the bed of Procrustes then, and as there is danger that the large men may beat
the small, make us all of a size, by lopping the former and stretching the
latter. Difference of opinion is advantageous in religion. The several sects
perform the office of a censor morum over each other. Is uniformity attainable?
Millions of innocent men, women, and children, since the introduction of
Christianity, have been burnt, tortured, fined, imprisoned; yet we have not
advanced one inch toward uniformity. What has been the effect of coercion? To
make one half of the world fools, and the other half hypocrites; to support
roguery and error all over the earth.

Ibid. Pennsylvania and New York, have long subsisted without any religious
establishment at all. The experiment was new and doubtful when they made it. It
has answered beyond conception. They flourish infinitely. Religion is well
supported; of various kinds, indeed, but all good enough; all sufficient to
preserve peace and order: or if a sect arises, whose tenets would subvert
morals, good sense has fair play, and reasons and laughs it out of doors,
without suffering the state to be troubled with it. They do not hang more
malefactors than we do. They are not more disturbed with religious dissentions.
On the contrary, their harmony is unparalleled, and can be ascribed to nothing
but their unbounded tolerance, because there is no other circumstance in which
they differ from every nation on earth. They have made the happy discovery,
that the way to silence religious disputes, is to take no notice of them. Let
us too give this experiment fair play, and get rid, while we may, of those
tyrannical laws. It is true, we are as yet secured against them by the spirit
of the times. I doubt whether the people of this country would suffer an
execution for heresy, or a three years imprisonment for not comprehending the
mysteries of the Trinity. But is the spirit of the people an infallible, a
permanent reliance? Is it government? Is this the kind of protection we receive
in return for the rights we give up? Besides, the spirit of the times may
alter, will alter. Our rulers will become corrupt, our people careless. A
single zealot may commence persecutor, and better men be his victims. It can
never be too often repeated, that the time for fixing every essential right on
a legal basis is while our rulers are honest, and ourselves united. From the
conclusion of this war we shall be going down hill. It will not then be
necessary to resort every moment to the people for support. They will be
forgotten, therefore, and their rights disregarded. They will forget
themselves, but in the sole faculty of making money, and will never think of
uniting to effect a due respect for their rights. The shackles, therefore,
which shall not be knocked off at the conclusion of this war, will remain on us
long, will be made heavier and heavier, till our rights shall revive or expire
in a convulsion.

Ibid. Almighty God being only Lord of conscience, author of all divine
knowledge, faith, and worship, who can only enlighten the minds and convince
the understanding of people; in due reverence to his sovereignty over the souls
of mankind, and the better to unite the Queen's Christian subjects in interest
and affection, BE IT ENACTED, by JOHN EVANS, Esquire by the Queen's royal
approbation Lieutenant Governor under WILLIAM PENN, Esquire absolute proprietary
and Governor in chief of the province of Pennsylvania and territories, by and
with the advice and consent of the freemen of the said province in General
Assembly met, and by the authority of the same, that no person now, or at any
time hereafter, dwelling or residing within this province, who shall profess
faith in GOD the Father, and in JESUS CHRIST his only Son, and in the HOLY
SPIRIT, One God blessed forevermore, and shall acknowledge the Holy Scriptures
of the Old and New Testament to be given by divine inspiration, and, when
lawfully required, shall profess and declare that they will live peaceably
under the civil government, shall not in any case be molested or prejudiced for
his or her conscientious persuasion, nor shall he or she be at any time
compelled to frequent or maintain any religious worship-place o^ ministry
whatsoever, contrary to his or her mind, but shall freely and fully enjoy his
or her Christian Liberty in all respects, without molestation or interruption.
This law is inserted as a tribute of respect to the illustrious Penn, the
father of religious liberty in the western world. It was the first law passed
on the landing of the emigrants, but was repealed by Queen Anne in council. It
was re-en-acted in 1705.


Laws of PENNSYLNANIA. And it came to pass, after these things, that Abraham
sat in the door of his tent, about the going down of the sun. And behold a man
bent with age, was coming from the way of the wilderness, leaning on a staff.
And Abraham arose, and met him, and said unto him, turn in, I pray thee, and
wash thy feet, and tarry all night, and thou shall arise early in the morning,
and go on thy way. And the man said, nay, for I will abide under this tree. But
Abraham pressed him greatly: so he turned, and they went into the tent; and
Abraham baked unleaven bread, and they did eat. And when Abraham saw that the
man blessed not God, he said unto him, wherefore do thou not worship the most
high God, creator of heaven and earth? And the man answered and said, I do not
worship thy God, neither do I call upon his name; for I have made to myself a
god, which abides always in my house, and provideth me with all things. And
Abraham's zeal was kindled against the man, and he arose and fell upon him, and
drove him forth with blows into the wilderness. And God called unto Abraham,
saying, Abraham, where is the stranger? And Abraham answered and said, Lord, he
would not worship thee, neither would he call upon thy name; therefore have I
driven him out from before my face into the wilderness. And God said, have I
borne with him these hundred and ninety and eight years, and nourished him, and
clothed him, notwithstanding his rebellion against me: and could not thou,
who art thyself a sinner, bear with him one night? The circumstance which gave
rise to the above elegant and instructive morceau, was, it is said, as follows:
Dr. Franklin being once in company where the discourse turned on the folly of
intolerance and persecution, he took up a bible, which was at hand, and opening
at Genesis, he delivered this parable extempore, in confirmation of what he had
advanced. The hearers, acknowledging it was extremely apposite, expressed great
surprise that such a remarkable passage of scripture had so long escaped their
notice.


FRANKLIN. LIBERTY AND PROPERTY.
Liberty, that dearest of names, and property, that best of characters, give an
additional, and inexpressible charm to every delightful object. -- See how the
declining sun has beautified the western clouds; has arrayed them in crimson,
and skirted them with gold. Such a refinement of our domestic bliss, is
property; such an improvement of our public privileges, is liberty. -- When the
lamp of day shall withdraw his beams, there will still remain the same
collection of floating vapors; but O! how changed, how gloomy! the carnation
streaks are faded; the golden edgings are worn away; and all the lovely things
are lost in a leaden-coloured louring sadness. Such would be the aspect of all
these scenes of beauty, and all these abodes of pleasure, if exposed
continually to the caprice of arbitrary sway.

HERVEY. LIBERTY.
-- Oh! give me liberty!
For were even Paradise itself my prison,
Still I should long to leap the crystal walls.
DRYDEN. Remember, O my friends! the laws, the rights,
The generous plan of power delivered down,
From age to age, by your renowned forefathers,
So dearly bought, the price of so much blood!
O let it never perish in your hands!
But piously transmit it to your children.
Do thou, great liberty inspire our souls,
And make our lives in thy possession happy;
Or our deaths glorious in thy just defense.
ADDISON. -- When liberty is lost,
Let abject cowards live; but in the brave
It were a treachery to themselves, enough
To merit chains.
THOMSON. How must the glorious change transport us all,
When into freedom, tyranny is turned?
When each may say his fortune is his own,
And sleep in fullness of tranquillity?
Then shall we taste the sweets of life and ease,
Which happier climes have known: then, then enjoy
That liberty, which Britain's smiling isle
So long has boasted through a length of years.
HAVARD. It Is liberty alone, that makes life dear:
He does not live at all, who lives to fear.
HILL. O liberty! heaven's choice prerogative!
True bond of law! thou social soul of property!
Thou breath of reason! life of life itself!
For thee the valiant bleed. O sacred liberty!
Winged from the summer's snare, from flattering ruin*
Like the bold stork you seek the wint'ry shore,
Leave courts, and pomps, and palaces to slaves,
Cleave to the cold, and rest upon the storm.
Upborne by thee, my soul disdained the terms
Of empire -- offer^d at the hands of tyrants.
With thee I sought this favorite soil; with thee
These favorite sons I sought; thy sons, O liberty,
For even among the wilds of life you lead them,
Lift their low rafted cottage to the clouds,
Smile over their heaths, and from the mountain tops
Beam glory to the nations.
BROOK. -- When he beheld the temple
Sacred to liberty, he cried aloud --
" Here let us sacrifice, my noble friends,
" To this best blessing that adorns our Rome
" To liberty, that makes our name revered;
" To sacred liberty -- the gift of gods --
" To liberty -- their gift and their enjoyment;
" Which, did they want, -- they could not be immortal."
HAVARD. The rich man that beholds the brave in chains
And pants not for his freedom, is a slave.
HILL. O liberty! thou goddess heav'nly-bright!
Profuse of bliss, and pregnant with delight!
Eternal pleasures in thy presence reign,
And smiling plenty leads thy wanton train.
Eased of her load, subjection grows more light,
And poverty looks cheerful in thy sight:
Thou make the gloomy face of nature gay,
Giv'st beauty to the sun, and pleasure to the day.
ADDISON. It Is liberty alone that gives the flower
Of fleeting life its luster and perfume,
And we are weeds without it. All constraint,
Except what wisdom lays on evil men,
Is evil; hurts the faculties, impedes
Their progress in the road of science; blinds
The eyesight of discov'ry, and begets
In those that suffer it, a sordid mind
Bestial, a meagre intellect, unfit
To be the tenant of man's noble form.
COWPER. In a state of liberty, every man learns to value himself as man; to
consider himself as of importance in the system which himself has approved and
contributed to establish; and therefore resolves to regulate his own behavior
consistently with its safety and preservation. He feels as a proprietor, not as
a tenant. He loves the state because he participates in it. His obedience is
not the cold reluctant result of terror; but the livery, cheerful, and
spontaneous effect of love. The violation of laws, formed on the pure principle
of general beneficence, and to which he has given his full assent, by a just
and perfect representation, he considers as a crime of the deepest die. He will
incessantly endeavor to improve it; and enter seriously into all political
debate. In the collision of agitated minds, sparks will sometimes be emitted;
but they will only give a favorable light and a genial warmth. They will never
produce an injurious conflagration.

Spirit of DESPOTISM. We shall conclude this subject, with observing the
falsehood of the common opinion, that no large state could ever be modelled
into a commonwealth, but that such a form of government can only take place in
a city or small territory. The contrary seems probable. Though it is more
difficult to form a republican government in an extensive country than in a
city; there is more facility, when once it is formed, of preserving it steady
and uniform, without tumult and faction. -- In a large government, which is
modeled with masterly skill, there is compass and room enough to refine the
democracy from the lower people who may be admitted into the first elections or
first concoction of the commonwealth, to the higher magistrates, who direct all
the movements. At the same time, the parts are so distant and remote, that it
is very difficult, either by intrigue, prejudice, or passion, to hurry them
into any measures against the public interest.

HUME. LIFE.
When I consider life, it is all a cheat:
Yet fooled with hope, men favor the deceit;
Trust on, and think, tomorrow will repay:
Tomorrow's falser than the former day;
Lies more, and while it says we shall be blessed
With some new joys, cuts off what we possessed:
Strange cozenage! none would live past years again,
Yet all hope pleasure in what yet remain:
And from the dregs of life think to receive
What the first sprightly running could not give.
I Am tired with waiting for this chymic gold,
Which fools us young, and beggars us when old.
DRYDEN. What art thou, life, so dearly loved by all?
What are thy charms that thus the great desire thee,
And to retain thee part with pomp and titles?
To buy thy presence, the gold watching miser
Will pour his moldy bags of treasure out,
And grow at once a prodigal. The wretch
Clad with disease and poverty's thin coat,
Yet holds thee fast, though painful company.
O life! thou universal wish; what art thou?
You Are but a day -- A few uneasy hours:
Thy morn is greeted by the flocks and herds;
And every bird that flatters with its note,
Salutes thy rising sun: Thy noon approaching,
Then haste the flies and every creeping insect
To bask in thy meridian; that declining
As quickly they depart, and leave thy evening
To mourn the absent ray: Night at hand,
Then croaks the raven conscience, time misspent,
The owl despair seems hideous, and the bat
Confusion flutters up and down --
Life's but a lengthened day not worth the waking for
HAVARD. LORDS.
-- Ye are lords:
A lazy, proud, unprofitable crew,
The vermin, gender'd from the rank corruption
Of a luxurious state.
CUMBERLAND. The princes of Europe have found out a manner of rewarding their
subjects, by presenting them with about two yards of blue ribbon, which is worn
about the shoulder. They who are honored with this mark of distinction are
called knights, and the king himself is always the head of the order. Should a
nobleman happen to lose his leg in battle, the king presents him with two yards
of ribbon, and he is paid for the loss of his limb. Should an ambassador spend
all his paternal fortune, in supporting the honor of his country abroad, the
king presents him with two yards of ribbon, which is to be considered as
equivalent to his estate. In short, while an European king has a yard of blue
or green ribbon left, he need be under no apprehension of wanting statesmen,
generals, and soldiers.

GOLDSMITH. There is a set of men in all the states of Europe who assume from
their infancy a pre-eminence, independent of their moral character. The
attention paid them from the moment of their birth, gives them the idea that
they are formed for command; they soon learn to distinguish themselves as a
distinct species, and being secure of a certain rank and station, take no pains
to make themselves worthy of it. To this institution we owe so many indifferent
ministers, ignorant magistrates, and bad generals.

ABBE RAYNAL. He is but a poor observer, who has not seen that the generality
of peers, far from supporting themselves in a state of independent greatness,
are but too apt to fall into an oblivion of their proper dignity, and run
headlong into an abject servitude.

BURKE. Let states that aim at greatness take heed how their nobility and
gentry do multiply too fast: for that makes the common subject grow to be a
peasant and base swain, driven out of heart, and in effect but a gentleman's
labourer.

LORD BACON. Princes and lords may flourish or may fade,
A breath can make them as a breath has made;
But a bold peasantry, a nation's pride,
When once destroyed, can never be supplied.
GOLDSMITH. What is a lord? Does that plain simple word,
Contain some magic spell? As soon as heard,
Like an alarm bell on night's dull ear,
Does it strike louder, and more strong appear
Than other words? Whether we will or no,
Through reason's court does it unquestioned go
Even on the mention, and of course transmit
Notions of something excellent, of wit
Pleasing, though keen, of humor free, though chaste,
Of sterling genius with sound judgment graced,
Of virtue far above temptation's reach,
And honor, which no malice can impeach?
Believe it not -- 't was nature's first intent,
Before their rank became their punishment,
They should have passed for men, nor blushed to prize
The blessings she bestowed. -- She gave them eyes,
And they could see -- she gave them ears, they heard
The instruments of stirring, and they stirred --
Like us they were designed to eat, to drink,
To talk, and (every now and then) to think.
Till they, by pride corrupted, for the sake
Of singularity, disclaimed that make;
Till they, disdaining nature's vulgar mode,
Flew off, and struck into another road,
More fitting quality, and to our view
Came forth a species altogether new,
Something we had not known, and could not know,
Like nothing of God's making here below --
Nature exclaimed with wonder -- lords are things,
Which, never made by me, were made by kings.
A lord (nor here let censure rashly call
My just contempt of some, abuse of all:)
A mere, mere lord, with nothing but the name,
Wealth all his worth, and title all his fame,
Lives on another man, himself a blank,
Thankless he lives, or must some grandsire thank
For smuggled honors, and ill-gotten pelf.
CHURCHIL. You say, a long descended race,
And wealth, and dignity, and power, and place,
Make gentlemen, and that your high degree
Is much disparaged to be matched with me:
Know this, my lord, nobility of blood,
Is but a glittering and fallacious good;
The nobleman is he whose noble mind
Is filled with inborn worth, unborrow'd from his kind.
DRYDEN. LOVE.
Love various minds does variously inspire;
He stirs in gentle natures gentle fire,
Like that of incense on the altar laid:
But raging flames tempestuous souls invade:
A fire, which every windy passion blows,
With pride it mounts, and with revenge it glows.
DRYDEN. The idle god of love supinely dreams,
Amidst inglorious shades and purling streams;
In rosy fetters, and fantastic chains,
He binds deluded maids, and simple swains;
With soft enjoyments, woos them to forget
The hardy toils, and labor of the great:
But, if the warlike trumpet's loud alarms
To virtuous acts excite, and manly arms;
The coward boy avows his abject fear,
On silken wings sublime he cuts the air;
Scared at the furious noise and thunder of the war.
ROW. LICENTIOUSNESS.
Those who are possessed of exorbitant power, who pant for its extension, and
tremble at the apprehension of losing it, are always sufficiently artful to
dwell with emphasis, on the evils of licentiousness; under which opprobrious
name, they wish to stigmatize liberty. They describe the horrors of anarchy and
confusion, in the blackest colors; and boldly affirm, that they are the
necessary consequences of entrusting the people with power. Indeed, they hardly
condescend to recognize the idea of the people; but whenever they speak of the
mass of the community, denominate them the mob, the rabble or the swinish
multitude. Language is at a loss for appellatives, significant of their
contempt for those who are undistinguished by wealth or titles, and is obliged
to content itself with such words as reptiles, scum, dregs, or the many-headed
monster.

Spirit of DESPOTISM. Licentiousness and despotism are more nearly allied than
is commonly imagined. They are both alike inconsistent with liberty, and the
true end of government; nor is there any other difference between them, than
that one is the licentiousness of great men, and the other the licentiousness
of little men; or that by one, the persons and property of a people are subject
to outrage and invasion from a king, or a lawless body of grandees; and that by
the other, they are subject to the like outrages from a lawless mob. In
avoiding one of these evils, mankind have often run into the other. But all
well-constituted governments guard equally against both. Indeed of the two, the
last is, on several accounts, the least to be dreaded, and has done the least
mischief. It may truly be said, if licentiousness has destroyed its thousands,
despotism has destroyed its millions. The former having little power, and no
system to support it, ne^^ssarily finds its own remedy; and a people soon get
out of the tumult and anarchy attending it. But a despotism, wearing a form of
government, and being armed with its force, is an evil not to be conquered
without dreadful struggles. It goes on from age to age, debasing the human
faculties, levelling all distinctions, and preying on the rights and blessings
of society. It deserves to be added, that in a state disturbed by
licentiousuess, there is an animation which is favorable to the human mind,
and puts it upon exerting its powers; but in a state habituated to despotism,
all is still and torpid. A dark and savage tyranny stifles every effort of
genius, and the mind loses all its spirit and dignity.

PRICE. LUXURY.
There, in her den, lay pompous luxury,
Stretched out at length; no vice could boast such high
And general victories as she had won:
Of which, proud trophies there at large were shown.
Besides small states and kingdoms ruined,
Those mighty monarchies, that had overspread
The spacious earth, and stretched their conquering arms
From pole to pole, by her ensnaring charms
Were quite consumed: there lay imperial Rome,
That vanquished all the world, by her overcome:
Fettered was the old Assyrian lion there;
The Grecian leopard, and the Persian bear;
With others, numberless, lamenting by:
Examples of the power of Luxury.
MAY. Now basket up the family of plagues
That waste our vitals. Peculation, sale
Of honor, perjury, corruption, frauds,
By forgery, by subterfuge of law,
By tricks and lies as numerous and as keen
As the necessities their authors feel;
Then cast them closely bundl'd, every brat
At the right door. Profusion is the fire.
Profusion unrestrained, with all that is base
In character, has litter'd all the land,
And bred within the memory of no few
A priesthood such as Baal's was of old,
A people such as never was till now.
It is a hungry vice: -- it eats up all
That gives society its beauty, strength,
Convenience, and security, and use.
Makes men m^re vermin, worthy to be trapp'd
And gibbetted as fast as catchpole claws
Can seize the slippery prey. Unties the knot
Of union, and converts the sacred band
That holds mankind together, to a scourge.
Profusion, deluging a state with losts
Of grossest nature, and of worst effects,
Prepares it for its ruin. Hardens, blinds,
And warps the consciences of public men,
Till they can laugh at virtue; mock the fools
That trust them; and in the end, disclose a face
That would have shocked credulity herself.
Unmasked, vouchsafing this their sole excuse,
Since all alike are selfish -- Why not they?
This does profusion, and the accursed cause
Of such deep mischief, has itself a cause.
COWPER. Increase of power begets increase of wealth,
Wealth luxury, and luxury excess;
Excess, the scrophulous and itchy plague
That seizes first the opulent, descends
To the next rank contagious, and in time
Taints downward all the graduated scale
Of order, from the chariot, to the plough.
The rich, and they that have an arm to check
The license of the lowest in degree,
Desert their office; and themselves intent
On pleasure, haunt the capital, and thus
To all the violence of lawless hands,
Resign the scenes their presence might protect.
Authority herself not seldom sleeps,
Though resident, and witness of the wrong.
Ibid. LAW.
He that with injury is grieved,
And goes to law to be relieved,
Is sillier than a sottish chowse,
Who, when a thief has robbed his house,
Applies himself to cunning-men,
To help him to his goods again;
When all he can expect to gain,
Is but to squander more in vain.
HUDIBRAS. LAWS.
The universal spirit of all laws in all countries, is to favor the strong in
opposition to the weak; and to assist those who have possessions against those
who have none.

ROUSSEAU. One of the seven sages of Greece was wont to say, that laws were
like cobwebs, where the small flies were caught, and the great ones break
through.

LORD BACON. Ask of politicians the end for which laws were originally
designed, and they will answer, that the laws were designed as a protection for
the poor and weak, against the oppression of the rich and powerful. But surely
no pretense can be so ridiculous; a man might as well tell me he has taken off
my load, because he has changed the burden. If the poor man is not able to
support his suit, according to the vexatious and expensive manner established
in civilized countries, has not the rich as great an advantage over him as the
strong has over the weak in a state of nature?

BURKE. To embarrass justice by multiplicity of laws, or to hazard it by
confidence in judges, seems to be the opposite rocks on which all civil
institutions have been wrecked, and between which, legislative wisdom has never
yet found an open passage.

JOHNSON. Bad laws are the worst sort of tyranny. In such a country as this,
they are of all bad things the worst, worse by far than any thing else; and
they derive a particular malignity even from the wisdom and soundness of the
rest of our institutions.

BURKE. LAWS (Ex post facto.)
Laws, made to punish for actions done before the existence of such laws, and
which have not been declared crimes by preceding laws, are unjust, oppressive,
and inconsistent with the fundamental principles of a free government.

Constitution of MASSACHUSETTS. Retrospective laws, punishing offenses
committed before the existence of such laws, are oppressive and unjust, and
ought not to be made.

Constitution of DELAWARE. Retrospective laws, punishing facts committed before
the existence of such laws, and by them only declared criminal, are oppressive,
unjust, and incompatible with liberty; wherefore no ex post facto law ought to
be made.

Constitution of MARYLAND. LIBERTY OF THE PRESS.
The liberty of the press is essential to the security of freedom in a state:
it ought therefore to be inviolably preserved.

Constitution of NEW HAMPSHIRE. The people have a right to freedom of speech,
and of writing and publishing their sentiments, concerning the transactions of
government -- and therefore the freedom of the press ought not to be restrained.

Constitution of VERMONT. As long as there are such things as printing and
writing, there will be libels: it is an evil arising out of a much greater
good. -- However it does not follow that the press is to be sunk for the errors
of the press: -- for it is certainly of much less consequence that an innocent
man should now and then be aspersed than that all men should be enslaved.

Many methods have been tried to remedy this evil. In Turkey and the Eastern
monarchies, all printing is forbid; which does it with a witness; for if there
can be no printing at all, there can be no libels printed; and by the same
reason there ought to be no talking, lest the people should talk treason,
blasphemy, or nonsense; and for a stronger reason yet, no preaching, because
the orator has an opportunity of haranguing often to a larger auditory than he
can persuade to read his lucubrations: but I desire it may be remembered, that
there is neither liberty, arts, sciences, learning, or knowledge in these
countries.

But another method has been thought on in these western parts of the world,
much less effectual, and yet more mischievous than the former, namely, to put
the press under the protection of the prevailing party, and authorize libels on
one side only, and deny the other side the opportunity of defending themselves.

What mischief is done by libels to balance all these evils? They seldom or
never annoy an innocent man, or promote any considerable error, Wise and honest
men laugh at them, and despise them, and such arrows always fly over their
heads, or fall at their feet. Most of the world take part with a virtuous man,
and punish c^lumny by their detestation of it. The best way to prevent libels
is not to deserve them. Guilty men alone fear them, or are hurt by them, whose
actions will not bear examination, and therefore must not be examined. It Is
fact alone which annoys them; for if you tell no truth, I dare say you may have
their leave to tell as many lies as you please.

The same is true in speculative opinions. You may write nonsense and folly as
long as you think fit, and no one complains of it but the bookseller. But if a
bold, honest, and wise book sallies forth, and attacks those who think
themselves secure in their trenches, then their camp is in danger, and they
call out all hands to arms, and their enemy is to be destroyed by fire, sword,
or fraud. But 'its senseless to think that any truth can suffer by being
thoroughly searched, or examined into; or that the discovery of it can
prejudice right religion, equal government, or the happiness of society in any
respect: she has so many advantages above error, that she wants only to be
shown to gain admiration and esteem; and we see every day that she breaks the
bonds of tyranny and fraud, and shines through the mists of superstition and
ignorance: and what then would she do, if these barriers were removed, and her
fetters taken off?

GORDON. It is apprehended, that arbitary power would steal in upon us, were we
not careful to prevent its progress, and were there not an easy method of
conveying the alarm from one end of the kingdom to another. The spirit of the
people must frequently be roused, in order to curb the ambition of the court,
and the dread of rousing this spirit must be employed to prevent that ambition.
Nothing is so effectual to this purpose as the liberty of the press, by which
all the learning, wit and genius of the nation may be employed on the side of
freedom, and every one be animated to its defense. As long therefore as the
republican part of our government can maintain itself against the monarchical,
it will naturally be careful to keep the press open, as of importance to its
own preservation.

HUME. MAN.
Behold of every age. Ripe manhood see,
Decrepit years, and helpless infancy:
Those who by lingering sickness lose their breath,
And those who, by despair, suborn their death:
See yon mad fools, who for some trival right,
For love, or for mistaken honor, fight:
See those more mad who throw their lives away
In needless wars, the stake which monarchs lay,
When for each others provinces they play.
Then as if earth too narrow were for fate,
On open seas their quarrels they debate;
In hollow wood they floating armies bear;
And force imprisoned winds to bring 'em near.
DRYDEN. Like leaves on trees the race of man is found,
Now green in youth, now withering on the ground,
Another race the foll'wing spring supplies;
They fall successive, and successive rise:
So generations in their course decay;
So flourish these when those are past away.
POPE. When I reflect upon man; and take a view of that dark side of him which
represents his life as open to so many causes of trouble -- when I consider how
often we eat the bread of affliction, and that we are born to it, as to the
portion of our inheritance -- when one runs over the catalogue of all the cross
reckonings and sorrowful items with which the heart of man is overcharged, it is
wonderful by what hidden resources the mind is enabled to stand it out, and
bear itself up as it does, against the impositions laid upon our nature.

STERN. Men are gregarious in their nature; they form together in society, not
merely from necessity, to avoid the evils of solitude, but from inclination and
mutual attachment. They find a positive pleasure in yielding assistance to each
other, in communicating their thoughts and improving their faculties. This
disposition in man is the source of morals; they have their foundation in
nature, and receive their nourishment from society. The different portions of
this society, that call themselves nations, have generally established the
principle of securing to the individuals who compose a nation, the exclusive
enjoyment of the fruits of their own labor; reserving however to the governing
power the right to reclaim from time to time so much of the property and labor
of individuals as shall be deemed necessary for the public service. This is the
general basis on which property, public and private, has hitherto been founded.
Nations have proceeded no farther. Perhaps in a more improved state of society,
the time will come, when a different system may be introduced; when it shall be
found more congenial to the social nature of man to exclude the idea of
separate property, and with that the numerous evils which seem to be entailed
upon it.

BARLOW. Hail man, exalted title! first and best,
On God's own image by his hand impressed,
To which at last the reasoning race is driven,
And seeks anew what first it gained from heaven.
O man, my brother, how the cordial flame
Of all endearments, kindles at the name!
In every clime, thy visage greets my eyes,
In every tongue thy kindred accents rise;
The thought expanding swells my heart with glee,
It finds a friend, and loves itself in thee.
Say then, fraternal family divine,
Whom mutual wants and mutual aids combine,
Say from what source the dire delusion rose,
That souls like ours were ever made for foes;
Why earth's maternal bosom, where we tread,
To rear our mansions and receive our bread,
Should blush so often for the race she bore,
So long be drenched with floods of filial gore?
Why to small realms for ever rest confined
Our great affections, meant for all mankind?
Though climes divide us; shall the stream or sea,
That forms a barrier 'twixt my friend and me,
Inspire the wish his peaceful state to mar,
And meet his falchion in the ranks of war?
Not seas, nor climes, nor wild ambition's fire
In nations' minds could ever the wish inspire;
Where equal rights each sober voice should guide,
No blood would stain them, and no war divide.
It Is dark deception, it is the glare of state,
Man sunk in titles, lost in small and great;
It Is rank, distinction, all the hell that springs
From those prolific monsters, courts and kings.
These are the vampires nursed on nature's spoils;
For these with pangs the starving peasant toils,
For these the earth's broad surface teems with grain,
Theirs the dread labors of the devious main;
And when the wasted world but dares refuse
The gifts oppressive and extorted dues,
They bid wild slaughter spread the gory plains,
The lifeblood gushing from a thousand veins,
Erect their thrones amid the sanguine flood,
And dip their purple in the nation's blood.
The gazing crowd, of glittering state afraid,
Adore the power their coward meanness made;
In war's short intervals; while regal shows
Still blind their reason and insult their woes.
What strange events for proud processions call!
See kingdoms crowding to a birth-night ball!
See the long pomp in gorgeous glare displayed,
The tinsel'd guards, the squadron'd horse parade;
See heralds gay, with emblems on their vest,
In tissu'd robes, tall, beauteous pages dressed;
Amid superior ranks of splendid slaves,
Lords, dukes and princes, titulary knaves,
Confusedly shine their crosses, gems and stars,
Sceptres and globes and crowns and spoils of wars.
On gilded orbs see thundering chariots rolled,
Steeds, snorting fire, and champing bitts of gold,
Prance to the trumpet's voice; while each assumes
A loftier gait, and lifts his neck of plumes.
High on a moving throne, and near the van,
The tyrant rides, the chosen scourge of man;
Clarions and flutes and drums his way prepare,
And shouting millions rend the troubled air;
Millions, whose ceaseless toils the pomp sustain,
Whose hour of stupid joy repays an age of pain.
Of these no more. From orders, slaves and kings,
To thee, O man, my heart rebounding springs,
Behold the ascending bliss that waits thy call,
Heaven's own bequest, the heritage of all.
Awake to wisdom, seize the proffered prize;
From shade to light, from grief to glory rise.
Freedom at last, with reason in her train,
Extends over earth her everlasting reign.
Ibid. Man, considered in himself, is a very helpless and a very wretched
being. He is subject every moment to the greatest calamities and misfortunes.
He is beset with dangers on all sides, and may become unhappy by numberless
casualties, which he could not foresee, nor had prevented had he foreseen them.

It is our comfort, while we are obnoxious to so many accidents, that we are
under the care of one who directs contingencies, and has in his hands the
management of every thing that is capable of annoying or offending us; who
knows the assistance we stand in need of, and is always ready to bestow it on
those who ask it of him.

The natural homage, which such a creature bears to so infinitely wise and good
a being, is a firm reliance on him, for the blessings and conveniences of
life, and an habitual trust in him for deliverance out of all such dangers and
difficulties as may befall us.

The man who always lives in this disposition of mind, has not the same dark
and melancholy views of human nature, as he who considers himself abstractedly
from this relation to the Supreme Being. At the same time that he reflects upon
his own weakness and imperfection, he comforts himself with the contemplation
of those divine attributes, which are employed for his safety and his welfare.
He finds his want of foresight made up by the omniscience of him who is his
support. He is not sensible of his own want of strength, when he knows that his
helper is almighty. In short, the person who has a firm trust on the Supreme
Being is powerful in his power, wise by his wisdom, happy by his happiness. He
reaps the benefit of every divine attribute, and loses his own insufficiency in
the fullness of infinite perfection.

To make our lives more easy to us, we are commanded to put our trust in him,
who is thus able to relieve and succor us; the divine goodness having made
such a reliance a duty, notwithstanding we should have been miserable had it
been forbidden us.

SPECTATOR. MEDIOCRITY.
Since wealth and power too weak we find
To quell the tumults of the mind;
Or from the monarch's roofs of state,
Drive thence the cares that round him wait:
Happy the man with little blessed,
Of what his father left, possessed;
No base desires corrupt his head,
No fears disturb him in his bed.
Thy portion is a wealthy stock,
A fertile glebe, a fruitful flock,
Horses and chariots for thy ease,
Rich robes to deck, and make thee please:
For me a little cell I choose,
Fit for my mind, fit for my muse;
Which soft content does best adorn,
Shunning the knaves, and fools I scorn.
OTWAY. If thou be wise, no glorious fortune choose;
Which it is but vain to keep, yet grief to lose;
For, when we place even trifles in the heart,
With trifles too unwillingly we part.
An humble roof, plain bed, and homely board,
More clear untainted pleasures do afford,
Than all the tumult of vain greatness brings
To kings, or to the favorites of kings.
COWLEY. MERCY.
Not the king's crown, nor the deputed sword;
The mareschall's truncheon, nor the judge's robe,
Become them with one half so good a grace,
As mercy does.
Alas! the souls of all men once were forfeit,
And he that might the advantage best have taken,
Found out the remedy: how would ye be,
If he, who is the top of judgment, should
But judge you as you are? Oh! think on that,
And mercy then will breathe within your lips,
Like new made man.
SHAKESPEARE. The quality of mercy is not strained,
It droppeth as the gentle rain from heaven
Upon the place beneath. It is twice blessed,
It blesses him that gives, and him that takes;
It Is mightiest in the mightiest; it becomes
The throned monarch better than his crown:
His scepter shows the force of temporal power,
The attribute to power and majesty;
Wherein does sit the dread and fear of kings.
It is an attribute to God himself;
And earthly power does then show likest God's,
When mercy seasons justice.
Ibid. My uncle Toby was a man patient of injuries; -- not from want of
courage; -- where just occasion presented, or called it forth, -- I know no man
under whose arm I would sooner have taken shelter; -- nor did this arise from
any insensibility or obtuseness of his intellectual parts; -- he was of a
peaceful, placid nature, -- no jarring element in it, -- all was mixed up so
kindly with him; my uncle Toby had scarce a heart to retaliate upon a fly: --
Go, -- says he one day at dinner, to an overgrown one which had buzzed about
his nose, and tormented him cruelly all dinner time, -- and which, after
infinite attempts, he had caught at last -- as it flew by him; -- I Will not hurt
thee, says my uncle Toby, rising from his chair, and going across the room,
with the fly in his hand, -- I Will not hurt a hair of thy head: -- Go, says he,
lifting up the sash, and opening his hand as he spoke, to let it escape; -- go
poor devil, get thee gone; why should I hurt thee? -- This world surely is wide
enough to hold thee and me.

STERN. MONARCH.
Why has the monarch so much use for life?
Yet in his health is levelled with the peasant!
O painful majesty! unequal state!
Not all thy gorgeous pomp, thy flags of power,
Thy dignities, dominions, ceremonies,
The crown, the scepter, and the royal ball,
The purple robe, nor princely crowds, whose press
Of duty intercepts the wholesome air;
Not all these glories, for one precious hour,
Can buy the beggar's health or appetite.
CIBBER. MAGNANIMITY.
How much more sweet and worth our constant prayer,
A mind unshaken by the storms of care!
Which can a vain and empty world despise,
And with an upward flight affect the skies;
Which the gay trappings of the great contemns,
Their sounding titles, and their shining gems.
Discharged of all which happiness debars,
She plants her conversation in the stars;
Looks on the clouds, and lower earth with scorn,
And seeks that country were she first was born.
MANNERS.
The manners of a people are not to be found in the schools of learning, or the
palaces of greatness, where the national character is obscured, or obliterated
by travel or instruction, by philosophy or vanity; nor is public happiness to
be estimated by the assemblies of the gay or the banquets of the rich. The
great mass of nations is neither rich nor gay. They whose aggregate constitutes
the people, are found in the streets and the villages; in the shops and farms;
and from them, collectively considered, must the measure of general prosperity
be taken. As they approach to delicacy, a nation is refined; as their
conveniences are multiplied, a nation, at least a commercial nation, must be
denominated wealthy.

JOHNSON. Manners are of more importance than laws. In a great measure the laws
depend upon them. The law touches us but here and there, and now and then.
Manners are what vex or soothe, corrupt or purify, exalt or bebase, barbarize
or refine us, by a constant, steady, uniform, insensible operation, like that
of the air we breathe in. They give their whole form and color to our lives.
According to their quality, they aid morals, they supply them, or they totally
destroy them.

BURKE. MILITIA.
A well regulated militia is the proper, natural, and sure defense of a state.

Standing armies are dangerous to liberty, and ought not to be raised, or kept
up without consent of the legislature.

In all cases and at all times, the military ought to be under strict
subordination to, and governed by the civil power.

No soldier in time of peace shall be quartered in any house, without the
consent of the owner; and in time of war, such quarters ought not to be made
but by the civil magistrate, in a manner ordained by the legislature.

Constitution of NEW HAMPSHIRE. A well-regulated militia is the proper,
natural, and safe defense of a free government.

Standing armies are dangerous to liberty, and ought not to be raised or kept
up, without the consent of the legislature.

In all cases, and at all times, the military ought to be under strict
subordination to, and governed by the civil power.

No soldier ought to be quartered in any house, in time of peace, without the
consent of the owner; and in time of war, in such manner only, as the
legislature shall direct.

Constitution of DELAWARE.

The sure and certain defense of a free people is a well regulated militia; and
as standing armies, in time of peace, are dangerous to freedom, they ought to
be avoided, as far as the circumstances and safety of the community will admit;
and in all cases the military shall be in strict subordination to the civil
authority.

Constitution of TENNESSEE. The militia of this country must be considered as
the palladium of our security, and the first effectual resort, in case of
hostility. It is essential, therefore, that the same system should pervade the
whole; that the formation and discipline of the militia of the continent,
should be absolutely uniform; and that the same species of arms, accoutrements,
and military apparatus, should be introduced in every part of the United
States. No one, who has not learned it from experience, can conceive the
difficulty, expense, and confusion, which result from a contrary system, or the
vague arrangements which have hitherto prevailed.

WASHINGTON. The documents which will be presented to you, will show the
amount, and kinds of arms and military stores now in our magazines and
arsenals; and yet an addition even to these supplies cannot with prudence be
neglected; as it would leave nothing to the uncertainty of procuring a warlike
apparatus in the moment of public danger. Nor can such arrangements, with such
objects, be exposed to the ^ensure or jealousy of the warmest friends of
republican government. They are incapable of abuse in the hands of the militia,
who ought to possess a pride in being the depository of the force of the
Republic, and may be trained to a degree of energy, equal to every military
exigency of the United States.

Ibid. MILITARY POWER.
There is one circumstance in the conduct of the tory friends to absolute sway,
truly alarming to the champions of liberty. They are always inclined, on the
smallest tumult, to call in the military. They would depreciate the civil
powers, and break the constable's staff to introduce the bayonet. In their
opinion, the best executive powers of government are a party of dragoons. They
are therefore constantly sounding alarms, and aggravating every petty
disturbance into a riot or rebellion. They are not for parleying with the
many-headed monster; they scorn lenient measures; and while their own persons
are in perfect safety, boldly command the military to fire. What is the life or
the limb of a poor man, in their opinion? Not so much as the life or limb of a
favorite pointer or race-horse. They are always eager to augment the army. They
would build barracks in every part of the country, and be glad to see a free
country overrun, like some of the enslaved nations of the continent, from east
to west, from north to south, with men armed to overawe the saucy advocates of
charters, privileges, rights, and reformations.

Against principles so dangerous in public life, and odious in private, every
friend to his country, every lover of his fellow creatures, every competent
judge of those manners, which sweeten the intercourse of man with man, will
show a determined opposition. But how shall he show it with effect? By
ridicule. Nothing lowers the pride from which such principles proceed, so much
as general contempt and derision. The insolence of petty despots in private
life should be laughed at by an Aristophanes, while it is rebuked by a Cato.

Spirit of DESPOTISM. As, in time of peace, armies are dangerous to liberty,
they ought not to be maintained, without the consent of the legislature; and
the military power shall always be held in exact subordination to the civil
authority, and be governed by it.

Constitution of MASSACHUSETTS. No standing army shall, in time of peace, be
kept up, without the consent of the legislature; and the military shall, in all
cases, and at all times, be in strict subordination to the civil power.

Constitution of PENNSYLVANIA. No soldier shall, in time of peace, be quartered
in any house, without the consent of the owner, nor, in time of war, but in a
manner to be prescribed by law.

Ibid. Standing armies are dangerous to liberty, and ought not to be raised or
kept up, without consent of the legislature.

Constitution of MARYLAND. In all cases, and at all times, the military ought
to be under strict subordination to and control of the civil power.

Ibid. No soldier ought to be quartered in any house, in time of peace, without
the consent of the owner; and in time of war, in such manner only, as the
legislature shall direct.

Ibid. No standing army shall, in time of peace, be kept up, without the
consent of the legislature; and the military shall, in all cases, and at all
times, be in strict subordination to the civil power.

Constitution of KENTUCKY. No soldier shall, in time of peace, be quartered in
any house, without the consent of the owner, nor in time of war, but in a
manner to be prescribed by law.

Ibid. Overgrown military establishments, under any form of government, are
inauspicious to liberty, and are to be regarded as particularly hostile to
republican liberty.

WASHINGTON. MODESTY.
What is more respectable, or more sacred, than true modesty; who will dare
bring a blush on the cheek of chaste beauty, ignorant of the mysteries of which
she has not even an idea! Who will dare to blemish the carnation of a chaste
countenance and a pure mind; break the seal of virtue, and a peaceful heart,
that shame has not yet affected! even the depraved man feels (...) schemes die
away; he restrains the emotions of his i^ poisoned tongue, and his bold hand;
he is disarmed by the glance where modest assurance shines; he turns ^side, as
the most brutal wretch would turn the wheel of his carriage, when it threatened
to crush an infant stretched on the road.

MERCIER. MAGISTRATES.
As great respect is due to the office of the supreme magistrate, so also is
great affection due to his person, while he conducts himself with propriety,
and consults the happiness of the people. The most decorous language should be
used to him, the most respect al behavior preserved toward him; every mode
adopted of showing him proofs of love and honor, on this side idolatry. Arduous
is his task, though honorable. It should be sweetened by every mode which true
and sincere loyalty can devise. I would rather exceed, than fail short of the
deference due to the office and the man.

Spirit of DESPOTISM. All powers residing originally in the people, and being
derived from them, the several magistrates, and officers of government, vested
with authority, whether legislative, executive, or judicial, are their
substitutes and agents, and are at all times accountable to them.

Constitution of MASSACHUSETTS. All persons invested with the legislative or
executive powers of government are the trustees of the public, and, as such,
accountable for their conduct; wherefore, whenever the ends of government are
perverted, and public liberty manifestly endangered, and all other means of
redress are ineffectual, the people may, and of right ought, to reform the old
or establish a new government. The doctrine of non-resistance, against
arbitrary power and oppression, is absurd, slavish, and destructive of the good
and happiness of mankind.

Constitution of MARYLAND. MINISTERS OF STATE.
I had formerly upon occasion discoursed with my master upon the nature of
government in general, and particularly of our own excellent constitution,
deservedly the wonder and envy of the whole world. But having here accidentally
mentioned a minister of state, he commanded me some time after to inforn him,
what species of yahoo I particularly meant by that appellation.

I told him, that a chief or first minister of state, who was the person I
intended to describe, was a creature wholly exempt from joy and grief, love and
hatred, pity and anger; at least makes use of no other passions, but a violent
desire of wealth, power, and titles; that he applies his words to all uses,
except to the indication of his mind; that he never tells a truth but with an
intent that you should take it for a lie: nor a lie, but with a design that you
should take it for a truth; that those he speaks worst of behind their backs,
are in the surest way of preferment; and whenever he begins to praise you to
others, or to yourself, you are from that day forlorn. The worst mark you can
receive is a promise, especially when it is confirmed with an oath; after which
every wise man retires, and gives over all hopes.

SWIFT. Ministers and favorites are a sort of people who have a state prisoner
in their custody, the whole management of whose understanding and actions they
can easily engross. This they completely effect with a weak and credulous
master, nor can the most cautious and penetrating elude their machinations.

Ministers become a sort of miniature kings in their turn. The king has been
used to hear those things only which were adapted to give him pleasure, and it
is with a grating and uneasy sensation that he listens to communications of a
different sort. He has been used to unhesitating compliance; and it is with
difficulty he can digest expostulation and opposition. The temporising
politician expects the same pliability in others that he exhibits in himself;
and the fault which he can least forgive is an ill timed and inauspicious
scrupulosity.

Expecting this compliance from all the coadjutors and instruments of his
designs, he soon comes to set it up as a standard by which to judge of the
merits of all other men. He is deaf to every recommendation but that of a
fitness for the secret service of government, or a tendency to promote his
interest, and extend the sphere of his influence. The worst man with this
argument in his favor will seem worthy of encouragement; the best man who has
no advocate but virtue to plead for him will be treated with superciliousness
and neglect. -- To obtain honor, it will be necessary to pay a servile court to
administration, to bear with unaltered patience their contumely and scorn, to
flatter their vices, and render ourselves useful to their private
gratification. To obtain honors, it will be necessary, by assiduity and
intrigue, to make to ourselves a party, to procure the recommendation of lords
and the good word of women of pleasure and clerks in office. To obtain honor,
it will be necessary to merit disgrace. The whole scene consists in hollowness,
duplicity, and falsehood. The minister speaks fair to the man he despises, and
the slave pretends a generous attachment, while he thinks of nothing but his
personal interest.

GODWIN. If you ask me where to look for those beautiful shining qualities of
prime ministers and the great favorites of princes, that are so finely painted
in dedications, addresses, epitaphs, funeral sermons, and inscriptions? I
answer, there, and no where else. Where would you look for the excellency of a
statue, but in that part which you see of it? It is the polished outside only
that has the skill and labor of the sculptor to boast of; what is out of sight
is untouched. Would you break the head or cut open the breast to look for the
brains or the heart, you would only show your ignorance and destroy the
workmanship. This has often made me compare the virtues of great men to your
large china jars; they make a fine show, and are ornamental to a chimney; one
would, by the bulk they appear in, and the value that is set upon them, think
they might be very useful, but look into a thousand of them, and you will find
nothing but dust and cobwebs.

MANDEVILLE. I know not how it happens, but there is hardly ever a prince so
bad but his minister is worse: If he commit any ill action he is still prompted
to it; accordingly the ambition of a prince is never so dangerous as baseness
of soul in his counselors.

MONTESQUIEU. Oh! what a mine of mischief is a statesman!
Ye furies, whirlwinds, and ye treacherous rocks,
Ye ministers of death, devouring fire,
Convulsive earthquake, and plague tainted air,
All you are merciful and mild to him.
SEWEL. NOBILITY.
Were honor to be scanned by long descent
From ancestors illustrious, I could vaunt
A lineage of the greatest, and recount
Among my fathers, names of ancient story,
Heroes and godlike patriots, who subdued
The world by arms and virtue:
But that be their own praise:
Nor will I borrow merit from the dead,
Myself an undeserver.
ROW. Virtue alone is true nobility:
Let your own acts immortalize your name
It Is poor relying on another's fame:
For take the pillars but away, and all
The (...) ^^ructure must in ruins fall:
As a (...) ^^oops, when by divorce removed
From (...) embraces of the elm she loved.
STEPHENSON. -- Nobility of blood,
Is but a glittering and fallacious good:
The nobleman is he, whose noble mind
Is filled with in-born worth, unb^^^ow'd from his kind.
The king of heaven was in a (...) laid,
And took his earth but from an (...) maid;
Then what can birth or mortal men bestow.
Since floods no higher than their fountains flow?
We, who for name and empty honor strive,
Our true nobility from him derive.
Your ancestors, who puff your mind with pride,
And vast estates, to mighty titles tied,
Did not your honor, but their own advance;
For virtue comes not by inheritance:
DRYDEN. No man is nobler born than another, unless he is born with better
abilities and a more amiable disposition. They who make such a parade with
their family pictures and pedigrees, are, properly speaking, rather to be
called noted or notorious than noble persons. I thought it right to say this
much, in order to repel the insolence of men who depend entirely upon chance
and accidental circumstances for distinction, and not at all on public services
and personal merit.

SENECA. Virtue is nobility. Personal merit, useful, generous, benevolent
exertion, the only honorable distinction. The trappings which every tailor can
make to clothe a poor puny mortal, add no real dignity. In ages of ignorance,
they might strike with awe. Those ages are no more. Nor will they ever return,
notwithstanding the efforts of petty despots, (fearing the loss of those
distinctions which they know they never earned,) to keep the people in the
grossest ignorance.

God Almighty, who gives his sun to shine with as much warmth and radiance on
the cottage as on the palace, has dispensed the glorious privilege of genius
and virtue to the poor and middle classes, with a bounty perhaps seldom
experienced in any of the proud pretenders to hereditary or official grandeur.
Let us call to mind a few among the worthies who have adorned the ages that
have elapsed: Socrates; was he noble in the sense of a king at arms? Would he
have condescended to be bedizened with ribands, and stars, and garters? Cicero;
was he not a novus homo? a man unconnected with patricians, and deriving his
glory from the purest fountain of honor, his own genius and virtue? Demosthenes
would have scorned to owe his estimation to a pedigree.

Spirit of DESPOTISM. The greatest scholars, poets, orators, philosophers,
warriors, statesmen, inventors and improvers of the arts, arose from the lowest
of the people. If we had waited till courtiers had invented the art of
printing, clock-making, navigation, and a thousand others, we should probably
have continued in darkness to this hour. They had something else to do, than to
add to the comforts and conveniences of ordinary life. They had to worship an
idol, with the incense of flattery, who was often much more stupid than
themselves, and who sometimes had no more care or knowledge of the people under
him, or their wants, than he had of arts or literature.

The education of the middle classes is infinitely better than the education of
those who are called great people. Their time is less consumed by that vanity
and dissipation which enfeebles the mind, while it precludes opportunity for
reading and reflection. They usually have a regard to character, which
contributes much to the preservation of virtue. Their honor and integrity are
valued by them, as pearls of great price. These are their stars, and these
their coronets. They are for the most part attached to their religion. They are
temperate, frugal, and industrious. In one particular, and that one adds a
value above all that courts can give, they greatly excel the great, and that
particular is sincerity. They are in earnest in their words and deeds. They
have little occasion for simulation and dissimulation. Courtiers are too often
varnished, fictitious persons, whom God and nature never made; while the people
preserve the image unaffected, which the Supreme Being impressed when he
created man.

Ibid. NATURE AND ART.
Unerring nature, still divinely bright,
One clear, unchanged, and universal light,
Life, force, and beauty, must to all impart,
At once the source, and end, and test of art.
Art from that fund each just supply provides,
Works without show, and without pomp besides:
In some fair body thus the secret soul
With spirits feeds, with vigor fills the whole,
Each motion guides, and every nerve sustains;
Itself unseen, but in effect remains.
POPE. NEGLIGENCE.
No man can safely do that by others, which might be done by himself. He that
indulges negligence, will quickly become ignorant of his own affairs; and he
that trusts without reserve, will at last be deceived.

RAMBLER. NATURAL ARISTOCRACY.
That the best and ablest men should govern the worst and weakest, is
reasonable: and this is the aristocracy appointed by God and nature. But what
do we mean when we say the best and ablest men? Do we mean men of the best
families; that is, men in whose families riches and titles have long been
conspicuous? By the ablest men, do we mean men who possess the greatest power,
by undue influence, in borough and county elections, though the exertion of
that power be strictly forbidden by the law and constitution? Or do we mean men
of honest, upright, and benevolent hearts; of vigorous, well-informed, well
exercised understandings? Certainly the latter sort, which forms the
aristocracy established by God and nature. This is gold; the king's head
stamped upon it may make it a guinea. The other is only copper; and though the
same impression may be made upon it at the mint, it is still intrinsically
worth no more than a halfpenny.

Spirit of DESPOTISM. NON-RESISTANCE.
Government being instituted for the common benefit, the doctrine of
non-resistance against arbitrary power and oppression is absurd, slavish, and
destructive to the good and happiness of mankind.

Constitution of TENNESSEE. NATURE.
Nature does nothing in vain; the creator of the universe has appointed every
thing to a certain use and purpose, and determined it to a settled course and
sphere of action, from which if it in the least deviates, it becomes unfit to
answer those ends for which it was designed. In like manner it is in the
dispositions of society; the civil economy is formed in a chain as well as the
natural; and in either case the breach but of one link puts the whole in some
disorder. It is, I think, pretty plain, that most of the absurdity and ridicule
that we meet with in the world, is generally owing to the impertinent
affectation, of excelling in characters men are not fit for, and for which
nature never designed them.

Every man has one or more qualities which may make him useful both to himself
and others; nature never fails of pointing them out, and while the infant
continues under the guardianship, she brings him on in his way, and then offers
herself for a guide in what remains of the journey; if he proceeds in that
course, he can hardly miscarry: nature makes good her engagements; for as she
never promises what she is not able to perform, so she never fails of
performing what she promises. But the misfortune is, men despise what they may
be masters of, and affect what they are not fit for; they reckon themselves
already possessed of what their genius inclines them to, and so bend all their
ambition to excel in what is out of their reach. Thus they destroy the use of
their natural talents, in the same manner as covetous men do their quiet and
repose; they can enjoy no satisfaction in what they have, because of the absurd
inclination they are possessed with for what they have not.

SPECTATOR. OPPRESSION.
Men irritated by oppression, and elevated by a triumph over it, are apt to
abandon themselves to violent and extreme courses.

BURKE. OATHS.
Ye have heard that it has been said by them of old time, Thou shall not
forswear thyself, but shall perform unto the Lord thine oaths:

But I say unto you, Swear not at all; neither by heaven, for it is God's
throne:

Nor by the earth; for it is his footstool: neither by Jerusalem, for it is the
city of the great king:

Neither shall thou swear by thy head, because thou can not make one hair
white or black:

But let your communication be yea, yea; nay, nay; for whatsoever is more than
these comes of evil.

NEW TESTAMENT. It is great sin to swear unto a sin,
But greater sin to keep a sinful oath;
Who can be bound by any solemn vow,
To do a murderous deed, to rob a man,
To force a spotless virgin's chastity,
To reave the orphan of his patrimony,
To wring the widow from her custom'd right,
And have no other reason for his wrong,
But that he was bound by a solemn oath?
SHAKESPEARE. Whoever considers the number of absurd and ridiculous oaths
necessary to be taken at present in most countries, on being admitted into any
society or profession whatever, will be less surprised to find prevarication
still prevailing, where perjury has led the way.

While good faith reigned upon the earth, a simple promise was sufficient to
insure confidence. Oaths owe their origin to perfidy. Man was not required to
call upon the God that heard him to witness his veracity, till he deserved no
longer to be believed. Magistrates and sovereigns, to what do your regulations
tend? You either oblige the man of probity to lift up his hand, and call heaven
to witness, which with him is a requisition as injurious as it is useless; or
you compel an oath from the mouth of a reprobate. Of what value can the oath of
such a man appear to you? If the oath be contrary to his own security, it is
absurd. If it be consonant with his interest, it is superfluous. Does it argue
a knowledge of the human heart, to give the debtor his choice between his ruin
and a falsehood; or the criminal his option between death and perjury? Will the
man whom motives of revenge, interest, or wickedness, have determined to give a
false testimony, be deterred by the fear of committing one crime more? Is he
not apprised, before he is brought up to the tribunal of justice, that this
formality will be required of him? And has he not from the bottom of his heart
despised it, before he complied with it? Is it not a species of impiety to
introduce the name of God in our wicked disputes? Is it not a singular mode of
making heaven, as it were, an accomplice in the guilt, to suffer that heaven to
be called upon, which never has contradicted nor ever will contradict the oath?
How intrepid, therefore, must the false witness become, when he has with
impunity called down the divine vengeance on his head, without the fear of
being convicted? Oaths seem to be so much debased and prostituted by their
frequency, that false witnesses are grown as common as robbers.

RAYNAL. OLD SOLDIER.
Once, gay in life, and free from anxious care,
I through the furrows drove the shining share --
I saw my waving fields with plenty crowned,
And yellow Ceres, joyous, smile around;
'Till roused by freedom at my country's call,
I left my peaceful home, and gave up all.
Now forced, alas! to beg my hard-earn'd bread,
This crazy body longs to join the dead:
Ungrateful country! when the danger's over,
Your bravest sons cold charity implore.
Children of wealth, in downy pleasure bred,
Pampered in ease, by favoring fortune fed;
Who view with thoughtless eye the humble poor,
That glean their scanty meals from door to door;
Ah! heave for me a sympathetic sigh,
And wipe the falling tear from sorrow's eye.
FENTHAM. PRIMOGENITURE.
How unnatural is the anxious desire of aristocratical bigots to make, as they
express it, an eldest son! to starve, or at least to distress, a dozen sons and
daughters, in order to leave behind them one great representative, who may
continue to toil in the pursuit of civil preeminence, for the gratification of
family pride. The privileges of primogeniture establish petty despots all over
the land, who are interested, and sufficiently inclined, from pride as well as
interest, to promote the spirit of despotism. They would have no objection to
the feudal system, in which the only distinction was that of lords and vassals.
Not contented with engrossing the property which ought to be shared among their
brothers and sisters, they claim privileges in consequence of their property,
and would appropriate the birds of the air and the beasts of the forest for
their recreation in the field, and their luxury at the table.

When the laws of nature, and eternal truth and justice, are violated, no
wonder that despotism advances, and man is degraded.

Spirit of DESPOTISM. PASSION.
How terrible is passion! how our reason
Falls down before it! whilst the tortured frame,
Like a ship dashed by fierce encount'ring tides,
And of her pilot spoiled, drives round and round,
The sport of wind and wave.
BARFORD. PATIENCE.
O heaven born patience! source of peace and rest,
Descend; infuse thy spirit through my breast,
That I may calmly meet the hour of fate,
My foes forgive, and triumph over their hate.
This body let their engines tear and grind:
But let not all their racks subdue my mind.
MALLET. If what we suffer has been brought on us by ourselves, it is observed
by an ancient poet, that patience is eminently our duty, since no one ought to
be angry at feeling that which he has deserved. If we are conscious that we
have not contributed to our own sufferings, if punishment falls upon innocence,
or disappointment happens to industry and prudence, patience, whether more
necessary or not, is much easier, since our pain is then without aggravation,
and we have not the bitterness of remorse to add to the asperity of misfortune.

RAMBLER. In those evils which are allotted us by Providence, such as
deformity, privation of any of the senses, or old age, it is always to be
remembered, that impatience can have no present effect, but to deprive us of
the consolations which our condition admits, by driving away from us those, by
whose conversation, or advice, we might be amused or helped; and that with
regard to futurity, it is yet less to be justified, since without lessening the
pain, it cuts off the hope of that reward, which he, by whom it is inflicted,
will confer upon them that bear it well.

Ibid. In all evils which admit a remedy, impatience is to be avoided, because
it wastes that time and attention in complaints, that, if properly applied,
might remove the cause.

Ibid. PATRIOTISM.
-- For all connections else,
All private duties are subordinate,
To what we owe the public. Partial ties
Of son, and father, husband, friend or brother,
Owe their enjoyments to the public safety,
And without that were vain. --
WHITEHEAD. -- The patriot's breast
No hopes, no fears, but for his country knows,
And in her danger loses private woes.
Ibid. Learn hence, ye Romans, on how sure a base
The patriot builds his happiness; no stroke,
No keenest, deadliest, shaft of adverse fate,
Can make his generous bosom quite despair,
But that alone by which his country falls.
Grief may to grief in endless round succeed,
And nature suffer when our children bleed:
Yet still superior must that hero prove,
Whose first, best passion is his country's love.
Ibid. To be attached to the subdivision, to love the little platoon we belong
to in society, is the first principle (the germ, as it were) of public
affections. It is the first link in the series by which we proceed toward a
love to our country and to mankind. The interests of that portion of social
arrangement is a trust in the hands of all those who compose it; and as none
but bad men would justify it in abuse, none but traitors would barter it away
for their own personal advantage.

BURKE. PEACE.
Give peace, give healing peace to two brave nations,
Fatigued with war, and sick of cruel deeds!
To carry on destruction's easy trade,
Afflict mankind, and scourge the world with war,
Is what each wicked, each ambitious man,
Who lets his furious passions loose, may do:
But in the flattering torrents of success,
To check his rage, and drop the avenging sword.
When a repenting people ask it of him,
That is the genuine bounty of a God.
THOMSON. Fair peace! how lovely, how delightful thou!
By whose wide tie, the kindred sons of men
Like brothers live, in amity combined,
And unsuspicious faith; while honest toil
Gives every joy, and to those joys a right,
Which idle, barbarous rapine but usurps.
Beneath thy calm inspiring influence,
Science his views enlarges, art refines,
And swelling commerce opens all her ports.
Blessed be the man divine who gives us thee!
Who bids the trumpet hush his horrid clang,
Nor blow the giddy nations into rage;
Who sheathes the murderous blade; the deadly gun
Into the well-pil'd armoury returns:
And every vigor from the work of death
To grateful industry converting, makes
The country flourish, and the city smile,
Unviolated, him the virgin sings;
And him the smiling mother to her train;
Of him the shepherd, in the peaceful dale,
Chaunts: and, the treasures of his labor safe,
The husbandman of him, as at the plough,
Or team, he toils. With him the sailor soothes,
Beneath the trembling moon, the midnight wave;
And the full city, warm from street to street,
And shop to shop, responsive, rings of him,
Nor joys one land alone; his praise extends
Far as the (...) rolls the diffusive day;
Far as the breeze can bear the gifts of peace,
Till all the happy nations catch the song.
Ibid. A peace too eagerly sought, is not always the sooner obtained; and when
obtained, it never can be every thing we wish. The discovery of vehement wishes
generally frustrates their attainment; and your adversary has gained a great
advantage over you when he finds you impatient to conclude a treaty. There is
in reserve, not only something of dignity, but a great deal of prudence too. A
sort of courage belongs to negotiation as well as to operations of the field. A
negociato^ must seem willing to hazard all, if he wishes to secure any material
point.

BURKE. Oh stretch thy reign, fair peace! from shore to shore,
Till conquest cease, and slavery be no more!
Till the freed Indians in their native groves
Reap their own fruits, and woo their fable loves!
Peru once more a race of kings behold,
And other Mexicos be roof'd with gold!
Exiled by thee from earth to deepest hell,
In brazen bonds shall barbarous discord dwell:
Gigantic pride, pale terror, gloomy care,
And mad ambition shall attend her there:
There purple vengeance bathed in gore retires,
Her weapons blunted, and extinct her fires:
There hateful envy her own snakes shall feel,
And persecution mourn her broken wheel:
There faction roar, rebellion bite her chain,
And gasping furies thirst for blood in vain.
POPE. PERSECUTION.
-- To subdue the unconquerable mind,
To make one reason have the same effect
Upon all apprehensions; to force this
Or that man to think just as I do;
Impossible! unless souls, which differ
Like human faces, were alike in all.
ROW. A fury crawled from out her horrid cell;
The bloodiest minister of death and hell.
Huge full-gorg'd snakes on her lean shoulders hung,
And death's dark courts with their loud hissing rung.
Her teeth and claws were iron, and her breath,
Like subterranean damps, gave present death.
Flames, worse than hell's, shot from her bloody eyes,
And fire and sword eternally she cries.
No certain shape, no figure regular,
No limbs distinct in the odious fiend appear.
Her squalid bloated belly did arise,
Swollen with black gore, to a prodigious size,
Distended vastly by a mighty flood
Of slaughtered saints, and constant martyrs' blood.
Part stood out prominent, but part fell down,
And, in a swagging heap, lay wall'wing on the ground.
Horror, till now the ugliest shape esteemed,
So much outdone, a harmless figure seemed.
Envy, and hate, and malice blushed to see
Themselves eclipsed by such deformity.
Her fev'rish thirst drinks down a sea of blood,
Not of the impious, but the just and good;
Against whom she burns with unextinguish'd rage,
Nor can the exhausted world her wrath assuage.
BLACKMORE. It is injustice, and not a mistaken conscience that has been the
principle of persecution, at least as far as it has fallen under my observation.

BURKE. PITY.
It is the mark of a dishonest mind
Not to commiserate even the most guilty.
He, who unmoved beholds the wretch's pains,
Is such a wretch, as may deserve our pity.
CHARLES JOHNSON. In benevolent natures the impulse to pity is so sudden, that,
like instruments of music, which obey the touch -- the objects which are fitted
to excite such impressions, work so instantaneous an effect, that you would
think the will was scarce concerned, and that the mind was altogether passive
in the sympathy which her own goodness has excited. The truth is -- the soul is
generally in such cases so busily taken up and wholly engrossed by the object
of pity, that she does not attend to her own operations, or take leisure to
examine the principles upon which she acts.

STERN. Pity is to many of the unhappy, a source of comfort in hopeless
distresses, as i^ contributes to recommend them to themselves, by proving that
they have not lost the regard of others; and heaven seems to indicate the duty
even of barren compassion, by inclining us to weep for evils which we cannot
remedy.

RAMBLER. POVERTY.
Poverty has, in large cities, very different appearances. It is often
concealed in splendour, and often in extravagance. It is the care of a very
great part of mankind to conceal their indigence from the rest. They support
themselves by temporary expedients, and every day is lost in contriving for
tomorrow.

JOHNSON. It is the great privilege of poverty to be happy unenvied, to be
healthful without physic, and secure without a guard; to obtain from the bounty
of nature what the great and wealthy are compelled to procure by the help of
artists, and the attendance of flatterers and spies.

RAMBLER. There are natural reasons why poverty does not easily conciliate. He
that has been confined from his infancy to the conversation of the lowest
classes of mankind, must necessarily want those accomplishments which are the
usual means of attracting favor; and though truth, fortitude, and probity,
give an indisputable right to reverence and kindness, they will not be
distinguished by common eyes, unless they are brightened by elegance of
manners; but are cast aside, like unpolished gems, of which none but the artist
knows the intrinsic value, till their asperities are smoothed, and their
incrustations rubbed away.

Ibid. Nature makes us poor only when we want necessaries, but custom gives the
name of poverty to the want of superfluities.

IDLER. The poor are insensible of many little vexations which sometimes
embitter the possessions and pollute the enjoyments of the rich. They are not
pained by casual incivility, or mortified by the mutilation of a compliment;
but this happiness is like that of a malefactor, who ceases to feel the cords
that bind him when the pincers are tearing his flesh.

JOHNSON. To be idle and to be poor have always been reproaches, and therefore
every man endeavors, with his utmost care, to hide his poverty from others,
and his idleness from himself.

IDLER. PRIDE.
Of all the causes which conspire to blind
Man's erring judgment, and misguide the mind,
What the weak head with strongest bias rules,
Is pride, the never-failing vice of fools.
Whatever nature has in worth denied,
She gives in large recruits of needful pride.
For as in bodies, so in souls, we find
What wants in blood and spirits, swelled with wind:
Pride, where wit fails, steps in to our defense,
And fills up all the mighty void of sense.
POPE. PASSION.
It is a very common expression, that such a one is very good natured, but very
passionate. The expression indeed is very good-natured to allow passionate
people so much quarter: but I think a passionate man deserves the least
indulgence imaginable. It is said, it is soon over; that is, all the mischief
he does is quickly dispatched, which, I think, is no great recommendation to
favor. I have known one of those good-natured passionate men say in a mixed
company, even to his own wife or child, such things as the most inveterate
enemy of his family would not have spoken, even in imagination.

SPECTATOR. PROVIDENCE.
Happy the man who sees a God employed
In all the good and ill that chequer life!
Resolving all events, with their effects
And manifold results, into the will
And arbitration wise of the Supreme.
Did not his eye rule all things, and intend
The least of all concerns (since from the least
The greatest often originate) could chance
Find place in his dominion, or dispose
One lawless particle to thwart his plan,
Then God might be surpised, and unforeseen
Contingence might alarm him, and disturb
The smooth and equal course of his affairs.
COWPER. PHILOSOPHY.
One of the chief advantages derived by the present generation from the
improvement and diffusion of philosophy, is deliverance from unnecessary
terrors, and exemption from false alarms. The unusual appearances, whether
regular or accidental, which once spread consternation over ages of ignorance,
are now the recreations of inquisitive security. The sun is no more lamented
when it is eclipsed, than when it sets, and meteors play their corruscations
without prognostic or prediction.

JOHNSON. Many men in our times, who wish to extend and aggrandize that power,
from whose arbitrary bounty they derive all the honor they are capable of
acquiring, endeavor to throw contempt on philosophy. It may indeed be doubted
whether they all know the meaning of the word; but they know it implies a merit
not derived from princes, and therefore they wish to degrade it. Their fountain
of honor, they conceive, has no resemblance, in its nature or efficacy, to the
famed fountains of Parnassus: it conveys no inspiration, except that which
displays itself in the tumor of pride.

The present age has heard upstart noblemen give to philosophers (whose genius
and discoveries entitle them to rank, in reason's table of precedence, above
every nobleman in the red book) the opprobrious appellation of wretches and
miscreants. Philosophy and philosophers have been mentioned by men, whose
seize would only qualify them for distinction in a ball-room, with
expressions of hatred and contempt due only to thieves, murderers, the very
outcasts and refuse of human nature.

Spirit of DESPOTISM. Philosophy, so far from deserving contempt, is the glory
of human nature. Man approaches by contemplation to what we conceive of
celestial purity and excellence. Without the aid of philosophy, the mass of
mankind, all over the terraqueous globe, would have sunk in slavery and
superstition, the natural consequences of gross ignorance. Men at the very
bottom of society, have been enabled by the natural talents they possessed,
seconded by favorable opportunities, to reach the highest improvements in
philosophy; and have thus lifted up a torch in the valley, which has exposed
the weakness and deformity of the castle on the mountain, from which the
oppressors sallied, in the night of darkness, and spread desolation with
impunity. Despots, the meanest, the basest, the most brutal and ignorant of the
human race, would have trampled on the rights and the happiness of men
unresisted, if philosophy had not opened the eyes of the sufferers, shown them
their own power and dignity, and taught them to despise those giants of power,
as they appeared through the mists of ignorance, who ruled a vassal world with
a mace of iron. Liberty is the daughter of philosophy; and they who detest the
offspring, do all that they can to vilify and discountenance the mother.

But let us calamly consider what is the object of this philosophy, so
formidable in the eyes of those who are bigoted to ancient abuses, who hate
every improvement, and who wish to subject the many to the control of an
arbitrary few. Philosophy is ever employed in finding out whatever is good, and
whatever true. She darts her eagle eye over all the busy world, detects error
and mischief, and points out modes of improvement. In the multiform state of
human affairs, ever obnoxious to decay and abuse, it is here is to meditate on
the means of melioration. She wishes to demolish nothing but what is a
nuisance. To build, to repair, to strengthen, and to polish, these are the
works which she delights to plan; and, in concerting the best methods of
directing their accomplishment, she consumes the midnight oil. How can she
disturb human affairs, since she dwells in contemplation, and descends not to
action? neither does she impel others to action by the arts of delusive
eloquence. She applies to reason alone; and if reason is not convinced, all
that she has done, is swept away, like the web of Arachne.

Ibid. PHYSIC.
By chase our long-lived fathers earned their food;
Toil strung the nerves, and purified the blood:
But we, their sons, a pampered race of men,
Are dwindled down to threescore years and ten:
Better to hunt in fields for health unbought,
Than see the Doctor for a poisonous draught.
The wise for cure on exercise depend:
God never made his work for man to mend.
DRYDEN. PROMISES.
The man who is wantonly profuse of his promises, ought to sink his credit as
much as a tradesman would, by uttering a great number of promissory notes,
payable at a distant day. The truest conclusion in both cases is, that neither
intend, or will be able to pay. And as the latter most probably intends to
cheat you of your money, so the former at least designs to cheat you of your
thanks.

FIELDING. PRIDE.
O God! what is man! -- even a thing of naught -- a poor, infirm, miserable,
short-lived creature, that passes away like a shadow, and is hastening off the
stage, where the theatrical titles and distinctions, and the whole mask of
pride which he has worn for a day, will fall off, and leave him naked as a
neglected slave. -- Send forth your imagination, I beseech you, to view the
last scene of the greatest and proudest who ever awed and governed the world --
See the empty vapor disappearing! one of the arrows of mortality this moment
sticks fast within him: see -- it forces out his life, and freezes his blood
and spirits.

Approach his bed of state -- lift up the curtain -- regard a moment with
silence --

Are these cold hands and pale lips, all that are left of him who was canonized
by his own pride or made a god of by his flatterers?

STERN. Pride, according to the doctrine of some, is the universal passion.
There are others, who consider it as the foible of great minds; and others
again, who will have it to be the very foundation of greatness; but to real
greatness, which is the union of a good heart with a good head, it is almost
diametrically opposite; as it generally proceeds from the depravity of both,
and almost certainly from the badness of the latter. Indeed a little
observation will show us, that fools are the most addicted to this vice, and a
little reflection will teach us that it is incompatible with true understanding.
Accordingly we see that while the wisest of men have constantly lamented the
imbecility and imperfection of their own nature, the meanest and weakest have
been trumpeting forth their own excellencies, and triumphing in their own
sufficiency.

FIELDING. To show the strength and infamy of pride,
By all it is followed, and by all denied.
What numbers are there, who at once pursue
Praise, and the glory to contemn it, too!
YOUNG. PARTIALITY.
Let a man be never so honest, the account of his own conduct will, in spite of
himself, be so very favorable, that his vices will become purified through his
lips, and, like foul liquors, well strained, will leave all their foulness
behind. For though the facts themselves may appear, yet so different will be
the motives, circumstances, and consequences, when a man tells his own story,
and when his enemy tells it, that we scarce recognize the fact to be one and
the same.

FIELDING. PATRONAGE.
A man conspicuous in a high station, who multiplies hopes, that he may
multiply dependents, may be considered as a beast of prey.

IDLER. PROFESSION.
The attachment every man has to his own profession, and the contempt he has
for others, discovers itself in numberless instances. It has been said of a
geographer, that he received no other pleasure from the AEneid of Virgil, than
by tracing out the voyage of AEneas in the map -- and of a celebrated
coach-maker, who just having Latin enough to read the story of Phaeton in the
Metamorphosis, shook his head, that so fine a genius for making chariots, as
Ovid had, was thrown away on making poems.

FIELDING.

PRAISE.
The real satisfaction which praise can afford, is when what is repeated aloud,
agrees with the whispers of conscience, by showing us that we have not
endeavored to deserve well in vain.

RAMBLER. Men are seldom satisfied with praise, introduced or followed by any
mention of defect.

Life of POPE. Some are lavish of praise, because they hope to be repaid.

RAMBLER. PRUDENCE.
Goodness of heart, and openness of temper, though they may give great comfort
within, and administer to an honest pride, will by no means, alas! do our
business in this world; prudence and circumspection are necessary even to the
best of men. They are, indeed, as it were, a guard to virtue, without which she
can never be safe. It is not enough that your designs, nay, that your actions
are intrinsically good, you must take care they shall appear so.

FIELDING. Prudence is a duty which we owe ourselves, and if we will be so much
our own enemies as to neglect it, we are not to wonder if the world is
deficient in discharging their duty to us; for when a man lays the foundation
of his own ruin, others too often are apt to build upon it.

Ibid. PEEVISHNESS.
He that resigns his peace to little casualties, and suffers the course of his
life to be interrupted by fortuitous inadvertencies or offenses, delivers up
himself to the direction of the wind, and loses all that constancy and
equanimity, which constitute the chief praise of a wise man.

RAMBLER. PRODIGALITY.
He seldom lives frugally who lives by chance. Hope is always liberal, and they
that trust her promises, make little scruple of revelling today, on the
profits of tomorrow.

JOHNSON. POLITENESS.
Politeness is one of those advantages which we never estimate rightly, but by
the inconvenience of its loss. Its influence upon the manners is constant and
uniform, so that, like an equal motion, it escapes perception. The
circumstances of every action are so adjusted to each other, that we do not see
where any error could have been committed, and rather acquiesce in its
propriety, than admire its exactness.

RAMBLER. When the pale of ceremony is once broken, rudeness and insult soon
enter the breach.

Ibid. PRIVATE VICES.
The absurd and abominable doctrine, that private vices are public benefits, it
is hoped will be blotted from the memory of man, and expunged from the
catalogue of human follies, with the systems of government which gave it birth.
The ground of this insulting doctrine is, that advantage may be taken of the
extravagant foibles of individuals to increase the revenues of the state; as if
the chief end of society were, to steal money for the government's purse! to be
squandered by the governors, to render them more insolent in their oppressions!
it is humiliating, to answer such arguments as these; where we must lay open
the most degrading retreats of prostituted logic, to discover the positions on
which they are founded. But orders and privileges will lead to any thing: once
teach a man, that some are born to command, and others to be commanded; and
after that, there is no camel too big for him to swallow.

BARLOW. POPULATION.
No nation is yet so numerous, nor any country so populous, as it is capable of
becoming. Europe, taken together, would support at least five times its present
number, even on its present system of cultivation; and how many times this
increased population may be multiplied by new discoveries in the infinite
science of subsistence, no man will pretend to calculate. This of itself is
sufficient to prove, that society at present has the means of rendering all its
members happy in every respect, except the removal of bodily disease.

BARLOW. POLITICAL DISCUSSION.
What employment, in the busy scene in which man engages from the cradle to the
tomb, is more worthy of him than political discussion? It affords a field for
intellectual energy, and all the finest feelings of benevolence. It exercises
and strengthens every faculty. It calls forth latent virtues, which else had
slept in the bosom, like the diamond in the mine. And is this employment, thus
useful and honorable, to be confined to a few among the race of mortals? Is
there to be a monopoly of political action and speculation? Why then did heaven
bestow reason and speech, powers of activity, and a spirit of enterprise, in as
great perfection on the lowest among the people, as on those who, by no merit
of their own, inherit wealth and high station? Heaven has declared its will by
its acts. Man contravenes it; but time, and the progressive improvement of the
understanding, will reduce the anomaly to its natural rectitude. And if a few
irregularities should sometimes arise in the process, they are of no importance
when weighed with the happy result; the return of distorted systems to truth,
to reason, and the will of God. Occasional ferments, with all their
inconveniences, are infinitely preferable to the putrescence of stagnation.
They are symptoms of health and vigor; and though they may be attended with
transient pain, yet while they continue to appear at intervals, there is no
danger of mortification. Good hearts, accompanied with good understandings,
seldom produce, even where mistaken, lasting evil. They repair and compensate.

Spirit of DESPOTISM. RELIGION.
-- True religion
Is always mild, propitious, and humble;
Plays not the tyrant, plants no faith in blood,
Nor bears destruction on her chariot-wheels;
But stoops to polish, succor, and redress,
And builds her grandeur on the public good.
MILLER. Religion's all. Descending from the skies
To wretched man, the goddess in her left
Holds out this world, and, in her right, the next;
Religion! the sole voucher man is man:
Supporter sole of man above himself!
Even in this night of frailty, change, and death,
She gives the soul a soul that acts a god.
Religion! providence! an after-state!
Here is firm footing; here is solid rock!
This can support us; all is sea besides;
Sinks under us; bestorms, and then devours.
His hand the good man fastens on the skies,
And bids earth roll, nor feels her idle whirl.
YOUNG. Religion! oh thou cherub heavenly bright!
Of joys unmixt, and fathomless delight!
Thou, thou art all; nor find I in the whole
Creation aught, but God and my own soul.
Thy force alone, religion, death disarms,
Breaks all his darts, and every viper charms.
Softened by thee, the grisly form appears
No more the horrid object of our fears.
We undismayed this awful power obey,
That guides us through the safe though gloomy way
Which leads to life, and to the blessed abode,
What ravished minds enjoy what here they owned a God.
We grant, a train of mischiefs often proceeds
From superstitious rites and penal creeds;
But view religion in her native charms,
Dispersing blessings with indulgent arms,
From her fair eyes what heavenly rays are spread?
What blooming joys smile round her blissful head?
Offspring divine! by thee we bless the cause,
Who formed the world, and rules it by his laws;
His independent being we adore,
Extol his goodness, and revere his power.
Our wondering eyes his high perfections view,
The lofty contemplation we pursue,
'Till ravished, we the great idea find,
Shining in bright impressions on our mind.
Inspired by thee, guest of celestial race,
With generous love we human kind embrace;
We provocations unprovoked receive,
Patient of wrong, and easy to forgive;
Protect the orphan, plead the widow's cause,
Nor deviate from the line unerring justice draws.
Thy luster, blessed effulgence! can dispel
The clouds of error, and the gloom of hell;
Can to the soul impart etherial light,
Give life divine, and intellectual sight:
Before our ravished eyes thy beams display
The opening scenes of bliss, and endless day;
By which incited, we with ardor rise,
Scorn this inferior ball, and claim the skies.
Tyrants to thee a change of nature owe,
Dismiss their tortures, and indulgent grow.
Ambitious conquerors, in their mad carreer.
Checked by thy voice, lay down the sword and spear.
The boldest champions of impiety,
Scornful of heaven, subdued or won by thee,
Before thy hallowed altars bend their knee.
Loose wits, made wise, a public good become,
The sons of pride an humble mien assume,
The profligate in morals grow severe,
Defrauders just, and sycophants sincere.
BLACKMORE. RESOLUTION.
When desperate ills demand a speedy cure, distr^^^ is cowardice, and prudence
folly.

JOHNSON. Marshal Turenne, among the acknowledgments which he used to pay in
conversation to the memory of those by whom he had been instructed in the art
of war, mentioned one, with honor, who taught him not to spend his time in
regretting any mistake which he had made, but to set himself immediately, and
vigorously, to repair it. Patience and submission should be carefully
distinguished from cowardice and indolence; we are not to repine, but we may
lawfully struggle; for the calamities of life, like the necessities of nature,
are calls to labor, and exercises of diligence.

RAMBLER. To have attempted much is always laudable, even when the enterprise
is above the strength that undertakes it. To rest below his own aim, is
incident to every one whose fancy is active, and whose views are comprehensive;
nor is any man satisfied with himself, because he has done much, but because he
can conceive little.

JOHNSON. Nothing will ever be attempted if all possible objections must be
first overcome.

Ibid. RICHES.
The more experience we have of the world, the more that experience should show
us how little is in the power of riches; for what indeed, truly desirable, can
they bestow upon us? Can they give beauty to the deformed, strength to the
weak, or health to the infirm? Surely if they could, we should not see so many
ill-favored faces haunting the assemblies of the great, nor would such numbers
of feeble wretches languish in their coaches and palaces? Can they prolong
their own possession, or lengthen his days who enjoys them? So far otherwise,
that the sloth, the luxury, the care which attend them, shorten the lives of
millions, and bring them with pain and misery to an untimely grave, Where,
then, is their value, if they can neither embellish, nor strengthen our forms,
sweeten, or prolong our lives? Again, can they adorn the mind more than the
body? Do they not rather swell the heart with vanity, puff up the cheeks with
pride, shut our ears to every call of virtue, and our bowels to every motive of
compassion.

FIELDING. Whoever shall look heedfully upon those who are eminent for their
riches, will not think their condition such, as that he should hazard his
quiet, and much less his virtue, to obtain it; for all that great wealth
generally gives above a moderate fortune, is more room for the freaks of
caprice, and more privilege for ignorance and vice; a quicker succession of
flatteries; and a larger circle of voluptuousness.

RAMBLER. It is observed of gold, by an old epigrammatist, "that to have it, is
to be in fear, and to want it, to be in sorrow."

Ibid. Every man is rich or poor, according to the proportion between his
desires and enjoyments. Any enlargement of riches is therefore equally
destructive to happiness with the diminution of possession; and he that teaches
another to long for what he shall never obtain, is no less an enemy to his
quiet, than if he had robbed him of part of his patrimony.

Ibid. Whosoever rises above those who once pleased themselves with equality,
will have many malevolent gazers at his eminence. To gain sooner than others
that which all pursue with the same ardour, and to which all imagine themselves
entitled, will for ever be a crime. When those who started with us in the race
of life, leave us so far behind, that we have little hope to overtake them, we
revenge our disappointment by remarks on the arts of supplantation by which
they gained the advantage, or on the folly and arrogance with which they
possess it; of them whose rise we could not hinder, we solace ourselves by
prognosticating the fall. Riches, therefore, perhaps do not so often produce
crimes as incite accusers.

Ibid. Of riches, as of every thing else, the hope is more than the enjoyment.
Whilst we consider them as the means to be used at some future time, for the
attainment of felicity, we press on our pursuit ardently and vigorously, and
that ardor secures us from weariness of ourselves; but no sooner do we sit down
to enjoy our acquisitions, than we find them insufficient to fill up the
vacuities of life.

IDLER. Can gold calm passion, or make reason shine?
Can we dig peace, or wisdom from the mine?
Wisdom to gold prefer; for it is much less
To make our fortune, than our happiness;
That happiness which great ones often see,
With rage and wonder, in a low degree,
Themselves unblest: the poor are only poor;
But what are they who droop amid their store!
Nothing is meaner than a wretch of state;
The happy only are the truly great
Peasants enjoy like appetites with kings,
And those best satisfied with cheapest things.
Could both our Indies buy but one new sense,
Our envy would be due to large expense;
Since not, those pomps, which to the great belong,
Are but poor arts to mark them from the throng.
YOUNG. RAILLERY.
The raillery which is consistent with good-breeding, is a gentle animadversion
on some foible, which, while it raises the laugh in the rest of the company,
does not put the person rallied out of countenance, or expose him to shame or
contempt. On the contrary, the jest should be so delicate, that the object of
it should be capable of joining in the mirth it occasions.

FIELDING. REPUTATION.
The purest treasure mortal times afford,
Is spotless reputation: That away,
Men are but gilded loam, or painted clay.
A jewel in a ten-times barr'd-up chest,
Is a bold spirit in a loyal breast.
SHAKESPEARE. RESIGNATION.
Bid her remember that the ways of heaven,
Though dark, are just: that often some guardian power
Attends unseen, to save the innocent!
But if high heaven decrees our fall, -- O bid her
Firmly to wait the stroke; prepared alike
To live or die.
BROWN. When any accident threatens us, we are not to despair; nor, when it
overtakes us, to grieve. We must submit in all things to the will of
providence, and not set our affections so much on any thing here, as not to be
able to quit it without reluctance.

FIELDING. RIDICULE.
He that indulges himself in ridiculing the little imperfections and weaknesses
of his friends, will in time find mankind united against him. The man who sees
another ridiculed before him, though he may, for the present, concur in the
general laugh, yet, in a cool hour, will consider the same trick might be
played against himself; but when there is no sense of this danger, the natural
pride of human nature rises against him, who, by general censures, lays claim
to general superiority.

RAMBLER. RECRUITING.
The vanity of the poor men is to be worked upon at the cheapest rate possible.
Things we are accustomed to, we do not mind, or else what mortal, that never
had seen a soldier, could look, without laughing, upon a man accoutred with so
much paltry gaudiness and affected finery? The coarsest manufacture that can be
made of wool, dyed of a brick-dust color, goes down with him, because it is an
imitation of scarlet or crimson cloth; and to make him think himself as like
his officer as it is possible, with little or no cost, instead of silver or
gold lace, his hat is trimmed with white or yellow worsted, which in others
would deserve bedlam; yet these fine allurements, and the noise made upon a
calf-skin, have drawn in and been the destruction of more men in reality, than
all the killing eyes and bewitching voices of women ever slew in jest. Today
the swine-herd puts on his red coat, and believes every body in earnest that
calls him gentleman; and two days after, sergeant Kite gives him a swinging rap
with his cane, for holding his musket an inch higher than he should do. -- When
a man reflects on all this, and the usage they generally receive -- their pay
-- and the care that is taken of them when they are not wanted, must he not
wonder how wretches can be so silly, as to be proud of being called gentlemen
soldiers? Yet if they were not so called, no art, discipline, or money, would
be capable of making them so brave as thousands of them are.

Spirit of DESPOTISM. ROTATION OF OFFICE.
A long continuance, in the first executive departments of power or, trust, is
dangerous to liberty; a rotation, therefore, in those departments, is one of
the best securities of permanent freedom.

Constitution of MARYLAND. RUSTIC FELICITY.
Many are the silent pleasures of the honest peasant; who rises cheerfully to
his labor: -- look into his dwelling, -- where the scene of every happiness
chiefly lies: -- he has the same domestic endearments, -- as much joy and
comfort in his children, and as flattering hopes of their doing well, -- to
enliven his hours and glad his heart, as you could conceive in the most
affluent station. -- And I make no doubt, in general, but if the true account
of his joys and sufferings were to be balanced with those of his betters, --
that the upshot would prove to be little more than this, -- that the rich man
had the more meat, -- but the poor man the better stomach; the one had more
luxury, -- more able physicians to attend and set him to rights; -- the other
more health and soundness in his bones, and less occasion for their help; that,
after these two articles betwixt them were balanced, -- in all other things
they stood upon a level: -- that the sun shines as warm, -- the air blows as
fresh, -- and the earth breathes as fragrant upon the one as the other: and
that they have an equal share in all the beauties and real benefits of nature.

STERN. RIGHTS OF MAN.
Absurd prejudices have perverted human reason, and even stifled that instinct
which teaches animals to resist oppression and tyranny. Multitudes of the human
race really believe themselves to be the property of a small number of men who
oppress them. Such is the fatal progress of that original error, which
imposture has either produced or kept up in the mind of man. May true knowledge
revive those rights of reasonable beings, which, to be recovered, need only to
be felt! sages of the earth, philosophers of every nation, it is yours alone
to make laws by pointing out these rights to your fellow citizens. Take the
glorious resolution to instruct your fellow creatures, and be assured that if
truth is longer in diffusing and establishing itself than error, yet its empire
is more solid and lasting. Error passes away; but truth remains. Mankind,
allured by the expectation of happiness, the road to which you will show them,
will listen to you with attention. Excite a sense of shame in the breasts of
those numerous hireling slaves, who are always ready at the command of their
masters, to destroy their fellow citizens. Rouse all the powers of human nature
to oppose this subversion of social laws. Teach mankind that liberty is the
institution of God; authority that of man. Expose those mysterious arts which
hold the world in chains and darkness; let the people be sensible how far their
credulity has been imposed upon; let them reassume with one accord the use of
their faculties, and vindicate the honor of the human race.

ABBE RAYNAL. We hold these truths to be self-evident, that all men are created
equal; that they are endowed by their creator with certain unalienable rights;
that among these are life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness; that to
secure these rights, governments are instituted among men, deriving their just
powers from the consent of the governed; that whenever any form of government
becomes destructive of these ends, it is the right of the people to alter or to
abolish it, and to institute new government, laying its foundation on such
principles, and organizing its powers in such form, as to them shall seem most
likely to effect their safety and happiness. Prudence, indeed, will dictate,
that governments long established should not be changed for light and transient
causes; and accordingly all experience has shown, that mankind are more
disposed to suffer, while evils are sufferable, than to right themselves by
abolishing the forms to which they are accustomed. -- But when a long train of
abuses and usurpations, pursuing invariably the same object, evinces a design
to reduce them under absolute despotism, it is their right, it is their duty,
to throw off such government, and to provide new guards for their future
security.

Declaration of INDEPENDENCE. All men have certain natural, essential and
inherent rights -- among which are the enjoying and defending life and liberty,
acquiring, possessing and protecting property; and, in a word, of seeking and
obtaining happiness.

Constitution of NEW HAMPSHIRE. All power is inherent in the people; and all
free governments are founded on their authority, and instituted for their
peace, safety, and happiness. For the advancement of those ends, they have, at
all times, an unalienable and indefeasible right, to alter, reform, or abolish
their government, in such manner as they may think proper.

Constitution of PENNSYLVANIA. The citizens have a right, in a peaceable
manner, to assemble together for their common good, and to apply to those
invested with the powers of government, for redress of grievances, or other
proper purposes, by petition, address, or remonstrance.

Ibid. The right of the citizens to bear arms, in defense of themselves and the
state, shall not be questioned.

Ibid. Persons entrusted with the legislative and executive powers, are the
trustees and servants of the public, and, as such, accountable for their
conduct; wherefore, whenever the ends of government are perverted, and public
liberty manifestly endangered, by the legislative singly, or a treacherous
combination of both, the people may, and of right ought to establish a new, or
reform the old government.

Constitution of DELAWARE. The right, in the people, to participate in the
legislature, is the foundation of liberty and of all free government; and for
this end, all elections ought to be free and frequent; and every freeman,
having sufficient evidence of a permanent common interest with, and attachment
to the community, has a right of suffrage.

Ibid. All government of right originates from the people, is founded in
compact only, and instituted solely for the good of the whole.

Constitution of MARYLAND. No man or set of men are entitled to exclusive or
separate emoluments or privileges from the community, but in consideration of
public services.

Constitution of NORTH CAROLINA. The people have a right to assemble together,
to consult for their common good, to instruct their representatives, and to
apply to the legislature, for redress of grievances.

Ibid. All power being originally inherent in, and consequently derived from
the people; therefore, all officers of government, whether legislative or
executive, are their trustees and servants, and at all times, in a legal way,
accountable to them.

Constitution of VERMONT. Government is, or ought to be, instituted for the
common benefit, protection and security of the people, nation, or community,
and not for the particular emolument or advantage of any single man, family, or
set of men, who are a part only of that community: and the community has an
indubitable, unalienable, and indefeasible right, to reform or alter
government, in such manner as shall be, by that community, judged to be most
conducive to the public weal.

Ibid. All power is inherent in the people, and all free governments are
founded on their authority, and instituted for their peace, safety, and
happiness: for the advancement of those ends, they have at all times an
unalienable and indefeasible right to alter, reform, or abolish the government
in such manner as they may think proper.

Constitution of TENNESSEE. All power is inherent in the people, and all free
governments are founded on their authority, and instituted for their peace,
safety, and happiness. For the advancement of those ends, they have at all
times an unalienable and indefeasible right to alter, reform or abolish their
government, in such manner as they may think proper.

Constitution of KENTUCKY. RICH AND POOR.
If you should see a flock of pigeons in a field of corn; and if (instead of
each picking where, and what it liked, taking just as much as it wanted and no
more) you shall see ninety-nine of them gathering all they get into a heap;
reserving nothing for themselves, but the chaff and refuse; keeping this heap
for one, and that the weakest perhaps, and worst pigeon of the flock; sitting
round and looking on, all the winter, whilst this one was devouring, throwing
about, and wasting it; and, if a pigeon more hardy or hungry than the rest,
touched a grain of the hoard, all the others instantly flying upon it, and
tearing it to pieces: if you should see this, you would see nothing more, than
what is every day practiced and established among men. Among men you see the
ninety and nine, toiling and scraping together a heap of superfluities for one;
getting nothing for themselves all the while, but a little of the coarsest of
the provision, which their own labor produces; and this one oftentimes the
feeblest and worst of the whole set, a child, a woman, a madman, or a fool;
looking quietly on, while they see the fruits of all their labor spent or
spoiled; and if one of them take or touch a particle of it, the others join
against him, and hang him for the theft.

PALEY. The most obvious division of society, is into rich and poor; and it is
no less obvious, that the number of the former bears a great disproportion to
those of the latter. The whole business of the poor is to administer to the
idleness, folly, and luxury of the rich; and that of the rich, in return, is to
find the best methods of confirming the slavery and increasing the burdens of
the poor. In a state of nature it is an invariable law, that a man's
acquisitions are in proportion to his labors. In a state of artificial
society, it is a law as constant and as invariable, that those who labor most,
enjoy the fewest things; and that those who labor not at all, have the
greatest number of enjoyments. A constitution of things this strange and
ridiculous beyond expression. We scarce believe a thing when we are told it,
which we actually see before our eyes every day without being the least
surprised. I suppose that there are in Great Britain upwards of an hundred
thousand people employed in lead, tin, iron, copper, and coal mines; these
unhappy wretches scarce ever see the light of the sun; they are buried in the
bowels of the earth; there they work at a severe and dismal task, without the
least prospect of being delivered from it; they subsist upon the coarsest and
worst sort of fare; they have their health miserably impaired, and their lives
cut short, by being perpetually confined in the close vapor of these malignant
minerals. An hundred thousand more at least are tortured without remission by
the suffocating smoke, intense fires, and constant drudgery necessary in
refining and managing the products of those mines. If any man informed us that
two hundred thousand innocent persons were condemned to so intolerable slavery,
how should we pity the unhappy sufferers, and how great would be our just
indignation against those who inflicted so cruel and ignominious a punishment?
This is an instance, I could not wish a stronger, of the numberless things
which we pass by in their common dress, yet which shock us when they are
nakedly represented. But this number, considerable as it is, and the slavery
with all its baseness and horror, which we have at home, is nothing to what the
rest of the world affords of the same nature. Millions daily bathed in the
poisonous damps and destructive effluvia of lead, silver, copper, and arsenic.
To say nothing of those other employments, those stations of wretchedness and
contempt in which civil society has placed the numerous ensans perdus of her
army. Would any rational man submit to one of the most tolerable of these
drudgeries, for all the artificial enjoyments which policy has made to result
from them? By no means. And yet need I suggest, that those who find the means,
and those who arrive at the end, are not at all the same persons. On
considering the strange and unaccountable fancies and contrivances of
artificial reason, I have somewhere called this earth the Bedlam of our system.
Looking now upon the effects of some of those fancies, may we not with equal
reason call it likewise the Newgate and the Bridewell of the universe? Indeed
the blindness of one part of mankind cooperating with the frenzy and villainy
of the other, has been the real builder of this respectable fabric of political
society. And as the blindness of mankind has caused their slavery, in return,
their state of slavery is made a pretense for continuing them in a state of
blindness; for the politician will tell you gravely that their life of
servitude disqualifies the greater part of the race of man for a search of
truth, and supplies them with no other than mean and insufficient ideas. This
is but too true; and this is one of the reasons for which I blame such
institutions

In a misery of this sort, admitting some few lenitives, and those too but a
few, nine parts in ten of the whole race of mankind drudge through life.

BURKE. In the most refined states of Europe the inequality of property has
risen to an alarming height. Vast numbers of their inhabitants are deprived of
almost every accommodation that can render life tolerable or secure. Their
utmost industry scarcely suffices for their support. The women and children
lean with an insupportable weight upon the efforts of the man, so that a large
family has in the lower order of life become a proverbial expression for an
uncommon degree of poverty and wretchedness. If sickness, or some of those
casualties which are perpetually incident to an active and laborious life, be
super-added to these burdens, the distress is still greater.

It seems to be agreed that in England there is less wretchedness and distress
than in most of the kingdoms of the continent. In England the poor's rates
amount to the sum of two millions sterling per annum. It has been calculated,
that one person in seven of the inhabitants of the country derives at some
period of his life assistance from this fund. If to this we add the persons,
who, from pride, a spirit of independence, or the want of a legal settlement,
though in equal distress, receive no such assistance, the proportion will be
considerably increased.

I lay no stress upon the accuracy of this calculation; the general fact is
sufficient to give us an idea of the greatness of the evil.

GODWIN. Their's is yon house that holds the parish poor,
Whose walls of mud scarce bear the broken door;
There where the putrid vapors flagging play,
And the dull wheel hums doleful through the day:
There children dwell, who know no parents' care,
Parents, who know no children's love, dwell there;
Heart-broken matrons on their joyless bed,
Forsaken wives, and mothers never wed;
Dejected widows with unheeded tears,
And crippled age with more than childhood fears!
The lame, the blind -- and, far the happiest they!
The moping idiot and the madman gay.
Here too the sick their final doom receive,
Here brought, amid the scenes of grief, to grieve:
Where the loud groans from some sad chamber flow
Mixed with the clamours of the crowd below;
Here sorrowing, they each kindred sorrow scan,
And the cold charities of man to man:
Whose laws indeed for ruined age provide,
And strong compulsion plucks the scrap from pride;
But still that scrap is bought with many a sigh,
And pride embitters what it cannot deny.
Say ye, oppressed by some fantastic woes,
Some jarring nerve that baffles your repose;
Who press the downy couch, while slaves advance
With timid eye, to read the distant glance;
Who with sad prayers the weary doctor tease,
To name the nameless, ever-new disease;
Who with mock patience dire complaints endure,
Which real pain and that alone can cure;
How would ye bear in real pain to lie,
Despised, neglected, left alone to die?
How would ye bear to draw your latest breath,
Where all that is wretched paves the way for death?
Such is that room which one rude beam divides,
And naked rafters form the sloping sides;
Where the vile bands that bind the thatch are seen,
And lath and mud are all that lie between;
Save one dull pane, that, coarsely patched, gives way
To the rude tempest, yet excludes the day:
Here, on a matted flock, with dust overspread,
The drooping wretch reclines his languid head;
For him no hand the cordial cup applies,
Nor wipes the tear that stagnates in his eyes;
No friends with soft discourse his pain beguile,
Nor promise hope till sickness wears a smile.
CRABBE. REFORMATION.
Reformation is one of those pieces which must be put at some distance in order
to please. Its greatest favorers love it better in the abstract than in the
substance. When any old prejudice of their own, or any interest that they
value, is touched, they become scrupulous, they become captious, and every man
has his separate exception. Some pluck out the black hairs, some the gray; one
point must be given up to one; another point must be yielded to another;
nothing is suffered to prevail upon its own principles: the whole is so
frittered down, and disjointed, that scarcely a trace of the original scheme
remains! Thus, between the resistance of power, and the unsystematical process
of popularity, the undertaker and the undertaking are both exposed, and the
poor reformer is hissed off the stage, both by friends and foes.

BURKE. ROSE.
How fair is the rose! what a beautiful flower!
The glory of April and May!
But the leaves are beginning to fade in an hour;
And they wither and die in a day.
Yet the rose has one powerful virtue to boast,
Above all the flowers of the field:
When its leaves are all dead, and fine colors are lost,
Still how sweet a perfume will it yield!
So frail is the youth and the beauty of men,
Though they bloom and look gay like the rose:
But all our fond care to preserve them is vain;
Time kills them as fast as he goes.
Then I Will not be proud of my youth or my beauty,
Since both of them wither and fade;
But gain a good name by well doing my duty;
This will scent like a rose when I Am dead.
WATTS. RULE OF LIFE.
Live while you live, the epicure will say,
And take the pleasure of the present day:
Live while you live, the sacred preacher cries,
And give to God each moment as it flies. --
Lord, in my view let both united be!
I live in pleasure when I live to thee.
DODDRIDGE. RETROSPECT OF LIFE.
Riches, chance may take or give;
Beauty lives a day, and dies;
Honor lulls us while we live;
Mirth's a cheat, and pleasure flies.
Is there nothing worth our care?
Time, and chance, and death our foes;
If our joys so sleeting are,
Are we only tied to woes?
Let bright virtue answer no;
Her eternal powers prevail,
When honors, riches, cease to flow,
And beauty, mirth, and pleasure, fail.
RIOTS.
Riots, tumults, and popular commotions, are indeed truly dreadful, and to be
avoided with the utmost care by the lovers of liberty. Peace, good order, and
security to all ranks, are the natural fruits of a free constitution. True
patriots will be careful to discourage every thing which tends to destroy them;
not only because whatever tends to destroy them, tends to destroy all human
happiness, but also because even an accidental outrage in popular assemblies
and proceedings, is used by the artful to discredit the cause of liberty. By
the utmost attention to preserving the public peace, true patriots will defeat
the malicious designs of servile courtiers; but, whatever may happen, they will
not desert the cause of human nature. Through a dread of licentiousness, they
will not forsake the standard of liberty. It is the part of fools to fall upon
Scylla in striving to avoid Charybdis.

Spirit of DESPOTISM. SCANDAL.
There is a lust in man no charm can tame,
Of loudly publishing his neighbor's shame:
On eagle's wings, immortal, scandals fly,
While virtuous actions are but born and die.
HAVARD. What other man speaks so often and so vehemently against the vice of
pride, sets the weakness of it in a more odious light, or is more hurt with it
in another, tha^ the proud man himself? It is the same with the passionate, the
designing, the ambitious, and some other common characters in life; and being a
consequence of the nature of such vices, and almost inseparable from them, the
effects of it are generally so gross and absurd, that where pity does not
forbid, it is pleasant to observe and trace the cheat through the several
turnings and windings of the heart, and detect it through all the shapes and
appearances which it puts on.

STERN. How frequently is the honesty and integrity of a man disposed of by a
smile or shing! -- how many good and generous actions have been sunk into
oblivion, by a distrustful look, or stamped with the imputation of proceeding
from bad motives, by a mysterious and seasonable whisper!

Look into companies of those whose gentle natures should disarm them, we shall
find no better account. -- How large a portion of chastity is sent out of the
world by distant hints, -- nodded away and cruelly winked into suspicion, by
the envy of those who are past all temptation of it themselves! How often does
the reputation of a helpless creature bleed by a report -- which the party, who
is at the pains to propagate it, beholds with much pity and fellow-feeling --
that she is heartily sorry for it, -- hopes in God it is not true: however, as
archbishop Tillotson wittily observes upon it, is resolved, in the mean time,
to give the report her pass, that at least it may have fair play to take its
fortune in the world, -- to be believed or not, according to the charity of
those into whose hands it shall happen to fall!

Ibid. The tongue of a viper is less hurtful than that of a slanderer, and the
glided scales of a rattle-snake less dreadful than the purse of the oppressor.

FIELDING. The company of a slanderer should always be avoided, except you
choose to feast on your neighbor's faults, at the price of being served up
yourself at the tables of others; for persons of this stamp are generally
impartial in their abuse. Indeed it is not always possible totally to escape
them; for being barely known to them, is a sure title to their calumny; but the
more they are admitted to your acquaintance, the more you will be abused by
them.

Ibid. SHAME AND DISGRACE.
They who have considered our nature, affirm, that shame and disgrace are two
of the most insupportable evils of human life: the courage and spirits of many
(...) mastered other misfortunes, and borne themselves up against them; but the
wisest and best of s^^ls have not been a match for these; and we have many a
tragical instance on record, what greater evils have been run into, merely to
avoid this one.

Without this tax of infamy, poverty, with all the burdens it lays upon our
flesh -- so long as it is virtuous, could never break the spirits of a man; all
its hunger, and pain, and nakedness, are nothing to it, they have some
counterpoise of good; and besides, they are directed by Providence, and must be
submitted to: but those are afflictions not from the hand of God or nature -- "
for they do come forth of the dust," and most properly may be said to spring
out of the ground, and this is the reason they lay such stress upon our
patience, -- and in the end create such a distrust of the world, as makes us
look up and pray, Let me fall into thy hands, O God! but let me not fall into
the hands of men."

STERN. SELF-IMPORTANCE.
Every man is of importance to himself, and therefore, in his own opinion, to
others; and supposing the world already acquainted with all his pleasures and
his pains, is, perhaps, the first to publish injuries or misfortunes which had
never been known unless related by himself, and at which those that hear him
will only laugh; for no man sympathizes with the sorrows of vanity.

Life of POPE. Observe one of these persons, who swells to an unnatural size of
self-consequence, from the emptiness of his head and the pride of his heart,
entering a coffee-house or public room at a watering place. To show his
contempt of all around him, he begins whistling, or beating a tune with his
fingers or with a stick on the table. He stands with his back to the fire,
holding up the skirts of his coat, protruding his lips, picking his teeth,
adjusting his cravat, surveying his buckles, and turning out his knees or toes;
showing, by every sign he can think of, his own opinion of his own importance,
and his sovereign contempt for the company.

Spirit of DESPOTISM. SECRETS.
To tell our own secrets is generally folly, but that folly is without guilt.
To communicate those with which we are entrusted, is always treachery, and
treachery for the most part combined with folly.

RAMBLER. The vanity of being known to be trusted with a secret, is generally
one of the chief motives to disclose it; for, however absurd it may be thought
to boast an honor by an act which shows that it was conferred without merit,
yet most men seem rather inclined to confess the want of virtue than of
importance, and more willingly show their influence, though at the expense of
their probity, than glide through life with no other pleasure than the private
consciousness of fidelity, which, while it is preserved, must be without
praise, except from the single person who tries and knows it.

Ibid. SOCIETY.
From the earliest dawnings of policy to this day, the invention of men has
been sharpening and improving the mystery of murder, from the first rude essays
of clubs and stones, to the present perfection of gunnery, cannoneering,
bombarding, mining, and all these species of artificial, learned, and refined
cruelty, in which we are now so expert, and which make a principal part of what
politicians have taught us to believe is our principal glory.

It is an incontestible truth, that there is more havoc made in one year by
men, of men, than has been made by all the lions, tigers, panthers, ounces,
leopards, hyenas, rhinoceroses, elephants, bears, and wolves, upon their
several species, since the beginning of the world; though these agree ill
enough with each other, and have a much greater proportion of rage and fury ^n
their composition than we have.

BURKE. SEDUCTION.
There is not perhaps in all the stores of ideal an guish, a though more
painful than the consciousness of having propagated corruption by vitiating
principles; of having not only drawn others from the paths of virtue, but
blocked up the way by which they should return; of having blinded them to every
beauty but the paint of pleasure; and deafened them to every call, but the
alluring voice of the syre^s of destruction.

RAMBLER. SECKER, (Archbishop of Canterbury.)
While Secker lived, he showed how seers should live;
While Secker taught, heaven opened to our eye;
When Secker gave, we knew how angels give;
When Secker died, we know even saints must die.
SUSPICION.
Suspicion is no less an enemy to virtue, than to happiness. He that is already
corrupt is naturally suspicious; and he that becomes suspicious, will quickly
be corrupt.

RAMBLER. He that suffers by imposture, has too often his virtue more impaired
than his fortune. But as it is necessary not to invite robbery by supineness,
so it is our duty not to suppress tenderness by suspicion. It is better to
suffer wrong than to do it; and happier to be sometimes cheated, than not to
trust.

Ibid. SPIES.
At whatever period spies, informers, false witnesses, and pretended plots are
adopted by men in power, to strengthen themselves in office, and destroy
virtuous opposition, there is reason to fear in spite of all professions of the
contrary, that the tyrannic spirit of the degenerate Caesar's waits but for
opportunities to display itself in acts of Neronian atrocity. Power is
deficient; but inclination is equally hostile to the mass of mankind,
denominated the people, whom some politicians scarcely condescend to
acknowledge as possessed of any political existence.

The employment of spies and informers is a virtual declaration of hostilities
against the people. It argues a want of confidence in them. It argues a fear
and jealousy of them. It argues a desire to destroy them by ambuscade. It is,
in civil government, what stratagems are in a state of war. It tends also to
excite retaliation.

Spirit of DESPOTISM. A hired spy and informer will, by an easy transition,
become a false witness, even in trials where liberty and life are at stake. In
trials of less consequence, there is no doubt but that his conscience will
stretch with the occasion. His object is not truth or justice; but filthy
lucre; and when he aspires at great rewards, great must be his venture. Having
once broken down, as a treacherous spy, the fences of honor and conscience,
nothing but fear will restrain him, as a witness, from overleaping the bounds
of tru^^, justice, and mercy. He will rob and murder under the forms of law;
and add to the atrocity of blood-guiltiness, the crime of perjury. No man is
safe, where such men are countenanced by officers of state. They themselves may
perish by his false tongue; suffering the vengeance due to their base
encouragement of traitors to the public, by falling unpitied victims to his
disappointed treachery. The pestilential breath of spies and informers is not
to be endured in the pure healthy atmosphere of a free state. It brings with it
the sickly despotism of oriental climes.

Ibid. TYRANNY.
Tyranny is a poor provider. It neither knows how to accumulate, nor how to
extract.

BURKE. A great deal of the furniture of ancient tyranny is torn to rags; the
rest is entirely out of fashion.

Ibid. TYRANT.
-- Proud, impatient
Of aught superior, even of heaven that made him:
Fond of false glory, of the savage power
Of ruling without reason, of confounding
Just and unjust, by an unbounded will;
By whom religion, honor, all the bands
That ought to hold the jarring world in peace,
Were held the tricks of state, snares of wise princes,
To draw their easy neighbors to destruction,
To waste with sword and fire their fruitful fields:
Like some accursed fiend, who, 'scap'd from hell,
Poisons the balmy air through which he flies;
He blasts the bearded corn, and loaded branches,
The laboring hind's best hopes, and marks his way with ruin.
ROW. There is hardly any prince without a favorite, by whom he is governed in
as arbitrary a manner as he governs the wretches subjected to him. Here the
tyranny is doubled. There are two courts and two interests; both very different
from the interests of the people. The favorite knows that the regard of a
tyrant is as inconstant and capricious as that of a woman; and concluding his
time to be short, he makes haste to fill up the measure of his iniquity, in
rapine, in luxury, and in revenge. Every avenue to the throne is shut up. He
oppresses, and ruins the people, whilst he persuades the prince, that those
murmurs raised by his own oppression are the effects of disaffection to the
prince's government. Then is the natural violence of despotism inflamed, and
aggravated by hatred and revenge. To deserve well of the state is a crime
against the prince. To be popular, and to be a traitor, are considered as
synonymous terms. Even virtue is dangerous, as an aspiring quality, that claims
an esteem by itself, and independent of the countenance of the court. What has
been said of the chief, is true of the inferior officers of this species of
government; each in his province exercising the same tyranny, and grinding the
people by an oppression, the more severely felt, as it is near them, and
exercised by base and subordinate persons. For the gross of the people, they
are considered as a mere herd of cattle; and really in a little time become no
better; all principle of honest pride, all sense of the dignity of their nature
is lost in their slavery. The day, says Homer, which makes a man a slave, takes
away half his worth; and in fact he loses every impulse to action, but that low
and base one of fear. -- In this kind of government human nature is not only
abused, and insulted, but it is actually degraded and sunk into a species of
brutality.

BURKE. The punishment of real tyrants is a noble and awful act of justice; and
it has with truth been said to be consolatory to the human mind.

Ibid. TIME PAST.
Whether it be that life has more vexations than comforts, or what is in event
just the some, that evil makes deeper impressions than good it is certain that
few can review the time past, without heaviness of heart. He remembers many
calamities incurred by folly; many opportunities lost (...) negligence. The
shades of the dead rise up before him, and he laments the companions of his
youth, the partners of his amusements, the assistants of his labors, whom the
hand of death has snatched away.

IDLER. TITLES.
Most of the titles of nobility, and other civil distinctions, were taken from
war: as a marquis, a duke, a count, a baron, a landgrave, a knight, an esquire.
The inventors of arts, the improvers of life, those who have mitigated evil and
augmented the good allotted to men in this world, were not thought worthy of
any titular distinctions. The reason is indeed sufficiently obvious: titles
were originally bestowed by despotic kings, who required and rewarded no other
merit but that which supported them by violence in their arbitrary rule. In
some countries they are now given, for the same reasons, to those who effect
the same purposes, not by war only, but by corruption.

Spirit of DESPOTISM. The deathbed shows the emptiness of titles in a true
light. A poor dispirited sinner lies trembling under the apprehensions of the
state he is entering on; and is asked by a grave attendant, how his holiness
does? Another hears himself addressed under the title of highness or
excellency, who lies under such mean circumstances of mortality as are the
disgrace of human nature. Titles at such a time look rather like insults and
mockery than respect.

SPECTATOR.

TRIFLES.
Trifles always require exuberance of ornament. The building which has no
strength, can be valued only (...) the grace of its decorations. The pebble
must be polished with care, which hopes to be valued as a diamond, and words
ought surely to be labored, when they are intended to stand for things.

RAMBLER. TAXATION.
Taxing is an easy business. Any projector can contrive new impositions; any
bungler can add to the old. But is it altogether wise to have no other bounds
to your impositions, than the patience of those who are to bear them?

BURKE. TRUTH.
There is no crime more infamous than the violation of truth: it is apparent,
that men can be sociable beings no longer than they can believe each other.
When speech is employed only as the vehicle of falsehood, every man must
disunite himself from others, inhabit his own cave, and seek prey only for
himself.

IDLER. TOLERATION.
We all know, that toleration is odious to the intolerant; freedom to
oppressors; property to robbers; and all kinds and degrees of prosperity to the
envious.

BURKE. TENDERNESS TO ANIMALS.
The heart is hard in nature, and unfit
For human fellowship, as being void
Of sympathy, and therefore dead alike
To love and friendship both, that is not pleased
With sight of animals enjoying life,
Nor feels their happiness augment his own.
The bounding fawn, that darts across the glade
When none pursues, through mere delight of heart,
And spirits buoyant with excess of glee;
The horse as wanton, and almost as fleet,
That skims the spacious meadow at full speed,
Then stops, and snorts, and throwing high his heels,
Starts to the voluntary race again;
The very kine that gambol at high noon,
The total herd receiving first from one
That leads the dance a summons to be gay,
Though wild their strange vagaries, and uncouth
Their efforts, yet resolved with one consent,
To give such act and utt'rance as they may
To ecstacy too big to be suppressed --
These, and a thousand images of bliss,
With which kind nature graces every scene
Where cruel man defeats not her design,
Impart to the benevolent, who wish
All that are capable of pleasure pleased,
A far superior happiness to theirs,
The comfort of a reasonable joy,
COWPER. I would not enter on my list of friends
(Though graced with polished manners and fine sense,
Yet wanting sensibility) the man
Who needlessly sets foot upon a worm.
An inadvertent step may crush the snail
That crawls at evening in the public path;
But he that has humanity, forewarned,
Will tread aside, and let the reptile live.
The creeping vermin, loathsome to the sight,
And charged perhaps with venom, that intrudes,
A visitor unwelcome, into scenes
Sacred to neatness and repose -- the alcove,
The chamber, or re^ectory -- may die:
A necessary act incurs no blame.
Not so, when held within their proper bounds,
And guiltless of offense, they range the air,
Or take their pastime in the spacious field:
There they are priv^leg'd; and he that hunts
Or harms them there is guilty of a wrong,
Disturbs the economy of nature's realm,
Who, when she formed, designed them an abode,
The sum is this. -- If man's convenience, health,
Or safety, interfere, his rights and claims
Are paramount, and must extinguish their's.
Else they are all -- the meanest things that are --
As free to live, and to enjoy that life,
As God was free to form them at the first,
Who, in his sovereign wisdom, made them all.
Ye, therefore, who love mercy, teach your sons
To love it too. The springtime of our years
Is soon dishonored and defiled in most
By budding ills, that ask a prudent hand
To check them. But, alas! none sooner shoots,
If unrestrained, into luxuriant growth,
Than cruelty, most devilish of them all.
Mercy to him that shows it, is the rule
And righteous limitation of its act,
By which heaven moves in pard'ning guilty man;
And he that shows none, being ripe in years,
And conscious of the outrage he commits,
Shall seek it, and not find it in his turn.
Ibid. TODAY AND TOMORROW.
Today man's dressed in gold and silver bright,
Wrapped in a shroud before tomorrow night;
Today he is feeding on delicious food,
Tomorrow dead, unable to do good;
Today he is nice, and scorns to feed on crumbs,
Tomorrow he is himself a dish of worms;
Today he is honored and in vast esteem,
Tomorrow not a beggar values him;
Today he rises from a velvet bed,
Tomorrow lies in one that is made of lead;
Today his house, though large he thinks but small,
Tomorrow no command, no house at all;
Today has forty servants at his gate,
Tomorrow scorned, not one of them will wait;
Today persum'd, as sweet as any rose,
Tomorrow stinks in every body's nose;
Today he^ grand, majestic, all delight,
Ghastful and pale before tomorrow night;
True, as the scripture says, "man's life's a span,"
The present moment is the life of man.
VIRTUE.
He that would govern his actions by the laws of virtue, must regulate his
thoughts by the laws of reason; he must keep guilt from the recesses of his
heart, and remember that the pleasures of fancy and the emotion of desire, are
more dangerous as they are more hidden, since they escape the awe of
observation, and operate equally in every situation, without the concurrence of
external opportunities.

RAMBLER. To dread no eye and to suspect no tongue, is the great prerogative of
innocence; an exemption granted only to invariable virtue. But guilt has always
its horrors and solicitudes; and to make it yet more shameful and detestable,
it is doomed often to stand in awe of those, to whom nothing could give
influence or weight, but their power of betraying.

Ibid. VANITY.
So weak are human kind by nature made,
Or to such weakness by their vice betrayed,
Almighty vanity! to thee they owe
Their zest of pleasure and the balm of woe.
Thou, like the sun, all colors do contain,
Varing like rays of light on drops of rain;
For every soul finds reasons to be proud,
Though hissed and hooted by the pointing crowd.
YOUNG. VICE.
Vice is a monster of so frightful mien,
As, to be hated, needs but to be seen;
Yet seen too often, familiar with her face,
We first endure, then pity, then embrace.
POPE. USURPER.
As when the sea breaks over its bounds,
And overflows the level grounds;
Those banks and dams, that like a skreen
Did keep it out, now keep it in:
So when tyrannic usurpation,
(...) the freedom of a nation.
(...) laws of the land that were intended
To keep it out, are made defend it.
HUDIBRAS. WAR.
As war is the extremity of evil, it is surely the duty of those whose station
entrusts them with the care of nations, to avert it from their charge. There
are dis^^ses of an animal nature which nothing but amputation ^an remove; so
there may, by the depravation of human passions, be sometimes a gangrene in
collected life, for which fire and the sword are the necessary remedies; but in
what can skill or caution be better (...), than in preventing such dreadful
operations, while there is room for gentler methods.

JOHNSON. War never fails to exhaust the state, and endanger its destruction,
with whatever success it is carried on. Though it may be commenced with
advantage, it can never be finished without danger of the most fatal reverse of
fortune. With whatever superiority of strength an engagement is begun, the
least mistake, the slightest accident, may turn the scale and give victory to
the enemy. Nor can a nation that should be always victorious prosper: it would
destroy itself by destroying others: the country would be depopulated, the soil
untilled, and trade interrupted: and what is worse, the best laws would lose
their force, and a corruption of manners insensibly take place. Literature will
be neglected among the youth; the troops, conscious of their own importance,
will indulge themselves in the most pernicious licentiousness with impunity,
and the disorder will necessarily spread through all the branches of government.

FENELON. It is unquestionably a very notable art to ravage countries, destroy
dwellings, and one year with another, out of a hundred thousand men to cut off
forty thousand. This invention was originally cultivated by nations assembled
for their common good. It is otherwise in our time.

An odd circumstance in this infernal enterprise is, that every chief of these
ruffians has his colo^rs consecrated, and solemnly prays to God before he goes
to destroy his neighbor. If the slain in a battle do not exceed two or three
thousand, the fortunate commander does not think it worth thanking God for; but
if, besides killing ten or twelve thousand men, he has been so far favored by
heaven as totally to destroy some remarkable place, then a verbose hymn is sung
in four parts, composed in a language unknown to all the combatants.

VOLTA^^^. It is wonderful with what coolness and indifference the greater part
of mankind see war commenced. Those that hear of it at a distance, or read of
it in books, but have never presented its evils to their minds, consider it as
little more than a splendid game, a proclamation, an army, a battle, and a
triumph. Some indeed must perish in the most successful field, but they die
upon the bed of honor, resign their lives amidst the joys of conquest, and,
filled with England's glory, smile in death.

The life of a modern soldier is ill represented by heroic fiction. War has
means of destruction more formidable than the cannon and the sword. Of the
thousands and ten thousands that perished in our late contests with France and
Spain, a very small part ever felt the stroke of an enemy; the rest languished
in tents and ships, amidst damps and putrefaction; pale, torpid, spiritless,
and helpless; gasping and groaning, unpitied among men, made obdurate by long
continuance of hopeless misery; and were at last whelmed in pits, or heaved
into the ocean, without notice and without remembrance. By incommodious
encampments and unwholesome stations, where courage is useless, and enterprise
impracticable, fleets are silently dispeopled, and armies sluggishly melted
away.

Thus is a people gradually exhausted, for the most part with little effect.
The wars of civilized nations make very slow changes in the system of empire.
The public perceive scarcely any alteration but an increase of debt; and the
few individuals who are benefited, are not supposed to have the clearest right,
to their advantages. If he that shared the danger enjoyed the profit, and after
bleeding in the battle grew rich by the victory, he might show his gains
without envy. But at the conclusion of a ten years war, how are we recompen^ed
for the death of multitudes and the expense of millions, but by contemplating
the sudden glories of paymasters and agents, contractors and commissaries,
whose equipages shine like meteors, and whose palaces rise like exhalations.

These are the men who, without virtue, labor, or hazard, are growing rich as
their country is impoverished; they rejoice when obstinacy or ambition adds
another year to slaughter and devastation; and laugh from their desks at
bravery and science, while they are adding figure to figure, and cipher to
cipher, hoping for a new contract from a new armament, and computing the
profits of a siege or tempest.

JOHNSON. One to destroy is murder by the law;
And gibbets keep the lifted hand in awe.
To murder thousands, takes a specious name,
War's glorious art, and gives immortal fame.
When, after battle, I the field have seen
Spread over with ghastly shapes, which once were men;
A nation crushed! a nation of the brave!
A realm of death! and on this side the grave!
Are there, said I, who from this sad survey,
This human chaos, carry smiles away?
How did my heart with indignation rise!
How honest nature swelled into my eyes!
How was I shocked, to think the hero's trade
Of such materials, same and triumph made!
YOUNG. First Envy, eldest born of hell embrued
Her hands in blood, and taught the sons of men
To make a death which nature never made,
And God abhorred; with violence rude to break
The thread of life ere half its length was run,
And rob a wretched brother of his being.
With joy Ambition saw, and soon improved
The execrable deed. 'T was not enough
By subtle fraud to snatch a single life,
Puny impiety! whole kingdoms fell
To fate the lust of power: more horrid still,
The foulest stain and scandal of our nature
Became its boast. One murder makes a villain;
Millions a hero. Princes were privileged
To kill; and numbers sanctified the crime.
Ah! why will kings forget that they are men?
And men that they are brethren? Why delight
In human sacrifice? Why burst the ties
Of nature, that should knit their souls together
In one soft bond of amity and love?
Yet still they breathe destruction, still go on,
Inhumanly ingenious, to find out
New pains for life, new terrors for the grave,
Artificers of death! still monarchs dream
Of universal empire growing up
From universal ruin. Blast the design,
Great God of hosts, nor let thy creatures fall
Unpitied victims at ambition's shrine!
PORTEUS. He who makes war his profession cannot be otherwise than vicious.

War makes thieves, and peace brings them to the gallows.

MACHIAVEL. A Soldier is a being hired to kill in cold blood as many of his own
species, who have never offended him, as possibly he can.

SWIFT. THE WHISTLE.
When I was a child, at seven years old, my friends on a holiday, filled my
pocket with coppers. I went directly to a shop where they sold toys for
children; and being charmed with the sound of a whistle, that I met by the way
in the hands of another boy, I voluntarily offered him all my money for one. I
then came home, and went whistling all over the house, much pleased with my
whistle, but disturbing all the family. My brothers, and sisters, and cousins,
understanding the bargain I had made, told me I had given four times as much
for it as it was worth. This put me in mind what good things I might have
bought with the rest of my money; and they laughed so much at me for my folly,
that I cried with vexation; and the reflection gave me more chagrin than the
whistle gave me pleasure.

This however was afterward of use to me, the impression continuing in my
mind; so that often, when I was tempted to buy some unnecessary thing, I said
to myself, Don't give too much for the whistle; and so I saved my money.

As I grew up, came into the world, and observed the actions of men, I thought
I met with many, very many, who gave too much for the whistle.

When I saw any one too ambitious of court favors, sacrificing his time in
attendance on levees, his repose, his liberty, his virtue, and perhaps his
friends to attain it, I have said to myself, This man gives too much for his
whistle.

When I saw another fond of popularity, constantly employing himself in
political bustles, neglecting his own affairs, and ruining them by that
neglect; He pays, indeed, says I, too much for his whistle.

If I knew a miser, who gave up every kind of comfortable living, all the
pleasure of doing good to others, all the esteem of his fellow-citizens, and
the joys of benevolent friendship, for the sake of accumulating wealth: Poor
man, says I, you do indeed pay too much for your whistle.

When I meet a man of pleasure, sacrificing every laudable improvement of the
mind, or of his fortune, to mere corporeal sensations; Mistaken man, says I,
you are providing pain for yourself, instead of pleasure; you give too much for
your whistle.

If I see one fond of fine clothes, fine furniture, fine equipages, all above
his fortune, for which he contracts debts, and ends his career in prison; Alas,
says I, he has paid dear, very dear, for his whistle.

When I see a beautiful, sweet-tempered girl, married to an ill natured brute
of a husband: What a pity it is, says I, that she has paid so much for a
whistle.

In short, I conceive that great part of the miseries of mankind were brought
upon them by the false estimates they had made of the value of things, and by
their giving too much for their whistles.

FRANKLIN. WISDOM.
Wisdom, whose lessons have been represented as so hard to learn, by those who
were never at her school, only teaches us to extend a simple maxim, universally
known, and followed even in the lowest life, a little farther than that life
carries it, and this is, not to buy at too dear a price.

Whoever takes this maxim abroad with him into the grand market of the world,
and constantly applies it to honors, to riches, to pleasures, and to every
other commodity which that market affords, is a wise man, and must be so
acknowledged in the worldly sense of the word; for he makes the best of
bargains; since in reality he purchases every thing at the price only of a
little trouble, and carries home all the good things I have mentioned, while he
keeps his health, his innocence, and his reputation, the common prices which
are paid for them by others, entire to himself.

From this moderation likewise he learns two lessons which complete his
character; first, never to be intoxicated when he has made the best bargain,
nor dejected when the market is empty; or when its commodities are to dear for
his purchase.

FIELDING. WANT.
Want is a bitter and a hateful good,
Because its virtues are not understood:
Yet many things, impossible to thought,
Have been by need to full perfection brought.
The daring of the soul proceeds from thence,
Sharpness of wit, and active diligence.
Prudence at once and fortitude it gives:
And, if in patience taken, mends our lives:
For even that indigence that brings me low,
Makes me my self, and him above, to know,
A good which none would challenge, few would choose,
A fair possession, which mankind refuse.
If we from wealth to poverty descend,
Want gives to know the flatt'rer from the friend.
DRYDEN. WIT.
Time his fervent petulance may cool;
For though he is a wit, he is no fool.
In time he will learn to use, not waste his sense,
Nor make a frailty of an exellence.
His brisk attack on block heads we should prize,
Were not his jest as a flippant with the wise.
He spares nor friend nor foe; but calls to mind,
Like dooms -- day, all the faults of all mankind.
What though wit tickles? tickling is unsafe,
If still it is painful while it makes us laugh.
Who, for the poor renown of being smart,
Would leave a sting within a brother's heart?
Parts may be praised; goodnature is adored;
Then draw your wit as seldom as your sword,
And never on the weak; or you will appear,
As there no hero, no great genius here.
As in smooth oil the razor best is whet,
So wit is by politeness sharpest set;
Their want of edge from their offense is seen;
Both pain us least when exquisitely keen.
The fame men give is for the joy they find;
Dull is the jester, when the joke's unkind.
YOUNG. YOUTH.
Down the smooth stream of life the stripling darts,
Gay as the morn; bright glows the vernal sky,
Hope swells his fails, and passion steers his course.
Safe glides his little bark along the shore
Where virtue takes her stand; but if too far
He launches forth beyond discretion's mark,
Sudden the tempest scowls, the surges roar,
Blot his fair day, and plunge him in the deep.
O sad but sure mischance! O happier far
To lie like gallant How 'midst Indian wilds
A breathless corse, cut off by savage hands
In earliest prime, a generous sacrifice
To freedom's holy cause, than so to fall,
Torn immature from life's meridian joys,
A prey to vice, intemp'rance, and disease.
PORTEUS. That the highest degree of reverence should be paid to youth, and
that nothing indecent should be suffered to approach their eyes, or ears, are
precepts extorted by sense and virtue from an ancient writer, by no means
eminent for chastity of thought. The same kind, though not the same degree of
caution is required in every thing which is laid before them, to secure them
from unjust prejudices, perverse opinions, and incongruous combinations of
images.

RAMBLER. THE END.

