[CHEAP REPOSITORY.] [No. XII.]

THE WAY TO PLENTY, OR, THE SECOND PART OF TOM WHITE.



PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED BY B. and J. JOHNSON, NO. 147 HIGH STREET.

1800. [Price 4 Cen^^ (...) 2s. 4d. p^^. doz.]

THE WAY TO PLENTY, OR, THE HISTORY OF TOM WHITE. [CONCLUDED.]
I THANK you for the hint, sir, said the farmer, "I am resolved to rejoice
though, and others shall rejoice with me: And we will have a merry night on it."

So Mrs. White dressed a very plentiful supper of meat and pudding; and spread
out two tables. The farmer sat at the head of one, consisting of some of the
neighbors, and all his work-people. At the other sat his wife, with two long
benches on each side of her. At these sat all the old and infirm poor,
especially those who lived in the workhouse, and had no day of festivity to
look forward to in the whole year but this. On the grass, in the little court,
sat the children of his laborers, and of the other poor, whose employment it
had been to gather flowers, and dress and adorn the horns of the ram; for the
farmer did not wish to put an end to any old custom, if it was innocent. His
own children stood by the table, and he gave them plenty of pudding, which they
carried to the children of the poor, with a little draught of cider to every
one.

This feast though orderly and decent, was yet hearty and cheerful. Dr.
Shepherd dropped in with a good deal of company he had at his house, and they
were much pleased. When the Doctor saw how the aged and the infirm poor were
enjoying themselves, he was much moved; he shook the farmer by the hand, and
said, "But thou, when thou make a feast, call the blind, and the lame, and
the halt; they cannot recompense thee, but thou shall be recompensed at the
resurrection of the just."

"Sir," said the farmer, "'it is no great matter of expense, I kill a sheep of my
own, potatoes are as plenty as blackberries, with people who have a little
forethought. I save much more cider in the course of a year by never allowing
any carousing in my kitchen, or drunkenness in my fields, than would supply
many such feasts as these, so that I shall be never the poorer at Christmas. It
is cheaper to make people happy, sir, than to make them drunk. The Doctor and
the ladies condescended to walk from one table to the other, and heard many
merry stories, but not one profane word, or one indecent song; so that he was
not forced to the painful necessity either of reproving them, or leaving them
in anger. When all was over they sung the sixty-fifth psalm, and the ladies all
joined in it, and when they got home to the vicarage to tea, they declared they
liked it better than any concert.

The HARD WINTER.
In the famous cold winter of the present year, 1795, it was edifying to see
how patiently farmer White bore that long and severe frost. Many of his sheep
were frozen to death, but he thanked GOD that he had still many left. He
continued to find in-door work that his men might not be out of employ. Mrs.
White was so considerate, that just at that time she lessened the number of her
hogs, that she might have more whey and skim milk to assist poor families. Nay,
I have known her live on boiled meat for a long while together, in a sickly
season, because the pot-liquor made such a supply of broth for the sick poor.
As the spring came on, and things grew worse, she never had a cake, a pie, or a
pudding in her house; though she used to have plenty of these good things, and
will again I hope when the present scarcity is over; though she says she never
will use such white flour again, even if it should come down to five shillings
a bushel.

All the parish now began to murmur. Farmer Jones was sure the frost had killed
the wheat. Farmer Wilson said the rye would never come up. Brown the maltster
insisted the barley was dead at the root. Butcher Jobbins said beef would be a
shilling a pound. All declared there would not be a hop to brew with. The
orchards were all blighted, there would not be apples enough to make a pie; and
as to hay there would be none to be had for love nor money. I Will tell you what,
said farmer White, the season is dreadful. The crops are unpromising just now;
but it is too early to to judge. Don't let us make things worse than they are.
We ought to comfort the poor, and you are driving them to despair. Don't you
know how much GOD was displeased with the murmurs of his chosen people? And
yet, when they were tired of manna he sent them quails; but all did not do.
Nothing satisfies grumblers. We have a promise on our side, that there shall be
seed time and harvest time to the end. Let us then hope for a good day, but
provide against an evil one. Let us rather prevent the evil before it is come
upon us, than sink under it when it comes. Grumbling cannot help us. Activity
can. Let us set about planting potatoes in every nook and corner, in case the
corn should fail, which however I don't believe. Let us mend our management
before we are driven to it by actual want. And if we allow our honest laborers
to plant a few potatoes for their families in the head lands of our plowed
fields, or other waste bits of ground, it will do us no harm, and be a great
help to them."

The farmer had many temptations to end his corn at an extravagant price to a
certain sea port town; but as he knew that it was intended to export it against
law, he would not be tempted to encourage unlawful gain; so he threshed out a
small mow at a time, and sold it to the neighboring poor far below the market
price. He served his own workmen first. This was the same to them as if he had
raised their wages, and even better, as it was a benefit of which their
families were f^^e to partake. If the poor in the next parish were more
distressed than his own, he sold to them at the same rate. "For," said he,
"there is no distinction of parishes in heaven, and though charity begins at
home, yet it ought not to end there."

He had been used in good times now and then to catch a hare or a partridge, as
he was qualified. But he now resolved to give up that pleasure. So he parted
from a couple of spaniels he had; for he could not bear that his dogs should be
eating the meat, or the milk which so many men, women, and children wanted.

The WHITE LOAF.
ONE day, it was about the middle of July, 1795 when things seemed to be at the
dearest, and the Rulers of the land had agreed to set the example of eating
nothing but coarse bread. Doctor Shepherd read, before sermon, in the church
their public declaration, which the magistrates of the county sent him, and had
also signed themselves. Mrs. White of course was at church, and commended it
mightily. Next morning the Doctor took a walk over to the farmer's, in order to
settle further plans for the relief of the parish. He was much surprised to
meet Mrs. White's little maid Sally with a very small white loaf, which she had
been buying at a shop. He said nothing to the girl, as he never thought it
right to expose the faults of a mistress to her servant; but walked on,
resolving to give Mrs. White a severe lecture for the first time in his life.
He soon changed his mind, for on going into the kitchen the first person he saw
was Tom the thatcher, who had had a sad fall from a ladder; his arm, which was
slipped out of his sleeve, was swelled in a frightful manner. Mrs. White was
standing at the dresser making the little white loaf into a poultice, which she
laid upon the swelling in a large clean old cloth.

"I ask your pardon, my good Sarah," said the Doctor, "I ought not, however
appearances were against you, to have suspected that so humble and prudent a
woman as you are, would be led either to indulge any daintiness of your own, or
to fly in the face of your betters, by eating white bread while they are eating
brown. Whenever I come here I see it is not needful to be rich in order to be
charitable. A bountiful rich man would have sent Tom to a surgeon who would
have done no more good for him than you have done; for in those inflammations
the most skilful surgeon could only apply a poultice. Your kindness in dressing
the wound yourself, will, I doubt not, perform the cure at the expense of that
three-penny loaf and a little hog's lard. And I will take care that Tom shall
have a a good supply of Rice from the Subscription." "And he shall not want for
skim milk," said Mrs. White, and was he the best lord in the land, in the state
he is in, a dish of good rice milk would be better for him than the richest
meat.

The PARISH MEETING.
ON the tenth of August the vestry held another meeting, to consult on the best
method of further assisting the poor. The prospect of abundant crops now
cheered every heart. Farmer White had a mind to be a little jocular with his
desponding neighbors. Well, neighbor Jones," said he, "all the wheat was
killed, I suppose. The barley all dead at the root. Farmer Jones looked
sheeepish, and said, to be sure the crops had turned out better than he
thought, Then," said Dr. Shepherd, learn to trust Providence another time."

Among other things, they agreed to subscribe for a large quantity of rice,
which was to be sold out to the poor at a very low price, and Mrs. White was so
kind as to undertake the trouble of selling it. After their day's work was
over, all who wished to buy at these reduced rates were ordered to come to the
farm on the Tuesday evening. Dr. Sepherd dropped in at the same time, and when
Mrs. White had done weighing her rice, the Doctor spoke as follows:

"My honest friends, it has pleased GOD to visit this land with a scarcity, to
which we have been little accustomed. There are some idle evil minded people
who are on the watch for public distresses, not that they may humble themselves
under the mighty hand of GOD, (which is the true use to be made of all
troubles) but that they may benefit themselves by disturbing the public peace.
These people, by riot and drunkenness, double the evil which they pretend to
cure. Riot will complete our misfortune, while peace, industry, and good
management, will go near to cure them. Bread to be sure is uncommonly dear.
Among the various ways of making it cheaper, one is to reduce the quality of
it, another, to lessen the quantity we consume. If we cannot get enough of
coarse wheaten bread, let us mix one half of potatoes, and one half of wheat.
This last is what I eat in my own family. It is pleasant and wholesome. Our
blessed Savior ate barley bread you know, as we were told in one of the
Numbers of the Cheap Repository, which I hope you have all heard; as I desired
the master of the Sunday school to read it just after evening service, when I
know many of the parents are apt to call in at the school. This is a good
custom, and one of those little books shall be often read at that time.

"My good women, I truly feel for you at this time of scarcity; and I am going
to show my good will, as much by my advice as my subscription. It is my duty,
as your friend and minister, to tell you, that one half of your present
hardships is owing to BAD MANAGEMENT. I often meet your children without shoes
and stockings, with great luncheons of the very whitest bread, and that three
times a day. Half that quantity, and still less if it were coarse, put into a
dish of good onion or leek porridge, would make them an excellent breakfast.
Many too of the very poorest of you eat your bread hot from the oven; this
makes the difference of one loaf in five; I assure you it is what I cannot
afford to do. Come Mrs. White, you must assist me a little. I am not very
knowing in these matters myself* but I know that the rich would be twice as
charitable, if the poor made a better use of their bounty. Mrs. White do give
these poor women a little advice how to make their pittance go further than it
now does. When you lived with me you were famous for making us nice, cheap
dishes, and I dare say you are not less notable now you manage for yourself."

"Indeed neighbors, said Mrs. White, what the good doctor says is very true. A
halfpenny worth of oatmeal or groats* with a leek or onion, out of your own
garden which costs nothing, a bit of salt, and a little coarse bread, will
breakfast your whole family. It is a great mistake at any time to think a bit
of meat so ruinous, and a great loaf of bread so cheap. A poor man gets seven
or eight shillings a week; if he is careful he bring's it home. I dare not say
how much of this goes for tea in the afternoon, now sugar and butter are so
dear, because I should have you all upon me, but, I will say that too much of
this little goes even for bread, from a notion that it is the hardest fare.
This at all times, but particularly just now, is bad management. Dry pease to
be sure have been very dear lately! but now they are plenty enough. I am
certain then, that if a shilling or two of the seven or eight was laid out for
a bit of coarse beef, a sheep's head, or any such thing, it would be well
bestowed. I would throw a couple of pounds of this into the pot with two or
three handfuls of gray pease, an onion, and a little pepper. Then I would throw
in cabbage, or turnip, and carrot; or any garden stuff that was most plenty;
and let it stew two or three hours, and it will make a dish sit for his
Majesty. The working man should have the meat: the children don't want it, the
soup will be thick and substantial, and requires no bread.

RICE MILK.
"You who can get skim milk, as all our workmen can, have a great advantage. A
quart of this, and a quarter of a pound of the rice you have just bought, a
little bit of all-spice, and brown sugar, will make a dainty and a cheap dish."

"Bless your heart!" muttered Amy Grumble, who looked as dirty as a
cinder-wench with her face and fingers all daubed with s^uff; "rice milk
indeed!" it is very nice to be sure for those who can dress it, but we have not
a bit of coal; rice is of no use to us without firing." "And yet," said the
Doctor, "I see your tea-kettle boiling twice every day, as I pass by the
poor-house, and fresh butter at eleven-pence a pound on your shelf." "O dear,
sir," cried Amy, "a few sticks serve to boil the tea-kettle." "And a few more,"
said the Doctor," will boil the rice milk, and give twice the nourishment at a
quarter of the expense."

RICE PUDDING.
"PRAY Sarah," said the Doctor, "how did you use to make that pudding my
children were so fond of? And I remember when it was cold, we used to have it
in the parlour for supper." "Nothing more easy," said Mrs. White. "I put half a
pound of rice, two quarts of skim milk, and two ounces of brown sugar." "Well,"
said the Doctor, "and how many will this dine?" "Seven or eight, sir," very
well, and what will it cost?" Why, sir, it did not cost you so much because we
baked it at home, and I used our own milk; it will not cost above seven-pence
to those who pay for both. Here too bread is saved."

"Pray, Sarah, let me put in a word," said farmer White. "I advise my men to
raise each a large bed of parsnips. They are very nourishing, and very
profitable. Sixpennyworth of seed, well sowed, and trod in, will produce more
meals than four sacks of potatoes; and what is material to you who have so
little ground, it will not require more than an eighth part of the ground which
the four sacks will take. Parsnips are very good the second day warmed in the
drying pan, and a little rasher of pork or baoon will give them a nice flavor."

Dr. Shepherd now said, "as a proof of the nourishing quality of parsnips, I
was reading in a history book this very day, that the American Indians make a
great part of their bread of parsnips, though Indian corn is so famous: it will
make a little variety too."

"I remember," said Mrs. White, "a cheap dish, so nice that it makes my mouth
water. I peel some raw potatoes, slice them thin, put the slices into a deep
drying pan, or pot, with a little water, an onion, and a bit of pepper. Then I
get a bone or two of a breast of mutton, or a little strip of salt pork, and
put into it. Cover it down close, keep in the steam, and let it stew for an
hour."

"You really get me an appetite, Mrs. White by your dainty receipts," said the
Doctor. "I am resolved to have this dish at my own table." "I could tell you
another very good dish, and still cheaper," answered she. "Come, let us have
it," cried the Doctor. "I shall write all down as soon as I get home, and I
will favor any body with a copy of these receipts who will call at my house."
"And I will do more, Sir," said Mrs. White, "for I will put any of these women
in the way how to dress it, the first time, if they are at a loss. But this is
my dish.

"Take two or three pickled herrings, put them into a stone jar, filled up with
potatoes, and a little water, and let it bake in the oven till it is done. I
would give one hint more," added she; "I have taken to use nothing but potatoe
starch; and though I say it that should not say it, nobody's linen in a common
way looks better than ours."

The Doctor now said, "I am sorry for one hardship which many poor people
labor under. I mean the difficulty of getting a little milk. I wish all
farmers wives were as considerate as you are, Mrs. White. A little milk is a
great comfort to the poor, especially when their children are sick. And I have
known it answer to the seller as well as to the buyer, to keep a cow or two on
purpose to sell it out by the quart.

"Sir," said farmer White, "I beg leave to say a word to the men, if you
please, for all your advice goes to the women. If you will drink less Gin you
may get more meat. If you abstain from the ale ^o^se you may many of you get a
little good beer at home." "Aye, that we can Farmer," said poor Tom the
thatcher, who was now got well. "Easter Monday for that -- I say no more. -- A
word to the wise." The Farmer smiled and went on. "The number of public houses
in many a parish brings on more hunger and rags than all the taxes in it heavy
as they are. All the other evils put together hardly make up the sum of that
one. We are now raising a fresh subscription for you. This will be our rule of
giving. We will not give to Sots, Gamblers, and Sabbath breakers. Those who do
not set their young children to work on week days, and send them to school on
Sundays, deserve little favor. No man should keep a dog till he has more food
than his family wants. If he feeds them at home they rob his children; if he
starves them, they rob his neighbors. We have heard in a neighboring city
that some people carried back the subscription loaves because they were too
coarse; but we hope better things of you." Here Betty Plane begged with all
humility, to put in a word. "Certainly," said the Doctor, "we will listen to
all modest complaints, and try to redress them." "You were pleased to say,
sir," said she, "that we might find much comfort from buying coarse bits of
beef. And so we might, but you do not know, sir, that we can seldom get them,
even when we had the money, and times were not so bad." How so, Betty?" "Sir,
when we go to butcher Jobbins for a bit of shin, or any other lean pieces, his
answer is, "You cannot have it today. The cook at the great house has bespoke
it for gravy, or the Doctor's maid (begging your pardon, sir) has just ordered
it for soup. Now, sir, if such kind gentle-folks were aware that this gravy and
soup not only consume a great deal of meat, (which, to be sure, those have a
right to use who can pay for it) but that it takes away those coarse pieces
which the poor would buy, if they bought at all, I am sure they would not do
it. For indeed the rich have been very kind, and I don't know what we should
have done without them."

"I thank you for the hint Betty," said the Doctor, "and I assure you I will
have no more gravy soup. My garden will supply me with soups, that are both
wholesomer and better. And I will answer for my lady at the great house that
she will do the same. I hope that this will become a general rule, and then we
shall expect that the butchers will favor you ^n the prices of the coarse
pieces, if we buy nothing but the prime. In our gifts we shall prefer, as the
farmer has told you, those who keep steadily to their work; Such as come to the
vestry for a loaf, and do not come to church for the sermon, we shall mark; and
prefer those who come constantly whether there are any gifts or not. But there
is one rule from which we never will depart. Those who have been seen aiding or
abetting any RIOT, any attack on butchers, bakers, wheat mows, mills, or
millers, we will not relieve. With the quiet, contented, hard-working man, I
will share my last morsel of bread. I shall only add, that though it has
pleased GOD to send us this visitation as a punishment, yet we may convert this
short trial into a lasting blessing, if we all turn over a new leaf. Prosperity
has made most of us careless. The thoughtless profusion of some of the rich
could only be exceeded by the idleness and bad management of some of the poor.
Let us now at last adop^ that good old maxim, EVERY ONE MIND ONE. And may GOD
add his blessing!"

The people now cheerfully departed with their rice, resolving, as many of them
as could get milk, to put one of Mrs. White's receipts in practice that very
night; and a rare supper they had.

FINIS.
THE GRAND ASSIZES; OR General Goal Delivery.
THERE was in a certain country a great King, who was also a Judge. He was very
merciful, but he was also very just; for he used to say, that justice was the
foundation of all goodness. His subjects were apt enough, in a general way, to
extol his merciful temper, and especially those subjects who were always
committing crimes which made them liable to be punished by his justice. This
last quality they constantly kept out of sight, till they had cheated
themselves into a not^^n that he was too good to punish at all.

Now it had happened a long time before, that this whole people had broken
their allegiance, and had forfeited the Kings' favor, and had also fallen from
a very prosperous state in which he had placed them, having one and all become
bankrupts: but when they were over head and ears in debt, and had nothing to
pay, the King's son most generously took the whole burden of their debts on
himself; and, in short, it was proposed that all their affairs should be
fettled, and their very crimes forgiven, (for they were criminals as well as
debtors) provided only they would show themselves to be sorry for what they had
done themselves, and be thankful for what was done for them. I should here
remark, that a book was also given them, in which a true and faithful account
of their own rebellion was written; and of the manner of obtaining the King's
pardon, together with a variety of directions for their conduct in the time to
come; and in this book it was particularly mentioned, that after having lived a
certain ^^mber of years in a part of the same King's country, and under his eye
and jurisdiction, there should be a Grand Assizes, when every one was to be
publicly tried for his past behavior, and after this trial was over, certain
heavy punishments were to be inflicted on those who should have still persisted
in their rebellion, and certain high premiums were to be bestowed as a gracious
reward upon the obedient.

It may be proper here to notice, that this King's Court differed in some
respects from our Courts of Justice, being indeed a sort of Court of Appeal, to
which questions were carried after they had been imperfectly decided in the
Common Courts. And although with us all criminals are tried, and very properly
in my opinion, by a Jury of their Peers, yet in this King's country the mode
was very different; for since every one of the people had been in a certain
sense criminals, the King did not think it fair to make them judges also. It
would indeed have been impossible to follow in all respects the customs which
prevail with us, for the crimes with which men are charged in our Courts are
mere overt acts, as the Lawyers call them, that is, acts which regard the
outward behavior; such as the acts of striking, maiming, stealing, and so
forth. But in the King's Court it was not merely outward sins, but sins of the
heart also which were to be punished. Many a crime, therefore, which was never
heard of in the Court of King's bench, or at the Old Bailey, was here to be
brought to light, and was reserved for this great day. Among these were Pride
and Oppression, and Envy, and Malice, and Revenge, and Covetousness, and Secret
Vanity of Mind, and Evil Thoughts of all sorts, and all evil Wishes and
Desires. When Covetousness, indeed, put men on committing Robbery, or when
Malice drove them to an act of Murder, then the common Courts immediately
judged the criminal, without waiting for these Great Assizes; nevertheless,
since even a Thief and Murderer would now and then escape in the common Courts,
for want of evidence, or through some fault or other of the Judge or Jury, the
escape was of little moment for the poor criminal, for he was sure to be tried
again by this great King; and even though he should have been punished in some
sense before, yet he had now a farther punishment to fear, unless, indeed, he
was one of those, who had obtained, by the means I before spoke of this great
King's pardon. The sins of the heart, however, were by far the most numerous
sort of sins, which were to come before this great Tribunal; and these were to
be judged by this great King in person, and by none but himself; because he
possessed a certain power of getting at all secrets.

I once heard of a certain King of Sicily, who built a whispering gallery in
the form of an ear, through which he could hear every word his rebellious
subjects uttered, though spoken ever so low. But this secret of the King of
Sicily was nothing to what this great* King possessed; for He had the power of
knowing every thought which was conceived in the mind, though it never broke
out into words, or proceeded to actions.

Now you may be ready to think, perhaps, that these people were worse off than
any others because they were to be examined so closely, and judged so strictly;
far from it; the King was too just to expect bricks without giving them straw;
he gave them, therefore, every help that they needed. He gave them a book of
directions, as I before observed; and because they were naturally
short-sighted, he supplied them with a glass for reading it, and thus the most
dim-sighted might see, if he did not wilfully shut his eyes: but though the
King invited them to open their eyes, he did not compel them; and many remained
stone blind all their lives with the book in their hand, because they would not
use the glass, nor take the proper means for reading and understanding all that
was written for them. The humble and sincere learnt in time, to see even that
part of the book which was least plainly written; and it was observed that the
ability to understand it depended more on the heart than the head; an evil
disposition blinded the sight, while humility operated like an eye salve.

Now it happened that those who had been so lucky as to escape the punishment
of the lower Courts, took it into their heads that they were all very good sort
of people, and of course very safe from any danger of this Great Assize. This
grand intended trial had been talked of so much, and put off so long, (for it
had seemed long at least to these short-sighted people,) that many persuaded
themselves it would never take place at all; and far the greater part were
living away therefore without ever thinking about it; they went on just as if
nothing at all had been done for their benefit; and as if they had no King to
please, no King's son to be thankful to, no book to guide themselves by, and as
if the assizes were never to come about.

But with this King "a thousand years were as one day, for he was not slack
concerning his promises, as some men count slackness." So at length the solemn
period approached. Still, however, the people did not prepare for the
solemnity, or rather, they prepared for it much as some of the people in our
towns are apt to prepare for the Assize times; I mean by balls and feastings,
and they saw their own trial come on, with as little concern as is felt by the
people in our streets, when they see the Judge's procession enter the town, who
indeed comfort themselves that it is only those in the prisons who are guilty.

But when at last the day came and every man found that he was to be judged for
himself, and that some how or other, all his secrets were brought out, and that
there was now no escape, things began to take a more serious turn. Some of the
criminals were got together debating in an outer Court of the Grand Hall, and
there they passed their time, not in compunction and tears, not in comparing
their lives with what was required in that book which had been given them, but
in comparing themselves with such as had been still more notorious offenders.

One who had grown wealthy by rapine and oppression, but had contrived to keep
within the letter of the law, insulted a poor fellow as a thief, because he had
stolen a loaf of bread. "You were far wickeder than I was, said a Citizen to
his Apprentice, for you drank and swore at the alehouse every Sunday night."
Yes," said the poor fellow, "but it was your fault that I did so, for you took
no care of my soul, but spent all your Sabbaths in jaunting abroad or in
rioting at home; I might have learnt, but there was no one to teach me; I might
have followed a good example, but I saw only bad ones. I sinned against less
light than you did." A drunken journeyman, who had spent all his wages on gin,
took comfort that he had not spent a great estate in Bribery at Elections, as
the Lord of his Manor had done, while a perjured Elector boasted that he was no
drunkard, like the journeyman.

I have not room to describe the awful pomp of the Court, nor the terrible
founding of the trumpet which attended the Judge's entrance, nor the sitting of
the Judge, nor the opening of the books, nor the crouding of the millions, who
stood before him. I shall pass over the multitudes who were tried and condemned
to dungeons and chains, and fire, and perpetual banishment, from the presence
of the King, which always seemed to be the saddest part of the sentence. I
shall only notice further, a few who brought some plea of merit, and claimed a
right to be rewarded by the King, and even deceived themselves so far as to
think that his own book of laws would be their justification.

A thoughtless Spendthrift advanced without any contrition, and said, "that he
had lived handsomely, and had hated the covetous whom God abhors, and that
he trusted in that passage of the book which said, that 'Covetousness was
Idolatry;' and that he therefore hoped for a favorable sentence.' It proved
that this man had not only avoided Covetousness, but he had even left his wife
and children in want through his excessive prodigality. The Judge immediately
pointed to that place in the Book where it is written, he that provideth not
for his household, is worse than an Infidel. He that lives in pleasure is dead
while he lives; "thou," said he, in thy life time, received'st thy good
things, and now thou must be tormented. -- Then a miser, whom hunger and
hoarding had worn to skin and bone, crept forward and praised the sentence
passed on this extravagant youth, "and surely," said he, "since he is
condemned, I am the man that may make some plea to favor -- I was never idle or
drunk, I kept my body in subjection. I have been so self-denying that I am
certainly a Saint: I have loved neither father nor mother, nor wife, nor
children to excess, in all this I have obeyed the book of the law, -- Then the
Judge said, "but where are thy works of mercy and thy labors of love? see that
family which perished in thy sight last hard winter, while thy barns were
overflowing; that poor family were my representatives, yet they were hungry,
and thou gave them no meat." "Go to now, thou rich man, weep and howl for the
miseries that are come upon you. Your gold and your silver is cankered, and the
rust of them shall be a witness against you, and shall eat your flesh as it
were fire." -- Then came up one with a most self sufficient air, He walked up
boldly, having in one hand the plan of an Hospital which he had built, and in
the other the drawing of a statue, which was erecting for him in the country
that he had just left, and on his forehead appeared, in Gold Letters, the List
of all the Public Charities to which he had subscribed. He seemed to take great
pleasure in the condemnation of the Miser, and said, "Lord, where saw I thee
hungry and fed thee not, or in prison and visited thee not? I have visited the
fatherless and widow in their affliction." -- Here the Judge cut him short by
saying "True, thou did visit the fatherless, but (...) fulfill equally that
other part of my command to keep thyself unspotted from the world. No, thou
were conformed to the world in many of its sinful customs, "thou did follow a
multitude to do evil;" "thou did love the world and the things of the world:"
and the motive to all thy charities was not a regard to me but to thy own
credit with thy fellow men. Thou have done every thing for the sake of
reputation, and now thou art vainly trusting in thy works, instead of putting
all thy trust in my Son, who has offered himself to be a surety for thee. Where
has been that humility and gratitude to him which was required of thee. No,
thou would be thine own surety: thou have trusted in thyself: thou have made
thy boast of thine own goodness; thou have sought after and thou have enjoyed
the praise of men, and verily I say unto thee, "thou have thy reward."

A poor diseased blind cripple, from the very Hospital which this great man had
built, then sell prostrate on his face, crying out, "Lord be merciful to me a
sinner!" on which the Judge, to the surprise of all, said, Well done, good and
faithful servant." The poor man replied, "Lord, I have done nothing! but thou
have suffered." "Well," said the Judge; "thou have been an example of patience
and meekness, and though thou had but few talents, yet thou have well
improved those few; thou had time, this thou did spend in the humble duties
of thy station, and also in earnest prayer, even for that proud Founder of
thine Hospital, who never prayed for himself; thou wast indeed blind and lame,
but it is no where said, my Son give me thy feet, or thine eyes, but give me
thy heart; and even the faculties I did grant thee, were employed to my glory;
with thine ears thou did listen to my word, with thy tongue thou did show
forth my praise, Enter thou into the joy of thy Lord. -- There were several who
came forward and boasted of some single and particular virtue, in which they
had been supposed to excel. One talked of his generosity, another of his
courage, and a third of his fortitude; but it proved, on close examination,
that some of those supposed virtues were merely the effect of a particular
constitution of body: that others proceeded from a false motive, and that not a
few of them were actual vices, since they were carried to excess; and under the
pretense of fulfilling one duty, some other duty was lost sight of; in short,
these partial virtues were none of them done in obedience to the will of the
King, but merely to please the person's own humor, and they would not,
therefore, stand this day's trial, for "he that keeps the whole law, and yet
wilfully and habitually offends in any one point, was declared guilty of
breaking the whole.

At this moment a sort of thick scales fell from the eyes of the multitude.
They could now no longer take comfort by measuring their neighbors conduct
against their own. Each at once found himself in his true light, and saw, alas!
when it was too late, that he should have made the book which had been given
him his rule of practice before, since it now proved to be the rule by which he
was to be judged. Nay, every one now thought himself even worse than his
neighbor, because, while he only saw and heard of the guilt of others, he felt
his own in all its aggravated horrors.

To complete their confusion, they were compelled to acknowledge the justice of
the judge who condemned them; and also to approve the favorable sentence by
which thousands of other criminals had not only their lives saved, but were
made happy and glorious beyond all imagination, and all this was in consequence
of their sincere repentance, and their humble acceptance of the pardon offered
to them by the King's Son. One thing was remarkable, that whilst most of them
who were condemned never expected condemnation, but even claimed reward for
their supposed innocence or goodness, all who were rewarded or forgiven were
sensible, that they owed every thing to a mere act of grace, and they cried out
with one voice, "Not unto us, not unto us, but unto thy name be the praise!!!

Z,

THE END. Next Week will be published, the History of the Cheap Side Apprentice.

