EDGAR HUNTLY; OR, MEMOIRS OF SLEEP-WALKER. TO WHICH IS ANNEXED, THE DEATH OF
CICERO, A FRAGMENT. BY THE AUTHOR OF ARTHUR MERVYN, WIELAND, ORMOND, etc. VOL.
III.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED BY H. MAXWELL, NO. 25 NORTH SECOND STREET, AND SOLD BY
THOMAS DOBSON, ASBURY DICKENS, AND THE PRINCIPAL BOOKSELLERS. 1800.

EDGAR HUNTLY; OR, MEMOIRS OF A SLEEP-WALKER.
CHAPTER XX.
I LIKEWISE burned with impatience to know the condition of my family, to
dissipate at once their tormenting doubts and my own, with regard to our mutual
safety. The evil that I feared had befallen them was too enormous to allow me
to repose in suspense, and my restlessness and ominous forebodings would be
more intolerable than any hardship or toils to which I could possibly be
subjected during this journey.

I was much refreshed and invigorated by the food that I had taken, and by the
rest of an hour. With this stock of recruited force I determined to scale the
hill. After receiving minute directions, and returning many thanks for my
hospitable entertainment, I set out.

The path was indeed intricate, and deliberate attention was obliged to be
exerted in order to preserve it. Hence my progress was slower than I wished.
The first impulse was to fix my eye upon the summit, and to leap from crag to
crag till I reached it, but this my experience had taught me was impracticable.
It was only by winding through gullies, and coasting precipices and bestriding
chasms, that I could hope finally to gain the top, and I was assured that by
one way only was it possible to accomplish even this.

An hour was spent in struggling with impediments, and I seemed to have gained
no way. Hence a doubt was suggested whether I had not missed the true road. In
this doubt I was confirmed by the difficulties which now grew up before me. The
brooks, the angles and the hollows, which my hostess had described, were not to
be seen. Instead of these, deeper dells, more headlong torrents and wider
gaping rifts were incessantly encountered.

To return was as hoples as to proceed. I consoled myself with thinking that
the survey which my informant had made of the hill-side, might prove
inaccurate, and that in spite of her predictions, the heights might be reached
by other means than by those pointed out by her. I will not enumerate my
toilsome expedients, my frequent disappointments and my desperate exertions.
Suffice it to say that I gained the upper space, not till the sun had dipped
beneath the horizon.

My satisfaction at accomplishing thus much was not small, and I hied, with
renovated spirits, to the opposite brow. This proved to be a steep that could
not be descended. The river flowed at its foot. The opposite bank was five
hundred yards distant, and was equally towering and steep as that on which I
stood. Appearances were adapted to persuade you that these rocks had formerly
joined, but by some mighty effort of nature, had been severed, that the stream
might find way through the chasm. The channel, however, was encumbered with
asperities over which the river fretted and foamed with thundering impetuosity.

I pondered for a while on these stupendous scenes. They ravished my attention
from considerations that related to myself; but this interval was short, and I
began to measure the descent, in order to ascertain the practicability of
treading it. My survey terminated in bitter disappointment. I turned my eye
successively eastward and westward. Solebury lay in the former direction, and
thither I desired to go. I kept along the verge in this direction, till I
reached an impassable rift. Beyond this I saw that the steep grew lower, but it
was impossible to proceed farther. Higher up the descent might be practicable,
and though more distant from Solebury, it was better to reach the road, even at
that distance, than never to reach it.

Changing my course, therefore, I explored the spaces above. The night was
rapidly advancing, the gray clouds gathered in the south-east, and a chilling
blast, the usual attendent of a night in October, began to whistle among the
pigmy cedars that scantily grew upon these heights. My progress would quickly
be arrested by darkness, and it behoved me to provide some place of shelter and
repose. No recess, better than an hollow in the rock, presented itself to my
anxious scrutiny.

Meanwhile I would not dismiss the hope of reaching the road, which I saw some
hundred feet below, winding along the edge of the river, before daylight should
utterly fail. Speedily these hopes derived new vigor from meeting a ledge that
irregularly declined from the brow of the hill. It was wide enough to allow of
cautious footing. On a similar stratum, or ledge, projecting still further from
the body of the hill, and close to the surface of the river, was the road. This
stratum ascended from the level of the stream, while that on which I trod
rapidly descended. I hoped that they would speedly be blended, or at least
approach so near as to allow me to leap from one to the other without enormous
hazard.

This fond expectation was frustrated. Presently I perceived that the ledge
below began to descend, while that above began to tend upward, and was quickly
terminated by the uppermost surface of the cliff. Here it was needful to pause.
I looked over the brink and considered whether I might not leap from my present
station, without endangering my limbs. The road into which I should fall was a
rocky pavement far from being smooth. The descent could not be less than forty
or fifty feet. Such an attempt was, to the last degree, hazardous, but was it
not better to risque my life by leaping from this eminence, than to remain and
perish on the top of this inhospitable mountain. The toils which I had endured,
in reaching this height appeared to my panic-struck fancy, less easy to be
borne again than death.

I know not but that I should have finally resolved to leap, had not different
views been suggested by observing that the outer edge of the road was, in like
manner, the brow of a steep which terminated in the river. The surface of the
road, was twelve or fifteen feet above the level of the stream, which, in this
spot was still and smooth. Hence I inferred that the water was not of
inconsiderable depth. To fall upon rocky points was, indeed, dangerous, but to
plunge into water of sufficient depth, even from an height greater than that at
which I now stood, especially to one to whom habit had rendered water almost as
congenial an element as air, was scarcely attended with inconvenience. This
expedient was easy and safe.

Twenty yards from this spot, the channel was shallow, and to gain the road
from the stream, was no difficult exploit.

Some disadvantages, however, attended this scheme. The water was smooth, but
this might arise from some other cause than its depth. My gun, likewise, must
be left behind me, and that was a loss to which I felt invincible repugnance.
To let it fall upon the road, would put it in my power to retrieve the
possession, but it was likely to be irreparably injured by the fall.

While musing upon this expedient, and weighing injuries with benefits, the
night closed upon me. I now considered that should I emerge in safety from the
stream, I should have many miles to travel before I could reach an house. My
clothes meanwhile would be loaded with wet. I should be heart-pierced by the
icy blast that now blew, and my wounds and bruises would be chafed into
insupportable pain.

I reasoned likewise on the folly of impatience and the necessity of repose. By
thus long continuance in one posture, my sinews began to stiffen, and my
reluctance to make new exertions to increase. My brows were heavy, and I felt
an irresistible propensity to sleep. I concluded to seek some shelter, and
resign myself, my painful recollections, and my mournful presages to sweet
forgetfulness. For this end, I once more ascended to the surface of the cliff.
I dragged my weary feet forward, till I found somewhat that promised me the
shelter that I sought.

A cluster of cedars appeared, whose branches over-arched a space that might be
called a bower. It was a slight cavity, whose flooring was composed of loose
stones and a few faded leaves blown from a distance, and finding a temporary
lodgement here. On one side was a rock, forming a wall rugged and projecting
above. At the bottom of the rock was a rift, somewhat resembling a coffin in
shape, and not much larger in dimensions. This rift terminated on the opposite
side of the rock, in an opening that was too small for the body of a man to
pass. The distance between each entrance was twice the length of a man.

This bower was open to the South-east whence the gale now blew. It therefore
imperfectly afforded the shelter of which I stood in need; but it was the best
that the place and the time afforded. To stop the smaller entrance of the
cavity with a stone, and to heap before the other, branches lopped from the
trees with my hatchet, might somewhat contribute to my comfort.

This was done, and thrusting myself into this recess, as far as I was able, I
prepared for repose. It might have been reasonably suspected to be the den of
rattle-snakes or panthers; but my late contention with superior dangers and
more formidable enemies made me reckless of these, but another inconvenience
remained. In spite of my precautions, my motionless posture and slender
covering exposed me so much to the cold that I could not sleep.

The air appeared to have suddenly assumed the temperature of mid-winter. In a
short time, my extremeties were benumbed, and my limbs shivered and ached as if
I had been seized by an ague. My bed likewise was dank and uneven, and the
posture I was obliged to assume, unnatural and painful. It was evident that my
purpose could not be answered by remaining here.

I, therefore, crept forth, and began to reflect upon the possibility of
continuing my journey. Motion was the only thing that could keep me from
freezing, and my frame was in that state which allowed me to take no repose in
the absence of warmth; since warmth were indispensible. It now occurred to me
to ask whether it were not possible to kindle a fire.

Sticks and leaves were at hand. My hatchet and a pebble would enable me to
extract a spark. From this, by suitable care and perseverance, I might finally
procure sufficient fire to give me comfort and ease, and even enable me to
sleep. This boon was delicious and I felt as if I were unable to support a
longer deprivation of it.

I proceeded to execute this scheme. I took the dryest leaves, and endeavored
to use them as tinder, but the driest leaves were moistened by the dews. They
were only to be found in the hollows, in some of which were pools of water and
others were dank. I was not speedily discouraged, but my repeated attempts
failed, and I was finally compelled to relinquish this expedient.

All that now remained was to wander forth and keep myself in motion till the
morning. The night was likely to prove tempestuous and long. The gale seemed
freighted with ice, and acted upon my body like the points of a thousand
needles. There was no remedy, and I mustered my patience to endure it.

I returned again, to the brow of the hill. I ranged along it till I reached a
place where the descent was perpendicular, and, in consequence of affording no
sustenance to trees or bushes, was nearly smooth and bare. There was no road to
be seen, and this circumstance, added to the sounds which the ripling current
produced, afforded me some knowledge of my situation.

The ledge, along which the road was conducted, disappeared near this spot. The
opposite sides of the chasm through which flowed the river, approached nearer
to each other, in the form of jutting promontories. I now stood upon the verge
of that on the northern side. The water flowed at the foot, but, for the space
of ten or twelve feet from the rock, was so shallow as to permit the traveller
and his horse to wade through it, and thus to regain the road which the
receding precipice had allowed to be continued on the farther side.

I knew the nature and dimensions of this ford. I knew that, at a few yards
from the rock, the channel was of great depth. To leap into it, in this place,
was a less dangerous exploit, than at the spot where I had formerly been
tempted to leap. There I was unacquainted with the depth, but here I knew it to
be considerable. Still there was some ground of hesitation and fear. My present
station was loftier, and how deeply I might sink into this gulf, how far the
fall and the concussion would bereave me of my presence of mind, I could not
determine. This hesitation vanished, and placing my tom-hawk and fusil upon the
ground, I prepared to leap.

This purpose was suspended, in the moment of its execution, by a faint sound,
heard from the quarter whence I had come. It was the warning of men, but had
nothing in common with those which I had been accustomed to hear. It was not
the howling of a wolf or the yelling of a panther. These had often been
overheard by night during my last year's excursion to the lakes. My fears
whispered that this was the vociferation of a savage.

I was unacquainted with the number of the enemies who had adventured into this
district. Whether those whom I had encountered at Deb's but were of that band
whom I had met with in the cavern, was merely a topic of conjecture. There
might be an half-score of troops, equally numerous, spread over the wilderness,
and the signal I had just heard might betoken the approach of one of these. Yet
by what means they should gain this nook, and what prey they expected to
discover, were not easily conceived.

The sounds, somewhat diversified, nearer and rising from different quarters,
were again heard. My doubts and apprehensions were increased. What expedient to
adopt for my own safety, was a subject of rapid meditation. Whether to remain
stretched upon the ground or to rise and go forward. Was it likely the enemy
would coast along the edge of the steep? Would they ramble hither to look upon
the ample scene which spread on all sides around the base of this rocky
pinnacle? In that case, how should I conduct myself! My arms were ready for
use. Could I not elude the necessity of shedding more blood? Could I not
anticipate their assault by casting myself without delay into the stream.

The sense of danger demanded more attention to be paid to external objects
than to the motives by which my future conduct should be influenced. My post
was on a circular projecture, in some degree, detached from the body of the
hill, the brow of which continued in a straight line, uninterrupted by this
projecture, which was somewhat higher than the continued summit of the ridge.
This line ran at the distance of a few paces from my post. Objects moving along
this line could merely be perceived to move, in the present obscurity.

My scrutiny was entirely directed to this quarter. Presently the treading of
many feet was heard, and several figures were discovered, following each other
in that straight and regular succession which is peculiar to the Indians. They
kept along the brow of the hill joining the promontory. I distinctly marked
seven figures in succession.

My resolution was formed. Should any one cast his eye hither, suspect, or
discover an enemy, and rush toward me, I determined to start upon my feet,
fire on my foe as he advanced, throw my piece on the ground, and then leap into
the river.

Happily, they passed unobservant and in silence. I remained, in the same
posture, for several minutes. At length, just as my alarms began to subside,
the hollows, before heard, arose, and from the same quarter as before. This
convinced me that my perils were not at an end. This now appeared to be merely
the vanguard, and would speedily be followed by others, against whom the same
caution was necessary to be taken.

My eye, anxiously bent the only way by which any one could approach, now
discerned a figure, which was indubitably that of a man armed, none other
appeared in company, but doubtless others were near. He approached, stood
still, and appeared to gaze steadfastly at the spot where I lay.

The optics of a Lennilennapee I knew to be far keener than my own. A log or a
couched fawn would never be mistaken for a man, nor a man for a couched fawn or
a log. Not only a human being would be instantly detected, but a decision be
unerringly made whether it were friend or foe. That my prostrate body was the
object on which the attention of this vigilant and steadfast gazer was fixed,
could not be doubted. Yet, since he continued an inactive gazer, there was
ground for a possibility to stand upon, that I was not recognized. My fate,
therefore, was still in suspense.

This interval was momentary. I marked a movement, which my fears instantly
interpreted to be that of leveling a gun at my head. This action was
sufficiently conformable to my prognostics. Supposing me to be detected, there
was no need for him to change his post. Aim might too fatally be taken, and his
prey be secured, from the distance at which he now stood.

These images glanced upon my thought, and put an end to my suspense.

A single effort placed me on my feet. I fired with precipitation that
precluded the certainty of hitting my mark, dropped my piece upon the ground,
and leaped from this tremendous height into the river. I reached the surface,
and sunk in a moment to the bottom.

Plunging endlong into the water, the impetus created by my fall from such an
height, would be slowly resisted by this denser element. Had the depth been
less, its resistance would not perhaps have hindered me from being mortally
injured against the rocky bottom. Had the depth been greater, time enough would
not have been allowed me to regain the surface. Had I fallen on my side, I
should have been bereaved of life or sensibility by the shock which my frame
would have received. As it was, my fate was suspended on a thread. To have lost
my presence of mind, to have forborne to counteract my sinking, for an instant,
after I had reached the water, would have made all exertions to regain the air,
fruitless. To so fortunate a concurrence of events, was thy friend indebted for
his safety!

Yet I only emerged from the gulf to encounter new perils. Scarcely had I
raised my head above the surface, and inhaled the vital breath, when twenty
shots were aimed at me from the precipice above. A shower of bullets fell upon
the water. Some of them did not fall further than two inches from my head. I
had not been aware of this new danger, and now that it assailed me continued
gasping the air, and floundering at random. The means of eluding it did not
readily occur. My case seemed desperate and all caution was dismissed.

This state of discomfiting surprise quickly disappeared. I made myself
acquainted, at a glance, with the position of surrounding objects. I conceived
that the opposite bank of the river would afford me most security, and thither
I tended with all the expedition in my power.

Meanwhile, my safety depended on eluding the bullets that continued
incessantly to strike the water at an arm's length from my body. For this end I
plunged beneath the surface, and only rose to inhale fresh air. Presently the
firing ceased, the flashes that lately illuminated the bank disappeared, and a
certain bustle and murmur of confused voices gave place to solitude and silence.

CHAPTER XXI.
I REACHED without difficulty the opposite bank, but the steep was
inaccessible. I swam along the edge in hopes of meeting with some projection or
recess where I might, at least, rest my weary limbs, and if it were necessary
to recross the river, to lay in a stock of recruited spirits and strength for
that purpose. I trusted that the water would speedily become shoal, or that the
steep would afford rest to my feet. In both these hopes I was disappointed.

There is no one to whom I would yield the superiority in swimming, but my
strength, like that of other human beings, had its limits. My previous fatigues
had been enormous, and my clothes, heavy with moisture, greatly incumbered and
retarded my movements. I had proposed to free myself from this imprisonment,
but I foresaw the inconveniences of wandering over this scene in absolute
nakedness, and was willing therefore, at whatever hazard, to retain them. I
continued to struggle with the current and to search for the means of scaling
the steeps. My search was fruitless, and I began to meditate the recrossing of
the river.

Surely my fate has never been paralleled! Where was this series of hardships
and perils to end? No sooner was one calamity eluded, than I was beset by
another. I had emerged from abhorred darkness in the heart of the earth, only
to endure the extremities of famine and encounter the fangs of a wild beast.
From these I was delivered only to be thrown into the midst of savages, to wage
an endless and hopeless war with adepts in killing; with appetites that longed
to feast upon my bowels and to quaff my heart's-blood. From these likewise was
I rescued, but merely to perish in the gulfs of the river, to welter on
unvisited shores or to be washed far away from curiosity or pity.

Formerly water was not only my field of sport but my sofa and my bed. I could
float for hours on the surface, enjoying its delicious cool, almost without the
expense of the slightest motion. It was an element as fitted for repose as for
exercise, but now the buoyant spirit seemed to have flown. My muscles were
shrunk, the air and water were equally congealed, and my most vehement
exertions were requisite to sustain me on the surface.

At first I had moved along with my wonted celerity and ease, but quickly my
forces were exhausted. My pantings and efforts were agumented and I saw that to
cross the river again was impracticable. I must continue, therefore, to search
out some accessible spot in the bank along which I was swimming.

Each moment diminished my stock of strength, and it behoved me to make good my
footing before another minute should escape. I continued to swim, to survey the
bank, and to make ineffectual attempts to grasp the rock. The shrubs which grew
upon it would not uphold me, and the fragments which, for a moment, inspired me
with hope, crumbled away as soon as they were touched.

At length, I noticed a pine, which was rooted in a crevice near the water. The
trunk, or any part of the root, was beyond my reach, but I trusted that I could
catch hold of the branch which hung lowest, and that, when caught, it would
assist me in gaining the trunk, and thus deliver me from the death which could
not be otherwise averted.

The attempt was arduous. Had it been made when I first reached the bank, no
difficulty had attended it, but now, to throw myself some feet above the
surface could scarcely be expected from one whose utmost efforts seemed to be
demanded to keep him from sinking. Yet this exploit, arduous as it was, was
attempted and accomplished. Happily the twigs were strong enough to sustain my
weight till I caught at other branches and finally placed myself upon the trunk.

This danger was now past, but I admitted the conviction that others, no less
formidable remained to be encountered and that my ultimate destiny was death. I
looked upward. New efforts might enable me to gain the summit of this steep,
but, perhaps, I should thus be placed merely in the situation from which I had
just been delivered. It was of little moment whether the scene of my
imprisonment was a dungeon not to be broken, or a summit from which descent was
impossible.

The river, indeed, severed me from a road which was level and safe, but my
recent dangers were remembered only to make me shudder at the thought of
incurring them a second time, by attempting to cross it. I blush at the
recollection of this cowardice. It was little akin to the spirit which I had
recently displayed. It was, indeed, an alien to my bosom, and was quickly
supplanted by intrepidity and perseverance.

I proceeded to mount the hill. From root to root, and from branch to branch,
lay my journey. It was finished, and I sat down upon the highest brow to
meditate on future trials. No road lay along this side of the river. It was
rugged and sterile, and farms were sparingly dispersed over it. To reach one of
these was now the object of my wishes. I had not lost the desire of reaching
Solebury before morning, but my wet clothes and the coldness of the night
seemed to have bereaved me of the power.

I traversed this summit, keeping the river on my right hand. Happily, its
declinations and ascents were by no means difficult, and I was cheered in the
midst of my vexations, by observing that every mile brought me nearer to my
uncle's dwelling. Meanwhile I anxiously looked for some tokens of an
habitation. These at length presented themselves. A wild heath, whistled over
by October blasts, meagrely adorned with the dry stalks of scented shrubs and
the bald heads of the sapless mullen, was succeeded by a fenced field and a
corn-stack. The dwelling to which these belonged was eagerly sought.

I was not surprised that all voices were still and all lights extinguished,
for this was the hour of repose. Having reached a piazza before the house, I
paused. Whether, at this drousy time, to knock for admission, to alarm the
peaceful tenants and take from them the rest which their daily toils and their
rural innocence had made so sweet, or to retire to what shelter an hay-stack or
barn could afford, was the theme of my deliberations.

Meanwhile I looked up at the house. It was the model of cleanliness and
comfort. It was built of wood; but the materials had undergone the plane, as
well as the axe and the saw. It was painted white, and the windows not only had
sashes, but these sashes were supplied, contrary to custom, with glass. In most
cases, the aperture where glass should be is stuffed with an old hat or a
petticoat. The door had not only all its parts entire, but was embellished with
mouldings and a pediment. I gathered from these tokens that this was the abode
not only of rural competence and innocence, but of some beings, raised by
education and fortune, above the intellectual mediocrity of clowns.

Methought I could claim consanguinity with such beings. Not to share their
charity and kindness would be inflicting as well as receiving injury. The
trouble of affording shelter, and warmth, and wholesome diet to a wretch
destitute as I was, would be eagerly sought by them.

Still I was unwilling to disturb them. I bethought myself that their kitchen
might be entered, and all that my necessities required be obtained without
interrupting their slumber. I needed nothing but the warmth which their kitchen
hearth would afford. Stretched upon the bricks, I might dry my clothes, and
perhaps enjoy some unmolested sleep. In spite of presages of ill and the horrid
remembrances of what I had performed and endured. I believed that nature would
afford a short respite to my cares.

I went to the door of what appeared to be a kitchen. The door was wide open.
This circumstance portended evil. Though it be not customary to lock or to
bolt, it is still less usual to have entrances unclosed. I entered with
suspicious steps, and saw enough to confirm my apprehensions. Several pieces of
wood half burned, lay in the midst of the floor. They appeared to have been
removed hither from the chimney, doubtless with a view to set fire to the whole
building.

The fire had made some progress on the floor, but had been seasonably
extinguished by pail's-full of water, thrown upon it. The floor was still
deluged with wet, the pail not emptied of all its contents stood upon the
hearth. The earthen vessels and plates whose proper place was the dresser, were
scattered in fragments in all parts of the room. I looked around me for some
one to explain this scene, but no one appeared.

The last spark of fire was put out, so that had my curiosity been idle, my
purpose could not be accomplished. To retire from this scene, neither curiosity
nor benevolence would permit. That some mortal injury had been intended was
apparent. What greater mischief had befallen, or whether greater might not, by
my interposition, be averted, could only be ascertained by penetrating further
into the house. I opened a door on one side which led to the main body of the
building and entered to a bedchamber. I stood at the entrance and knocked, but
no one answered my signals*

The sky was not totally clouded, so that some light pervaded the room. I saw
that a bed stood in the corner, but whether occupied or not, its curtains
hindered me from judging. I stood in suspense a few minutes, when a motion in
the bed showed me that some one was there. I knocked again but withdrew to the
outside of the door. This roused the sleeper, who, half-groaning and puffing
the air through his nostrils, grumbled out in the hoarsest voice that I ever
heard, and in a tone of surly impatience -- Who is there?

I hesitated for an answer, but the voice instantly continued in the manner of
one half-asleep and enraged at being disturbed -- Is It you Peg? Damn ye, stay
away, now; I tell ye stay away, or, by God I will cut your throat -- I will --
He continued to mutter and swear, but without coherence or distinctness.

These were the accents of drunkenness, and denoted a wild and ruffian life.
They were little in unison with the external appearances of the mansion, and
blasted all the hopes I had formed of meeting under this roof with gentleness
and hospitality. To talk with this being, to attempt to reason him into
humanity and soberness, was useless. I was at a loss in what manner to address
him, or whether it was proper to maintain any parley. Meanwhile, my silence was
supplied by the suggestions of his own distempered fancy. Ay, said he, ye will,
will ye? well come on, let us see who is the better at the oak-stick. If I part
with ye, before I have bared your bones -- I Will teach ye to be always dipping
in my dish, ye devil's dam! ye!

So saying, he tumbled out of bed. At the first step, he struck his head
against the bed-post, but setting himself upright, he staggered toward the
spot where I stood. Some new obstacle occurred. He stumbled and fell at his
length upon the floor.

To encounter or expostulate with a man in this state was plainly absurd. I
turned and issued forth, with an aching heart, into the court before the house.
The miseries which a debauched husband or father inflicts upon all whom their
evil destiny allies to him were pictured by my fancy, and wrung from me tears
of anguish. These images, however, quickly yielded to reflections on my own
state. No expedient now remained, but to seek the barn, and find a covering and
a bed of straw.

I had scarcely set foot within the barn-yard when I heard a sound as o the
crying of an infant. It appeared to issue from the barn. I approached softly
and listened at the door. The cries of the babe continued, but were accompanied
by entreaties of a nurse or a mother to be quiet. These entreaties were mingled
with heartbreaking sobs and exclamations of -- Ah! me, my babe! Can thou not
sleep and afford thy unhappy mother some peace? Thou art cold, and I have not
sufficient warmth to cherish thee! What will become of us? Thy deluded father
cares not if we both perish.

A glimpse of the true nature of the scene seemed to be imparted by these
words. I now likewise recollected incidents that afforded additional light.
Somewhere on this bank of the river, there formerly resided one by name Selby.
He was an aged person, who united science and taste to the simple and laborious
habits of an husbandman. He had a son who resided several years in Europe, but
on the death of his father, returned home, accompanied by a wife. He had
succeeded to the occupation of the farm, but rumor had whispered many tales to
the disadvantage of his morals. His wife was affirmed to be of delicate and
polished manners, and much unlike her companion.

It now occured to me that this was the dwelling of the Selby's, and I seemed
to have gained some insight into the discord and domestic miseries by which the
unhappy lady suffered. This was no time to waste my sympathy on others. I could
benefit her nothing. Selby had probably returned from a carousal, with all his
malignant passions raised into phrensy by intoxication. He had driven his
desolate wife from her bed and house, and to shun outrage and violence she had
fled, with her helpless infant, to the barn. To appease his fury, to console
her, to suggest a remedy for this distress, was not in my power. To have sought
an interview would be merely to excite her terrors and alarm her delicacy,
without contributing to alleviate her calamity. Here then was no asylum for me.
A place of rest must be sought at some neighboring habitation. It was probable
that one would be found at no great distance, the path that led from the spot
where I stood, through a gate into a meadow, might conduct me to the nearest
dwelling, and this path I immediately resolved to explore.

I was anxious to open the gate without noise, but I could not succeed. Some
creaking of its hinges, was unavoidably produced, which I feared would be
overheard by the lady and multiply her apprehensions and perplexities. This
inconvenience was irremediable. I therefore closed the gate and pursued the
foot way before me with the utmost expedition. I had not gained the further end
of the meadow when I lighted on something which lay across the path, and which,
on being closely, inspected, appeared to be an human body. It was the corse of
a girl, mangled by an hatchet. Her head gory and deprived of its looks, easily
explained the kind of enemies by whom she had been assailed. Here was proof
that this quiet and remote habitation had been visited, in their destructive
progress by the Indians. The girl had been slain by them, and her scalp,
according to their savage custom, had been torn away to be preserved as a
trophy.

The fire which had been kindled on the kitchen floor was now remembered, and
corroborated the inferences which were drawn from this spectacle. And yet that
the mischief had been thus limited, that the besotted wretch who lay helpless
on his bed, and careless of impending danger, and that the mother and her
infant should escape, excited some degree of surprise. Could the savages have
been interrupted in their work, and obliged to leave their vengeance unfinished?

Their visit had been recent. Many hours had not elapsed since they prowled
about these grounds. Had they wholly disappeared and meant they not to return?
To what new danger might I be exposed in remaining thus guideless and destitute
of all defense?

In consequence of these reflections, I proceeded with more caution. I looked
with suspicious glances, before and on either side of me. I now approached the
fence which, on this side, bounded the meadow. Something was discerned or
immagined, stretched close to the fence, on the ground, and filling up the
pathway. My apprehensions of a lurking enemy, had been previously awakened,
and my fancy instantly figured to itself an armed man, lying on the ground and
waiting to assail the unsuspecting passenger.

At first I was prompted to fly, but a second thought showed me that I had
already approached near enough to be endangered. Notwithstanding my pause, the
form was motionless. The possibility of being misled in my conjectures was
easily supposed. What I saw might be a log or it might be another victim to
savage ferocity. This tract was that which my safety required me to pursue. To
turn aside or go back would be merely to bewilder myself anew.

Urged by these motives, I went nearer, and at least was close enough to
perceive that the figure was human. He lay upon his face, near his right hand
was a musket, unclenched. This circumstance, his death-like attitude and the
garb and ornaments of an Indian, made me readily suspect the nature and cause
of this catastrophe. Here the invaders had been encountered and repulsed, and
one at least of their number had been left upon the field.

I was weary of contemplating these rueful objects. Custom, likewise, even in
so short a period, had innured me to spectacles of horror. I was grown callous
and immovable. I staid not to ponder on the scene, but snatching the musket,
which was now without an owner, and which might be indispensable to my defense,
I hastened into the wood. On this side the meadow was skirted by a forest, but
a beaten road lead into it, and might therefore be attempted without danger.

CHAPTER XXII.
THE road was intricate and long. It seemed designed to pervade the forest in
every possible direction. I frequently noticed cut wood, piled in heaps upon
either side, and rejoiced in these tokens that the residence of men was near.
At length I reached a second fence, which proved to be the boundary of a road
still more frequented. I pursued this, and presently beheld, before me, the
river and its opposite barriers.

This object afforded me some knowledge of my situation. There was a ford over
which travelers used to pass, and in which the road that I was now pursuing
terminated. The stream was rapid and tumultuous, but in this place it did not
rise higher than the shoulders. On the opposite side was an highway, passable
by horses and men, though not carriages, and which led into the midst of
Solebury. Should I not rush into the stream, and still aim at reaching my
uncle's house before morning* Why should I delay?

Thirty hours of incessant watchfulness and toil, of enormous efforts and
perils, preceded and accompanied by abstinence and wounds, were enough to
annihilate the strength and courage of ordinary men. In the course of them, I
had frequently believed myself to have reached the verge beyond which my force
would not carry me, but experience as frequently demonstrated my error. Though
many miles, were yet to be traversed, though my clothes were once more to be
drenched and loaded with moisture, though every hour seemed to add somewhat to
the keenness of the blast: yet how should I know, but by trial, whether my
stock of energy was not sufficient for this last exploit?

My resolution to proceed was nearly formed, when the figure of a man moving
slowly across the road, at some distance before me, was observed. Hard by this
ford lived a man by name Bisset, of whom I had slight knowledge. He tended his
two hundred acres with a plodding and money-doating spirit, while his son
overlooked a Grist-mill, on the river. He was a creature of gain, coarse and
harmless. The man whom I saw before me might be he, or some one belonging to
his family. Being armed for defense, I less scrupled a meeting with any thing
in the shape of man. I therefore called. The figure stopped and answered me,
without surliness or anger. The voice was unlike that of Bisset, but this
person's information I believed would be of some service.

Coming up to him, he proved to be a clown, belonging to Bisset's habitation.
His panic and surprise on seeing me made him aghast. In my present garb I
should not have easily been recognized by my nearest kinsman, and much less
easily by one who had seldom met me.

It may be easily conceived that my thoughts, when allowed to wander from the
objects before me, were tormented with forebodings and inquietudes on account
of the ills which I had so much reason to believe had befallen my family. I had
no doubt that some evil had happened, but the full extent of it was still
uncertain. I desired and dreaded to discover the truth, and was unable to
interrogate this person in a direct manner. I could deal only in circuities and
hints. I shuddered while I waited for an answer to my inquiries.

Had not Indians, I asked, been lately seen in this neighborhood? Were they
not suspected of hostile designs? Had they not already committed some mischief?
Some passenger, perhaps, had been attacked; or fire had been set to some house?
On which side of the river had their steps been observed, or any devastation
been committed? Above the ford or below it? At what distance from the river?

When his attention could be withdrawn from my person and bestowed upon my
questions, he answered that some alarm had indeed been spread about Indians,
and that parties from Solebury and Chetasko were out in pursuit of them, that
many persons had been killed by them, and that one house in Solebury had been
rifled and burnt on the night before the last.

These tidings were a dreadful confirmation of my fears. There scarcely
remained a doubt: but still my expiring hope prompted me to inquire to whom did
the house belong?

He answered that he had not heard the name of the owner. He was a stranger to
the people on the other side of the river.

Were any of the inhabitants murdered?

Yes. All that were at home except a girl whom they carried off. Some said that
the girl had been retaken?

What was the name? Was it Huntly?

Huntly? yes. No. He did not know. He had forgotten.

I fixed my eyes upon the ground. An interval of gloomy meditation succeeded.
All was lost, all for whose sake I desired to live, had perished by the hands
of these assassins. That dear home, the scene of my sportive childhood, of my
studies, labors and recreations, was ravaged by fire and the sword: was
reduced to a frightful ruin.

Not only all that embellished and endeared existence was destroyed, but the
means of subsistence itself. Thou know that my sister and I were dependants
on the bounty of our uncle. His death would make way for the succession of his
son, a man fraught with envy and malignity: who always testified a mortal
hatred to us, merely because we enjoyed the protection of his father. The
ground which furnished me with bread was now become the property of one, who,
if he could have done it with security, would gladly have mingled poison with
my food.

All that my imagination or my heart regarded as of value had likewise
perished. Whatever my chamber, my closets, my cabinets contained, my furniture,
my books, the records of my own skill, the monuments of their existence whom I
loved, my very clothing, were involved in indiscriminate and irretreivable
destruction. Why should I survive this calamity?

But did not he say that one had escaped? The only females in the family were
my sisters. One of these had been reserved for a fate worse than death; to
gratify the innate and insatiable cruelty of savages by suffering all the
torments their invention can suggest, or to linger out years of dreary bondage
and unintermitted hardship in the bosom of the wilderness. To restore her to
liberty; to cherish this last survivor of my unfortunate race was a sufficient
motive to life and to activity.

But soft! Had not rumor whispered that the captive was retaken? Oh! who was
her angel of deliverance? Where did she now abide? Weeping over the untimely
fall of her protector and her friend. Lamenting and upbraiding the absence of
her brother? Why should I not haste to find her? To mingle my tears with hers,
to assure her of my safety and expiate the involuntary crime of my desertion,
by devoting all futurity to the task of her consolation and improvement?

The path was open and direct. My new motives, would have trampled upon every
impediment and made me reckless of all dangers and all toils. I broke from my
reverie, and without taking leave or expressing gratitude to my informant, I
ran with frantic expedition toward the river, and plunging into it gained the
opposite side in a moment.

I was sufficiently acquainted with the road. Some twelve or fifteen miles
remained to be traversed. I did not fear that my strength would fail in the
performance of my journey. It was not my uncle's habitation to which I directed
my steps. Inglefield was my friend. If my sister had existence, or was snatched
from captivity, it was here that an asylum had been afforded to her, and here
was I to seek the knowledge of my destiny. For this reason having reached a
spot where the road divided into two branches, one of which led to Inglefield's
and the other to Huntly's, I struck into the former.

Scarcely had I passed the angle when I noticed a building, on the right hand,
at some distance from the road. In the present state of my thoughts, it would
not have attracted my attention, had not a light gleamed from an upper window,
and told me that all within were not at rest.

I was acquainted with the owner of this mansion. He merited esteem and
confidence, and could not fail to be acquainted with recent events. From him I
should obtain all the information that I needed, and I should be delivered from
some part of the agonies of my suspense. I should reach his door in a few
minutes, and the window-light was a proof that my entrance at this hour would
not disturb the family, some of whom were stirring.

Through a gate, I entered an avenue of tall oaks, that led to the house. I
could not but reflect on the effect which my appearance would produce upon the
family. The sleek locks, neat apparel, pacific guise, sobriety and gentleness
of aspect by which I was customarily distinguished, would in vain be sought in
the apparition which would now present itself before them. My legs, neck and
bosom were bare, and their native hue were exchanged for the livid marks of
bruises and scarrifications. An horrid scar upon my cheek, and my uncombed
locks; hollow eyes, made ghastly by abstinence and cold, and the ruthless
passions of which my mind had been the theater, added to the musket which I
carried in my hand, would prepossess them with the notion of a maniac or
ruffian.

Some inconveniences might hence arise, which however could not be avoided. I
must trust to the speed with which my voice and my words should disclose my
true character and rectify their mistake.

I now reached the principal door of the house. It was open, and I
unceremoniously entered. In the midst of the room stood a German stove, well
heated. To thaw my half frozen limbs was my first care. Meanwhile, I gazed
around me, and marked the appearances of things.

Two lighted candles stood upon the table. Beside them were cyder-bottles and
pipes of tobacco. The furniture and room was in that state which denoted it to
have been lately filled with drinkers and smokers, yet neither voice, nor
visage, nor motion were any where observable. I listened but neither above nor
below, within or without, could any tokens of an human being be perceived.

This vacancy and silence must have been lately preceded by noise and concourse
and bustle. The contrast was mysterious and ambiguous. No adequate cause of so
quick and absolute a transition occured to me. Having gained some warmth and
lingered some ten or twenty minutes in this uncertainty, I determined to
explore the other apartments of the building. I knew not what might betide in
my absence, or what I might encounter in my search to justify precaution, and,
therefore, kept the gun in my hand. I snatched a candle from the table and
proceeded into two other apartments on the first floor and the kitchen. Neither
was inhabited, though chairs and tables were arranged in their usual order, and
no traces of violence or hurry were apparent.

Having gained the foot of the staircase, I knocked, but my knocking was wholly
disregarded. A light had appeared in an upper chamber. It was not, indeed, in
one of those apartments which the family permanently occupied, but in that
which, according to rural custom, was reserved for guests; but it indubitably
betokened the presence of some being by whom my doubts might be solved. These
doubts were too tormenting to allow of scruples and delay. -- I mounted the
stairs.

At each chamber door I knocked, but I knocked in vain. I tried to open, but
found them to be locked. I at length reached the entrance of that in which a
light had been discovered. Here, it was certain, that some one would be found;
but here, as well as elsewhere, my knocking was unnoticed.

To enter this chamber was audacious, but no other expedient was afforded me to
determine whether the house had any inhabitants. I, therefore, entered, though
with caution and reluctance. No one was within, but there were sufficient
traces of some person who had lately been here. On the table stood a traveling
escrutoire, open, with pens and inkstand. A chair was placed before it, and a
candle on the right hand. This apparatus was rarely seen in this country. Some
traveller it seemed occupied this room, though the rest of the mansion was
deserted. The pilgrim, as these appearances testified, was of no vulgar order,
and belonged not to the class of periodical and every-day guests.

It now occurred to me that the occupant of this appartment could not be far
off, and that some danger and embarrassment could not fail to accrue from being
found, thus accoutred and garbed, in a place sacred to the study and repose of
another. It was proper, therefore, to withdraw, and either to resume my
journey, or wait for the stranger's return, whom perhaps some temporary
engagement had called away, in the lower and public room. The former now
appeared to be the best expedient, as the return of this unknown person was
uncertain, as well as his power to communicate the information which I wanted.

Had paper, as well as the implements of writing, lain upon the desk, perhaps
my lawless curiosity would not have scrupled to have pryed into it. On the
first glance nothing of that kind appeared, but now, as I turned toward the
door, somewhat, lying beside the desk, on the side opposite the candle, caught
my attention. The impulse was instantaneous and mechanical, that made me leap
to the spot, and lay my hand upon it. Till I felt it between my fingers, till I
brought it near my eyes and read frequently the inscriptions that appeared upon
it, I was doubtful whether my senses had deceived me.

Few, perhaps, among mankind have undergone vicissitudes of peril and wonder
equal to mine. The miracles of poetry, the transitions of enchantment, are
beggarly and mean compared with those which I had experienced: Passage into new
forms, overleaping the bars of time and space, reversal of the laws of
inanimate and intelligent existence had been mine to perform and to witness.

No event had been more fertile of sorrow and perplexity than the loss of thy
brother's letters. They went by means invisible, and disappeared at a moment
when foresight would have least predicted their disappearance. They now placed
themselves before me, in a manner equally abrupt, in a place and by means, no
less contrary to expectation. The papers which I now seized were those letters.
The parchment cover, the string that tied, and the wax that sealed them,
appeared not to have been opened or violated.

The power that removed them from my cabinet, and dropped them in this house, a
house which I rarely visited, which I had not entered during the last year,
with whose inhabitants I maintained no cordial intercourse, and to whom my
occupations and amusements, my joys and my sorrows, were unknown, was no object
even of conjecture. But they were not possessed by any of the family. Some
stranger was here, by whom they had been stolen, or into whose possession, they
had, by some incomprehensible chance, fallen.

That stranger was near. He had left this apartment for a moment. He would
speedily return. To go hence, might possibly occasion me to miss him. Here then
I would wait, till he should grant me an interview. The papers were mine, and
were recovered. I would never part with them. But to know by whose force or by
whose stratagems I had been bereaved of them thus long, was now the supreme
passion of my soul, I seated myself near a table and anxiously awaited for an
interview, on which I was irresistably persuaded to believe that much of my
happiness depended.

Meanwhile, I could not but connect this incident with the destruction of my
family. The loss of these papers had excited transports of grief, and yet, to
have lost them thus, was perhaps the sole expedient, by which their final
preservation could be rendered possible. Had they remained in my cabinet, they
could not have escaped the destiny which overtook the house and its furniture.
Savages are not accustomed to leave their exterminating work unfinished. The
house which they have plundered, they are careful to level with the ground.
This not only their revenge, but their caution prescribes. Fire may originate
by accident as well as by design, and the traces of pillage and murder are
totally obliterated by the flames.

These thoughts were interrupted by the shutting of a door below, and by
footsteps ascending the stairs. My heart throbbed at the sound. My seat became
uneasy and I started on my feet. I even advanced half way to the entrance of
the room. My eyes were intensely fixed upon the door. My impatience would have
made me guess at the person of this visitant by measuring his shadow, if his
shadow were first seen; but this was precluded by the position of the light. It
was only when the figure entered, and the whole person was seen, that my
curiosity was gratified. He who stood before me was the parent and fosterer of
my mind, the companion and instructor of my youth, from whom I had been parted
for years; from whom I believed myself to be forever separated; -- Sarsefield
himself!

CHAPTER XXIII.
MY deportment, at an interview so much desired and so wholly unforeseen, was
that of a maniac. The petrifying influence of surprise, yielded to the
impetuosities of passion. I held him in my arms: I wept upon his bosom, I
sobbed with emotion which, had it not found passage at my eyes, would have
burst my heart strings. Thus I who had escaped the deaths that had previously
assailed me in so many forms, should have been reserved to solemnize a scene
like this by -- dying for joy!

The sterner passions and habitual austerities of my companion, exempted him
from pouring out this testimony of his feelings. His feelings were indeed more
allied to astonishment and incredulity than mine had been. My person was not
instantly recognized. He shrunk from my embrace, as if I were an apparition or
impostor. He quickly disengaged himself from my arms, and withdrawing a few
paces, gazed upon me as on one whom he had never before seen.

These repulses were ascribed to the loss of his affection. I was not mindful
of the hideous guise in which I stood before him, and by which he might justly
be misled to imagine me a ruffian or a lunatic. My tears flowed now on a new
account, and I articulated in a broken and faint voice -- My master! my friend!
Have you forgotten! have you ceased to love me?

The sound of my voice made him start and exclaim -- Am I alive? am I awake?
Speak again I beseech you, and convince me that I am not dreaming or delirious.

Can you need any proof, I answered, that it is Edgar Huntly, your pupil, your
child that speaks to you?

He now withdrew his eyes from me and fixed them on the floor. After a pause he
resumed, in emphatic accents. Well, I have lived to this age in unbelief. To
credit or trust in miraculous agency was foreign to my nature, but now I am no
longer skeptical. Call me to any bar, and exact from me an oath that you have
twice been dead and twice recalled to life; that you move about invisibly, and
change your place by the force, not of muscles, but of thought, and I will give
it.

How came you hither? Did you penetrate the wall? Did you rise through the
floor?

Yet surely it is an error. You could not be he whom twenty witnesses affirmed
to have beheld a lifeless and mangled corpse upon the ground, whom my own eyes
saw in that condition.

In seeking the spot once more to provide you a grave, you had vanished. Again
I met you. You plunged into a rapid stream, from an height from which it was
impossible to fall and to live: yet, as if to set the limits of nature at
defiance; to sport with human penetration, you rose upon the surface: You
floated; you swam: Thirty bullets were aimed at your head, by marks-men
celebrated for the exactness of their sight. I myself was of the number, and I
never missed what I desired to hit.

My predictions were confirmed by the event. You ceased to struggle; you sunk
to rise no more, and yet after these accumulated deaths, you light upon this
floor: so far distant from the scene of your catastrophe; over spaces only to
be passed, in so short a time as has since elapsed, by those who have wings.

My eyes, my ears bear testimony to your existence now, as they formerly
convinced me of your death -- What am I to think; What proofs am I to credit?
-- There he stopped.

Every accent of this speech added to the confusion of my thoughts. The
allusions that my friend had made were not unintelligible. I gained a glimpse
of the complicated errors by which we had been mutually deceived. I had fainted
on the area before Deb's hut. I was found by Sarsefield in this condition, and
imagined to be dead.

The man whom I had seen upon the promontory was not an Indian. He belonged to
a numerous band of pursuers, whom my hostile and precipitate deportment caused
to suspect me for an enemy. They that fired from the steep were friends. The
interposition that screened me from so many bullets, was indeed miraculous. No
wonder that my voluntary sinking, in order to elude their shots, was mistaken
for death, and that, having accomplished the destruction of this foe, they
resumed their pursuit of others. But how was Sarsefield apprized that it was I
who plunged into the river? No subsequent event was possible to impart to him
the incredible truth.

A pause of mutual silence ensued. At length, Sarsefield renewed his
expressions of amazement at this interview, and besought me to explain why I
had disappeared by night from my Uncle's house, and by what series of unheard
of events this interview was brought about. Was it indeed Huntly whom he
examined and mourned over at the threshold of Deb's hut? Whom he had sought in
every thicket and cave in the ample circuit of Norwalk and Chetasco? Whom he
had seen perish in the current of the Delaware?

Instead of noticing his questions, my soul was harrowed with anxiety
respecting the fate of my uncle and sisters. Sarsefield could communicate the
tidings which would decide on my future lot, and set my portion in happiness or
misery. Yet I had not breath to speak my inquiries. Hope tottered, and I felt
as if a single word would be sufficient for its utter subversion. At length, I
articulated the name of my Uncle.

The single word sufficiently imparted my fears, and these fears needed no
verbal confirmation. At that dear name, my companion's features were overspread
by sorrow -- Your Uncle, said he, is dead.

Dead? Merciful Heaven! And my sisters too! Both?

Your Sisters are alive and well.

Nay, resumed I, in faultering accents, jest not with my feelings. Be not cruel
in your pity. Tell me the truth.

I have said the truth. They are well, at Mr. Inglefield's.

My wishes were eager to assent to the truth of these tidings. The better part
of me was then safe: but how did they escape the fate that overtook my uncle?
How did they evade the destroying hatchet and the midnight conflagration? These
doubts were imparted in a tumultuous and obscure manner to my friend. He no
sooner fully comprehended them, than he looked at me, with some inquietude and
surprise.

Huntly, said he, are you mad -- What has filled you with these hideous
prepossessions? Much havoc has indeed been committed in Chetasco and the
wilderness; and a log hut has been burnt by design or by accident in Solebury,
but that is all. Your house has not been assailed by either firebrand or
tom-hawk. Every thing is safe and in its ancient order. The master indeed is
gone, but the old man fell a victim to his own temerity and hardihood. It is
thirty years since he retired with three wounds, from the field of Braddock;
but time, in no degree, abated his adventurous and military spirit. On the
first alarm, he summoned his neighbors, and led them in pursuit of the
invaders. Alas! he was the first to attack them, and the only one who fell in
the contest.

These words were uttered in a manner that left me no room to doubt of their
truth. My uncle had already been lamented, and the discovery of the nature of
his death, so contrary to my forebodings, and of the safety of my girls, made
the state of my mind partake more of exultation and joy, than of grief or
regret.

But how was I deceived? Had not my fusil been found in the hands of an enemy?
Whence could he have plundered it but from my own chamber? It hung against the
wall of a closet; from which no stranger could have taken it except by
violence. My perplexities and doubts were not at an end, but those which
constituted my chief torment were removed. I listened to my friend's entreaties
to tell him the cause of my elopement, and the incidents that terminated in the
present interview.

I began with relating my return to consciousness in the bottom of the pit; my
efforts to free myself from this abhorred prison; the acts of horror to which I
was impelled by famine, and their excruciating consequences; my gaining the
outlet of the cavern, the desperate expedient by which I removed the impediment
to my escape, and the deliverance of the captive girl; the contest I maintained
before Deb's hut; my subsequent wanderings; the banquet which hospitality
afforded me, my journey to the river-bank; my meditations on the means of
reaching the road; my motives for hazarding my life, by plunging into the
stream; and my subsequent perils and fears till I reached the threshold of this
habitation.

Thus, continued I, I have complied with your request. I have told all that I,
myself, know. What were the incidents between my sinking to rest at
Inglefield's, and my awaking in the chambers of the hill; by which means and by
whose contrivance, preternatural of human, this transition was effected, I am
unable to explain; I cannot even guess.

What has eluded my sagacity may not be beyond the reach of another. Your own
reflections on my tale, or some facts that have fallen under your notice, may
enable you to furnish a solution. But, meanwhile, how am I to account for your
appearance on this spot? This meeting was unexpected and abrupt to you, but it
has not been less so to me. Of all mankind, Sarsefield was the farthest from my
thoughts, when I saw these tokens of a traveller and a stranger.

You were imperfectly acquainted with my wanderings. You saw me on the ground
before Deb's hut. You saw me plunge into the river. You endeavored to destroy
me while swimming; and you knew, before my narrative was heard, that Huntly was
the object of your enmity. What was the motive of your search in the desert,
and how were you apprized of my condition? These things are not less wonderful
than any of those which I have already related.

During my tale the features of Sarsefield betokened the deepest attention. His
eye strayed not a moment from my face. All my perils and forebodings, were
fresh in my remembrances, they had scarcely gone by; their skirts, so to speak,
were still visible. No wonder that my eloquence was vivid and pathetic, that I
pourtrayed the past as if it were the present scene; and that not my tongue
only, but every muscle and limb, spoke.

When I had finished my relation. Sarsefield sunk into thoughtfulness. From
this, after a time, he recovered and said: Your tale, Huntly; is true, yet, did
I not see you before me, were I not acquainted with the artlessness and
rectitude of your character, and, above all, had not my own experience, during
the last three days, confirmed every incident, I should question its truth. You
have amply gratified my curiosity, and deserve that your own, should be
gratified as fully. Listen to me.

Much has happened since we parted, which shall not be now mentioned. I
promised to inform you of my welfare by letter, and did not fail to write, but
whether my letter were received, or any were written by you in return, or if
written were ever transmitted, I cannot tell; none were ever received.

Some days since, I arrived, in company with a lady who is my wife, in America.
You have never been forgotten by me. I knew your situation to be little in
agreement with your wishes, and one of the benefits which fortune has lately
conferred upon me, is the power of snatching you from a life of labor and
obscurity; whose goods, scanty as they are, were transient and precarious; and
affording you the suitable leisure and means of intellectual gratification and
improvement.

Your silence made me entertain some doubts concerning your welfare, and even
your existence. To solve these doubts, I hastened to Solebury, some delays upon
the road, hindered me from accomplishing my journey by daylight. It was night
before I entered the Norwalk path, but my ancient rambles with you made me
familiar with it, and I was not afraid of being obstructed or bewildered.

Just as I gained the southern outlet, I spied a passenger on foot, coming
toward me with a quick pace. The incident was of no moment, and yet the time
of night, the seeming expedition of the walker, recollection of the mazes and
obstacles which he was going to encounter, and a vague conjecture that,
perhaps, he was unacquainted with the difficulties that awaited him, made me
eye him with attention as he passed.

He came near, and I thought I recognized a friend in this traveller. The form,
the gesture, the stature bore a powerful resemblance to those of Edgar Huntly.
This resemblance was so strong, that I stopped, and after he had gone by,
called him by your name. That no notice was taken of my call proved that the
person was mistaken, but even though it were another, that he should not even
hesitate or turn at a summons which he could not but perceive to be addressed,
though erroneously, to him, was the source of some surprise. I did not repeat
my call, but proceeded on my way.

All had retired to repose in your uncle's dwelling. I did not scruple to rouse
them, and was received with affectionate and joyous greetings. That you allowed
your uncle to rise before you, was a new topic of reflection. To my inquiries
concerning you, answers were made that accorded with my wishes. I was told that
you were in good health and were then abed. That you had not heard and risen at
my knocking, was mentioned with surprise, but your uncle accounted for your
indolence by saying that during the last week you had fatigued yourself by
rambling night and day, in search of some maniac, or visionary who was supposed
to have retreated into Norwalk.

I insisted upon awakening you myself. I anticipated the effect of this sudden
and unlooked for meeting, with some emotions of pride as well as of pleasure.
To find, in opening your eyes, your old preceptor standing by your bedside and
gazing in your face, would place you, I conceived, in an affecting situation.

Your chamber door was open, but your bed was empty. Your uncle and sisters
were made acquainted with this circumstance. Their surprise gave way to
conjectures that your restless and romantic spirit, had tempted you from your
repose, that you had rambled abroad on some phantastic errand, and would
probably return before the dawn. I willingly acquiesced in this opinion, and my
feelings being too thoroughly aroused to allow me to sleep, I took possession
of your chamber, and patiently awaited your return.

The morning returned but Huntly made not his appearance. Your uncle became
somewhat uneasy at this unseasonable absence. Much speculation and inquiry, as
to the possible reasons of your flight was made. In my survey of your chamber,
I noted that only part of your clothing remained beside your bed. Coat, hat,
stockings and shoes lay upon the spot where they had probably been thrown when
you had disrobed yourself, but the pantaloons, which according to Mr. Huntly's
report, completed your dress, were no where to be found. That you should go
forth on so cold a night so slenderly appareled, was almost incredible. Your
reason or your senses had deserted you, before so rash an action could be
meditated.

I now remembered the person I had met in Norwalk. His resemblance to your
figure, his garb, which wanted hat, coat, stockings and shoes, and your absence
from your bed at that hour, were remarkable coincidences: but why did you
disregard my call? Your name, uttered by a voice that could not be unknown, was
surely sufficient to arrest your steps.

Each hour added to the impatience of your friends; to their recollections and
conjectures, I listened with a view to extract from them some solution of this
mystery. At length, a story was alluded to, of some one who, on the preceding
night, had been heard walking in the long room; to this was added, the tale of
your anxieties and wonders occasioned by the loss of certain manuscripts.

While ruminating upon these incidents, and endeavoring to extract from this
intelligence a clue, explanatory of your present situation, a single word,
casually dropped by your uncle, instantly illuminated my darkness and dispelled
my doubts. -- After all, said the old man, ten to one, but Edgar himself was
the man whom we heard walking, but the lad was asleep, and knew not what he was
about.

Surely said I, this inference is just. His manuscripts could not be removed by
any hands but his own, since the rest of mankind were unacquainted not only
with the place of their concealment, but with their existence. None but a man,
insane or asleep, would wander forth so slightly dressed, and none but a
sleeper would have disregarded my calls. This conclusion was generally adopted,
but it gave birth in my mind, to infinite inquietudes. You had roved into
Norwalk, a scene of inequalities, of prominences and pits, among which, thus
destitute of the guidance of your senses, you could scarcely fail to be
destroyed, or at least, irretreivably bewildered. I painted to myself the
dangers to which you were subjected. Your careless feet would bear you into
some whirlpool or to the edge of some precipice, some internal revolution or
outward shock would recall you to consciousness at some perilous moment.
Surprise and fear would disable you from taking seasonable or suitable
precautions, and your destruction be made sure.

The lapse of every new hour, without bringing tidings of your state, enhanced
these fears. At length, the propriety of searching for you occurred, Mr. Huntly
and I determined to set out upon this pursuit, as well as to commission others.
A plan was laid by which every accessible part of Norwalk, the wilderness
beyond the flats of Solebury, and the valey of Chetasco, should be traversed
and explored.

Scarcely had we equipped ourselves for this expedition, when a messenger
arrived, who brought the disastrous news of Indians being seen within these
precincts, and on the last night a farmer was shot in his fields, a dwelling in
Chetasco was burnt to the ground, and its inhabitants murdered or made
captives. Rumor and inquiry had been busy, and a plausible conjecture had been
formed, as to the course and number of the enemies. They were said to be
divided into bands, and to amount in the whole to thirty or forty wariors. This
messenger had come to warn us of danger which might impend, and to summon us to
join in the pursuit and extirpation of these detestable foes.

Your uncle, whose alacrity and vigor age had not abated, eagerly engaged in
this scheme. I was not averse to contribute my efforts to an end like this. The
road which we had previously designed to take, in search of my fugitive pupil,
was the same by which we must trace or intercept the retreat of the savages.
Thus two purposes, equally momentous, would be answered by the same means.

Mr. Huntly armed himself with your fusil; Inglefield supplied me with a gun;
during our absence the dwelling was closed and locked, and your sisters placed
under the protections of Inglefield, whose age and pacific sentiments unfitted
him for arduous and sanguinary enterprises. A troop of rustics was collected,
half of whom remained to traverse Solebury and the other, whom Mr. Huntly and I
accompanied, hastened to Chetasco.

CHAPTER XXIV.
IT was noon day before we reached the theater of action. Fear and revenge
combined to make the people of Chetasco diligent and zealous in their own
defense. The havoc already committed had been mournful. To prevent a
repetition of the same calamities, they resolved to hunt out the hostile
footsteps and exact a merciless retribution.

It was likely that the enemy, on the approach of day, had withdrawn from the
valley and concealed themselves in the thickets, between the parrallel ridges
of the mountain. This space, which according to the object with which it is
compared is either a vale or the top of an hill, was obscure and desolate. It
was undoubtedly the avenue by which the robbers had issued forth, and by which
they would escape to the Ohio. Here they might still remain, intending to
immerge from their concealment on the next night, and perpetrate new horrors.

A certain distribution was made of our number, so as to move in all directions
at the same time. I will not dwell upon particulars. It will suffice to say
that keep eyes and indefatigable feet, brought us at last to the presence of
the largest number of those marauders. Seven of them were slain by the edge of
a brook, where they sat wholly unconscious of the danger which hung over them.
Five escaped, and one of these secured his retreat by wresting your fusil from
your uncle, and shooting him dead. Before our companion could be rescued or
revenged, the assassin, with the remnant of the troop, disappeared, and bore
away with him the fusil as a trophy of his victory.

This disaster was deplored not only on account of that life which had thus
been sacrificed, but because a sagacious guide and intrepid leader was lost.
His acquaintance with the habits of the Indians, and his experience in their
wars made him trace their footsteps with more certainty than any of his
associates.

The pursuit was still continued, and parties were so stationed that the escape
of the enemy was difficult, if not impossible. Our search was unremitted, but
during twelve or fourteen hours, unsuccessful. Queen Mab did not elude all
suspicion. Her hut was visited by different parties, but the old woman and her
dogs had disappeared.

Meanwhile your situation was not forgotten. Every one was charged to explore
your footsteps as well as those of the savages, but this search was no less
unsuccessful than the former. None had heard of you or seen you.

This continued till midnight. Three of us, made a pause at a brook, and
intended to repair our fatigues by a respite of a few hours, but scarcely had
we stretched ourselves on the ground when we were alarmed by a shot which
seemed to have been fired at a short distance. We started on our feet and
consulted with each other on the measure to be taken. A second, a third and a
fourth shot, from the same quarter, excited our attention anew. Mab's hut was
known to stand at the distance and in the direction of this sound, and hither
we resolved to repair.

This was done with speed but with the utmost circumspection. We shortly gained
the road that leads near this hut and at length gained a view of the building.
Many persons were discovered, in a sort of bustling inactivity, before the hut.
They were easily distinguised to be friends, and were therefore approached
without scruple.

The objects that presented themselves to a nearer view were five bodies
stretched upon the ground. Three of them were savages. The fourth was a girl,
who though alive seemed to have received a mortal wound. The fifth, breathless
and mangled and his features almost concealed by the blood that overspread his
face, was Edgar; the fugitive for whom I had made such anxious search.

About the same hour on the last night I had met you hastening into Norwalk.
Now were you, lying in the midst of savages, at the distance of thirty miles
from your home, and in a spot, which it was impossible for you to have reached
unless by an immense circuit over rocks and thickets. That you had found a rift
at the basis of the hill, and thus permeated its solidities, and thus precluded
so tedious and circuitous a journey as must otherwise have been made, was not
to be imagined.

But whence arose this scene? It was obvious to conclude that my associates had
surprised their enemies in this house, and exacted from them the forfeit of
their crimes, but how you should have been confounded with their foes, or
whence came the wounded girl was a subject of astonishment.

You will judge how much this surprise was augmented when I was informed that
the party whom we found had been attracted hither by the same signals, by which
we had been alarmed. That on reaching this spot you had been discovered, alive,
seated on the ground and still sustaining the gun with which you had apparently
completed the destruction of so many adversaries. In a moment after their
arrival you sunk down and expired.

This scene was attended with inexplicable circumstances. The musket which lay
beside you appeared to have belonged to one of the savages. The wound by which
each had died was single. Of the four shots we had distinguished at as
distance, three of them were therefore fatal to the Indians and the fourth was
doubtless that by which you had fallen, yet three muskets only were
discoverable.

The arms were collected, and the girl carried to the nearest house in the arms
of her father. Her situation was deemed capable of remedy, and the sorrow and
wonder which I felt at your untimely and extraordinary fate, did not hinder me
from endeavoring to restore the health of this unfortunate victim. I reflected
likewise that some light might be thrown upon transactions so mysterious, by
the information which might be collected from her story. Numberless questions
and hints were necessary to extract from her a consistent or intelligible tale.
She had been dragged, it seems, for miles, at the heels, of her conquerors, who
at length, stopped in a cavern for the sake of some repose; all slept but one,
who sat and watched. Something called him away, and, at the same moment, you
appeared at the bottom of the cave half naked and without arms. You instantly
supplied that last deficiency, by seizing the gun and tomhawk of him who had
gone forth, and who had negligently left his weapons behind. Then stepping over
the bodies of the sleepers, you rushed out of the cavern.

She then mentioned your unexpected return, her deliverance and flight, and
arrival at Deb's hut. You watched upon the hearth and she fell asleep upon the
blanket. From this sleep she was aroused by violent and cruel blows. She looked
up: -- you were gone and the bed on which she lay was surrounded by the men
from whom she had so lately escaped. One dragged her out of the hut and
levelled his gun at her breast. At the moment when he touched the trigger, a
shot came from an unknown quarter, and he fell at her feet. Of subsequent
events she had an incoherent recollection. The Indians were successively slain,
and you came to her, and interrogated and consoled her.

In your journey to the hut you were armed. This in some degree accounted for
appearances, but where were your arms? Three muskets only were discovered and
these undoubtedly belonged to your enemies.

I now had leisure to reflect upon your destiny. I had arrived soon enough on
this shore merely to witness the catastrophe of two beings whom I most loved.
Both were overtaken by the same fate, nearly at the same hour. The same hand
had possibly accomplished the destruction of uncle and nephew.

Now, however, I began to entertain an hope that your state might not be
irretreivable. You had walked and spoken after the firing had ceased, and your
enemies had ceased to contend with you. A wound had, no doubt, been previously
received. I had hastily inferred that the wound was mortal, and that life could
not be recalled. Occupied with attention to the wailings of the girl, and full
of sorrow and perplexity I had admitted an opinion which would have never been
adopted in different circumstances. My acquaintance with wounds would have
taught me to regard sunken muscles, lividness and cessation of the pulse as
mere indications of a swoon, and not as tokens of death.

Perhaps my error was not irreparable. By hastening to the hut, I might
ascertain your condition and at least transport your remains to some dwelling
and finally secure to you the decencies of burial.

Of twelve savages, discovered on the preceding day, ten were now killed. Two,
at least remained, after whom the pursuit was still zealously maintained.
Attention to the wounded girl, had withdrawn me from the party, and I had now
leisure to return to the scene of these disasters. The sun had risen, and,
accompanied by two others, I repaired thither.

A sharp turn in the road, at the entrance of the field, set before us a
starting spectacle. An Indian, mangled by repeated wounds of bayonet and
bullet, was discovered. His musket was stuck in the ground, by way of beacon
attracting our attention to the spot. Over this space I had gone a few hours
before, and nothing like this was then seen. The parties abroad, had hied away
to a distant quarter. Some invisible power seemed to be enlisted in our defense
and to preclude the necessity of our arms.

We proceeded to the hut. The savages were there, but Edgar had risen and
flown! Nothing now seemed to be incredible. You had slain three foes, and the
weapon with which the victory had been achieved, had vanished. You had risen
from the dead, had assailed one of the surviving enemies, had employed bullet
and dagger in his destruction, with both of which you could only be supplied by
supernatural means, and had disappeared. If any inhabitant of Chetasco had done
this, we should have heard of it.

But what remained? You were still alive. Your strength was sufficient to bear
you from this spot. Why were you still invisible and to what dangers might you
not be exposed, before you could disinvolve yourself from the (...) of this
wilderness?

Once more I procured indefatigable search to be made after you. It was
continued till the approach of evening and was fruitless. Inquiries were twice
made at the house where you were supplied with food and intelligence. On the
second call I was astonished and delighted by the tidings received from the
good woman. Your person and demeanor and arms were described, and mention made
of your resolution to cross the southern ridge, and traverse the Solebury road
with the utmost expedition.

The greater part of my inquietudes were now removed. You were able to eat and
to travel, and there was little doubt that a meeting would take place between
us on the next morning. Meanwhile, I determined to concur with those who
pursued the remainder of the enemy. I followed you, in the path that you were
said to have taken, and quickly joined a numerous party who were searching for
those who, on the last night, had attacked a plantation that lies near this,
and destroyed the inhabitants.

I need not dwell upon our doublings and circuities. The enemy was traced to
the house of Selby. They had entered, they had put fire on the floor, but were
compelled to relinquish their prey. Of what number they consisted could not be
ascertained, but one, lingering behind his fellows, was shot, at the entrance
of the wood, and on the spot where you chanced to light upon him.

Selby's house was empty, and before the fire had made any progress we
extinguished it. The drunken wretch whom you encountered, had probably returned
from his nocturnal debauch, after we had left the spot.

The flying enemy was pursued with fresh diligence. They were found, by various
tokens, to have crossed the river, and to have ascended the mountain. We trod
closely on their heels. When we arrived at the promontory, described by you,
the fatigues of the night and day rendered me unqualified to proceed, I
determined that this should be the bound of my excursions. I was anxious to
obtain an interview with you, and unless I paused here, should not be able to
gain Inglefield's as early in the morning as I wished. Two others concurred
with me in this resolution and prepared to return to this house which had been
deserted by its tenants till the danger was past and which had been selected as
the place of rendezvous.

At this moment, dejected and weary, I approached the ledge which severed the
head-land from the mountain. I marked the appearance of some one stretched upon
the ground where you lay. No domestic animal would wander hither and place
himself upon this spot. There was something likewise in the appearance of the
object that bespoke it to be man, but if it were man, it was, incontrovertibly,
a savage and a foe. I determined therefore to rouse you by a bullet.

My decision was perhaps absurd. I ought to have gained more certainty before I
hazarded your destruction. Be that as it will, a moments lingering on your part
would have probably been fatal. You started on your feet, and fired. See the
hole which your random shot made through my sleeve! This surely was a day
destined to be signalized by hair-breadth escapes.

Your action seemed incontestably to confirm my prognostics. Every one hurried
to the spot and was eager to destroy an enemy. No one hesitated to believe that
some of the shots aimed at you, had reached their mark, and that you had sunk
to rise no more.

The gun which was fired and thrown down was taken and examined. It had been my
companion in many a toilsome expedition. It had rescued me and my friends from
a thousand deaths. In order to recognize it, I needed only to touch and handle
it. I instantly discovered that I held in my hand the fusil which I had left
with you on parting, with which your uncle had equipped himself, and which had
been ravished from him by a savage. What was I hence to infer respecting the
person of the last possessor?

My inquiries respecting you of the woman whose milk and bread you had eaten,
were minute. You entered, she said, with an hatchet and gun in your hand. While
you ate, the gun was laid upon the table. She sat near, and the piece became
the object of inquisitive attention. The stock and barrels were described by
her in such terms as left no doubt that this was the Fusil.

A comparison of incidents enabled me to trace the manner in which you came
into possession of this instrument. One of those whom you found in the cavern
was the assassin of your uncle. According to the girl's report, on issuing from
your hiding place, you seized a gun that was unoccupied, and this gun chanced
to be your own.

Its two barrels was probably the cause of your success in that unequal contest
at Mab's hut. On recovering from deliquium, you found it where it had been
dropped by you, out of sight and unsuspected by the party that had afterward
arrived. In your passage to the river had it once more fallen into hostile
hands, or, had you missed the way, wandered to this promontory, and mistaken a
troop of friends for a band of Indian marauders?

Either supposition was dreadful. The latter was the most plausible. No motives
were conceivable by which one of the fugitives could be induced to post himself
here, in this conspicuous station: whereas, the road which lead you to the
summit of the hill, to that spot where descent to the river road was
practicable, could not be found but by those who were accustomed to traverse
it. The directions which you had exacted from your hostess, proved your
previous unacquaintance with these tracts.

I acquiesced in this opinion with an heavy and desponding heart. Fate had led
us into a maze, which could only terminate in the destruction of one or of the
other. By the breadth of an hair, had I escaped death from your hand. The same
fortune had not befriended you. After my tedious search, I had lighted on you,
forlorn, bewildered, perishing with cold and hunger. Instead of recognizing and
affording you relief, I compelled you to leap into the river, from a perilous
height, and had desisted from my persecution only when I had bereaved you of
life, and plunged you to the bottom of the gulf.

My motives in coming to America were numerous and mixed. Among these was the
parental affection with which you had inspired me. I came with fortune and a
better gift than fortune in my hand. I intended to bestow both upon you, not
only to give you competence, but one who would endear to you that competence,
who would enhance, by participating, every gratification.

My schemes were now at an end. You were gone, beyond the reach of my
benevolence and justice. I had robbed your two sisters of a friend and
guardian. It was some consolation to think that it was in my power to stand,
with regard to them, in your place, that I could snatch them from the poverty,
dependence and humiliation, to which your death and that of your uncle had
reduced them.

I was now doubly weary of the enterprise in which I was engaged, and returned,
with speed, to this rendezvous. My companions have gone to know the state of
the family who resided under this roof and left me to beguile the tedious
moments in whatever manner I pleased.

I have omitted mentioning one incident that happened between the detection of
your flight and our expedition to Chetasco. Having formed a plausible
conjecture as to him who walked in the Long-room, it was obvious to conclude
that he who purloined your manuscripts and the walker were the same personage.
It was likewise easily inferred that the letters were secreted in the Cedar
Chest or in some other part of the room. Instances similar to this have
heretofore occurred. Men have employed anxious months in search of that which,
in a freak of Noctambulation, was hidden by their own hands.

A search was immediately commenced, and your letters were found, carefully
concealed between the rafters and shingles of the roof, in a spot, where, if
suspicion had not been previously excited, they would have remained till the
vernal rains and the summer heats, had insensibly destroyed them. This packet
I carried with me, knowing the value which you set upon them, and there being
no receptacle equally safe, but your own cabinet, which was locked.

Having, as I said, reached this house, and being left alone, I bethought me of
the treasure I possessed. I was unacquainted with the reasons for which these
papers were so precious. They probably had some momentous and intimate
connection with your own history. As such they could not be of little value to
me, and this moment of inoccupation and regrets, was as suitable as any other
to the task of perusing them. I drew them forth, therefore, and laid them on
the table in this chamber.

The rest is known to you. During a momentary absence you entered. Surely no
interview of ancient friends ever took place in so unexpected and abrupt a
manner. You were dead. I mourned for you, as one whom I loved, and whom fate
had snatched forever from my sight. Now, in a blissful hour, you had risen, and
my happiness in thus embracing you, is tenfold greater than would have been
experienced, if no uncertainties and perils had protracted our meeting.

CHAPTER XXV.
HERE ended the tale of Sarsefield. Humiliation and joy were mingled in my
heart. The events that preceded my awakening in the cave were now luminous and
plain. What explication was more obvious? What but this solution ought to have
been suggested by the conduct I had witnessed in Clithero?

Clithero! Was not this the man whom Clithero had robbed of his friend? Was not
this the lover of Mrs. Lorimer, the object of the persecutions of Wiatte? Was
it not now given me to investigate the truth of that stupendous tale? To
dissipate the doubts which obstinately clung to my imagination respecting it?

But soft! Had not Sarsefield said that he was married? Was Mrs. Lorimer so
speedily forgotten by him, or was the narrative of Clithero the web of
imposture or the raving of insantiy?

These new ideas banished all personal considerations from my mind. I looked
eagerly into the face of my friend, and exclaimed in a dubious accent -- How
say you? Married? When? To whom?

Yes, Huntly, I am wedded to the most excellent of women. To her am I indebted
for happiness and wealth and dignity and honor. To her do I owe the power of
being the benefactor and protector of you and your sisters. She longs to
embrace you as a son. To become truly her son, will depend upon your own choice
and that of one, who was the companion of our voyage.

Heavens! cried I, in a transport of exultation and astonishment. Of whom do
you speak. Of the mother of Clarice? The sister of Wiatte? The sister of the
ruffian who laid snares for her life? Who pursued you and the unhappy Clithero,
with the bitterest animosity?

My friend started at these sounds as if the earth had yawned at his feet. His
countenance was equally significant of terror and rage. As soon as he regained
the power of utterance, he spoke -- Clithero! Curses light upon thy lips for
having uttered that detested name! Thousands of miles have I flown to shun the
hearing of it. Is the madman here? Have you set eyes upon him? Does he yet
crawl upon the face of the earth? Unhappy? Unparalleled, unheard of, thankless
miscreant! Has he told his execrable falsehoods here? Has he dared to utter
names so sacred as those of Euphemia Lorimer and Clarice?

He has: He has told a tale, that had all the appearances of truth --

Out upon the villain! The truth! Truth would prove him to be unnatural;
develish; a thing for which no language has yet provided a name! He has called
himself unhappy? No doubt, a victim to injustice! Overtaken by unmerited
calamity. Say! Has he fooled thee with such tales?

No. His tale was a catalogue of crimes and miseries of which he was the author
and sufferer. You know not his motives, his horrors: --

His deeds were monstrous and infernal. His motives were sordid and flagitious.
To display all their ugliness and infamy was not his province. No: He did not
tell you that he stole at midnight to the chamber of his mistress: a woman who
astonised the world by her loftiness and magnanimity; by indefatigable
beneficence and unswerving equity; who had lavished on this wretch, whom she
snatched from the dirt, all the goods of fortune; all the benefits of
education; all the treasures of love; every provocation to gratitude; every
stimulant to justice.

He did not tell you that in recompense for every benefit, he stole upon her
sleep and aimed a dagger at her breast. There was no room for flight or
ambiguity or prevarication. She whom he meant to murder stood near, saw the
lifted weapon, and heard him confess and glory in his purposes.

No wonder that the shock bereft her, for a time, of life. The interval was
seized by the ruffian to effect his escape. The rebukes of justice, were
shunned by a wretch conscious of his inexpiable guilt. These things he has
hidden from you, and has supplied their place by a tale specious as false.

No. Among the number of his crimes, hypocrisy is not to be numbered. These
things are already known to me: he spared himself too little in the narrative.
The excellencies of his lady; her claims to gratitude and veneration, were
urged beyond their true bounds. His attempts upon her life, were related. It is
true that he desired and endeavored to destroy her.

How? Has he told you this?

He has told me all. Alas! the criminal intention has been amply expiated --

What mean you? Whence and how came he hither. Where is he now? I will not
occupy the same land, the same world with him. Have this woman and her daughter
lighted on the shore haunted by this infernal and implacable enemy?

Alas! It is doubtful whether he exists. If he lives, he is no longer to be
feared; but he lives not. Famine and remorse have utterly consumed him.

Famine? Remorse? You talk in riddles.

He has immured himself in the desert. He has abjured the intercourse of
mankind. He has shut himself in caverns where famine must inevitably expedite
that death for which he longs as the only solace of his woes. To no imagination
are his offenses blacker and more odious than to his own. I had hopes of
rescuing him from this fate, but my own infirmities and errors have afforded me
sufficient occupation.

Sarsefield renewed his imprecations on the memory of that unfortunate man: and
his inquiries as to the circumstances that led him into this remote district.
His inquiries were not to be answered by one in my present condition -- My
languors and fatigues had now gained a pitch that was insupportable. The wound
in my face had been chafed, and inflamed by the cold water and the bleak air;
and the pain attending it, would no longer suffer my attention to stray. I sunk
upon the floor, and entreated him to afford me the respite of a few hours
repose.

He was sensible of the deplorableness of my condition, and chid himself for
the negligence of which he had already been guilty. He lifted me to the bed,
and deliberated on the mode he should pursue for my relief. Some molifying
application to my wound, was immediately necessary; but in our present lonely
condition, it was not at hand. It could only be procured from a distance. It
was proper therefore to hasten to the nearest inhabited dwelling, which
belonged to one, by name Walton, and supply himself with such medicines as
could be found.

Meanwhile there was no danger of molestation and intrusion. There was reason
to expect the speedy return of those who had gone in pursuit of the savages.
This was their place of rendezvous, and hither they appointed to re-assemble
before the morrow's dawn. The distance of the neighboring farm was small, and
Sarsefield promised to be expeditious. He left me to myself and my own
ruminations.

Harrassed by fatigue and pain, I had yet power to ruminate on that series of
unparalleled events, that had lately happened. I wept, but my tears flowed from
a double source; from sorrow, on account of the untimely fate of my uncle, and
from joy, that my sisters were preserved, that Sarsefield had returned and was
not unhappy.

I reflected on the untoward destiny of Clithero. Part of his calamity
consisted in the consciousness of having killed his patronness; but it now
appeared, though by some infatuation, I had not previously suspected, that the
first impulse of sorrow in the lady, had been weakened by reflection and by
time. That the prejudice persuading her that her life and that of her brother
were to endure and to terminate together, was conquered by experience or by
argument. She had come, in company with Sarsefield and Clarice to America. What
influence might these events have upon the gloomy meditations of Clithero. Was
it possible to bring them together; to win the maniac from his solitude, wrest
from him his fatal purposes, and restore him to communion with the beings whose
imagined indignation is the torment of his life.

These musings were interrupted by a sound from below which were easily
interpreted into tokens of the return of those with whom Sarsefield had parted
at the promontory, voices were confused and busy but not turbulent. They
entered the lower room and the motion of chairs and tables showed that they
were preparing to rest themselves after their toils.

Few of them were unacquainted with me, since they probably were residents in
this district. No inconvenience, therefore, would follow from an interview,
though, on their part, wholly unexpected. Besides, Sarsefield would speelily
return and none of the present visitants would be likely to withdraw to this
apartment.

Meanwhile I lay upon the bed, with my face turned toward the door, and
anguidly gazing at the ceiling and walls. ust then a musket was discharged in
he room below. The shock affected me mechanically and the first impulse of
surprise, made me almost start upon my feet.

The sound was followed by confusion and bustle. Some rushed forth and called
on each other to run different ways, and the words "That is he" --

"Stop him" were spoken in a tone of eagerness, and rage. My weakness and pain
were for a moment forgotten, and my whole attention was bent to discover the
meaning of this hubbub. The musket which I had brought with me to this
chamber, lay across the bed. Unknowing of the consequences of this affray, with
regard to myself, I was prompted by a kind of self-preserving instinct, to lay
hold of the gun, and prepare to repel any attack that might be made upon me.

A few moments elapsed when I thought I heard light footsteps in the entry
leading to this room. I had no time to construe these signals, but watching
fearfully the entrance, I grasped my weapon with new force, and raised it so as
to be ready at the moment of my danger. I did not watch long. A figure
cautiously thrust itself forward. The first glance was sufficient to inform me
that this intruder was an Indian, and, of consequence, an enemy. He was
unarmed. Looking eagerly on all sides, he at last spied me as I lay. My
appearance threw him into consternation, and after the fluctuation of an
instant, he darted to the window, threw up the sash, and leaped out upon the
ground.

His flight might have been easily arrested by my shot, but surprise, added to
my habitual antipathy to bloodshed, unless in cases of absolute necessity, made
me hesitate. He was gone, and I was left to mark the progress of the drama. The
silence was presently broken by firing at a distance. Three shots, in quick
succession, were followed by the deepest pause.

That the party, recently arrived, had brought with them one or more captives,
and that by some sudden effort, the prisoners had attempted to escape, was the
only supposition that I could form. By what motives either of them could be
induced to seek concealment in my chamber, could not be imagined.

I now heard a single step on the threshold below. Some one entered the common
room. He traversed the floor during a few minutes, and then, ascending the
staircase, he entered my chamber. It was Sarsefield. Trouble and dismay were
strongly written on his countenance. He seemed totally unconscious of my
presence, his eyes were fixed upon the floor, and as he continued to move
across the room, he heaved forth deep sighs.

This deportment was mournful and mysterious. It was little in unison with
those appearances which he wore at our parting, and must have been suggested by
some event that had since happened. My curiosity impelled me to recall him from
his reverie. I rose and seizing him by the arm, looked at him with an air of
inquisitive anxiety. It was needless to speak.

He noticed my movement, and turning toward me, spoke in a tone of some
resentment -- Why did you deceive me? Did you not say Clithero was dead?

I said so because it was my belief. Know you any thing to the contrary? Heaven
grant that he is still alive, and that our mutual efforts may restore him to
peace.

Heaven grant, replied my friend, with a vehemence that bordered upon fury.
Heaven grant that he may live thousands of years, and know not, in their long
course, a moments respite from remorse and from anguish; but this prayer is
fruitless. He is not dead, but death hovers over him. Should he live, he will
live only to defy justice and perpetrate new horrors. My skill might perhaps
save him, but a finger shall not be moved to avert his fate.

Little did I think, that the wretch whom my friends rescued from the power of
the savages, and brought wounded and expiring hither was Clithero. They sent
for me in haste to afford him surgical assistance. I found him stretched upon
the floor below, deserted, helpless and bleeding. The moment I beheld him, he
was recognized. The last of evils was to look upon the face of this assassion,
but that evil is past, and shall never be endured again.

Rise and come with me. Accommodation is prepared for you at Walcots. Let us
leave this house, and the moment you are able to perform a journey, abandon
forever this district.

I could not readily consent to this proposal. Clithero had been delivered from
captivity but was dying for want of that aid which Sarsefield was able to
afford. Was it not inhuman to desert him in this extremity? What offense had he
committed that deserved such implacable vengeance? Nothing I had heard from
Sarsefield was in contradiction to his own story. His deed, imperfectly
observed, would appear to be atrocious and detestable, but the view of all its
antecedent and accompanying events and motives, would surely place it in the
list not of crimes, but of misfortunes.

But what is that guilt which no penitence can expiate? Had not Clithero's
remorse been more than adequate to crimes far more deadly and enormous than
this? This, however, was no time to argue with the passions of Sarsefield.
Nothing but a repetition of Clithero's tale, could vanquish his prepossessions
and mollify his rage; but this repetition was impossible to be given by me,
till a moment of safety and composure.

These thoughts made me linger, but hindered me from attempting to change the
determination of my friend. He renewed his importunities for me to fly with
him. He dragged me by the arm, and wavering and reluctant I followed where he
chose to lead. He crossed the common-room, with hurried steps and eyes averted
from a figure, which instantly fastened my attention.

It was, indeed, Clithero, whom I now beheld, supine, polluted with blood, his
eyes closed and apparently insensible. This object was gazed at with emotions
that rooted me to the spot. Sarsefield, perceiving me determined to remain
where I was, rushed out of the house, and disappeared.

CHAPTER XXVI.
I HUNG over the unhappy wretch whose emaciated form and rueful features,
sufficiently bespoke that savage hands had only completed that destruction
which his miseries had begun. He was mangled by the tom-hawk in a shocking
manner, and there was little hope that human skill could save his life.

I was sensible of nothing but compassion. I acted without design, when seating
myself on the floor I raised his head and placed it on my knees. This movement
awakened his attention, and opening his eyes he fixed them on my countenance.
They testified neither insensibility, nor horror nor distraction. A faint
emotion of surprise gave way to an appearance of tranquillity -- Having
perceived these tokens of a state less hopeless than I at first imagined, I
spoke to him: -- My friend! How do you feel? Can any thing be done for you?

He answered me, in a tone more firm and with more coherence of ideas than
previous appearances had taught me to expect. No, said he, thy kindness good
youth, can avail me nothing. The end of my existence here is at hand. May my
guilt be expiated by the miseries that I have suffered, and my good deeds only
attend me to the presence of my divine judge.

I am waiting, not with trembling or dismay, for this close of my sorrows. I
breathed but one prayer, and that prayer has been answered. I asked for an
interview with thee, young man, but feeling as I now feel, this interview, so
much desired, was beyond my hope. Now thou art come, in due season, to hear the
last words that I shall need to utter.

I wanted to assure thee that thy efforts for my benefit were not useless. They
have saved me from murdering myself, a guilt more inexpiable than any which it
was in my power to commit.

I retired to the innermost recess of Norwalk, and gained the summit of an
hill, by subterranean paths. This hill I knew to be on all sides inaccessible
to human footsteps, and the subterranean passages was closed up by stones. Here
I believed my solitude exempt from interruption and my death, in consequence of
famine, sure.

This persuasion was not taken away by your appearance on the opposite steep.
The chasm which severed us I knew to be impassable. I withdrew from your sight.

Some time after, awakening from a long sleep, I found victuals beside me. He
that brought it was invisible. For a time, I doubted whether some messenger of
heaven had not interposed for my salvation. How other than by supernatural
means, my retreat should be explored, I was unable to conceive. The summit was
encompassed by dizzy and profound gulfs, and the subterranean passages was
still closed.

This opinion, though corrected by subsequent reflection, tended to change the
course of my desperate thoughts. My hunger, thus importunately urged, would not
abstain, and I ate of the food that was provided. Henceforth I determined to
live, to resume the path of obscurity and labor, which I had relinquished, and
wait till my God should summon me to retribution. To anticipate his call, is
only to redouble our guilt.

I designed not to return to Inglefield's service, but to choose some other and
remoter district. Meanwhile, I had left in his possession, a treasure, which my
determination to die, had rendered of no value, but which, my change of
resolution, restored. Enclosed in a box at Inglefield's, were the memoirs of
Euphemia Lorimer, by which in all my vicissitudes, I had been hitherto
accompanied, and from which I consented to part only because I had refused to
live. My existence was now to be prolonged and this manuscript was once more to
constitute the torment and the solace of my being.

I hastened to Inglefield's by night. There was no need to warn him of my
purpose. I desired that my fate should be an eternal secret to my ancient
master and his neighbors. The apartment, containing my box was well known, and
easily accessible.

The box was found but broken and rifled of its treasure. My transports of
astonishment, and indignation and grief yielded to the resumption of my fatal
purpose. I hastened back to the hill, and determined anew to perish.

This mood continued to the evening of the ensuing day. Wandering over rocks
and pits, I discovered the manuscript, lying under a jutting precipice. The
chance that brought it hither was not less propitious and miraculous than that
by which I had been supplied with food. It produced a similar effect upon my
feelings, and, while in possession of this manuscript I was reconciled to the
means of life. I left the mountain, and traversing the wilderness, stopped in
Chetasco. That kind of employment which I sought was instantly procured; but my
new vocation was scarcely assumed when a band of savages invaded our security.

Rambling in the desert, by moonlight, I encountered these foes. They rushed
upon me, and after numerous wounds which, for the present, neither killed nor
disabled me, they compelled me to keep pace with them in their retreat. Some
hours have passed since the troop was overtaken, and my liberty redeemed.
Hardships, and repeated wounds, inflicted at the moment when the invaders were
surprised and slain, have brought me to my present condition. I rejoice that my
course is about to terminate.

Here the speaker was interrupted by the tumultuous entrance of the party, by
whom he had been brought hither. Their astonishment at seeing me, sustaining
the head of the dying man, may be easily conceived. Their surprise was more
strongly excited by the disappearance of the captive whom they had left in this
apartment, bound hand and foot. It now appeared that of the savage troop who
had adventured thus far in search of pillage and blood, all had been destroyed
but two, who, had been led hither as prisoners. On their entrance into this
house, one of the party had been sent to Walcot's to summon Sarsefield to the
aid of the wounded man, while others had gone in search of chords to secure the
arms and legs of the captives, who had hitherto been manacled imperfectly.

The chords were brought and one of them was bound, but the other, before the
same operation was begun upon him, broke, by a sudden effort, the feeble
ligatures by which he was at present constrained, and seizing a musket that
lay near him, fired on his enemies, and then rushed out of doors. All eagerly
engaged in the pursuit. The savage was fleet as a deer and finally eluded his
pursuers.

While their attention was thus engaged abroad, he that remained found means to
extricate his wrists and ancles from his bonds and betaking himself to the
stairs, escaped, as I before described, through the window of the room which I
had occupied. They pestered me with their curiosity and wonder, for I was known
to all of them; but waving the discussion of my own concerns I entreated their
assistance to carry Clithero to the chamber and the bed which I had just
deserted.

I now in spite of pain, fatigue and watchfulness, set out to go to Walton's.
Sarsefield was ready to receive me at the door, and the kindness and compassion
of the family were active in my behalf. I was conducted to a chamber and
provided with suitable attendance and remedies.

I was not unmindful of the more deplorable condition of Clithero. I
incessantly meditated on the means for his relief. His case stood in need of
all the vigilance and skill of a physician, and Sarsefield was the only one of
that profession whose aid could be seasonably administered. Sarsefield
therefore must be persuaded to bestow this aid.

There was but one mode of conquering his abhorrence of this man. To prepossess
my friend with the belief of the innocence of Clithero, or to soothe him into
pity by a picture of remorse and suffering. This could best be done, and in the
manner most conformable to truth, by a simple recital of the incidents that had
befallen, and by repeating the confession which had been extorted from Clithero.

I requested all but my friend to leave my chamber, and then, soliciting a
patient hearing, began the narrative of Waldegrave's death! of the detection of
Clithero beneath the shade of the elm! of the suspicions which were thence
produced; and of the forest interview to which these suspicions gave birth; I
then repeated, without variation or addition, the tale which was then told. I
likewise mentioned my subsequent transactions in Norwalk so far as they
illustrated the destiny of Clithero.

During this recital, I fixed my eyes upon the countenance of Sarsefield, and
watched every emotion as it rose or declined. With the progress of my tale, his
indignation and his fury grew less, and at length gave place to horror and
compassion.

His seat became uneasy, his pulse throbbed with new vehemence. When I came to
the motives which prompted the unhappy man to visit the chamber of his
mistress, he started from his seat, and sometimes strode across the floor in a
troubled mood, and sometimes stood before me, with his breath almost suspended
in the eagerness of his attention. When I mentioned the lifted dagger, the
shriek from behind, and the apparition that interposed, he shuddered and drew
back as if a dagger had been aimed at his breast.

When the tale was done, some time elapsed in mutual and profound silence. My
friend's thoughts were involved in a mournful and indefinable reverie. From
this he at length recovered and spoke.

It is true. A tale like this could never be the fruit of invention or be
invented to deceive. He has done himself injustice. His character was spotless
and fair: All his moral properties seemed to have resolved themselves into
gratitude fidelity and honor.

We parted at the door, late in the evening, as he mentioned, and he guessed
truly that subsequent reflection had induced me to return and to disclose the
truth to Mrs. Lorimer* Clarice relieved by the sudden death of her friend, and
unexpectedly by all, arrived at the same hour.

These tidings, astonished, afflicted, and delighted the lady. Her brother's
death had been long believed by all but herself. To find her doubts verified,
and his existence ascertained was the dearest consolation that he ever could
bestow. She was afflicted at the proofs that had been noted of the continuance
of his depravity, but she dreaded no danger to herself from his malignity or
vengeance.

The ignorance and prepossessions of this woman were remarkable. On this
subject only she was perverse, headlong, obstinate. Her anxiety to benefit this
arch-ruffian occupied her whole thoughts and allowed her no time to reflect
upon the reasonings or remonstrances of others. She could not be prevailed on
to deny herself to his visits and I parted from her in the utmost perplexity.

A messenger came to me at midnight entreating my immediate presence. Some
disaster had happened, but of what kind the messenger was unable to tell. My
fears easily conjured up the image of Wiatte. Terror scarcely allowed me to
breathe. When I entered the house of Mrs. Lorimer, I was conducted to her
chamber. She lay upon the bed in a state of stupefaction, that rose from some
mental cause. Clarice sat by her, wringing her hands and pouring forth her
tears without intermission. Neither could explain to me the nature of the
scene. I made inquiries of the servants and attendants. They merely said that
the family as usual had retired to rest, but their lady's bell rung with great
violence, and called them in haste, to her chamber, where they found her in a
swoon upon the floor and the young lady in the utmost affright and perturbation.

Suitable means being used Mrs. Lorimer had, at length, recovered, but was
still nearly insensible. I went to Clithero's apartments but he was not to be
found, and the domestics informed me that since he had gone with me, he had not
returned. The doors between this chamber and the court were open; hence that
some dreadful interview had taken place, perhaps with Wiatte, was an
unavoidable conjecture. He had withdrawn, however, without committing any
personal injury.

I need not mention my reflections upon this scene. All was tormenting doubt
and suspense till the morning arrived, and tidings were received that Wiatte
had been killed in the streets: This event was antecedent to that which had
occasioned Mrs. Lorimer's distress and alarm. I now remembered that fatal
prepossession by which the lady was governed, and her frantic belief that her
death and that of her brother were to fall out at the same time. Could some
witness of his death, have brought her tidings of it: Had he penetrated,
unexpected and unlicensed to her chamber, and were these the effects produced
by the intelligence?

Presently I knew that not only Wiatte was dead, but that Clithero had killed
him. Clithero had not been known to return and was no where to be found. He
then was the bearer of these tidings, for none but he could have found access
or egress without disturbing the servants.

These doubts were at length at an end. In a broken and confused manner, and
after the lapse of some days the monstrous and portentous truth was disclosed.
After our interview, the lady and her daughter had retired to the same chamber;
the former had withdrawn to her closet and the latter to bed. Some one's
entrance alarmed the lady, and coming forth after a moment's pause, the
spectacle which Clithero has too faithfully described, presented itself.

What could I think? A life of uniform hypocrisy or a sudden loss of reason
were the only suppositions to be formed. Clithero was the parent of fury and
abhorrence in my heart. In either case I started at the name. I shuddered at
the image of the apostate or the maniac.

What? Kill the brother whose existence was interwoven with that of his
benefactress and his friend? Then hasten to her chamber, and attempt her life?
Lift a dagger to destroy her who had been the author of his being and his
happiness?

He that could meditate a deed like this was no longer man. An agent from Hell
had mastered his faculties. He was become the engine of infernal malice against
whom it was the duty of all mankind to rise up in arms and never to desist
till, by shattering it to atoms, its power to injure was taken away.

All inquiries to discover the place of his retreat were vain. No wonder
methought that he wrapped himself in the folds of impenetrable secrecy. Curbed,
checked, baffled in the midst of his career, no wonder that he shrunk into
obscurity, that he fled from justice and revenge, that he dared not meet the
rebukes of that eye which, dissolving in tenderness or flashing with disdain,
had ever been irresistible.

But how shall I describe the lady's condition? Clithero she had cherished from
his infancy. He was the stay, the consolation, the pride of her life. His
projected alliance with her daughter, made him still more dear. Her eloquence
was never tired of expatiating on his purity and rectitude. No wonder that she
delighted in this theme, for he was her own work. His virtues were the
creatures of her bounty.

How hard to be endured was this sad reverse? She can be tranquil, but never
more will she be happy. To promote her forgetfulness of him, I persuaded her to
leave her country, which contained a thousand memorials of past calamity, and
which was lapsing fast into civil broils. Clarice has accompanied us, and time
may effect the happiness of others, by her means, though she can never remove
the melancholy of her mother.

I have listened to your tale, not without compassion. What would you have me
to do? To prolong his life, would be merely to protract his misery.

He can never be regarded with complacency by my wife. He can never be thought
of without shuddering by Clarice. Common ills are not without a cure less than
death, but here, all remedies are vain. Consciousness itself is the malady; the
pest; of which he only is cured who ceases to think.

I could not but assent to this mournful conclusion; yet, though death was
better to Clithero than life, could not some of his mistakes be rectified?
Euphemia Lorimer, contrary to his belief, was still alive. He dreamed that she
was dead, and a thousand evils were imagined to flow from that death. This
death and its progeny of ills, haunted his fancy, and added keenness to his
remorse. Was it not our duty to rectify this error?

Sarsefield reluctantly assented to the truth of my arguments on this head. He
consented to return, and afford the dying man, the consolation of knowing that
the being whom he adored as a benefactor and parent, had not been deprived of
existence, though bereft of peace by his act.

During Sarsefield's absence my mind was busy in revolving the incidents that
had just occured. I ruminated the last words of Clithero. There was somewhat in
his narrative that was obscure and contradictory. He had left the manuscript
which he so much and so justly prized, in his cabinet. He entered the chamber
in my absence, and found the cabinet unfastened and the manuscript gone. It was
I by whom the cabinet was opened, but the manuscript supposed to be contained
in it, was buried in the earth beneath the elm. How should Clithero be
unacquainted with its situation, since none but Clithero could have dug for it
this grave?

This mystery vanished when I reflected on the history of my own manuscript.
Clithero had buried his treasure with his own hands as mine had been secreted
by myself, but both acts had been performed during sleep. The deed was neither
prompted by the will, nor noticed by the senses of him, by whom it was done.
Disastrous and humiliating is the state of man! By his own hands, is
constructed the mass of misery and error in which his steps are forever
involved.

Thus it was with thy friend. Hurried on by phantoms too indistinct to be now
recalled, I wandered from my chamber to the desert. I plunged into some
unvisited cavern, and easily proceeded till I reached the edge of a pit. There
my step was deceived, and I tumbled headlong from the precipice. The fall
bereaved me of sense, and I continued breathless and motionless during the
remainder of the night and the ensuing day.

How little cognizance have men over the actions and motives of each other? How
total is our blindness with regard to our own performances! Who would have
sought me in the bowels of this mountain? Ages might have passed away, before
my bones would be discovered in this tomb, by some traveller whom curiosity had
prompted to explore it.

I was roused from these reflections by Sarsefield's return. Inquiring into
Clithero's condition; he answered that the unhappy man was insensible, but that
notwithstanding numerous and dreadful gashes, in different parts of his body,
it was possible that by submitting to the necessary treatment, he might recover.

Encouraged by this information, I endeavored to awaken the zeal and
compassion of my friend in Clithero's behalf. He recoiled with involuntary
shuddering from any task which would confine him to the presence of this man.
Time and reflection he said, might introduce different sentiments and feelings,
but at present he could not but regard this person as a maniac, whose disease
was irremediable, and whose existence could not be protracted, but to his own
misery and the misery of others.

Finding him irreconcilably averse to any scheme, connected with the welfare of
Clithero, I began to think that his assistance as a surgeon was by no means
necessary. He had declared that the sufferer needed nothing more than common
treatment, and to this the skill of a score of aged women in this district,
furnished with simples culled from the forest, and pointed out, of old time, by
Indian Leeches was no less adequate than that of Sarsefield. These women were
ready and officious in their charity, and none of them were prepossessed
against the sufferer by a knowledge of his genuine story.

Sarsefield, meanwhile, was impatient for my removal to Inglefield's
habitation, and that venerable friend was no less impatient to receive me. My
hurts were superficial, and my strength sufficiently repaired by a night's
repose. Next day, I went thither, leaving Clithero to the care of his immediate
neighbors.

Sarsefield's engagements compelled him to prosecute his journey into Virginia,
from which he had somewhat deviated, in order to visit Solebury. He proposed to
return in less than a month and then to take me in his company to New York. He
has treated me with paternal tenderness, and insists upon the previlege of
consulting for my interest, as if he were my real father. Meanwhile, these
views have been disclosed to Inglefield, and it is with him that I am to
remain, with my sisters, until his return.

My reflections have been various and tumultuous. They have been busy in
relation to you, to Weymouth, and especially to Clithero. The latter polluted
with gore and weakened by abstinence, fatigue and the loss of blood, appeared
in my eyes, to be in a much more dangerous condition than the event proved him
to be. I was punctually informed of the progress of his cure, and proposed in a
few days to visit him. The duty of explaining the truth, respecting the present
condition of Mrs. Lorimer, had devolved upon me. By imparting this
intelligence, I hoped to work the most auspicious revolutions in his feelings,
and prepared therefore, with alacrity* for an interview.

In this hope I was destined to be disappointed. On the morning on which I
intended to visit him, a messenger arrived from the house in which he was
entertained, and informed us that the family on entering the sick man's
apartment, had found it deserted. It appeared that Clithero, had, during the
night, risen form his bed, and gone secretly forth. No traces of his flight
have since been discovered.

But, O! my friend? The death of Waldegrave, thy brother, is at length divested
of uncertainty and mystery. Hitherto, I had been able to form no conjecture
respecting it, but the solution was found shortly after this time.

Queen Mab, three days after my adventure, was seized in her hut on suspicion
of having aided and counseled her countrymen, in their late depredations. She
was not to be awed or intimidated by the treatment she received, but readily
confessed and gloried in the mischief she had done; and accounted for it by
enumerating the injuries which she had received from her neighbors.

These injuries consisted in contemptuous or neglectful treatment, and in the
rejection of groundless and absurd claims. The people of Chetasco were less
obsequious to her humors than those of Solebury, her ancient neighborhood,
and her imagination brooded for a long time, over nothing but schemes of
revenge. She became sullen, irascible and spent more of her time in solitude
than ever.

A troop of her countrymen at length visited her hut. Their intentions being
hostile, they concealed from the inhabitants their presence in this quarter of
the country. Some motives induced them to withdraw and postpone, for the
present, the violence which they meditated. One of them, however, more
sanguinary and audacious than the rest would not depart, without some
gratification of his vengeance. He left his associates and penetrated by night
into Solebury, resolving to attack the first human being whom he should meet.
It was the fate of thy unhappy brother to encounter this ruffian, whose
sagacity made him forbear to tear away the usual trophy from the dead, least he
should afford grounds for suspicion as to the authors of the evil.

Satisfied with this exploit he rejoined his companions, and after an interval
of three weeks returned with a more numerous party, to execute a more extensive
project of destruction. They were councelled and guided, in all their
movements, by Queen Mab, who now explained these particulars, and boldly defied
her oppressors. Her usual obstinacy and infatuation induced her to remain in
her ancient dwelling and prepare to meet the consequences.

This disclosure awakened anew all the regrets and anguish which flowed from
that disaster. It has been productive, however, of some benefit. Suspicions and
doubts, by which my soul was harrassed, and which were injurious to the
innocent are now at an end. It is likewise some imperfect consolation to
reflect that the assassin has himself been killed and probably by my own hand.
The shedder of blood no longer lives to pursue his vocation, and justice is
satisfied.

Thus have I fulfilled my promise to compose a minute relation of my
sufferings. I remembered my duty to thee, and as soon as I was able to hold a
pen, employed it to inform thee of my welfare. I could not at that time enter
into particulars, but reserved a more copious narrative till a period of more
health and leisure.

On looking back I am surprised at the length to which my story has run. I
thought that a few days would suffice to complete it, but one page has
insensibly been added to another till I have consumed, weeks and filled
volumes. Here I will draw to a close; I will send you what I have written, and
discuss with you in conversation, my other immediate concerns, and my schemes
for the future. As soon as I have seen Sarsefield, I will visit you.

FAREWELL. E. H.
Solebury, November, 10.
LETTER I. TO MR. SARSEFIELD.
Philadelphia.
I CAME hither but ten minutes ago, and write this letter in the bar of the
Stagehouse. I wish not to lose a moment in informing you of what has happened.
I cannot do justice to my own feelings when I reflect upon the rashness of
which I have been guilty.

I will give you the particulars tomorrow. At present, I shall only say that
Clithero is alive, is apprised of your wife's arrival and abode in New York,
and has set out, with mysterious intentions to visit her.

May heaven avert the consequences of such a design. May you be enabled by some
means to prevent their meeting. If you cannot prevent it -- but I must not
reason on such an event, nor lengthen out this letter.

E. H.

LETTER II. TO THE SAME.
I WILL now relate the particulars which I yesterday promised to send you. You
heard through your niece of my arrival at Inglefield's in Solebury: My
inquiries, you may readily suppose, would turn upon the fate of my friend's
servant, Clithero, whose last disappearance was so strange and abrupt, and of
whom since that time, I had heard nothing. You are indifferent to his fate and
are anxious only that his existence and misfortunes may be speedily forgotten.
I confess that it is somewhat otherwise with me. I pity him: I wish to relieve
him, and cannot admit the belief that his misery is without a cure. I want to
find him out? I want to know his condition, and if possible to afford him
comfort, and inspire him with courage and hope.

Inglefield replied to my questions. O yes! He has appeared. The strange being
is again upon the stage. Shortly after he left his sick bed, I heard from
Philip Beddington, of Chetasco, that Deb's hut had found a new tenant. At
first, I imagined that the Scotsman who built it had returned, but making
closer inquiries, I found that the new tenant was my servant. I had no
inclination to visit him myself, but frequently inquired respecting him of
those, who lived or past that way, and find that he still lives there.

But how, said I. What is his mode of subsistence. The winter has been no time
for cultivation, and he found, I presume, nothing in the ground.

Deb's hut, replied my friend, is his lodging and his place of retirement, but
food and clothing he procures by laboring on a neighboring farm. This farm
is next to that of Beddington, who consequently knows something of his present
situation. I find little or no difference in his present deportment; and those
appearances which he assumed, while living with me, except that he retires
every night to his hut, and holds as little intercourse as possible with the
rest of mankind. He dines at his employers table, but his supper, which is
nothing but rye-bread, he carries home with him, and at all those times when
disengaged from employment, he secludes himself in his hut, or wanders nobody
knows whither.

This was the substance of Inglefield's intelligence. I gleaned from it some
satisfaction. It proved the condition of Clithero to be less deplorable and
desperate than I had previously imagined. His fatal and gloomy thoughts seemed
to have somewhat yielded to tranquillity.

In the course of my reflections, however, I could not but perceive, that his
condition, though eligible when compared with what it once was, was likewise
disastrous and humiliating, compared with his youthful hopes and his actual
merits. For such an one to mope away his life in this unsocial and savage
state, was deeply to be deplored. It was my duty, if possible, to prevail on
him to relinquish his scheme. And what would be requisite, for that end, but to
inform him of the truth?

The source of his dejection was the groundless belief that he had occasioned
the death of his benefactress. It was this alone that could justly produce
remorse or grief. It was a distempered imagination both in him and in me, that
had given birth to this opinion, since the terms of his narrative, impartially
considered, were far from implying that catastrophe. To him, however, the
evidence which he possessed was incontestable. No deductions from probability
could overthrow his belief. This could only be affected by similar and counter
evidence. To apprize him that she was now alive, in possession of some degree
of happiness, the wife of Sarsefield, and an actual resident on this shore,
would dissipate the sanguinary apparition that haunted him; cure his diseased
intellects, and restore him to those vocations for which his talents, and that
rank in society for which his education had qualified him. Influenced by these
thoughts, I determined to visit his retreat. Being obliged to leave Solebury
the next day, I resolved to set out the same afternoon, and stopping in
Chetasco, for the night, seek his habitation at the hour when he had probably
retired to it.

This was done. I arrived at Beddington's, at night-fall. My inquiries
respecting Clithero obtained for me the same intelligence from him, which I had
received from Inglefield. Deb's hut was three miles from this habitation, and
thither, when the evening had somewhat advanced, I repaired. This was the spot
which had witnessed so many perils during the last year, and my emotions, on
approaching it, were awful. With palpitating heart and quick steps I traversed
the road, skirted on each side by thickets, and the area before the house. The
dwelling was by no means in so ruinous a state as when I last visited it. The
crannies between the logs had been filled up, and the light within was
perceivable only at a crevice in the door.

Looking through this crevice I perceived a fire in the chimney, but the object
of my visit was no where to be seen. I knocked and requested admission, but no
answer was made. At length I lifted the latch and entered. Nobody was there.

It was obvious to suppose that Clithero had gone abroad for a short time, and
would speedily return, or perhaps some engagement had detained him at his
labor, later than usual. I therefore seated myself on some straw near the
fire, which, with a woollen rug, appeared to constitute his only bed. The rude
bedstead which I formerly met with, was gone. The slender furniture, likewise,
which had then engaged my attention, had disappeared. There was nothing capable
of human use, but a heap of faggots in the corner, which seemed intended for
fuel. How slender is the accommodation which nature has provided for man, and
how scanty is the portion which our physical necessities require.

While ruminating upon this scene, and comparing past events with the objects
before me, the dull whistling of the gale without gave place to the sound of
footsteps. Presently the door opened, and Clithero entered the apartment. His
aspect and guise were not essentially different from those which he wore when
an inhabitant of Solebury.

To find his hearth occupied by another, appeared to create the deepest
surprise. He looked at me without any tokens of remembrance! His features
assumed a more austere expression, and after scowling on my person for a
moment, he withdrew his eyes, and placing in a corner, a bundle which he bore
in his hand, he turned and seemed preparing to withdraw.

I was anxiously attentive to his demeanor, and as soon as I perceived his
purpose to depart, leaped on my feet to prevent it. I took his hand, and
affectionately pressing it, said, do you not know me? Have you so soon
forgotten me who is truly your friend?

He looked at me with some attention, but again withdrew his eyes, and placed
himself in silence on the seat which I had left. I seated myself near him, and
a pause of mutual silence ensued.

My mind was full of the purpose that brought me hither, but I knew not in what
manner to communicate my purpose. Several times I opened my lips to speak, but
my perplexity continued, and suitable words refused to suggest themselves. At
length, I said, in a confused tone;

I came hither with a view to benefit a man, with whose misfortunes his own
lips have made me acquainted, and who has awakened in my breast the deepest
sympathy. I know the cause and extent of his dejection. I know the event which
has given birth to horror and remorse in his heart. He believes that, by his
means, his patroness and benefactress has found an untimely death.

These words produced a visible shock in my companion, which evinced that I had
at least engaged his attention. I proceeded:

This unhappy lady was cursed with a wicked and unnatural brother. She
conceived a disproportionate affection for this brother, and errnoeously
imagined that her fate was blended with his; that their lives would necessarily
terminate at the same period, and that therefore, whoever was the contriver of
his death, was likewise, by a fatal and invincible necessity, the author of her
own.

Clithero was her servant, but was raised by her bounty, to the station of her
son and the rank of her friend. Clithero, in self-defence took away the life of
that unnatual brother, and, in that deed, falsely but cogently believed, that
he had perpetrated the destruction of his benefactress.

To ascertain the truth, he sought her presence. She was found, the tidings of
her brother's death were communicated, and she sunk breathless at his feet.

At these words Clithero started from the ground, and cast upon me looks of
furious indignation -- And come you hither, he muttered, for this end; to
recount my offenses, and drive me again to despair?

No, answered I, with quickness, I come to out-root a fatal, but powerful
illusion. I come to assure you that the woman, with whose destruction you
charge yourself, is not dead.

These words, uttered with the most emphatical solemnity, merely produced looks
in which contempt was mingled with anger. He continued silent.

I perceive, resumed I, that my words are disregarded. Would to Heaven I were
able to conquer your incredulity, could show you not only the truth, but the
probability of my tale. Can you not confide in me? that Euphemia Lorimer is now
alive, is happy, is the wife of Sarsefield; that her brother is forgotten and
his murderer regarded without enmity or vengeance?

He looked at me with a strange expression of contempt -- Come, said he, at
length, make out thy assertion to be true. Fall on thy knees and invoke the
thunder of heaven to light on thy head if thy words be false. Swear that
Euphemia Lorimer is alive; happy; forgetful of Wiatte and compassionate of me.
Swear that thou have seen her; talked with her; received from her own lips the
confession of her pity for him who aimed a dagger at her bosom. Swear that she
is Sarsefield's wife.

I put my hands together, and lifting my eyes to heaven, exclaimed: I comply
with your conditions; I call the omniscient God to witness that Euphemia
Lorimer is alive; that I have seen her with these eyes; have talked with her;
have inhabited the same house for months.

These asseverations were listened to with shuddering. He laid not aside,
however, an air of incredulity and contempt. Perhaps, said he, thou can point
out the place of her abode. Can guide me to the city, the street, the very
door of her habitation?

I can. She rises at this moment in the city of New York; in Broadway; in an
house contiguous to the --

It Is well, exclaimed my companion, in a tone, loud, abrupt, and in the utmost
degree, vehement. It Is well. Rash and infatuated youth. Thou have ratified,
beyond appeal or forgiveness, thy own doom. Thou have once more let loose my
steps, and sent me on a fearful journey. Thou have furnished the means of
detecting thy imposture. I will fly to the spot which thou describest. I will
ascertain thy falsehood with my own eyes. If she be alive then am I reserved
for the performance of a new crime. My evil destiny will have it so. If she be
dead, I shall make thee expiate.

So saying, he darted through the door, and was gone in a moment, beyond my
sight and my reach. I ran to the road, looked on every side, and called; but my
calls were repeated in vain. He had fled with the swiftness of a deer.

My own embarrassment, confusion and terror were enexpressible. His last words
were incoherent. They denoted the tumult and vehemence of phrenzy. They
intimated his resolution to seek the presence of your wife. I had furnished a
clue, which could not sail to conduct him to her presence. What might not be
dreaded from the interview? Clithero is a maniac. This truth cannot be
concealed. Your wife can with difficulty preserve her tranquillity, when his
image occurs to her remembrance. What must it be when he starts up before her
in his neglected and ferocious guise, and armed with purposes, perhaps as
terrible as those, which had formerly led him to her secret chamber, and her
bed side?

His meaning was obscurely conveyed. He talked of a deed, for the performance
of which, his malignant fate had reserved him; which was to ensue their
meeting, and which was to afford disastrous testimony of the infatuation which
had led me hither.

Heaven grant that some means may suggest themselves to you of intercepting his
approach. Yet I know not what means can be conceived. Some miraculous chance
may befriend you; yet this is scarcely to be hoped. It is a visionary and
fantastic base on which to rest our security.

I cannot forget that my unfortunate temerity has created this evil. Yet who
could foresee this consequence of my intelligence. I imagined, that Clithero
was merely a victim of erroneous gratitude, a slave of the errors of his
education, and the prejudices of his rank, that his understanding was deluded
by phantoms in the mask of virtue and duty, and not as you have strenuously
maintained, utterly subverted.

I shall not escape your censure, but I shall, likewise, gain your compassion.
I have erred, not through sinister or malignant intentions, but from the
impulse of misguided, indeed, but powerful benevolence.

LETTER III. TO EDGAR HUNTLY.
New York. EDGAR,
AFTER the fatigues of the day, I returned home. As I entered, my wife was
breaking the seal of a letter, but, on seeing me, she forbore and presented the
letter to me.

I saw, said she, by the superscription of this letter, who the writer was. So
agreeably to your wishes, I proceeded to open it, but you have come just time
enough to save me the trouble.

This letter was from you. It contained information relative to Clithero. See
how imminent a chance it was that saved my wife from a knowledge of its
contents. It required all my efforts to hide my perturbation from her, and
excuse myself from showing her the letter.

I know better than you the character of Clithero, and the consequences of a
meeting between him and my wife. You may be sure that I would exert myself to
prevent a meeting.

The method for me to pursue was extremely obvious. Clithero is a madman whose
liberty is dangerous, and who requires to be fettered and imprisoned as the
most atrocious criminal.

I hastened to the chief Magistrate, who is my friend, and by proper
representations, obtained from him authority to seize Clithero wherever I
should meet with him, and effectually debar him from the perpetration of new
mischiefs.

New York does not afford a place of confinement for lunatics, as suitable to
his case, as Pennsylvania. I was desirous of placing him as far as possible
from the place of my wife's residence. Fortunately there was a packet for
Philadelphia, on the point of setting out on her voyage. This vessel I engaged
to wait a day or two, for the purpose of conveying him to the Pennsylvania
hospital. Meanwhile, proper persons were stationed at Powels-hook, and at the
quays where the various stageboats from Jersey arrive.

These precautions were effectual. Not many hours after the receipt of your
intelligence, this unfortunate man applied for a passage at Elizabeth-town, was
seized the moment he set his foot on shore, and was forthwith conveyed to the
packet, which immediately set sail.

I designed that all these proceedings should be concealed from the women, but
unfortunately neglected to take suitable measures for hindering the letter
which you gave me reason to expect on the ensuing day, from coming into their
hands. It was delivered to my wife in my absence and opened immediately by her.

You know what is, at present, her personal condition. You know what strong
reasons I had to prevent any danger or alarm from approaching her. Terror could
not assume a shape, more ghastly than this. The effects have been what might
have been easily predicted. Her own life has been imminently endangered and an
untimely birth, has blasted my fondest hope. Her infant, with whose future
existence so many pleasures were entwined, is dead.

I assure you Edgar, my philosophy has not found itself lightsome and active
under this burden. I find it hard to forbear commenting on your rashness in no
very mild terms. You acted in direct opposition to my council, and to the
plainest dictates of propriety. Be more circumspect and more obsequious for the
future.

You knew the liberty that would be taken of opening my letters; you knew of my
absence from home, during the greatest part of the day, and the likelihood
therefore that your letters would fall into my wife's hands before they came
into mine. These considerations should have prompted you to send them under
cover to Whitworth or Harvey, with directions to give them immediately to me.

Some of these events happened in my absence, for I determined to accompany the
packet myself and see the madman safely delivered to the care of the hospital.

I will not torture your sensibility by recounting the incidents of his arrest
and detention. You will imagine that his strong, but perverted reason exclaimed
loudly against the injustice of his treatment. It was easy for him to outreason
his antagonist, and nothing but force could subdue his opposition. On me
devolved the province of his jailor and his tyrant; a province which required
an heart more steeled by spectacles of suffering and the exercise of cruelty,
than mine had been.

Scarcely had we passed The Narrows, when the lunatic, being suffered to walk
the deck, as no apprehensions were entertained of his escape in such
circumstances, threw himself overboard, with a seeming intention to gain the
shore. The boat was immediately manned, the fugitive was pursued, but at the
moment, when his flight was overtaken, he forced himself beneath the surface,
and was seen no more.

With the life of this wretch, let out regrets and our forebodings terminate.
He has saved himself from evils, for which no time would have provided a
remedy, from hingering for years in the noisome dungeon of an hospital. Having
no reason to continue my voyage, I put myself on board a coasting sloop, and
regained this city in a few hours. I persuade myself that my wife's
indisposition will be temporary. It was impossible to hide from her the death
of Clithero, and its circumstances. May this be the last arrow in the quiver of
adversity! Farewell.

END.
DEATH OF CICERO, A FRAGMENT.

DEATH OF CICERO, A FRAGMENT. TIRO TO ATTICUS.
THE task of relating the last events in the life of my beloved master, has
fallen upon me. His last words reminded me of the obligation, which I had long
since assumed, of conveying to his Atticus a faithful account of his death.
Having performed this task, life will cease to be any longer of value.

Having parted with his brother, he went on board a vessel which lay at anchor
in the road. The master was a Cyprian, ignorant of the Roman language; a stupid
and illiterate sailor, whose provincial jargon was luckily understood and
spoken by Chlorus, who was by birth a Cnidian. He served us as interpreter.

He was a stranger to the affairs of Italy, and his knowledge was so extremely
limited, that he had never heard even the name of my master. This ignorance we
were careful not to remove; and finding him unengaged, and merely waiting till
some one should offer him a cargo, I tendered him a large sum if he would set
sail immediately. This incident determined our course. No great deviation from
his usual route was necessary to carry us to Tarsus* and there my master would
not only be under the protection of Cassius, but in the midst of his Cilician
clients. His ancient subjects would not fail to receive, with joy and
gratitude, a patron from whom they had received so many benefits, and in case
of any adverse fortune, their mountains would afford him concealment and
security.

The vessel was small and crazy. It afforded wretched accommodation, but it
behoved us to submit to every inconvenience, and to console ourselves with the
hope that the voyage would be short. We had scarcely got on board, however, and
made our bargain with the master when the wind, which had lately been
propitious, changed to the south-east, and with this wind, the master declared
it impossible to move from our present station.

This was an untoward event. Our safety depended upon the expedition with which
we should fly from the shores of Italy. Our footsteps would be diligently
traced, and another hour might bring the bloodhounds within view.

One expedient was obvious. The search might be eluded, or, at least prolonged,
by leaving this spot. It was possible to move by the help of oars along the
coast. Further south, the country near the sea was still more desolate and
woody than here, and we might be concealed in some obscure and unfrequented
bay, till the wind should once more become favorable.

Additional rewards and promises induced the captain to adopt this scheme. The
wind and the turbulence of the waves increased. My master had always an
antipathy to voyages by sea, owing, probably, to the deadly sickness, with
which the tossing of the billows never failed to afflict him. This sickness
speedily came on, and added to the pent-up air, filthiness and inconvenience of
the ship, plunged him into new impatience and dejection. He frequently declared
his resolution to go on shore, and offer to his enemies a life which was a
burden to him, and relinquished his design not till I had employed the most
pathetic and vehement remonstrances.

We had not gone two leagues before night came on. This for a time suspended
our toils. We came to anchor near the shore, and being somewhat sheltered from
the wind, by the direction of the shore, the sea became more calm, and my
master's sickness disappeared. Still he was unwilling to pass the night on
board the vessel, and ordered us to land.

This proceeding was imminently dangerous. I endeavored to convince him of
this danger. The town of Circoeum was two or three miles distant, but the huts
of which it consited would afford him accommodation little better than that
which the ship afforded. He would unavoidably be recognized by the inhabitants,
and if they had not yet heard of the proscription, his appearance among them
would lead them to suspect the truth, and what reliance could be placed upon
their fidelity? This town might contain some tenant or retainer of Caesar, or
it might at this moment be visited by the messengers of Anthony, at least, his
appearance there would shortly be known, and would afford to his pursuers a new
clue, by which they may be aided in their search. The same hazards would
accompany his entrance into any of the neighboring farmhouses.

These reasonings made him give up his resolution of going to Circoeum, but he
retained his determination to land. If he should pass the night in the open
air, though the ground was covered with snow, it was better than to breathe the
poisonous atmosphere of the ship, and remain cooped up with the Cyprian and his
crew.

Since he would not give up this design, I endeavored to find reasons for
approving it. One danger against which it was needful to provide, was the
suspicion of the sailors. The grief and dejection of my master, our impatience
to be gone from Italy, and the secret and abrupt manner of our embarkation,
could not but excite their notice and make them busy at conjecture. They would
be still more at a loss to conceive why, when a town was so near, we should
prefer to spend the night on board their vessel, and the shelter of a tree or a
rock, with the fire which might easily be kindled, were, in truth, not less
safe or commodious than continuance in the ship. Preparations, were, therefore,
made to land.

My caution led me to go on shore before him, that any danger which impended
might be seasonably descried. Wandering over the strand, a small hut was
discovered which appeared to have been formerly inhabited by fishermen. This
was a season when the net was idle, and this hut was therefore deserted. The
walls and roof were broken, but a good fire might render it tenable for a few
hours. Here my master consented to repose himself.

The ground within the hut, as well as without, was covered with snow. This was
removed and a kind of bed of withered sticks and dried leaves was provided for
him. On this he lay down, and the servants seated themselves around him. He did
not endeavor to sleep, but supporting his head upon his elbow, and fixing his
eyes, in a thoughtful mood, upon the fire, he delivered himself up to
meditation. A pause of general and mournful silence ensued.

Every one's eyes were fixed upon those venerable features. To behold one, so
illustrious, one that had so lately governed the destinies of mankind, seated
on the pinnacle of human greatness, and encompassed with all the goods of
fortune, thus reduced to the condition of a fugitive and outlaw, stretched
upon the bare earth, in this wretched hovel, affected all of us alike. Every
bosom seemed to swell with the same sentiment, and required the relief of
tears. Chlorus set us the example of this weakness, and not one of us but
sobbed aloud.

His attention was recalled by this sound. He lifted his head, and looked upon
us by turns with an air of inexpressible benignity. My friends, said he, at
length, be not discomposed. My life has been sufficiently long, since I have
lived to reap the rewards of virtue. Those evils* must indeed be great, which
would not be compensated by these proofs of your affection. I need extort from
you no other testimony of the equity and kindness of my treatment of you, than
the fidelity and tenderness with which you have adhered to me in my distress.
This is a consolation of which it is not in the power of the tyrants to bereave
me. Let their executioners come: I am willing to die.

These words only heightened the emotions which they were intended to suppress.
I desired for my own sake, to change or to terminate this scene, and to reflect
that my duty forbade me to sit here in inactivity, when surrounded by so many
dangers. None of us had eaten a morsel since we left Astura. Our master was too
much absorbed in reflections connected with his fallen fortunes, to think of
food. It was our duty to contend with his indifference or aversion, in this
respect, as well as to supply our exhausted strength, and prepare for the
hardships which we were yet to endure.

I determined, therefore, to go, with two or three companions, to Circoeum and
purchase necessaries, as well as ascertain what danger was to be dreaded from
this quarter. My master was careless of necessity or danger, and the task of
consulting and deciding for the welfare of himself and his servants, had
entirely devolved upon me. This charge, it behoved me to perform with
circumspection and zeal.

We set out, and crossing an angle of the forest, quickly reached the village*
The utmost caution was necessary to be used, since many of the servants of
Cicero, and particularly myself, were nearly as well known, especially in this
district, as (...) lord. Chlorus was least liable to be detected, in
consequence of having spent the greater part of his life at the Cuman Villa. He
might be effectually disguised, likewise, by mimicking the accents of a Cyprian
sailor, and pretending that he came from the vessel. Chlorus went forward,
while I and Sura remained at a distance, awaiting his return. He came back in a
short time, and with some tokens of alarm. He had crept into a tavern, and
after purchasing some bread and dried fruits, had joined a knot of persons who
were earnestly engaged in conversation in the portico. One appeared to be a
stranger, who had just arrived, and was telling his news to the rest. The
coalition of the tyrants was the theme of his discourse. Poedius, the consul,
was said to be included in the sentence of proscription, and a tumult was
affirmed to have been raised, on this account, in the city. The populace had
aided the magistrate in arresting the emisaries from the armies, and the senate
had created Poedius dictator.

After listening some time, Chlorus ventured to slide into the company, and
inquired, in his broken Latin, of what proscription they were talking. The
traveller repeated his news with great vivacity, and mentioned, among a
thousand incredible circumstances, that the army of Brutus had revolted, and
that diligent search was making for the Ciceros. He had just passed near
Astura, and was told that a troop had been there, hunting for the fugitives,
and finding them to have lately fled, they had dispersed themselves over the
country, and he was sure they could not escape. Hearing this, Chlorus withdrew,
and hastened to communicate his tidings to me.

The revolt of the Macedonian army was sufficiently probable. This was mournful
news, but it showed with new force the propriety of taking refuge in Asia,
rather than in Greece. The last tale was noless probable, and convinced us that
no time was to be lost in leaving this fatal shore.

To leave it, however, was not in our power. The present state of the wind
imprisoned us in this spot. To change it for another would merely multiply our
perils. Here we must remain till it should please Jove to give us a prosperous
gale, or till our enemies should trace us to our covert. It only remained for
us to hasten back to the hut, and defend our master at the expense of our own
lives.

We returned. No interruption or intrusion had been experienced during our
absence. On entering the hovel, I found my master in profound sleep. His
features were tranquil and placid, and his anxieties were, for a while,
entirely forgotten. The bread and fruits we had brought were shared among our
companions, and we continued to watch during the night.

Anxious attention was paid to the state of the air, and fruitless wishes and
repinings were whispered by one to another. The morning light returned. The
enemy was still distant, but the sky was as untoward as ever.

At length, my master awoke of his own accord. After noticing the daylight,
and recollecting his situation, he turned to me, and said: Well, my dear Tiro,
what is now to be done? I will tell thee what; we will go on board; the Cyprian
shall ply his oars and carry us to Formia, and there will I wait for my release.

He noticed the down-cast eyes and mournful looks, which these words
occasioned. No one seemed inclined to move to such a purpose. He looked around
him, and continued in the same tone; What else, my friends, would you purpose
to be done? How unworthy of the savior of Rome and of Italy is it to be thus
clinging to a wretched life, and skulking from ungrateful foes, among rooks and
woods? No: I have done my part: All that remains is to die with firmness and
with dignity.

Hitherto, I have been the fool of passion and inconstancy. My purposes have
wavered from day to day, but it is time to shake off this irresolution and
trample on this cowardice. I am now resolved, and will be gone to Formia this
moment.

With these words he rose from the ground, and put on an air of sternness and
command, which left me no power to expostulate. We obeyed him in silence, and
once more put ourselves on board the vessel. The crew were still asleep, but
being roused by our arrival, were prevailed upon to row along the shore toward
Formia.

My master seemed to have retreived his wonted tranquillity, in consequence of
having formed his ultimate resolution. He was still, for the most part, wrapped
in meditation. He forebore to converse with me, but sat upon the deck, with his
eyes fixed upon the water, which was now less turbulent than on the former day,
and did not occasion sickness.

My own thoughts were occupied in devising some means of escape. We were now
approaching Sicily, and it was possible that some conveyance could be gained to
that island. This however must be found after our arrival at Formia, for beyond
this the Cyprian refused to go, under pretense, which indeed, was probably
true, of being unacquainted with the coast. Neither was I totally without hope
that the wind would suddenly change, and permit us to leave the coast. On this
event, I did not fear to obtain Cicero's concurrence, with a scheme so
conducive to his safety. To despair of himself or the republic while the seas
were open, and while Cassius was in arms, and furnished with the wealth of all
the Asiatic provinces, was unworthy of his understanding and his virtue.

His purpose to go to any one of his villas was pregnant with danger. These
places would be searched, by his enemies. As long as he remained in Italy, it
was expedient to conceal himself in unsuspected corners. Could not such be
found, where he might remain unmolested for years.

I now reflected that Formia being situated within a mile of the sea, might be
the best asylum to which he could betake himself. A ship might be provided,
ready to profit by the first wind, to sail away to Sicily, while, in the mean
time, my master might be effectually secreted in some part of his dominion. The
subterranean vaults, constructed to preserve wine and other provisions, on this
estate, might afford him concealment till the opportunity of escape should
offer.

While brooding over these images, we came in sight of Formia. It was now time
to mention to him this sceme. He received it with disapprobation -- I am too
old, said he, to undergo once more the hardships and hazards of a camp. I have
witnessed long enough the ingratitude and perfidy of mankind. I am tired of the
spectacle, and am determined to close my eyes upon it forever.

It shall never be said, that Marcus Cicero fled from the presence of tyrants,
that he saved the miserable remnant of his old age, by making himself an exile
from his country. I tell thee, Tiro, I am too old to become the sport of
fortune, and the follower of armies. Cassius and Brutus are young, they are
innured to war; it is their element. They fight for liberty and glory, which
their age will permit them to enjoy for many years to come; but as to me, I
have reached the verge of the grave already, and should I elude my enemies, and
reach Rhodes or Tarsus in safety, I should only have reserved myself for a
speedy and ignoble death. No: Here shall be the end of my wanderings.

I will go to my house. I will pass my time without anxiety or fear. When the
executioners of Antony arrive, they will find their victim prepared. My
resolution continued he, with some impatience, is taken. It is to no purpose to
harass me with arguments and remonstrances, for I shall never swerve from it.

I was not totally discouraged by these declarations. I confided in my power to
vanquish this resolution, as soon as the means of escape should be provided.
Till then it was indeed useless to contend with his despair. His imagination
saw nothing but cowardice and degradation, in hiding himself in vaults and
pits. That he who was so long at the head of the Roman state, should seek his
safety in shifts and stratagems like these, was ignominious and detestable.
Death was not so terrible that it should be shunned, life was not so dear that
it should be preserved at this price.

He proceeded to his house with an air of fearlessness and confidence. It was
far from certain, that it was not occupied already by assassins, expecting and
waiting his approach; of this, however, he testified no apprehension. As soon
as he entered the porch, his arrival was rumoured through the building, and his
servants hurried from all quarters to welcome him. Their looks betrayed anxiety
as well as joy. It was easy to perceive that they were not unapprised of the
dangers which encompassed their master, and that his appearance among them had
been unexpected. He greeted and smiled upon each, and then retired to his
chamber, whither he would not allow any one to follow him.

It was now time to adopt those measures on which my thoughts had been engaged.
As soon as I parted from my master, I took Glauco the steward aside. I told him
what had lately happened, and what I now designed to do, and desired his
assistance to procure a vessel which might carry us without delay to Sicily.

I found that there was need of the utmost expedition, for Glauco informed me
that, not many hours before, a troop of twenty horsemen, had come hither. They
rode furiously into the court, and without inquiry or permission, rushed into
the house. They entered every apartment, and not finding their victim, indulged
their resentment in imprecations on the upstart of Arpinum, and in striking
their swords against the furniture and pictures. Two busts, of Brutus and
Ahala, which stood in the library, they overturned upon the pavement.

The servants, affrighted at the stern and sullen visages of these intruders,
fled from their presence. After lingering for some time in the house, they
mounted their horses and disappeared.

These tidings showed me the magnitude and nearness of the danger. Not a moment
should be wasted in deliberation or uncertainty. It was possible that the
assassins might not speedily return, and the interval was to be employed in
procuring the means of flight. The sea was to be crossed, and Cajeta was a
league distant. At Cajeta only was it possible to find a vessel, suited to our
purpose.

I now called some of the most faithful servants together, and charged them to
guard the safety of their master, till Glauco and I should return, which should
be in less than an hour. We were going, I told them, to Cajeta, in hopes of
finding some immediate conveyance from this shore, and would return with the
utmost expedition.

We set out, selecting the fleetest horses to carry us. Three barks were seen
in the bay, Glauco imagined that he saw on one the stern and beak which is
peculiar to Sicily. To this we immediately transported ourselves. Happily his
penetration had not been deceived, and the Sicilian readily consented to take
us on board, and proceed immediately to Sicily.

By exerting themselves with energy, they might bring the vessel in a short
time to the shore nearest to my master's house. This was better than to bring
him to Cajeta, where it would be impossible for him to escape observation, and
to which he could come only by a public road, thronged and obstructed with
passengers.

I left Glauco on board the vessel, to hasten the motions of the sailors and to
direct them to the proper place. Meanwhile, I mounted my horse and rode back to
Formia. The vessel would be ready to receive us by the time that we should
reach the shore.

The domestics, whom I had posted in the atrium, were still assembled and
received me with joy, but one event had taken place in my absence which filled
me with foreboding and anxiety. A slave who wrought in the fields, who formerly
belonged to the Cornelian family, and whose temper was remarkably perverse and
malignant, had withdrawn himself immediately after my master's arrival. Glauco
had frequently complained of the turbulent and worthless character of this
slave, and had exhorted Cicero to part with him. In the multiplicity of more
momentous concerns this affair had been overlooked by my master, and he still
continued in the family.

It was now suggested to me that he had gone in order to recall the soldiers,
and to avenge himself in this manner, for the punishments which his refractory
and rebellious conduct had frequently incurred. This new danger was an
additional incitement to my diligence. I went to my master's chamber and found
him asleep. This was no time to be scrupulous or tardy. I awakened him.

On recovering his recollection, and finding me beside him, with every mark of
trepidation and dismay, and silent, from my uncertainty in what manner to
address him, he suspected that I brought fatal tidings. He looked at me without
emotion, and said:

How is it with thee, my Tiro? With me, all is well. I have slept soundly, and
am prepared to meet the worst. Thou would tell me that they are coming. I
rejoice to hear it: the sooner they arrive and execute the will of Anthony and
his Octavius, the better.

Saying this, he half rose from the couch, and stretching his feet toward the
stove, he continued: Thanks to Jove, that, at a time like this, nothing but my
feet are cold. I have done with hope and with fear, and Caesar's ministers
shall find that my heart's blood has lost none of its warmth. He may deface and
mangle this frame, but my spirit shall be found invincible.

I could no longer forbear, but while the tears flowed down my cheeks, I pulled
him by the arm toward the door, and exclaimed: We have found a vessel that
will carry us to Sicily. She lies at this moment near the shore ready to
receive us. Hasten, I beseech you, beyond the reach of the tyrants. Why would
you glut the vengeance of Anthony, and not rather live to raise up the republic?

He shook his head, and resisting my efforts: It is too late, said he: I never
can die in a fitter season and* place than the present, and hence I will not
move.

O! Heaven! Does Cicero love his enemies better than his friends? Is he willing
to sacrifice his country to parricides and traitors? Shall he seek death
because, while he lives, liberty is not extinguished; because the triumph of
the wicked can only be completed by his death?

Has Antony merited so well at your hands, that you are willing to die, that
his ambition may be fully gratified? Is this the issue of your warfare? After
contending with his treason so long, do you now fall of your own accord at his
feet, put the poniard in his hand and call upon him to strike? Thus will
mankind regard your conduct when the means of escape are offered you, when the
arms and treasures of Sicily and Greece and Asia are ready to be put into your
hand, you reject the gift, you abandon the cause of your country, of liberty,
of your friends; you invite infamous assassins to your bosom; you die at the
moment when your life is of most value to mankind, and nothing but your death
is wanting to ensure the destruction of Rome.

O! let it not be said that in his last hours, Marcus Cicero was a recreant and
coward. That so illustrious a life was closed with infamy, that his eulogies on
liberty, his efforts for the salvation of Rome, the claims of gratitude and
friendship were forgotten or despised. That mankind called on their deliverer,
that armies and provinces were offered to be employed by him in the rescue of
his country, and the ruin of tyrants, in vain.

The road is open and direct, there is nothing to create momentary hindrance or
delay. In a few hours, he may laugh at the impotent resentment of Antony; and
arm himself to punish the ingratitude and perfidy of Caesar -- But no, he will
thrust himself within their grasp; he will patiently wait till their assassins
have leisure to execute their sentence; he will beg them to except his homage,
and since his death is indispensable to their success, he will stretch out his
neck to receive it.

Perceiving that my master's resolution began to faulter. I redoubled my
remonstrances, I called up the images of his brother, his son and his nephew,
of Cassius and Brutus and Pompeius. I painted the effect which the tidings of
his death would produce in them; their transports of grief awakened not so much
by the injury redounding to the common cause, as by the infatuation and folly
to which his death must be ascribed. With their humiliation and terror, I
contrasted the exultation of his enemies, to whose malice he was thus making
himself a voluntary victim. What indignities would not be heaped upon his
lifeless remains! How would Fulvia and Anthony feast their eyes upon his head,
which, torn from the trunk, will be carried to their toilets, and how will the
folly of inviting their revenge and crouching to the stroke of their assassins
be made the endless theme of ridicule and mockery? --

At this moment, the servants entered the chamber with a litter. I had given
previous directions to this effect. I had resolved if persuasion should prove
inefficacious, to carry him away by force* One of the bearers was Chlorus,
whose looks betokened the deepest consternation, and by his eyes and gestures
besought me to use dispatch. I made a sign to the attendants, who approached
their master with diffidence and reverence and prepared to remove him from his
couch to the litter.

I renewed my supplications and remonstrances, to which he listened in silence,
and though his looks testified reluctance and perplexity, he made no
resistance. He was placed in the litter. I led the way into the garden. Chlorus
had now an opportunity to whisper me that the soldiers had scented their prey
anew and were hastening to the house. This intelligence induced me to strike
into an obscure path which led through a wood and to quicken the pace of my
companions.

The litter was surrounded by sixteen domestics well armed. They were all
faithful to their trust. Most of them were gray with age, but vigorous and
resolute. All of them had been, during many years, personal attendants on their
lord, and were eager to shed their blood in his defense; I was not without hope
that should we be overtaken and attacked, such resistance might be made, as, at
least, to secure the retreat of my master to the shore.

We had now accomplished half the journey, and were inspired with new
confidence in our good fortune. Turning an angle, however, a band of men
appeared in sight. They discovered us in a moment, and shouting aloud, made
toward us with the utmost expedition. There was now room but for one choice.
Fly, said I, to those that bore the litter, fly with your burden to the shore
and leave us to contend with these miscreants.

The enemy had been discovered by my master as soon as by us. He now raised
himself up, and exclaimed in a tone of irresistible authority* No: I charge you
stir not a step. Set down the litter and await their coming. Put up your
swords, continued he, turning to the rest, who had, in imitation of my example
unsheathed their weapons: Put up your swords. By the duty which you owe me, I
command you to forbear.

With whatever sternness these commands were delivered, they would not have
made me hesitate or faulter. I was prepared to conduct myself, not agreeable to
his directions, but to the exigencies of the time; I was willing to preserve
his life even at the hazard of offending him beyond forgiveness; but my
companions were endowed with less firmness.

Go on, said I, to the bearers, heed not the words of a desperate man. It is
your duty to save him, though you forfeit your lives by your disobedience --
They once more stooped to raise up the vehicle, but were again forbidden. What!
said he, am I fallen so low as to be trampled on by slaves? Desist, this
moment! Appalled and confounded by the energy of his accents, they let fall the
litter, and stood with their eyes down-cast and motionless.

The delay which this altercation produced, rendered his escape impossible. The
veteran and well-accoutred band that was approaching, left us no hope of
victory. All that I had meditated, was to retard their progress so long that my
master might reach the ship in safety. For this end we were to lay down our own
lives, but as long as he continued in this spot all opposition would be
fruitless.

To stay and behold violence committed on that venerable head was not in my
power. I went forward to meet the assassins. It was not, however, till I had
discerned the person of their leader that I had any hopes of diverting them
from their design. He was a tribune in the army of Caesar, and his name was
Popilius Laenas.

This man had been formerly accused of murdering his wife's brother. This
brother had considerable property to which Laenas expected to succeed, but on
some dissension between them, the brother had selected a new heir and Laenas
was said to have gratified his vengeance by his death. His wife and children
were among his accusers, and there was too much reason to believe the truth of
the accusation.

In this extremity he besought Cicero to be his advocate. Laenas had been
active in the Clodian tumults, and sided with Milo and the Senate, and had,
consequently, promoted the interests of my master. This service was now his
plea, and, joined with unwearied importunities, accomplished his end. Cicero
was an enthusiast in gratitude, and was not used to scrutinize suspiciously or
weigh accurately, this kind of merit. Benefits received from others were, if
possible, repaid an hundred fold. He made himself the advocate of a cause,
which, without his assistance, would doubtless have been desperate, and Laenas
was acquitted. His vows of gratitude and service were unbounded, and now that I
discovered him at the head of Caesar's executioners was scarcely credible.

After a moments pause, I advanced toward him, and offered him my hand. He
rejected it with scorn and rage, and thrusting me aside, Out of the way,
villain, said he, and thank my mercy that you do not share the fate of the
traitor you serve.

His followers surrounded me with drawn swords, and looking at the tribune,
seemed to wait only for his signal to put me to death. Come on, he cried; Our
prize is in view. Cut down every one that opposes, but leave the peacable
alone. They left me and hastened toward the litter.

My eyes followed them instinctively. Shuddering and a cold dew invaded my
limbs. With the life of Cicero, methought, was entwined the existence of Rome.
The stroke by which one was severed, would be no less fatal to the other. It
was indeed true that liberty would he extinguished by his death, and then only
would commence the reign of Anthony, and the servitude of mankind.

Would no effort avail to turn aside the stroke? Should I stand a powerless
spectator of the deed? Might I not save myself at least the ignominy and horror
of witnessing the fall of my master, by attacking his assassins or falling on
my own sword?

These impulses of grief, were repressed by the remembrance of the duties,
which his death would leave to be performed by me and of the promises by which
I was bound.

During these thoughts my eyes were fixed upon the litter. My master,
perceiving the approach of the tribune, held forth his head, as if to
facilitate the assassin's office. His posture afforded a distinct view of his
countenance, which was more thoughtful and serene than I had seen it during our
flight from --

The eyes of the ruffians sparkled with joy at sight of their victim. They
contended which should be foremost in guilt. The domestics, struck with
consternation, looked upon each other in silence. The soldiers, full of
eagerness to secure the reward which Anthony had promised for the head of his
enemy, were too much occupied to speak to each other, or to heed any foreign
object.

One blow severed the devoted head! No sooner had it fallen, than the troop set
up an horrid shout of exultation. Laenas grasped the hair and threw the head
into a large bag, held open by one of his companions for that purpose.

Come, lads, he cried: Post we, with our prize, with all speed to Rome? Anthony
will pay us well for this service -- So saying, they hastened away with as much
expedition as they came.

All passed in a moment. Nothing but the headless trunk, stretched upon the
floor of the litter, which floated in blood, remained. I approached the vehicle
without being fully conscious of my movements, and gazed upon the mutilated
figure. My thoughts were at a stand, as well as my power of utterance
suspended. My heart seemed too small to embrace the magnitude of this calamity.
It was not a single man who had fallen, or whose violent catastrophe was the
theme of everlasting regret. The light of the world was extinguished, and the
hopes of human kind brought to an end.

My mind gradually recovered some degree of activity. I mused upon the events
that led to this disaster. It seemed as if the most flagitious folly, had given
birth to this insupportable evil. Nothing was easier than to have fled to the
shore; to have embarked in the Sicilian vessel, and quickly to have moved
ourselves beyond the reach of our enemies. At one time, I loaded myself with
the most vehement upbraidings: Why did I not exert myself to hinder him from
leaving the Cyprian barque? Had we proceeded to Cajeta, without delay, we might
have put ourselves on board the Agrigentine, and set danger at defiance. The
Cyprian refused to proceed, but menaces would have been successful where
rewards had failed. He and his feeble crew, would have easily been mas^^^^^^ by
our superior number.

But was not Cicero himself the author of his evil destiny? Irresolute,
desponding or perverse, he thwarted or frustrated the measures conducive to his
safety. More sensible to the stings of ingratitude and his personal
humiliation, than to the claims of his fellow citizens; prone to despair of
liberty, though the richest and most populous portion of the empire was still
faithful to its cause; though veteran armies and illustrious officers were
still ranged under its banners in Sicily, Greece and Asia, he lingered on this
fatal shore, and threw himself before the executioner.

There were a thousand recesses on this desolate coast, and caverns in the
Apenine, and unsuspected retreats on his own estate, where he might have been
effectually concealed, till Cassius and Pompey had restored the republic, till
the pursuit of the enemies had slackened, and time and his faithful servants
had supplied the means of his escape. Had he even permitted the generous
sacrifice which his attendants were zealous to make, and profited by the
interval, which their contest with the ruffians would have afforded, to reach
the shore; had he looked, with a stern eye, on the tribune and his followers,
and rebuked them with the eloquence whose force had been so long irresistible;
had he called up the memory of past benefits, and thundered indignation in the
ears of the apostate Laenas, who known but that bloodhounds would have been
eluded or baffled, or disarmed of their sanguinary purpose? They were wretches,
incited by the lust of gain, void of enmity to Cicero, or love of his
oppressors. The bribe with which Anthony had bought their zeal, might have
easily been doubled by Cicero, to purchase their connivance at his flight. The
hope of promotion in the legions of the east, might have changed them into
guardians of our safety, and companions of our voyage. Thus had the magnanimity
of Marcus snatched him from worse perils, and kept him from despairing of his
life, and his cause, though laboring under a greater weight of years,
encompassed by enemies more numerous and more triumphant: lonely, succourless,
in chains and immured in a dungeon!

But why do I calumniate the memory of Cicero? Arraign the wisdom of his
conduct, and the virtue of his motives? Had he not lived long enough for
felicity and usefulness? Was there cowardice or error in refusing to mingles in
the tumults of war? In resigning to younger hands, innured to military offices,
the spear and the shield? Is it more becoming the brave to struggled for life;
to preserve the remnant which infirmity and old age had left, than serenely to
wait for death, and encounter it with majestic composure? Is it dishonorable
to mourn over the triumph of ambition, and the woes of our country? To be
impatient of life, when divorced from liberty, and fated to contemplate the
ruin of those schemes, on which his powers had incessantly been exercised, and
whose purpose was the benefit of mankind?

Yes. The close of thy day was worthy its beginning and its progress. Thou
die with no stain upon thy virtue. The termination of thy course was coveal
with the ruin of thy country. Thy hand had upheld the fabric of its freedom and
its happiness, as long as human force was adequate to that end. It fell,
because the seeds of dissolution had arrived at maturity, and the basis and
structure were alike dissolved. It fell, and thou wast crushed in its ruins.


