A SERMON, PREACHED ON THE DEATH OF George Washington, LIEUTENANT GENERAL of
the AMERICAN ARMIES: and LATE PRESIDENT of the UNITED STATES OF AMERICA:
DELIVERED in STONINGTON-PORT, CONNECTICUT, On Tuesday Evening, January 14 th,
1800.

BY CLARK BROWN, A. M. Minister of the Gospel Congregational Church and Society
in Brimfield, Massachusetts.

HOW ARE THE MIGHTY FALLEN.

STONINGTON-PORT, PRINTED BY SAMUEL TRUMBULL, For and by the request of a
number of the Hearers. January, 1800.

A SERMON, etc.
CONVENED for the purpose of making some suitable reflections, upon the death
of GENERAL GEORGE WASHINGTON; the Man who, in life, was highly venerable,
amiable and beloved; and who, in his death, is greatly lamented, and
universally honored by public and respectful ceremonies; -- the following
pathetic and ejaculatory Aphorism of Israel's inspired King, is highly
applicable to the occasion: "HELP, LORD; for the GODLY MAN cease; for the
FAITHFUL fail from among the CHILDREN of MEN."

PSALMS, CHAP. xii. VERSE 1.
ALL terrestial things and beings are of a transitory and perishable nature.
Even the Sun, that bright emblem of the Deity, which has for ages shone with
undistinguishable luster upon surrounding worlds, must at length cease to
shine, and be removed from its exalted station; among the shining worlds in the
expanded firmament. -- The principles of decay and dissolution, are inseperably
connected with all the visible objects of nature.

THAT all the human race are mortal is a truth which neither the godly, nor the
ungodly dispute. The most wise and amiable and the most godly and esteemed of
men, cannot be exempted from the stroke of death. To death, the rich as well as
the poor, the noble as well as the ignominious, must submit and bow. Neither
the virtues nor honors of WASHINGTON, could secure him from the arrest of
death. -- WASHINGTON, the faithful and godly, has fallen; -- he is removed from
us into the world of spirits, -- it should therefore be the prayer of United
Columbia, Help, or save us O Lord, for the godly Man has ceased; for the
faithful Man from among us has failed!

THE death of the wise and virtuous in public life, is a just cause of public
lamentation, sorrow and prayer. Though all things and beings are under the wise
and sovereign direction of HIM "whose kingdom rules over all," -- and tho it
be the duty of all mankind to submit to the events of his providence as just
and right, yet when persons of eminent worth and usefulness, of singular piety
and goodness, are taken out of the world, it is lawful to express grief, and to
mourn that they are no more. When persons of this character, in public life,
are taken away by death, it cannot be displeasing to the Holy Governor of the
universe, to see those of the same community or nation, noticing with religious
ceremonies, such an event of his providence, and respecting their virtues by
public testimonies of veneration. This may be done with all due submission to
his holy government, and to the particular instance of his providence, by which
their sorrow and mourning are united.

As the venerable Man, whose death we now lament, was possessed of
extraordinary virtues, and was more than uncommonly useful in public life, --
it becomes the sons and daughters of Columbia, to unite in public testamonies
of grief, and in public ceremonies of respect for his memory.

"THE ILLUSTRIOUS GENERAL GEORGE WASHINGTON IS DEAD." Let COLUMBIA be clothed
in an HABILIMENT of MOURNING. He has died, as expressed in the public Papers,
"mature in years, covered with glory, and rich in the affection of the American
people."

HOWEVER the Citizens of United America have been, and are yet divided in their
political sentiments, -- yet concerning the death of the illustrious
WASHINGTON, they lay aside their divisions and animosity, and are united in
paying a public respect to the talents, usefulness, virtues and memory of this
their departed Hero. -- In all our populous towns, the several Houses of public
worship, have been dressed in mourning, while the Bells, with solemn sound,
have announced that some public Calamity has come upon our country: And what is
the Calamity? Have either famines, earthquakes, or epidemic disorders, become
the cause of these public testimonies of sorrow and mourning? No! "The
illustrious LEADER; the SOLDIERS FRIEND; the FATHER of his COUNTRY," is forever
removed from this sublunary world. Numerous are the Orations, Sermons, and
Eulogies, which have been pronounced, in honor to his superior talents and
virtues: -- And in the commemoration and celebration of which, numerous hymns,
psalms, and dirges, have been sung in solemn strains: -- The vocal and
instrumental music, which have been performed on the occasion, have smitten the
mind with pungent anguish, while they have caused reflections highly useful and
important. The several funeral processions and military honors, which have been
formed, as public testimonies of sorrow for the melancholy event of his death,
are calculated to teach us the uncertainty and final End of all worldly
greatness and honors.

AMONG the many public tributes of respect with which he has been honored in
his death the speaker will now humbly attempt, to show that he was, according
to the text, "A Godly and faithful man."

WITH one voice, all the true Citizens of United Columbia, who respect the
divine government over mankind, must readily unite in this solemn and pathetic
Address to God, "Help, Lord; for the godly man cease; for the faithful fail
from among us." --

WHATEVER might have caused the pious king of Israel, to make this address,
none of us can be insensible of its application to the death of Washington, the
Hero, the Sage, and Patriot of United America.

HE was a Godly-man, because he always respected and vincated the character and
government of the Supreme Ruler of the Universe. -- He was never known to
trifle with the names by which the Creator and Governor of the world is
distinguished from other beings. He always reverenced his sacred names, titles,
and attributes; and of things sacred he always spoke with solemnity and
reverence. It has been remarked by those who have had a personal acquaintance
with him, and who have attended him both in the private and public walks of
life, that he never took the name of the Lord God in vain. His countenance
indicated a solemn mind, and all his private and public actions manifested that
he was a Godly-man.

IN his public addresses, and in his answers to the many thousand which he has
received, and especially in his FAREWELL ADDRESS to the people when he last
retired into private life, his Piety is evidently discovered. With Godly
reverence, he always mentioned the Divine government, related the Divine
goodness and expressed the Divine blessing, conferred on the American Nation.

AMIDST all the honors which his fellow Citizens could confer upon him, and
while living in the most affluent circumstances, his heart and affections
aspired to things of a more glorious and duriable nature. He lived as being
fully sensible of the uncertain and transitory nature of all human greatness
and glory. He lived as one who lived not to himself, but to the glory of his
Creator, and for the good of his fellow creatures. His heart was enlivened by
pious affections; his mind enlarged with exalted conceptions of Jehovah and his
providence; and his conduct made amiable by a course of uniformity and virtue.
Realizing the view and glory of making the people of these United States
virtuous and happy, under an equitable Constitution and Government, in their
National existence and independence; and animated by the hope of leaving
virtuous examples of marshall heroism, and of a just administration in the high
department of Government, both legislative and executive, he encountered the
greatest dangers, and cheerfully passed through many trying scenes. Endeavoring
to promote the honor and kingdom of Jehovah in the world, he has lest a name,
which will be revered by the virtuous of succeeding ages. In all the dangers
and distresses with which he has been surrounded, he has found abundant
consolation in the applause of a good conscience, and especially in the
reasonable expectation of having the approbation of the Supreme Ruler of all
nations. Such consolations shall survive the wreck of worlds and ages: "they
are independent solaces" far beyond the reach of time's destroying power.
These, in a degree, the Godly of all ranks and stations enjoy; and for them,
with the most servent zeal, we should all aspire.

PERSUADED that Jehovah governs the world, with the most perfect wisdom and
holiness, justice and benignity, and that all his requirements of mankind are
perfectly just and holy, this godly Man lived superior to all those
altercations and divisions which have been raised, and for ages carried on by
religious bigots. Sensible that modes of faith and religious sentiment were of
no importance, only as they tended to promote true benevolence, kindness,
charity, and virtue among mankind, -- his religion, was constituted in supreme
reverence for the character, perfections and government of Jehovah, and of
universal "good will to man."

THOUGH he was a professor of religion in the Church of England, yet it is
evident that he was a sincere believer in the absolute unity of the Deity, as
disconnected from all human opinions, and inventions, with which the doctrine
has long been taught, and handed down from one generation to another.

BELIEVING that there were virtuous persons, among the several classes and
different denomination of people in the United States, and unwilling to dictate
others in their religious sentiments, he in his Proclamation for a day of
public Thanksgiving in the year ninety-five, called on the people to express
their gratitude to the ONE ONLY SUPREME over all, on account of his wonderful
goodness manifested to them as a nation. He said nothing about any particular
system of religion, or any of the controversal doctrines among Christians, and
others: But he fully expressed the great fundamentals of all religion; such as
the acknowledgement of the existence, perfections, and providence of Jehovah;
the gratitude due to him for all his blessings, both of a public and private
nature; and our obligations to Him, as also our happiness, in the regulations
of our affections and conduct by a faithful obedience to the demands of that
religion, which requires repentance and an implicit reliance upon the Divine
mercy for the pardon of sin, and for every temporal and spiritual favor. He was
therefore GODLY by the exercise of universal CHARITY and "GOODWILL" which are
directly opposed to the disposition and conduct of those professors of
religion, who confine their charity and GOODWILL to those only of their
peculiar sentiments. As such characters are so few in the world, especially in
public life, we have the highest reason to mourn for the loss of the Man of
this character, who has lately fallen in death: -- With the utmost propriety
may we pray as in the words of the text, "Help, LORD; for this godly man has
ceased; for this faithful Man has failed from among us."

THAT WASHINGTON, who is justly styled the illustrious, was faithful, in the
exercise of that power and confidence reposed in him, is a fact too evident to
be denied by his greatest enemies. In what instance, has he ever acted
inconsistent with his dignified and exalted station? Did he ever abuse the
power with which he was entrusted? Or, Did he ever betray the high and
important TRUST committed to him, by the united suffrages of his fellow
Citizens? The greatest error which has ever been attributed to him in his
public administration, was the signing the British treaty. But as we have the
highest reason to suppose, that he was sincere in this act, the enemies to the
Treaty, should spare censure, and be candid and charitable, when speaking of
this instance of his public conduct.

POSSESSED of all the honors and powers which his Country could bestow upon
him; and possessed of an Independent fortune, can we conceive of any motive, by
which he could have been induced, to sign such a public Instrument, either to
aggrandize or enrich himself: -- On the contrary, Have we not every reason to
suppose, that he was actuated in this instance from a sincere and disinterested
regard for the public good? What the consequences might have been, if the
Treaty had not been ratified by his public sanction, it is now impossible for
us to determine: Perhaps much greater depredations on our commerce, and war
devastation, and bloodshed among us. But we will spare our conjectures, while
we consider him as having the general good of his country at heart, when to the
Treaty he put his public sanction. As the treaty is approbated by a Majority of
both branches of Government, and by the Majority of the people, a certain
deference is due to their opinion and judgment from the Minority.

A MAN elevated to the exalted station in which the Venerable MAN, whose death
we now deplore, was; and possessing the power with which he was entrusted,
might have been wholly actuated, in his public conduct, from the selfish
principles of avarice and ambition. History is filled with unnumbered evils of
sceptered ambition and avarice, abused power and domination. History teaches us
the fatal effects of the selfishness, avarice, and ambition of Rulers both in
the cabinet and field. Many of the Kings of Israel, several of the Roman
Emperors, such as Nero and Caligula, with innumerable others of almost all the
kingdoms and nations of the world, have converted their supreme magistracy and
authority, into engines of oppression and cruelty, and for the accomplishment
of the most tyrannical and selfish purposes. Such characters have ever been the
greatest instruments of national profligacy and destruction. Jeroboam, King of
Israel, finned, and made his nation to sin. Hence we find it repeatedly said in
the history of the wicked Kings of Israel, He "did like unto Jereboam, King of
Israel, who made Israel to sin." This character is applicable to every wicked
ruler. Such characters in their public administration, cause oppressive laws;
burdensome taxes; injurious promotions; causeless ejections from office; cruel
executions, internal devastation; and foreign domination. From the conduct and
example of such rulers, profligacy and ruin spread through the community, and
stop the streams of national health and glory. But how very different were the
public measures and administration of the illustrious Personage, whose death we
now lament. Was he ever known to be captivated by the splendour of dignity? or
wrongly allured by the dazzling effects of honor and influence? Was he ever
know to distribute justice with an uneven balance? Was virtue ever opposed by
his conduct, or discountenanced by his examples? Did he ever designedly elevate
the vicious to stations which claim respect and confidence? Are not the whole
of this assembly, and indeed the millions of confederated America, ready to
reply with one voice, No! -- Where in our own Country, or indeed in any other
Country, can we find another such a Character, so illustrious and useful, whom
Heaven has selected for an instrument of such public good? Impelled by similar
emotions, the whole American nation are now in mourning for the loss of a Man
so "godly and faithful." He was a Job, for patience, in danger and distress; a
Moses, for a national Deliverer and Savior; a Joshua for a Commander of a
numerous and respectable Army, in defense of his Country's rights and liberty;
and a David for the public administration of the constitution and government of
an highly favored nation. Such an assemblage of heroic and religious virtues,
were never found in any human character before. Grecian nor Roman Annals, have
never delineated such exalted virtues and talents, in the lines of any of their
boasted and deified heroes, legislators or philosophers. Under the
superintending providence of JEHOVAH who exalts and humbles nations, he has
done more than any other man, "in founding this our wide spreading Empire," and
in establishing in this western world a grea and independent nation.

IN a period of the deepest calamity, he was appointed Commander in chief of
the united army of the then thirteen States of America; in which station he
always acted with undaunted courage and uniform dignity. With a heroism and
military wisdom wholly unprecedented, and in dangers the most difficult, trying
and distressing, he has been instrumental of establishing our national
existence, independence and greatness. Having accomplished the great and highly
important OBJECT, for which he was appointed the Commander in chief of the
American armies, he according to the elegant language of prophecy, converted
the implements of war, such as the sword into the ploughshare and the spear
into the pruning hook; and with cheerfulness, retired into private life. But as
soon as it became obvious that it was necessary and highly expedient that there
should be a constitution founded, and a general Government established for the
United States, he again, at his country's call, forsook the retirements of
domestic life, and in a time of political convulsions, when a National storm
had arisen, came forward into public view; and with virtue and honor, presided
over the confederated States of America, as their first and chief Magistrate.
At the close of the last term for which he was elected to the chief Magistracy
of the United States, he voluntarily choose to retire again into the private
walks of life, even when his unanimous "re-election could not have been
doubted." -- But as soon as his beloved Country, was again in danger, by the
threatenings and assaults of foreign enemies, he was ready to step forward in
its defense. He therefore accepted accordingly the appointment and office of
Lieutenant General of the American Armies; in the discharge of which office he
was faithful unto death.

HENCE, "by the purity of his character," and by a long series of the most
important services of a public nature, he has rendered himself illustrious, not
only in this Country, but throughout the World. -- He always acted in such a
manner, as naturally tended to allure others to the practice of virtue and
righteousness, and not to vice and licentiousness. In the shade of retirement,
in the field, in the cabinet, and in the chair of State, he was respectable and
virtuous. He was "a Lion in the day of battle, and great and powerful in
command." The gentleness and simplicity of his manners, and his virtuous and
amiable conduct, united in forming a character truly grand and illustrious: a
character which was calculated to command attention and inspire confidence. His
natural genious, acquired talents and virtues; brought him at an uncommon early
period of life into public notice and esteem. In danger, and while others were
in dismay, he always acted with firmness and moderation. One instance of which,
may be noticed in his conduct at the banks of Monongahela: There consider the
youthful Washington, in an awful time of Indian victory and triumph, collecting
the remains of the defeated Army of Bradock. -- and saving, by a discernment
and valor uncommon for his years, the lives of hundreds whose hearts had failed
for fear, and whose lives were in jeopardy every moment by the unrelenting
savage foe.

DURING the period of almost Fifty Years, he was employed in the performance of
a series of great and important services to his country; the splendour and glory
of which, eclipse all the glittering royalty of all the crowns and dignified
names, of all the Monarchs which ever sat upon the thrones, of all the Kingdoms
and Empires of either Europe, Asia, or Africa.

RELIGION was his "constant angelic guest," and the divine paraclete of his
heart. -- During the whole of his life, he exhibited a uniform and illustrious
example of the most distinguished virtues. Under his auspicious protection and
patronage, piety and righteousness, as by "kindly rains and temperate suns"
sprang up and flourished, and have yielded a profitable harvest. Like the
unclouded Sun, he arose into public view; in the meredian and evening of life,
attracted the attention and admiration of millions; with refulgent brightness,
sat below the horizon of this life, in the serene Eve of this existence; and
has arisen, with holy splendour, in the Horizon of Immortality.

FROM hence we learn, That, in every instance, in which we, in our respective
stations and employments, can imitate his virtues, it is our most indispensible
duty thus to do. -- We all have parts to act upon the theater of time: and
justice, goodness, and religion are necessary for their right performance: Let
it be our constant and greatest concern to live, like the venerable WASHINGTON,
godly and faithful in the present evil world: And when this world shall recede
from our mortal view, as it has from his, May we, as he did, have a religious
peace in such a solemn and awful period: -- then we shall stand firm and sure
at the final Retribution, when the dissolution of all terrestial things and
scenes, shall astonish the thronging MULTITUDE, pressing forward to the general
Judgment.

FINALLY -- My Brethren, by this instance of Mortality, we learn, the vanity of
all human greatness and glory.

ALAS! WASHINGTON, the Hero, the Friend, and the Father of his Country, is
gone, forever gone!! -- His sacred Relics must remain under the power of death,
until the solemn Morn of the general Resurrection: -- And shall his unparralled
talents, virtues, services, and NAME, be forgotten* No! -- For Columbia's Sons
and Daughters, shall, to the latest generation, celebrate them with rapture and
delight.

"O WASHINGTON, thou HERO, Patriot, Sage," May we not say concerning thee, in
the sublime language of the celebrated Bard, to which thy Country has given
birth.

"Thy glorious life a volume shall compose,
"As Alps immortal; spotless as it snows.
"The stars shall be its types; the press its age,
"The Earth its binding, the sky its page: --
"In Heaven's high Dome, the Work shall stand.
"Shine with its Sun's, and with its Arch expand;
"'Till Nature's self, the vandal torch shall raise,
"And the vast Alcove of Creation blaze."
FINIS.
As the Author has not had an opportunity of examining the Proof Sheets, the
readers will please to excuse all the errors which may be discovered.


