[CHEAP REPOSITORY.] [No. V.]

THE Two Wealthy Farmers; Or, the History of Mr. BRAGWELL.

PART I.



PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED BY B. and J. JOHNSON No 147 HIGH STREET.

[Price 4 Cents Or. (...). 4d. per. doz.]

1800.

THE Two Wealthy Farmers, etc.
PART I.
MR. Bragwell and Mr. Worthy happened to meet last year at Weyhill Fair. They
were glad to see each other (...) they had but seldom met of late; Mr. Bragwell
having removed some years before from Mr. Worthy's neighborhood to a distant
village where he had bough an Estate.

Mr. Bragwell was a substantial Farme^ and Grazier. He had risen in the wo^^^
by what worldly men call a run of goo^ fortune. He had also been a man of great
industry; that is, he had paid a dilige^^ and constant attention to his own
intere^^ He understood business, and had a kn^^^ of turning almost every thing
to his own advantage. He had that sort of sense which good men call cunning,
and knave^ call wisdom. He was too prudent eve^ to do any thing so wrong that
the law could take hold of him; yet he was not over scrupulous about the
morality of (...) action, when the prospect of enriching himself by it was very
great, and the chance of hurting his character was small. The corn he sent home
to his customers was not always quite so good as the ^amples he had produced at
Market, and he now and then forgot to name some capital blemish in the horses
he sold at the Fair. He scorned to be guilty of the petty frauds of cheating in
weights and measures, for he thought that was a beggarly sin; but he valued
himself on his skill in making a bargain, and fancied it showed his knowledge
of the world to take advantage of the ignorance of a dealer.

It was his constant rule to undervalue every thing he was about to buy, and to
overvalue every thing he was about to sell; (...) as he prided himself on his
character he avoided every thing that was very shameful, so that he was
considered merely as a hard dealer, and a keen hand at a bargain. Now and then
when he had been caught in pushing his own advantage too far, he contrived to
get out of the scrape by turning the whole into a jest, saying it was a good
take in, a rare joke and that he had only a mind to divert himself with the
folly of his neighbor who could be so easily imposed on.

Mr. Bragwell had one favorite maxim, namely, that a man's success in life was
a sure proof of his wisdom; and that all failure and misfortune was the
consequence of a man's own folly. As thi^ opinion was first taken up by him
from vanity and ignorance; so it was more and more confirmed by his own
prosperity* He saw that he himself had succeeded greatly without either money
or education to begin with, and he therefore no^ despised every Man, however
excelle^^ his character or talents might be, who ha^ not had the same success
in life. His natural disposition was not particularly ba^ but prosperity had
hardened his hear^* He made his own progress in life the ru^^ by which the
conduct of all other me^ was to be judged, without any allowanc^ for their
peculiar disadvantages, or the visitations of Providence. He though^ for his
part, that every man of sense could command success on his undertaking and
control and dispose the events of hi^ own life.

But though he considered those who ha^ had less success than himself as no
bett^^ than fools, yet he did not extend this opinion to Mr. Worthy, whom he
looked upon not only as a good but a wise man. They had been bred up when
children in the same house, but with this difference, that Worthy was the
nephew of the master, and Bragwell the son of the servant.

Bragwell's father had been ploughman in the family of Mr. Worthy's uncle, a
sensible man, who farmed a small estate of his own, and who, having no
children, ^red up young Worthy as his son, in^^ructed him in the business of
husbandry and at his death left him his estate. The ^ather of Worthy was a
pious Clergyman who lived with his brother the farmer, in order to help out a
narrow income. He and bestowed much pains on the instruction of his son, and
used frequently to re^^eat to him a saying which he had picked ^p in a book,
written by one of the greatest men in this Country, "that there were ^wo things
with which every man ought ^o be acquainted, RELIGION AND HIS ^WN BUSINESS.
While he therefore ^ook care that his son should be made an excellent Farmer,
he filled up his leisure ^ours in improving his mind; so that young Worthy had
read more good Books and understood them better than most men in his station.
His reading however had been chiefly confined to husbandry and divinity, the
two subjects which were of the most immediate importance to him.

The reader will see by this time that Mr. Bragwell and Mr. Worthy were likely
to be as opposite to each other as two men could well be, who were nearly of
the same age and condition, and who were neither of them without credit in the
world. Bragwell indeed made far the greater figure, for he liked to cut a dash,
as he called it. And while it was the study of Worthy to conform to his
station, and to set a good example to those about him, it was the delight of
Bragwell to vie in his way of life with men of larger fortune. He did not see
how much this vanity raised the ill will of his equals and the contempt of his
betters.

His Wife was a notable stirring Woman, but vain, violent and ambitious; very
ignorant, and very high minded. She had married Bragwell before he was worth a
shilling, and as she had brought him a good deal of money, she thought herself
the grand cause of his rising in the world, and thence took occasion to govern
him most completely. Whenever he ventured to oppose her she took care to put
him in mind, "that he owed every thing to her, that had it not been for her he
might still have been stumping after a Plow-tail, or serving Hogs in old
Worthy's Farm-Yard, but that it was she who had made a Gentleman of him. In
order to set about making him a Gentleman, she began by teazing him till he had
turned away all his poor relations who worked in the Farm. She next drew him
off from keeping company with his old acquaintance, and at last persuaded him
to remove from the place where he had got his money. Poor Woman! she had not
sense and virtue enough to see how honorable it is for a man to raise himself
in the world by fair means, and then to help forward his poor relations and
friends, engaging their service by his kindness, and endeavoring to keep want
out of his family.

Mrs. Bragwell was an excellent mistress, according to her own notions of
excellence, for no one could say that she ever lost an opportunity of scolding
a servant, or was ever guilty of the weakness of overlooking a fault. Toward
her two daughters her behavior was far otherwise. In them she could see
nothing but perfections: but her extravagant fondness for these girls was full
as much owing to pride as to affection. She was bent on making a family, and
having found out that she was too ignorant, and too much trained to the habits
of getting money, ever to hope to make a figure herself, she looked to her
daughters as the persons who were to raise the family of the Bragwells: And in
this hope she foolishly submitted to any drudgery for their sakes, and to any
impertinence from them.

The first wish of her heart was to set them above their neighbors; for she
used to say "what was the use of having substance, if her daughters might not
carry themselves above girls who had nothing?" To do her justice, she herself
would be about early and late to see tha^ the business of the house was not
neglected. She had been bred to great industry, and continued to work when it
was no longer necessary, both from early habit, and the desire of heaping up
money for her daughters. Yet her whole notion of gentility was, that it
consisted in being rich and idle, and though she was willing to be a drudge
herself, she resolved to make her daughters gentlewomen. To be well dressed,
and to do nothing, or nothing that was of any use, was what she fancied
distinguished people in genteel life. And this is too common a notion of a fine
education among some people. They do not esteem things by their use, but by
their show. They estimate the value of their children's education by the money
it costs, and not by the knowledge and goodness it bestows. People of this
stamp often take a pride in the expense of learning, instead of taking pleasure
in the advantage of it. And the silly vanity of letting others see that they
can afford any thing, often sets parents on letting their daughters learn not
only things of no use, but things which may be really hurtful in their
situation; either by setting them above their proper duties, or by taking up
their time in a way inconsistent with them.

Mrs. Bragwell sent her daughters to a boarding School, where she wished them
to hold up their heads as high as any body; to have more spirit than to be put
upon by any one, never to be pitiful about money, but rather to show that they
could spend with the best; to keep company with the richest girls in the
School, and to make no acquaintance with Farmer's Daughters.

They came home at the usual age of leaving School, with a large portion of
vanity grafted on their native ignorance. The vanity was added but the
ignorance was not taken away. Of Religion they could not possibly learn any
thing, since none was taught, for at that place it was considered as a part of
education which belonged only to Charity Schools. Of knowledge they got just
enough to laugh at their fond parents' rustic manners and vulgar language, and
just enough taste to despise and ridicule every girl who was not as vainly
dressed as themselves.

The Mother had been comforting herself for the heavy expense of their bringing
up, by looking forward to the pleasure of seeing them become fine ladies, and
to the pride of marrying them above their station.

Their Father hoped also that they would be a comfort to him both in sickness
and in health. He had no learning himself, and could write but poorly, and owed
what skill he had in figures to his natural turn for business. He hoped that
his daughters, after all the money he had spent on them, would now write his
letters and keep his accounts. And as he was now and then laid up with a fit of
the gout, he was enjoying the prospect of having two affectionate children to
nurse him.

When they came home however, he had the mortification to find, that though he
had two smart showy ladies to visit him, he had neither dutiful daughters to
nurse him, nor faithful stewards to keep his books. They neither soothed him by
kindness when he was sick, nor helped him when he was busy. They thought the
maid might take care of him in the gout as she did before. And as to their
skill in cyphering he soon found to his cost, that though they knew how to
spend both Pounds, Shillings, and Pence, yet they did not know so well how to
cast them up.

Mrs. Bragwell one day being very busy in making a great dinner for the
neighbors, ventured to request her daughters to assist in making the pastry.
They asked her scornfully "whether she had sent them to Boarding School to
learn to cook; and added, that they supposed she would expect them next to make
puddings for the bay-makers." So saying they coolly marched off to their music.
When the Mother found her girls were too polite to be of any use, she would
take comfort in observing how her parlour was set out with their Fillagree and
Flowers, their Embroidery and cut paper. They spent the morning in bed, the
noon in dressing, the evening at the Spinnet, and the night in reading Novels.

With all these fine qualifications it is easy to suppose that as they despised
their ^ober duties, they no less despised their plain neighbors. When they
could not get to a horse race, a petty ball, or a strolling play, with some
company as idle and as smart as themselves, they were driven for amusement to
the Circulating Library. Jack the plowboy, on whom they had now put a livery
jacket, was employed half his time in trotting backwards and forwards with the
most wretched trash the little neighboring book shop could furnish. The choice
was often left to Jack, who could not read, but who had general orders to bring
all the new things, and a great many of them.

Things were in this state, or rather growing worse, for idleness and vanity
are never at a stand; when these two wealthy farmers, Bragwell and Worthy met
at Weyhill Fair, as was said before. After many hearty salutations had passed
between them, it was agreed that Mr. Bragwell should spend the next day with
his old friend, whose house was not many miles distant, which Bragwell invited
himself to do in the following manner, "we have not had a comfortable day's
that for years, said he, and as I am to look at a drove of lean beasts in your
neighborhood, I will take a bed at your house, and we will pass the evening in
debating as we used to do. You know I always loved a bit of an argument, and am
reckoned not to make the worst figure at our club: I had not, to be sure, such
good learning as you had, because your father was a Parson, and you got it for
nothing. But I can bear my part pretty well for all that. When any man talks to
me about his learning, I ask if it has helped him to get a good estate; if he
says no, then I would not give him a rush for it; for of what use is all the
learning in the world if it does not make a man rich? But as I was saying, I
will come and see you tomorrow; but now don't let your wife put herself into a
fuss for me. Don't alter your own plain way, for I am not proud I assure you,
nor above my old friends, though I thank GOD I am pretty well in the world.

To all this flourishing speech Mr. Worthy coolly answered, that certainly
worldly prosperity ought never to make any man proud since it is GOD who gives
strength to get riches, and without his blessing it is in vain to rise up early
and to eat the bread of carefulness.

About the middle of the next day Mr. Bragwell reached Mr. Worthy's neat and
pleasant dwelling. He found every thing in it the reverse of his own. It had
not so many ornaments but it had more comforts. And when he saw his friend's
good old fashioned arm chair in a warm corner, he gave a sigh, to think how his
own had been banished to make room for his daughter's Music. Instead of made
flowers in glass cases, and a tea chest and screen too fine to be used, and
about which he was cautioned, and scolded as often as he came near them, he saw
a neat shelf of good books for the service of the family, and a small medicine
chest for the benefit of the poor.

Mrs. Worthy and her daughters had prepared a plain but neat and good dinner.
The tarts were so excellent that Bragwell felt a secret kind of regret that his
own daughters were too genteel to do any thing so very useful. Indeed he had
been always unwilling to believe that any thing which was very proper and very
necessary, could be so extremely vulgar and unbecoming as his daughters were
always declaring it to be. And his late experience of the little comfort he
found at home, inclined him now still more strongly to suspect that things were
not so right as he had been made to suppose. But it was in vain to speak; for
his daughters constantly stopped his mouth by a favorite saying of theirs,
"better be out of the world than out of the fashion."

Soon after dinner the women went out to their several employments, and Mr.
Worthy being left alone with his guest the following discourse took place.

Bragwell. You have a couple of sober, pretty looking girls, Worthy; but I
wonder they do not tip off a little more. Why my girls have as much fat and
flour on their heads as would half maintain my reapers in suet pudding.


Worthy. Mr. Bragwell, in the management of my family, I don't consider what I
might afford only, though that is one great point; but I consider also what is
needful and becoming in a man of my station, for there are so many useful ways
of laying out money, that I feel as if it were a sin to spend one unnecessary
shilling. Having had the blessing of a good education myself, I have been able
to give the like advantage to my daughters. One of the best lessons I have
taught them is, to know themselves: and one proof that they have learnt this
lesson is, that they are not above any of the duties of their station. They
read and write well, and when my eyes are bad they keep my accounts in a very
pretty manner, If I had put them to learn what you call genteel things these
might either have been of no use to them, and so both time and money might have
been thrown away; or they might have proved worse than nothing to them by
leading them into wrong notions; and wrong company. Though we don't wish them
to do the laborious parts of the dairy work, yet they always assist their
Mother in the management of it. As to their appearance, they are every day
nearly as you see them now, and on Sundays they are very neatly dressed, but it
is always in a decent and modest way. There are no lappets, fringes, furbelows,
and tawdry ornaments, fluttering about among my cheese and butter. And I should
feel no vanity, but much mortification, if a stranger seeing Farmer Worthy's
daughters at Church should ask who those fine ladies were?


Bragwell. Now I own I should like to have such a question asked concerning my
daughters. I like to make people stare and envy. It makes one feel oneself
somebody. But as to yourself, to be sure you best know what you can afford. And
indeed there is some difference between your daughters and the Miss Bragwells.


Worthy. For my part, before I engage in any expense I always ask myself these
two short questions, First, can I afford it? -- Secondly -- Is it proper for me?


Bragwell. Do you so? Now I own I ask myself but one. For if I find I can
afford it, I take care to make it proper for me. If I can pay for a thing, no
one has a right to hinder me from having it.


Worthy. Certainly. But a man's own prudence and sense of duty, ought to
prevent him from doing an improper thing, as effectually as if there were
somebody to hinder him.


Bragwell. Now I think a man is a fool who is hindered from having any thing he
has a mind to; unless indeed he is in want of money to pay for it; I am no
friend to debt. A poor man must want on.


Worthy. But I hope my children have learnt not to want any thing which is not
proper for them. They are very industrious, they attend to business all day;
and in the evening they sit down to their work and a good book. I think they
live in the fear of GOD. I trust they are humble and pious, and I am sure they
seem cheerful and happy. If I am sick, it is pleasant to see them dispute which
shall wait upon me; for they say the maid cannot do it so tenderly as
themselves. --

This part of the discourse staggered Bragwell. Vain as he was, he could not
help feeling what a difference a religious and a worldly education made on the
heart, and how much the former regulated even the natural temper. Another thing
which surprised him was, that these girls living a life of domestic piety,
without any public diversions, should be so very cheerful and happy, while his
own daughters, who were never contradicted, and were indulged with continual
amusements, were always sullen and ill tempered. That they who were more
humoured should be less grateful and happy, disturbed him much. He envied
Worthy the tenderness of his children, though he would not own it, but turned
it off thus.


Bragwell. But my girls are too smart to make mopes of, that is the truth.
Though ours is such a lonely village, it is wonderful to see how soon they get
the fashions. What with the descriptions in the Magazines, and the pictures in
the pocket Books, they have them in a twinkling, and outdo their patterns all
to nothing. I used to take in the Country Journal, because it was useful enough
to see how Oats went, the time of high water, and the price of Stocks. But when
my ladies came home forsooth, I was soon wheedled out of that, and forced to
take a London paper, that tells a deal about caps and feathers, and all the
trumpery of the quality. When I want to know what hops are a bag, they are
snatching the paper to see what violet soap is a pound. And as to the dairy,
they never care how Cow's milk goes, as long as they can get some stuff which
they call Milk of Roses.


Worthy. But do your daughters never read?


Bragwell. Read! I believe they do too. Why our Jack the Plow boy spends half
his time in going to a shop in our Market town, where they let out books to
read with marble covers. And they sell paper with all manner of colors on the
edges, and gim cracks, and powder-puffs, and wash-balls, and cards without any
pips, and every thing in the world that is genteel and of no use. 'Twas but
the other day I met Jack with a basket full of these books, so having some time
to spare, I sat down to see a little what they were about.


Worthy. Well, I hope you there found what was likely to improve your
daughters, and teach them the true use of time.


Bragwell. O as to that, you are pretty much out. I could make neither head nor
tail of it. It was neither fish, flesh, nor good red-herring. It was all about
my Lord, and Sir Ha^^y and the Captain. But I never met with such nonsensical
fellows in my life. Their talk was no more like that of my old landlord, who
was a Lord you know, nor the Captain of our fencibles, than chalk is like
cheese. I was fairly taken in at first, and began to think I had got hold of a
godly book, for there was a deal about "hope and despair, and heaven, and
Angels, and torments, and everlasting happiness." But when I got a little on, I
found there was no meaning in all these words, or if any, 'twas a bad meaning.
"Misery" perhaps only meant a disappointment about a bit of a letter: and
"everlasting happiness" meant two people talking nonsense together for five
minutes. In short, I never met with such a pack of lies. The people talk such
gibberish as no folks in their sober senses ever talked; and the things that
happen to them are not like the things that ever happen to any of my
acquaintance. They are at home one minute, and beyond sea the next. Beggars
today, and Lord's tomorrow. Waiting maids in the morning, and Duchesses at
night. You and I, Master Worthy, have worked hard many years, and think it very
well to have scraped a trifle of money together, you a few hundreds I suppose,
and I a few thousands. But one would think every man in these books had the
Bank of England in his scrutoire. Then there is another thing which I never met
with in true life. We think it pretty well you know, if one has got one thing,
and another has got another. I Will tell you how I mean. You are reckoned
sensible, our Parson is learned, the Squire is rich, I am rather generous, one
of your daughters is pretty, and both mine are genteel. But in these books,
(except here and there one, whom they make worse than Satan himself) every man
and woman's child of them, are all wise, and witty, and generous, and rich, and
handsome, and genteel. Nobody is middling, or good in one thing, and bad in
another, like my live acquaintance. But it is all up to the skies, or down to
the dirt. I had rather read Tom Hickathrift, or Jack the Giant killer.


Worthy. You have found out Mr. Bragwell, that many of these books are
ridiculous, I will go farther, and say, that to me they appear wicked also. And
I should account the reading of them a great mischief, especially to people in
middling and low life, if I only take into the account the great loss of time
such reading causes, and the aversion it leaves behind for what is more serious
and solid. But this, though a bad part is not the worst. These books give false
views of human life. They teach a contempt for humble and domestic duties; for
industry, frugality, and retirement. Want of youth and beauty, is considered as
ridiculous. Plain people, like you and me, are objects of contempt. Parental
authority is set at naught. Nay, plots and contrivances, against parents and
guardians, fill half the volumes. They make love the great business of human
life, and even teach that it is impossible to be regulated or restrained, and
to the indulgence of this passion every duty is therefore sacrificed. A country
life, with a kind mother, or a sober aunt, is described as a state of
intolerable misery. And one would be apt to fancy, from their painting, that a
good country house is a prison, and a worthy father the jailer. Vice is set off
with every ornament which can make it pleasing and amiable; while virtue and
piety are made ridiculous by tacking to them something that is silly or absurd.
Crimes which would be considered as hanging matter at the Old Bailey, are here
made to take the appearance of virtue, by being mixed with some wild flight of
unnatural generosity. Those crying sins, ADULTERY, GAMING, DUELS, and SELF
MURDER, are made so familiar, and the wickedness of them is so disguised, that
even innocent girls get to lose their abhorrence, and to talk with complacency
of things which should not be so much as named by them.

I should not have said so much on this mischief, (continued Mr. Worthy,) from
which I dare say, great folks fancy people in our station are safe enough, if I
did not know and lament that this corrupt reading is now got down even among
some of the lowest class, And it is an evil which is spreading every day. Poor
industrious girls, who get their bread by the needle, or the loom, spend half
the night in listening to these books. Thus the labor of one girl is lost, and
the minds of the rest are corrupted; for though their hands are employed in
honest industry, which might help to preserve them from a life of sin, yet
their hearts are at that very time polluted by scenes and descriptions which
are too likely to plunge them into it. And I think I don't go too far, when I
say, that the vain and shew^ manner in which young women who have to work for
their bread, have taken to dress themselves, added to the poison they draw from
these books, contribute together to bring them to destruction, more than almost
any other cause. Now tell me, don't you think these wild books will hurt your
daughters?


Bragwell. Why I do think they are grown full of schemes, and contrivances, and
whispers, that is the truth on it. Every thing is a secret. They always seem to
be on the look out for something, and when nothing comes on it, then they are
sulky and disappointed. They will not keep company with their equals. They
despise trade and farming, and I own, I Am for the stuff. I should not like for
them to marry any but a man of substance, if he was ever so smart. Now they
will hardly sit down with a substantial country dealer. But if they hear of a
recruiting party in our Market Town, on goes the finery -- off they are. Some
flimsey excuse is patched up. They want something at the Book-shop, or the
Millener's, because I suppose there is a chance that some Jackanapes of an
Ensign may be there buying a Sticking plaster. In short I do grow a little
uneasy, for I should not like to see all I have saved, thrown away on a
Knapsack.

So saying they both rose, and walked out to view the Farm. Mr. Bragwell
^ffected greatly to admire the good order of every thing he saw; but never
forgot to compare it with something larger, and handsomer, or better of his
own. It was easy to see that Self was the standard of perfection in every
thing. All he possessed gained some increased value in his eyes from being his;
and in surveying the property of his friends, he derived food for his vanity,
from things which seemed least likely to raise it. Every appearance of comfort,
or success, or merit in any thing which belonged to Mr. Worthy, led him to
speak of some superior advantage of his own of the same kind. And it was clear,
that the chief part of the satisfaction he felt in walking over the farm of his
friend, was caused by thinking how much larger his own was.

Mr. Worthy, who felt a kindness for him, which all his vanity could not cure,
was on the watch how to turn their talk to some useful point. And whenever
people resolve to go into company with this view, it is commonly their own
fault if some opportunity of turning it to account does not offer.

He saw Bragwell was intoxicated with pride, and undone by prosperity, and that
his family was in the high road to ruin. He thought that if some means could be
found to open his eyes on his own character, to which he was now totally blind,
it might be of the utmost service to him. The more Mr. Worthy reflected, the
more he wished to undertake this kind office. He was not sure that Mr. Bragwell
would bear it, but he was very sure it was his duty to attempt it. Mr. Worthy
was very humble, and very candid, and he had great patience and forbearance
with the faults of others. He felt no pride at having escaped the same error,
for he knew who it was had made them to differ. He remembered that God had
given him many advantages, a pious father and a religious Education; this made
him humble under a sense of his own sins, and charitable toward the sins of
others, who had not the same privileges.

Just as he was going to try to enter into a very serious conversation with his
guest, he was stopped by the appearance of his daughter, who told them supper
was ready.

Soon after supper Mrs. Worthy left the room with her daughters, at her
husband's desire; for it was his intention to speak more plainly to Bragwell
than was likely to be agreeable to him before others.

The two farmers being seated at their little table, each in a handsome old
fashioned great chair, Bragwell began.

It is a great comfort, neighbor Worthy at a certain time of life to be got
above the world; my notion is, that a man should labor hard the first part of
his days and that he may then sit down and enjoy himself for the remainder. Now
though I hate boasting, yet as you are my oldest friend I am about to open my
heart to you. Let me tell you then I reckon I have worked as hard as any man in
my time, and that I now begin to think I have a right to indulge a little. I
have got my money with a good character and I mean to spend it with credit. I
pay every one his own, I set a good example, I keep to my church, I serve GOD,
I honor the king, and I obey the laws of the land.

This is doing a great deal indeed, replied Mr. Worthy, but added he, I doubt
that more goes to the making up all these duties than men are commonly aware
of. Suppose then that you and I talk the matter over coolly, we have the
evening before us. What if we sit down together, as two friends and examine one
another.

Bragwell, who loved an argument, and was not a little vain both of his sense
and his morality, accepted the challenge, and gave his word that he would take
in goo^ part any thing that should be said to him. Worthy was about to proceed
when Bragwell interrupted him for a moment, by saying, -- But stop friend,
before we begin I wish you would remember that we have had a long walk, and I
want a little refreshment; have you no liquor that is stronger than this cider?
I am afraid it will give me a fit of the gout.

Mr. Worthy immediately produced a bottle of wine and another of spirits,
saying though he drank neither spirits nor even wine himself, yet his wife
always kept a little of each as a provision in case of sickness or accident.

Farmer Bragwell prefered the brandy and began to taste it. Why, said he this
is no better than English, I always use foreign ^^self. I bought this for
foreign, said Mr. Worthy. No no, it is English spirits I assure you, but I can
put you into a way to get foreign nearly as cheap as English. Mr. Worthy
replied that he thought that was impossible.


Bragwell. O no, there are ways and means -- a word to the wise -- there is an
acquaintance of mine that lives upon the south coast -- you are a particular
friend and I will get you a gallon for a trifle.


Worthy. Not if it be smuggled Mr. Bragwell, though I should get it for
sixpence a bottle. -- Ask no questions, says the other, I never say any thing
to any one, and who is the wiser? And so this is your way of obeying the laws
of the land, said Mr. Worthy -- here is a fine specimen of your morality.


Bragwell. Come, come, don't make a fuss about trifles. If every one did it
indeed it would be another thing, but as to my getting a drop of good brandy
cheap ^hy that cannot hurt the revenue much.


Worthy. Pray Mr. Bragwell what should you think of a man who would dip his
hand into a bag and take out a few guineas.


Bragwell. Think; why I think that he should be hanged to be sure.


Worthy. But suppose that bag stood in the king's treasury.


Bragwell. In the king's treasury! worse and worse! What, rob the king's
treasury. Well I hope the robber will be taken up and executed, for I suppose
we shall all be taxed to pay the damage.


Worthy. Very true. If one man takes money out of the treasury others must be
obliged to pay the more into it; but what think you if the fellow should be
found to have stopped some money in it is way to the treasury instead of taking
it out of the bag after it got there.


Bragwell. Guilty, Mr. Worthy, it is all the same in my opinion. If I was (...)
Jury-man, I should say guilty, death.


Worthy. Hark ye Mr. Bragwell, he that deals in smuggled brandy, is the man who
takes to himself the king's money in it is way to the treasury, and he as much
robs the government as if he dipped his hands into a bag of guineas in the
treasury chamber. It comes to the same thing exactly. Here Bragwell seemed a
little offended. What Mr. Worthy; do you pretend to say I am not an honest man
because I like to get my brandy as cheap as I can? and because I like to save a
shilling to my family? Sir, I repeat it, I do my duty to GOD and my neighbor.
-- I say the Lord's prayer most days, I go to church on Sundays, I repeat my
creed and keep the ten commandments, and though I may now and then get a little
brandy cheap, yet upon the whole, I will venture to say, I do as much as can be
expected of any man.


Worthy. Come then, since you say you keep the commandments, you cannot be
offended if I ask you whether you understand them.


Bragwell. To be sure I do. I dare say I do, lookee, Mr. Worthy, I don't
pretend to much reading, I was not bred to it as you were. If my father had
been a person I fancy I should have made as good a figure as some other folks,
but I hope good sense and a good heart may teach a man his duty without much
scholarship.


Worthy. To come to the point let us now go through the ten commandments, and
let us take along with us those explanations of them which our Savior gave us
in his sermon on the mount.


Bragwell. Sermon on the mount! why the ten commandments are in the 20th
chapter of Exodus. Come, come, Mr. Worthy, I know where to find the
commandments as well as you do, for it happens that I am churchwarden, and I
can (...) altar piece where the ten commandments are without your telling me,
^or my pew directly faces it.


Worthy. But I advise you to read the sermon on the mount, that you may see the
full meaning of them.


TO BE CONTINUED.

