[CHEAP REPOSITORY.] [No. ^II]

THE Two Wealthy Farmers; Or, the History of Mr. BRAGWELL.

PART III.



PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED BY B. and J. JOHNSON, No. 147 HIGH STREET.

1800. [Price 4 Cent Or 2s. 4d. per. doz.]

THE Two Wealthy Farmers, etc. PART III.
He had, however, so strong a desire to be useful to Mr. Bragwell, that he at
length determined to break through his practice and pass the Sunday at his
house. Mr. Worthy was surprised to find that though the Church bell was going,
the breakfast was not ready, and expressed his wonder how this should be the
case in so industrious a family. Bragwell made some awkward excuses. He said
his wife worked her servants so hard all the week, that even she, as notable as
she was, a little relaxed from the strictness of her demands on Sunday
mornings; and he owned that in a general way, no one was up early enough for
church. He confessed that his wife commonly spent the morning in making
puddings, pies, and cakes, to last through the week, as Sunday was the only
leisure time she and her maids had. Mr. Worthy soon saw an uncommon bustle in
the house. All hands were busy. I was nothing but baking, and boiling and
frying, and roasting, and running, and scolding, and eating. The boy was kept
from Church to clean the plate, the man to gather the fruit, the mistress to
make the cheese-cakes, the maids to dress the dinner, and the young ladies to
dress themselves.

The truth was, Mrs. Bragwell, who had heard much of the order and good
management of Mr. Worthy's family, but who looked down with disdain upon them
as far less rich than herself, was resolved to indulge her vanity on the
present occasion. She was determined to be even with Mrs. Worthy, (...) whose
praises Bragwell had been so loud, and felt no small pleasure in the hope of
making her guest uneasy, when he should be struck with the display both of her
skill and her wealth. Mr. Worthy was indeed struck to behold as large a dinner
as he had been used to see at a Justice's meeting. He, whose frugal and pious
wife had accustomed him only to such a sunday's dinner as could be dressed
without keeping any one from church, when he surveyed the loaded table of his
friend, instead of feeling that envy which these grand preparations were meant
to raise, felt nothing but disgust at the vanity of his friend's wife, mixed
with much thankfulness for the piety of his own.

After having made the dinner wait a long time, the Miss Bragwells marched in,
dressed as if they were going to the Assize Ball; they looked very scornful at
having been so hurried; though they had been dressing ever since they got up,
and their fond father, when he saw them so fine, forgave all their
impertinence, and cast an eye of triumph on Mr. Worthy, who felt he had never
loved his own humble daughters so well as at that moment.

In the afternoon, the whole party went to church. To do them justice, it was
indeed their common practice once a day, when the weather was good, and the
road neither dusty nor dirty, when the Minister did not begin too early, when
the young Ladies had not been disappointed of their new bonnets on the Saturday
night, and when they had no smart company in the house who rather wished to
stay at home. When this last was the case, which, to say the truth, happened
pretty often, it was thought a piece of good manners to conform to the humor
of the guests. Mr. Bragwell had this day forborne to ask any of his usual
company, well knowing that their vain and worldly conversation would only serve
to draw on him some new reprimand from his guest.

Mrs. Bragwell and her daughters picked up as usual a good deal of acquaintance
at church. Many compliments passed, and much of the news of the week was
retailed before the service began. They waited with impatience for the lessons
as a licensed season for whispering, and the subject begun during the lessons
was finished while they were singing. The young Ladies made an appointment for
the afternoon with a friend in the next pew, while their Mamma took the
opportunity of enquiring the character of a Dairy Maid, which she observed with
a compliment to her own good management, would save time on a week day.

Mr. Worthy, who found himself quite in a new world, returned home with his
friend alone. In the evening he ventured to ask Bragwell, if he did not, on a
Sunday night at least, make it a custom to read and pray with his family.
Bragwell told him he was sorry to say he had no family at home, else he should
like to do it for the sake of example. But as his servants worked hard all the
week, his wife was of opinion that they should then have a little holiday. Mr.
Worthy pressed it home upon him, if the utter neglect of his servant's
principles was not likely to make a heavy article in his final account: and
asked him if he did not believe that the too general liberty of meeting
together, jaunting and diverting themselves, on Sunday evenings, was not often
found to produce the worst effects on the morals of servants and the good order
of families? "I put it to your conscience," said he, "Mr. Bragwell, whether
Sunday, which was meant as a blessing and a benefit, is not, as it is commonly
kept, turned into the most mischievous part of the week, by the selfish
kindness of masters, who, not daring to set their servants about any public
work, allot them that day to follow their own devices, that they themselves may
with more rigor refuse them a little indulgence and a reasonable holiday in
the working part of the week, which a good servant has now and then a right to
expect." Those masters who will give them half or all of the Lord's day, will
not spare them a single hour of a working day. Their work must be done; GOD's
work may be let alone."

Mr. Bragwell owned that Sunday had produced many mischiefs in his own family.
That the young men and maids, having no eye upon them, frequently went to
improper places with other servants turned adrift like themselves. That in
these parties the poor girls were too frequently led astray, and the men got to
public houses and fives-playing. But it was none of his business to watch them.
His family only did as others do; indeed it was his wife's concern; and as she
was so good a manager on other days, that she would not spare them an hour even
to visit a sick father or mother, it would be hard she said, if they might not
have Sunday afternoon to themselves, and she could not blame them for making
the most of it. Indeed she was so indulgent in this particular, that she often
excused the men from going to church that they might serve the beasts, and the
maids that they might get the milking done before the holiday part of the
evening come on. She would not indeed hear of any competition between doing her
work and taking their pleasure; but when the difference lay between their going
to church and taking their pleasure, he must say that for his wife, she was
always inclined to the good-natured side of the question. She is strict enough
in keeping them sober, because drunkenness is a costly sin, and to do her
justice, she does not care how little they sin at her expense.

"Well," said Mr. Worthy, "I always like to examine both sides fairly, and to
see the different effects of opposite practices; now, which plan produces the
greatest share of comfort to the master and of profit to the servants in the
long run? Your servants, it is likely, are very much attached to you; and very
fond of living where they get their own way in so great a point."

"O, as to that," replied Bragwell, "you are quite out. My house is a scene of
discord, mutiny and discontent. And though there is not a better manager in
England than my wife, yet she is always changing her servants, so that every
Quarter-day is a sort of Gaol Delivery at my house; and when they go off, as
they often do, at a moment's warning, to own the truth, I often give them money
privately, that they may not carry my wife before the Justice to get their
wages.

"I see," said Mr. Worthy, "that all your worldly compliances do not procure
you even worldly happiness. As to my own family, I take care to let them see
that their pleasure is bound up with their duty, and that what they may call my
strictness, has nothing in view but their safety and happiness. By this means I
commonly gain their love as well as secure their obedience. I know that with
all my care I am liable to be disappointed, from the corruption that is in the
world through sin. But whenever this happens, so far from encouraging me in
remissness, it only serves to quicken my zeal. If by God's blessing, my servant
turns out a good Christian, I have been an humble instrument in his hand of
saving a soul committed to my charge."

Mrs. Bragwell came home, but brought only one of her daughters with her, the
other, she said, had given them the slip, and was gone with a young friend, and
would not return for a day or two. Mr. Bragwell was greatly displeased, as he
knew that young friend had but a slight character, and kept bad acquaintances.
Mrs. Bragwell came in all hurry and bustle, saying, if her family did not "go
to-bed with the Lamb" on Sundays, when they had nothing to do, how could they
"rise with the Lark" on Mondays, when so much was to be done.

Mr. Worthy had this night much matter for reflection. "We need not." said he,
"go into the great world to look for dissipation and vanity. We can find both
in a farm-house. As for me and my house," continued he, "we will serve the Lord
every day, but especially on Sundays. It is the day which the Lord has made:
has made for himself; we will rejoice in it, and consider the religious use of
it not only as a duty but as a privilege."

Mr. Bragwell and Mr. Worthy set out early on the next morning on their way to
the Golden Lion, a small Inn in a neighboring market town. As they had time
before them, they had agreed to ride slowly, that they might converse on some
useful subject; but here, as usual, they had two opinions about the same thing.
Mr. Bragwell's notion of an useful subject was, something by which money was to
be got, and a good bargain struck. Mr. Worthy was no less a man of business
than his friend. His schemes were wise and his calculations just; his
reputation for integrity and good sense made him the common judge and umpire in
his neighbors affairs, while no one paid a more exact attention to every
transaction of his own. But the business of getting money was not with him the
first, much less was it the whole concern of the day. Every morning when he
rose, he remembered that he had a Maker to worship as well as a family to
maintain. Religion however, never made him neglect business, though it
sometimes led him to postpone it. He used to say, no man had any reason to
expect God's blessing through the day who did not ask it in the morning. But he
had not the less sense, spirit, and activity when he was among men abroad,
because he had first served God at home.

As these two Farmers rode along, Mr. Worthy took occasion from the fineness of
the day, and the beauty of the country through which they passed to turn the
discourse to the goodness of God and our infinite obligations to him. He knew
that the transition from thanksgiving to prayer would be natural and easy, and
he therefore slid, by degrees, into that important subject; and he observed
that secret prayer was a duty of universal obligation, which every man had it
in his power to fulfill, and which he seriously believed was the ground work of
all religious practice, and of all devout affections.

Mr. Bragwell felt conscious that he was very negligent and irregular in the
performance of this duty, he considered it as a mere ceremony, or at least as a
duty which might give way to the slightest temptation of drowsiness at night,
or of business in the morning. As he knew he did not live in the conscientious
performance of this practice, he tried to ward off the subject, knowing what a
home way his friend had of putting things. At last he said, he certainly
thought private prayer a good custom, especially for people who have time, and
that those who were sick, or old, or out of business, could not do better, but
that, for his part, he believed much of these sort of things was not expected
from men in active life.

Mr. Worthy. I should think Mr. Bragwell, that those who are most exposed to
temptation stand most in need of prayer; now there are few methinks who are
more exposed to temptation than men in business, for those must be in most
danger, at least from the world, who have most to do with it. And if this be
true, ought we not to prepare ourselves in the closet for the trials of the
market, the field, and the shop?


Bragwell. For my part, I think example is the whole of Religion, and if the
master of a family is orderly, and regular, and goes to church, he does every
thing which can be required of him, and no one has a right to call him to
account for any thing more.


Worthy. Give me leave to say, Mr. Bragwell that highly as I rate a good
example, still I must set a good principle above it. I must keep good order
indeed, for the sake of others; but I must keep a good conscience for my own
sake. To God I owe secret piety, I must therefore pray to him in private. -- To
my family I owe a Christian example, and for that, among other reasons, I must
not sail to go to Church.


Bragwell. You are talking, Mr. Worthy, as if I were an enemy to Christianity.
Sir, I am no Heathen. Sir, I belong to the Church. I always drink prosperity to
the Church. You yourself, as strict as you are, in never missing it twice a
day, are not a warmer friend to the Church than I am.


Worthy. That is to say, you know its value as an institution, but you do not
seem to know that a man may be very irreligious under the best religious
institutions; and that even the most excellent of them are but means of being
religious, and are no more religion itself than brick and mortar are prayers
and thanksgivings. I shall never think, howeve^ high their profession, and even
however regular their attendance, that those men truly respect the Church, who
bring home little of that religion which is taught in it into their own
families, or their own hearts. Excuse me, Mr. Bragwell.


Bragwell. Mr. Worthy, I am persuaded that religion is quite a proper thing for
the poor; and I don't think that the multitude can ever be kept in order
without it, and I am a bit of a politician you know.


Worthy. Your opinion is very just, as far as it goes, but it does not go far
enough, since it does not go to the root of the evil, for while you value
yourself on the soundness of this principle as a politician, I wish you to see
the reason of it as a Christian; depend upon it, if Religion be good for the
community at large, it is equally good for every family; and what is right for
a family is equally right for each individual in it. You have therefore
yourself brought the most unanswerable argument why you ought to be religious,
by asking how we shall keep others in order without Religion. For, believe me,
Mr. Bragwell, there is no particular clause to except you in the Gospel. No
exceptions in favor of any one class of men. The same restraints which are
necessary for the people at large are equally necessary for men of every order,
high and low, rich and poor, bond and free, learned and ignorant. May I ask
you, Mr. Bragwell, what (...) your reason for going to Church?


Bragwell. Sir, I am shocked at your question. How can I avoid doing a thing so
customary and so creditable? Not go to Church, indeed! What do you take (...)
for, Mr. Worthy? I am afraid you suspect me to be a Papist, or a Heathen, or of
some religion or other that is not what it should be.


Worthy. If a foreigner were to hear how violently one set of Christians in
this country often speak against another, how earnest would he suppose us all
to be in religious matters: and how astonished to discover that many a man has
perhaps little other proof to give of the sincerity of his own religion, except
the violence with which he hates the religion of another party. It is not
irreligion which such men hate, but the religion of the man, or the party, whom
they are set against. Well, you have told me why you go to Church; now pray
tell me why do you confess there on your bended knees every Sunday, that "you
have erred and strayed from God's ways?" "that there is no health in you?"
"th^^ you have done what you ought not to do* "and that you are a miserable
sinner?"


Bragwell. Because it is in the Common Prayer Book, to be sure, a book which I
have heard you yourself say wa^ written by wise and good men.


Worthy. But have you no other reason?


Bragwell. No, I cannot say I have.


Worthy. When you repeat that excellent form of confession, do you reall^ feel
that you are a miserable sinner?


Bragwell. No, I cannot say I do. B^^ that is no objection to my repeating i^
because it may suit the case of many who are so. I suppose the good Doctors who
drew it up intended that part for wicked people only, such as drunkards, and
thieves, and murderers; for I imagine they could not well contrive to make the
same prayer quite suit an honest man and a rogue; and so I suppose they thought
(...) safer to make a good man repeat a Prayer which suited a rogue, than to
make a rogue repeat a prayer which suited a good man: and you know it is so
customary for every body to repeat the general confession, that it cannot hurt
the credit of the most respectable persons, though every one must know they
have no particular concern in it.


Worthy. Depend upon it, Mr. Bragwell, those good Doctors you speak of, were
not quite of your opinion; they really thought that what you call honest men
were grievous sinners in a certain sense, and stood in need of making that
humble confession. Mr. Bragwell, do you believe in the fall of Adam?


Bragwell. To be sure I do, and a sad (...) for Adam it was; why, it is in the
Bible, is it not? It is one of the prettiest chapters in Genesis. Don't you
believe it, Mr. Worthy?


Worthy. Yes, truly I do. But I don't believe it merely because I read it in
Genesis. I know, indeed, that I am bound to believe every of the word of God.
But I have still an additional reason for believing in the fall of the first
man.


Bragwell. Have you indeed? Now, I cannot guess what that can be.


Worthy. Why my own observation of what is in myself teaches me to believe it.
It is not only the third chapter of Genesis which convinces me of the truth of
the fall, but also the sinful inclinations which I find in my own heart. This
is one of those leading truth's of Christianity of which I can never doubt a
moment, first, because it is abundantly expressed or implied in Scripture; and
next, because the consciousness of the evil nature I carry about with me
confirms the doctrine beyond all doubt. Besides, is it not said in Scripture
that by one man sin entered into the world, and that "all we, like sheep, have
gone astray; that by one man's disobedience many were made sinners," and so
again in twenty more places that I could tell you of.


Bragwell. Well, I never thought of this. But is not this a very melancholy
sort of doctrine, Mr. Worthy?


Worthy. It is melancholy, indeed, if we stop here. But while we are deploring
this sad truth, let us take comfort from another, that "As in Adam all die, so
in Christ shall all be made alive."


Bragwell. Yes, I remember I thought those very fine words, when I heard them
said over my poor father's grave. But as it was in the Burial of the dead, I
did not think of taking it to myself, for I was then young and hearty, and in
little danger of dying, and I have been so busy ever since, that I have hardly
had time to think of it.


Worthy. And yet the service pronounced at the burial of all who die, is a
solemn admonition to all who live. It is there said, as indeed the Scripture
says also, "I am the resurrection and the life, whosoever believes in me shall
never die, but I will raise him up at the last day." Now do you think you
believe in Christ, Mr. Bragwell?


Bagwell. To be sure I do; why, you are always fancying me an Atheist.


Worthy. In order to believe in Christ, we must believe first in our own guilt
and our own unworthiness, and when we do this we shall see the use of a Savior.


Bragwell. Why, all this is a new way of talking, I cannot say, I ever meddled
with such subjects before in my life. But now, what do you advise a man to do
upon your plan of Religion?


Worthy. Why, all this leads me back to the ground from which we set out. I
mean the duty of prayer; for if we believe that we have an evil nature within
us, and that we stand in need of God's grace to help us, and a Savior to
redeem us, we shall be led of course to pray for what we so much need.


Bragwell. Well, but don't you think, Mr. Worthy, that you good folks who make
so much of prayer, have lower notions than we of the wisdom of the Almighty?
you think he wants to be informed of the things you tell him; whereas, I take
for granted that he knows them already, and that, being so good as he is, he
will give me every thing he sees fit to give me without my asking it.


Worthy. God, indeed, who knows all things, knows what we want before we ask
him, but still has he not said, that with prayer and supplication we must make
known our requests unto him." Prayer is the way in which God has said that his
favor must be sought. It is the channel through which he has declared it is
his sovereign will and pleasure that his blessings should be conveyed to us.
What ascends up in prayer descends again to us in blessings. It is like the
rain which just now fell, and which had been drawn up from the ground in
vapors to the clouds before it descended from them to the earth in that
refreshing shower. Besides prayer has a good effect on (...) minds: it tends to
excite a right disposition toward God in us. But above all, it is the way to
get the good things we want. "Ask," says the Scripture, "and ye shall receive."


Bragwell. Now that is the very thing which I was going to deny. For the truth
is, men don't always get what they ask; I believe if I could get a good crop
for asking it I should pray oftener than I do.


Worthy. Sometimes Mr. Bragwell, men "ask and receive not, because they ask
amiss." They ask worldly blessings perhaps when they should ask spiritual ones.
Now the latter, which are the good things I spoke of, are always granted to
those who pray to God for them, though the former are not. I have observed in
the case of some worldly things I have sought for, that the grant of my prayer
would have caused the misery of my life.


Bragwell. And yet you continue to pray on I suppose?


Worthy. Certainly; but then I try to mend as to the object of my prayers. pray
for God's blessing and favor, which is better than riches.


Bragwell. You seem very earnest on this subject.


Worthy. To cut the matter short, I ask then whether prayer is not positively
commanded in the Gospel. When this is the case, we can never dispute about the
necessity or the duty of a thing, as we may when there is no such command. Here
however let me just add also, that a man's prayers may be turned to no small
use in the way of discovering to him whatever is amiss in his life.


Bragwell. How so, Mr. Worthy?


Worthy. Why, suppose now, you were to try yourself by turning into the shape
of a prayer every practice in which you allow yourself. For instance, let the
prayer in the morning be a sort of preparation for the deeds of the day, and
the prayer at night a sort of observation on those deeds. You, Mr. Bragwell, I
suspect are a little inclined to covetousness, excuse me, Sir. Now suppose
after you have been during a whole day a little too eager to get rich, suppose,
I say, you were to try how it would sound to beg of God at night to give you
still more money though you have already so much that you know not what to do
with it. Suppose you were to pray in the morning, O Lord give me more riches,
though those I have are a snare and a temptation to me; and ask him in the same
solemn manner to bless all the grasping means you intend to make use of in the
day, to add to your substance?


Bragwell. Mr. Worthy, I have no patience with you for thinking I could be so
wicked.


Worthy. Hear me out, Mr. Bragwell, you turned your good nephew, Tom Broad, out
of doors you know; you owned to me it was an act of injustice. Now suppose on
the morning of your doing so you had begged of God in a solemn act of prayer to
prosper the deed of cruelty and oppression, which you intended to commit. I see
you are shocked at the thought of such a prayer. Well, then, would not prayer
have kept you from committing that wicked action? In short, what a life must
that be, no act of which you dare beg God to prosper and bless. If once you can
bring yourself to believe that it is your bounden duty to pray-for God's
blessing on your day's work, you will certainly grow careful about passing such
a day as you may safely ask his blessing upon. The remark may be carried to
sports, diversions, company. A man who once takes up the serious use of prayer,
will soon find himself obliged to abstain from such diversions, occupations and
societies, as he cannot reasonably desire that God will bless to him; and thus
he will see himself compelled to leave off either the practice or the prayer.
Now, Mr. Bragwell, I need not ask you which of the two he that is a real
Christian will give up.


Mr. Bragwell began to feel that he had not the best of the argument, and was
afraid he was making no great figure in the eyes of his friend. Luckily
however, he was relieved from the difficulty into which the necessity of making
some answer must have brought him, by finding they were come to the end of
their little journey; and he never he held the Bunch of Grapes, which decorated
the Sign of the Golden Lion, with more real satisfaction.

Mr. Bragwell and Mr. Worthy alighted at the Golden Lion. It was market day:
the inn, the yard, the town was all alive. Mr. Bragwell was quite in his
element. He felt himself the principal man in the company. He had three great
objects in view, the sale of his land, the letting Mr. Worthy see how much he
was looked up to by so many subtsantial people, and the showing these people
what a wise man his most intimate friend Mr. Worthy was. It was his way to try
to borrow a little credit from every person and every thing he was connected
with, and by that credit to advance his interest and increase his wealth.

The Farmers met in a large room, and while they were transacting their various
concerns, those whose pursuits were the same naturally herded together. The
Tanners were drawn to one corner, by the common interest which they took in
bark, and hides. A useful debate was carrying on at another little table,
whether the practice of sowing wheat or of planting it were most profitable.
Another set were disputing whether horses or oxen were best for plows. Those
who were concerned in Canals, sought the company of other Canallers; while some
who were interested in the new bill for Enclosures, wisely looked out for such
as knew most about waste lands.

Mr. Worthy was pleased with all these subjects, and picked up something useful
on each. It was a saying of his, that most men understood some one thing, and
that he who was wise would try to learn from every man something on the subject
he best knew; but Mr. Worthy made a further use of the whole. "What a pity it
is," said he, "that Christians are not as desirous to turn their time to as
good account as men of business are! When shall we see religious persons as
anxious to derive profit from the experience of others as these Farmers? When
shall we see them as eager to turn their time to good account? While I approve
these men for not being slothful in business, let me improve the hint by being
also fervent in spirit."

When the hurry was a little over, Mr. Bragwell took a turn on the
Bowling-green. Mr. Worthy followed him, to ask why the sale of the estate was
not brought forward. "Let the Auctioneer proceed to business," said he; "the
company will be glad to get home by day light. I speak mostly with a view to
others for you, I do not think of being a purchaser myself." -- "I know it,"
said Bragwell, "or I would not be such a fool as to let the cat out of the bag.
But is it possible (proceeded he with a smile of contempt) that you should
think I will sell my estate before dinner? Mr. Worthy, you are a clever man at
books and such things; and perhaps can make out an account on paper in a
handsomer manner than I can. But I never found much to be got by fine writing.
As to figures, I can carry enough of them in my head to add, divide, and
multiply more money than your learning will ever give you the fingering of. You
may beat me at a book, but you are a very child at a bargain. Sell my land
before dinner, indeed!"

Mr. Worthy was puzzled to guess how a man was to show more wisdom by selling a
piece of ground at one hour than another, and desired an explanation. Bragwell
felt rather more contempt for his understanding than he had ever done before.
"Look'ee, Mr. Worthy," said he, "I do not know that knowledge is of any use to
a man unless he has sense enough to turn it to good account. Men are my books,
Mr. Worthy, and it is by reading, spelling, and putting them together to good
purpose, that I have got up in the world. I shall give you a proof of this
today. These Farmers are most of them come to the Lion with a view of
purchasing this bit of land of mine, if they should like the bargain. Now, as
you know a thing cannot be any great bargain to the buyer and the seller too, to
them and to me, it becomes me, as a man of sense, who has the good of his
family at heart to secure the bargain to myself. I would not cheat any man,
Sir, but I think it fair enough to turn his weakness to my own advantage; there
is no law against that you know; and this is the use of one man's having more
sense than another. So, whenever I have a bit of land to sell, I always give a
handsome dinner, with plenty of punch and strong beer. We fill up the morning
with other business, and I carefully keep back any talk about the purchase till
we have dined. At dinner we have of course a bit of politics. This puts most of
us into a passion, and you know anger is thirsty. Besides, Church and King
naturally bring on a good many other toasts. Now, as I am Master of the feast,
you know it would be shabby in me to save my liquor, so I push about the glass
one way and the tankard the other, till all my company are as merry as kings.
Every man is delighted to see what a fine hearty fellow he has to deal with,
and Mr. Bragwell receives a thousand compliments. By this time they have gained
as much in good humor as they have lost in sober judgment, and this is the
proper moment for setting the Auctioneer to work, and this I commonly do to
such good purpose, that I go home with my purse a score or two of pounds
heavier than if they had not been warmed by their dinner. In the morning men
are cool and suspicious, and have all their wits about them; but a cheerful
glass cures all distrust. And, what is lucky, I add to my credit as well as my
pocket, and get more praise for my dinner than blame for my bargain."

Mr. Worthy was struck with the absurd vanity which could tempt a man to own
himself guilty of an unfair action for the sake of showing his wisdom. He was
beginning to express his disapprobation, when they were told dinner was on
table. They went in and were soon seated. All was mirth and good cheer. Every
body agreed that no one gave such hearty dinners as Mr. Bragwell. Nothing was
pitiful where he was master of the Feast. Bragwell who looked with pleasure on
the excellent dinner before him, and enjoyed the good account to which he
should turn it, heard their praises with delight, and cast an eye on Worthy, as
much as to say, "Who is the wise man now?" Having a mind to make his friend
talk, he turned to him, saying, "Mr. Worthy, I believe no people enjoy life
more than men of our class. We have money and power, we live on the fat of the
land, and have as good a right to gentility as the best."

"As to gentility, Mr. Bragwell," replied Worthy, "I am not sure that this is
among the wisest of our pretensions. But I will say that ours is a creditable
and respectable business. In ancient times, Farming was the employment of
Princes and Patriarchs; and, nowadays, an honest, humane, sensible, English
yeoman, I will be bold to say, is not only a very useful but an honorable
character. But then he must not merely think of enjoying life, as you call it,
but he must think of living up to the great ends for which he was sent into the
world. A Wealthy Farmer not only has it in his power to live well, but to do
much good. He is not only the father of his own family, but of his workmen, his
dependents, and the poor at large, especially in these hard times. He has it in
his power to raise into credit all the parish offices which have fallen into
disrepute by getting in to bad hands; and he can convert, what have been
falsely thought mean offices into very important ones, by his just and
Christian like manner of f^^^ing them. An upright Juryman, a conscientious
Constable, a humane Overseer, an independent Elector, an active Superintendant
of a Workhouse, a just Arbritrator in public disputes, a kind Counselor in
private troubles, such a one, I say, fills up a station in society no less
necessary, and, as far as it reaches, scarcely less important than that of a
Magistrate, a Sheriff of a County, or even a Member of Parliament. That can
never be a slight or a degrading office, on which the happiness of a whole
parish may depend."

Bragwell, who thought the good sense of his friend reflected credit on
himself, encouraged Worthy to go on, but he did it in his own vain way. "Aye,
very true, Mr. Worthy," said he; "You are right; a leading man in our class
ough^ to be looked up to as an example, as you say; in order to which, he
should do things handsomely and liberally, and not grudge himself or his
friends any thing," casting an eye of complacency on the good dinner he had
provided. "True, replied Mr. Worthy, "he should be an example of simplicity,
sobriety and plainness of manners. But he will do well, added he, not to affect
a frothy gentility, which will fit but clumsily upon him. If he has money let
him spend prudently, lay up moderately for his children, and give liberally to
the poor. But let him rather seek to dignify his own station by his virtues
than to get above it by his v^nity. If he acts thus, then, as long (...) this
country lasts, a Farmer of England will be looked upon as one of its most
valuable members; nay more, by this conduct he may contribute to make England
last the longer. The riches of the Farmer, corn and cattle, are the true riches
of a nation; but let him remember, that though corn and cattle enrich a country,
nothing but justice and integrity can preserve it."

Young Wilson, the worthy grazier, whom Miss Bragwell had turned off because he
did not understand French dances, thanked Mr. Worthy for what he had said, and
hoped he should be the better for it as long as he lived, and desired his leave
to be better acquainted. Most of the others declared they had never heard a
finer speech, and then, as (...) usual, proceeded to show the good ^ffect it
had on them by loose conversati^n and hard drinking.

Mr. Worthy was much concerned to ^ear Mr. Bragwell, after dinner, whis^^r to
the waiter, to put less and less (...) into every fresh bowl of punch. (...) as
his way, if the time they had to sit was long, then the punch was to be weaker,
as he saw no good in wasting money to make it stronger than the time required.
But if time passed, then the strength was to be increased in due proportion, as
a small quantity must then intoxicate them as much in a short time as would be
required of a greater quantity had the time been longer. This was one of Mr.
Bragwell's nice calculations, and this was the sort of skill on which he so
much valued himself.

At length the guests were properly primed for business, just in that
convenient stage of intoxication which makes men warm and rash, yet short of
absolute drunkenness. The Auctioneer set to work. All were bidders, and, if
possible, all would have been purchasers, so happily had the feast and the
punch operated. They bid on with a still increasing spirit, till they had got
so much above the value of the land, that Bragwell with a (...) and (...)
whisper said, "Who would (...) his land fasting? Eh! Worthy?" At ^^^gth the
estate was knocked down, at a price very far above its worth.

TO BE CONTINUED.

