A REPORT OF AN ACTION FOR A LIBEL, BROUGHT BY DR. BENJAMIN RUSH, AGAINST
WILLIAM COBBETT, In the Supreme Court of Pennsylvania, December term, 1799, for
certain defamatory publications in a news-paper, entitled Porcupine's Gazette,
OF WHICH THE SAID WILLIAM COBBETT WAS EDITOR.

[ TAKEN IN SHORT HAND BY T. CARPENTER.]

Philadelphia: Printed by W. W. Woodward, No. 17, Chestnut Street. 1800.

The following charge was delivered at the close of the pleadings, by the Hon.
Judge Shippen.
GENTLEMEN,
THIS is an action brought by the Plaintiff against the Defendant for writing,
printing and publishing diverse scandalous libels, to defame and villify him.
The defendant has pleaded that he is not guilty; -- his counsel, however have
acknowledged the publication of the papers, which, otherwise, it would have
been incumbent on the plaintiff to prove. The question, therefore, will be,
whether they amount in law to defamatory libels or not?

By the law and practice in England, in the case of libels, the only task of
the jury is, to judge of the fact of publication, and the truth and fair
application of the inuendos. The court, as judges of the law, reserving to
themselves the sole power of deciding whether the paper amounts to a libel or
not: But in this state, by the special directions of our constitution, the jury
possess the power of judging both of the law and fact, under the direction of
the court.

A libel is defined by the law, to be the malicious defamation, expressed
either in printing or writing, or by signs or pictures, tending to blacken
either the memory of one who is dead, or the reputation of one who is alive, or
to expose him to public hatred, contempt or ridicule. This offense may be
punished, either by indictment at the suit of the commonwealth, or by a civil
action at the suit of the party injured. When the prosecution is by indictment,
the court only are to direct the punishment; but is a civil suit, the damages
are to be assessed solely by the jury.

The charges laid against the defendant in the declaration, are various; but
they may be reduced in substance to the following. -- That he repeatedly calls
the plaintiff a quack, an empyric; charges him with intemperate bleeding,
injudiciously administering Mercury in large doses in the yellow-fever; puffing
himself off; writing letters and answering them himself, stiling him the
Sampson in Medicine; charging him with murdering his patients and slaying his
thousands, and tens of thousands.

The counts laid in the declaration is full proved by the publications which
are certainly libellous. In what manner do the defendant's counsel repel these
proofs? Not by justifying the truth of the matters charged against Dr. Rush,
which on the contrary they have repeatedly acknowledged to be false, but by
analyzing the several allegations in the newspapers, and from thence drawing a
conclusion that no intentional personal malice appears, which they say is the
essence of the offense. -- Malice rests in the heart, and is only to be judged
of by the words and actions of the party; the words themselves import malice,
and in that case the proof lies on the defendant to show the innocence of his
intentions; if he has done THAT to your satisfaction, you will acquit him; but
as this is chiefly founded on the allegation that the attack was meant to be
made on Dr. Rush's System, and not on the Man; it unfortunately appears that
not the least attempt is made to combat the Doctor's arguments with regard to
the system itself, but the attack is made merely by gross scurrilous abuse of
the Doctor himself: Added to this, one of the witnesses proves a declaration
made by the defendant, that if Dr. Rush had not been the Man he should never
have meddled with the System.

Another ground of defense is of a more serious nature, as it leads to an
important question on our constitution -- it is said that the subject of
dispute between the plaintiff and defendant was a matter of public concern, as
it related to the health and lives of our fellow citizens, and that by the
words of our constitution, every man has a right to discuss such subjects in
print. The liberty of the press, gentlemen, is a valuable right in every free
country, and ought never to be unduly restrained; but when it is perverted to
the purposes of private slander, it then becomes a most destructive engine in
the hands of unprincipled men; the utmost purity and integrity of heart, is no
shield against the shafts and arrows of malice, conveyed to the world by
printed publications. Verbal slander may be frequently very injurious, but
slander writing or print being more generally disseminated and more durable in
its effects, is consequently infinitely more pernicious and provoking. Our
state constitution of 1790, contains certainly very general words with relation
to the right of a citizen to print his thoughts and offer them to the
consideration of the public, but it at the same time guard against the
generality of the privilege, by expressly declaring, that every person availing
himself of the liberty of the press, should be responsible for the abuse of
that liberty; thus securing to our citizens the invaluable right of reputation
against every malicious invader of it.

Printed publications attacking private character, is considered with great
reason by the law as a very atrocious offense, from its evident tendency to the
breach of the public peace -- if men find they can have no redress in our
courts of justice for such injuries, they will naturally take satisfaction in
their own way, involving perhaps their friends and families in the contest, and
leading evidently to duels, Murders, and perhaps to Assassinations.

The principal subject of consideration with the jury will be, what damages
they are to assess. On this subject you are the almost uncontrollable judges --
it is your peculiar province: -- The court have indeed the power to order a new
trial where damages are excessive; but in cases of torts and injuries of this
kind, the law books say the damages must be so outrageously disproportionate to
the offense, as at first blush to shock every person who hears of it, before
the court will order a new trial.

Every one must know that offenses of this kind have for some time past too
much abounded in our city; it seems high time to restrain them -- that task is
with you, Gentlemen. To suppress so great an evil, it will not only be proper
to give compensatory, but exemplary damages; thus stopping the growing progress
of this daring crime -- at the same time, the damages should not be so enormous
as absolutely to ruin the offender.

I hope no party considerations will ever have place in this court in the
administration of Justice -- and I entreat you, Gentlemen, to banish them, in
considering this subject, entirely from your breasts.

The Jury, after an absence of two hours, brought in a verdict in favor of the
Plaintiff of Five Thousand Dollars.

IMPORTANT TRIAL, IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PENNSYLVANIA.
Doctor Benjamin Rush, versus William Cobbett. December term, 1799.
ACTION on the case for a Libel was brought in the autumn of 1797, by the
Plaintiff against the Defendant, for certain defamatory publications which
appeared in a newspaper entitled "Porcupine's Gazette," of which COBBETT was
the Editor.

The publications stated in the Declaration to be libellous were as follow, viz.

From Porcupine's Gazette, September 19th, 1797. MEDICAL PUFFING.
The times are ominous indeed,
When quack to quack cries purge and bleed.

Those who are in the habit of looking over the Gazettes, which come in from
the different parts of the country, must have observed, and with no small
degree of indignation, the arts that our remorseless Bleeder is making use of
to puff off his preposterous practice. He has, unfortunately, his partisans in
almost every quarter of the country. To these he writes letters, and in return
gets letters from them: he extols their practice, and they extol his; and there
is scarcely a page of any newspaper that I see, which has the good fortune to
escape the poison of their prescriptions. -- Blood, blood! still they cry more
blood! -- In every sentence they menace our poor veins. Their language is as
frightful to the ears of the alarmed multitude, as is the raven's croak to
those of the sickly flock.

Among all these puffs, I do not recollect a more shameless one than the
following from Dr. TILTON.

Extract of a letter from Dr. Tilton, of Wilmington, to Dr. Rush, dated
September 12.
We have had repeated instances of your fever at this place. The infection has
generally been taken in Philadelphia, I am not acquainted with any instances
where the contagion has been received at Wilmington, but at Newcastle and
Newport there are unequivocal examples of the contagion being received from
those who brought it from the city.

In the treatment of the fever we use copious blood-letting in the beginning,
and active mercurial purges. I have conceived however, that mercury is useful,
not merely as a cathartic, but as a specific against all kinds of contagion. --
There is no contagious disease in which its use is not acknowledged: not only
smallpox, measles, dysentery, etc. but scarlitina and influenza yield to its
specific virtues. You probably remember as well as I, that it was given with
advantage in the hospital and camp fever. In short, I have established it as a
maxim, to give mercury as soon as I know a disease to be contagious.


This Dr. Tilton is a kind of a puritan; a four wry-faced incorrigible
democrat. He has the pride of Lucifer himself, and, to me, it is astonishing
that he should have condescended to become the trumpet, the underling, the mere
barber-surgeon of the master-bleeder.

The mercurial purges too, Dr. Tilton must break forth in praise of! Mercury is
good for every thing that is contagious! Is good for sanscullotism Doctor? If
it be, in the name of goodness, take a double dose of it twice a day, 'till it
has wrought a cure. -- Dr. Rush, in that emphatical style which is peculiar to
himself, calls Mercury "the Samson of medicine." In his hands and in those of
his partisans it may indeed be justly compared to Samson; for, I verily believe
they have slain more Americans with it, than ever Samson slew of the
Philistines. The Israelite slew his thousands, but the Rushites have slain
their tens of thousands.

From Porcupine's Gazette, September 25th, 1797. MR. PORCUPINE.
SIR,
I find my rascally hostler has forgot the frequent injunctions I have given
him, to mind his business, and has deserted his curry comb and brush, for the
pen and ink.

John is a very good man in his way, and understands his business well,
particularly the art of bleeding horses; when I proposed to my brethren to
commence business as physician, I had an eye on John's abilities as a bleeder,
and I hinted to him my intention. Would you believe it Mr. P -- that the rascal
after reading my essay in your paper, purchased "Dr. Rush on the Yellow Fever,"
and has been studying ever since, to my great loss and mortification. And now
the wise illiterate thinks he can commence business for himself. But let him
remember that "Ne suitor ultra crepidem," The cobbler must not go beyond his
last. I observe he is half a physician already, for he has got the Cocoe iters
scribendi -- and has obliged the public with his first medical essay.

Not content with deserting my service, he appears desirous to prejudice the
public against me, and my brethren, asserting in strong terms, that we are
enemies to the noble science of blood-letting: This is abominable and contrary
to the truth. For I am, and shall be nolens volens, an advocate for the
practice, and it is my creed that it will cure all diseases -- as our good
allies the French have clearly proved in their practice, -- I have also another
reason for commencing the business of a physician; In fact, the villainous
liquors my wine merchant obliges me to supply my guests with, has lately caused
in the latter severe and harsh expostulations, and, as I am a conscientious
man, I wish to follow a quiet business, and I prefer that of the lancet,
because you know Mr. P. dead men never tell tales.

As I have now cautioned your readers, and I conceive the public against my
rascally hostler, I have to observe to you, that a meeting of our brethren was
held at my tavern last evening; when the business I had recommended was very
warmly approved; and a college was determined to be held the ensuing week, for
the purpose of taking out our diplomas. -- And it was unanimously agreed to
request, Dr. J. Redman Coxe to favor us with a prefatory oration in praise of
the noble science of blood-letting. We also voted a serious expostulation to
the public, on their prejudices against the new practice addressed to Dr. Rush,
the great patron of the art.

As our resolves will appear in your paper, I think it unnecessary to state
more at present, than that we determined not to advertise the particular
taverns where compounds may be had; as we believed each of our brethren was
well qualified in that respect. The superior merits of some, who sell stale
porter, dead cider, etc. will be soon discovered by their respective patients.

I have already got my carriage newly painted, and have engaged a French
hostler, whose merits and sang froid in the use of the lancet are I believe,
unrivalled, for I believe he was an eleve of Robespierre.

I have also hired a few nurses, whose abilities I am well acquainted with.
They will never desert their patients, as I have engaged to supply them
constantly with excellent gin and have also promised them the pillage of such
of my patients who may be determined to die.

I am, Sir, Yours, etc. A TAVERN KEEPER.
N. B. I request your interest with some of your brother printers who appear to
me to have, if not the yellow fever, a very irritable billious complaint.



From Porcupine's Gazette, September 26, 1797. RUSH AND TILTON. Wilmington,
(Del.) September 22, 1797.
FRIEND PORCUPINE,
In reading thy paper of the 19th instant, I took notice of a curious
observation made on a certain rye faced incorrigible democrat, one of the
medical puffers. To complete the story, I will give thee a short sketch of a
curious fact (which happened some time past in this place) concerning this self
consequent Mercurial ghost.

There was a woman traveling from the head of Elk to Germantown, and on her
way her carriage was turned over, she thrown out, and very much hurt, She has
since returned from Germantown through Philadelphia, and made a stop at an inn,
in this borough; -- the woman overcome with fatigue and a cold she had taken,
felt herself a little indisposed.

This crooked faced Quack was called in. As soon as he saw her, he said he must
take some BLOOD, and I suppose, if he had not got frightened, a good dose of
mercury would have ensued.

But fortunate for the poor woman, he happened to push up her sleeve a little,
and discovered a bruise on her arm, which she received in her fall from the
carriage. Alarmed at the appearance of her arm, he asked her if she had been to
Philadelphia, the reply was, yes: he immediately pronounced her complaints to
be the Yellow Fever, made his escape and has not seen her since. The good woman
has recovered and proceeded on her way home. There now lies a person, a small
distance from the town, in a house (built for the reception of persons coming
here with the contagion) who he pronounced to have the yellow fever. But, who
in fact, has nothing but the common ague.

Thine, etc. A. B.

ANOTHER PUFF.
In Brown's paper of last evening appeared another of our "potent quack's"
brothered PUFFS.

It was "a letter from Dr. Rush to a correspondent in Newberry-Port," giving
his old account of the yellow fever, and concluding with a dragged-in
compliment to a Mr. Coats. -- Upon the very first glance, it is evident that
this letter was sent to Newberry Port, on purpose to be published there, and
then to be sent back here to make its appearance among us through the channel,
or rather through the SINK, of the quack-ridden Philadelphia Gazette! -- All
this bustle of letters and addresses, and prescriptions, in the name of Dr.
Rush, is intended to make the duped world believe, that he is the Oracle at
Philadelphia, and that all the other physicians are mere glister-pipe Dickes
under him. -- It is a cheap mode of acquiring fame, which he learned from the
crafty old hypocrite, Franklin. -- I wonder what Coats it is that the Doctor
has got in tow; Some well meaning man, I dare engage, whom he makes use of as a
step in the ladder of his ambition, at the same time that he expresses his
contempt of his intellects, by making his court to him in a strain of vulgar
flattery.

From Porcupine's Gazette, September ^9, 1797. A PUFF, Equal to Dr. Rush's.
We congratulate our fellow creatures, in having it in their power to get
relieved from the most unpleasant complaints incident to human nature, such as
the scurvy, gout, rheumatism, evil, ulcers, and other disorders arising from
impurities of the blood, indigestion, etc. by taking Spilsbury's Antiscorbutic
Drops, a medicine well known upwards of twenty-six years for having performed
more extraordinary cures than any other ever invented, and whose repute has
reached the remotest corners of the universe, every nation bearing grateful
testimony of its eminent virtues; how happy therefore is it for the inhabitants
of this island that they can supply themselves with a medicine, which, should
they travel to any part of the globe, will secure them from the fatal
consequences that too often attend the above complaints.

[ There Is for you, Master Sangrado! Beat that if you can. -- As to the
IMPURITIES OF THE BLOOD, I am sure, you have a more effectual remedy than
brother SPILSBURY.]

December 13, 1799, this case was brought to trial before Shippen, Yates and
Smith, Justices of the Supreme Court, and the following named gentlemen were
sworn and affirmed a special Jury:

Isaac Paxson, William Jolly, Thomas W. Armat, Joseph S. Lewis, Isaac Austin,
George Thompson, Jacob Sperry, Benjamin F. Garrigues, John Taggert, Jacob
Reese, William Roberts and Archibald Bingham.

Plaintiff's Council, Messrs. Hopkinson, Moses Levy, Ingersol and Lewis.

Defendant's Council, Messrs. Rawle, Harper and Edward Tilghman.

MR. HOPKINSON, As Counsel for the Plaintiff opened this cause, in the
following address:

Gentlemen of the Jury,

IT is my duty to open this cause to you on the part of the plaintiff, Dr.
Rush. In discharging this duty I shall beg leave to extend it somewhat beyond
its usual limits in ordinary cases. I shall not be content with merely reading
the declaration to you, and stating the points of evidence by which it will be
maintained; but shall also take the liberty of opening to you the views and
dispositions with which this action has been brought, and some of the leading
principles on which it will be supported.

The action now before you is an action of slander, brought by Dr. Benjamin
Rush, who has long been a distinguished ornament of our city, against William
Cobbett, the printer and publisher of a newspaper under the name of Porcupine's
Gazette. It will easily be imagined that no slight cause could bring a man of
Dr. Rush's character into this, or any other competition, with a man of William
Cobbett's character. -- Dr. Rush is as well known for his peaceful habits and
his amiable manners, as William Cobbett is for his disocial malignant
disposition and inveterate hate -- While the one may well be termed the friend
of humanity, the other has labored hard to be considered, hostis humani generis
-- It is not then to indulge a fondness for controversy -- It is not to gratify
unsocial, litigious or revengeful dispositions, for no such find a place in his
heart, that Dr. Rush now presents himself before the tribunal of his country,
demanding justice for barbarous and unprovoked injuries, and requiring that
protection of an honest reputation which the law guarantees to every citizen --
He comes here impressed with high duties -- To THE LAWS OF HIS COUNTRY he owes
a duty, that they shall not be violated; -- TO HIS FELLOW CITIZENS he owes a
duty to bring to punishment, and, if possible, suppress an abandoned and
dangerous offender, who tramples over truth, decency and character with a
tiger's stride, and assaults with venomous fury the most sacred bands of social
order and peace; the most endearing ties of private life and happiness -- TO
HIMSELF AND HIS FAMILY, he owes a duty of protection, which should never be
disregarded -- let the father of a family assert the honor and purity that it
descend not as a shame upon his children. -- Let the husband preserve the
tender feelings of a wife from insult, and her affections from the deep wounds
of public reproach.

On this high and dignified ground, Dr. Rush stands before you -- He appeals to
his country in firm confidence in its justice, and it is your province,
Gentlemen, to administer that justice -- you are to ascertain the security in
which a citizen of Pennsylvania holds his good name, and to sanction or to
check the ravages of defamation -- This day we are to know whether character is
deemed a valuable and sacred possession among us, in which we have a perfect
and inviolable right, or whether it is to be the mere sport and play-thing of
malicious ridicule and vulgar wit, the undefended victim of assassinating
malevolence; we are now to know if honor and virtue are known and respected
here; if a fair and unimpreached life, of above fifty years, spent in important
public services, and the constant exercise of private virtues, has a good claim
to protection from premeditated ruin, and shall not sue for redress in vain.

The courts of justice are so often harrassed with actions of slander, brought
for trifling or revengeful causes, originating in passion, and ending in
repentance, -- founded on the quarrels of children, or the unmeaning
intemperance of harmless old women, that they have fallen into some kind of
disrepute, and lost much of that importance, which the law and good reason
attaches to them, when properly founded. -- In fact, it seldom happens, that
the kind of slander which the law so seriously contemplates, occurs -- The
offense is so enormous, so destitute of palliation or defense, so unworthy, so
low and detestable, the penalty so exemplary, that few men are found regardless
enough of social order and decency, or sufficiently outrageous and audacious to
commit it. But when such a case does occur, it rises in terrible pre-eminence
above the multitude of actions for defamation which throng the dockets and
disgrace the remedy. -- When an offender is found hardy enough to assault the
sacred fortress of reputation, and strive to postrate it in the dust; hardy
enough to brave the vengeance denounced against him by God and man, he should
be struck with dreadful and speedy justice, and stand a blighted picture of
ruin and infamy, an awful lesson to depravity and vice. -- Such an offender, we
assert, is William Cobbett; and if such an offender we show him to be, we trust
that such a punishment awaits him. --

[Here Mr. Hopkinson read the declaration.]

You observe, Gentlemen, that the controversy between the plaintiff and
defendant in this cause, does not originate in any dispute about property; it
is a question of CHARACTER. And, as in its essence, it differs from suits on
questions of property, so must it in its mode of treatment, and in its objects
of enquiry -- While the defendant be permitted to a certain extent to
scrutinize and investigate the character and conduct of the plaintiff (to which
investigation Dr. Rush most cheerfully offers himself) we shall also claim a
right of examining or observing upon, to a certain extent, the character and
conduct of the defendant. -- His character, as far as relates to his occupation
of a printer and publisher; and his conduct, as far as relates to the general
management of his newspaper, are surely proper objects of observation at least
-- Nothing can be more evident; nothing more reasonable. If the general
character of his press is that of decency, of tenderness for reputation, of
candor, liberality and truth, and he has now, as if by accident, fallen into
personal defamation, it will certainly be urged by his counsel, as a powerful
extenuation of his offense, as a strong argument to induce you to believe that
this single deviation is error, and not crime, is ignorance and not malignity
-- The plea would most justly, hold a powerful influence over your judgments:
and although in the strict eye of the law, the only question in this action is
on the specific charge of slander, exhibited in the declaration, yet the
construction of those charges -- the quo animo or disposition with which the
offensive paragraphs were written and published, will depend much on the
general character and conduct of the defendant as a printer, and will have a
strong influence over the verdict of an equitable jury.

Permit me gentlemen one further explanation -- Parties have in our country,
become wrought up to such illiberal fury, that every action of a man's life,
from the most important to the most obscure and trifling is traced to party
motives and party principles -- His attachments and his enmities -- his
connexions in business or otherwise, nay almost the color of the cloth he
wears, and the species of diet he feeds on, are ascribed to his party and
political principles -- This is an unhappy state of things -- Were I of the
party to whom it has happened the defendant has opposed himself -- I should
expect that all I shall now or ever say against this man, would by many of my
fellow-citizens, perhaps by you gentlemen, be deemed to be the mere vengeance
of party spirit, the unmanly gratification of political hatred -- But my
opinions of this man have ever, even from the commencement of his extraordinary
career, been the same; and are now, as they always have been, honest,
consistent, and conscientious -- My political character depends not in the
slightest degree, upon his recommendation or his censure -- I have had both; I
have regarded neither -- Doubtless his dark and virulent spirit prepares some
attack, which his insufferable arrogance informs him will be formidable and
destructive to lawyers, court and jury, that shall dare to do him justice. For
myself I declare, if the declaration be necessary, that there is not in the
bounds of creation that thing so feeble or so vile that I should hold it in
greater contempt than the resentment of William Cobbett; and, I will answer
that you will not be driven from your duty or your oaths, by a fear of being
placed on his black list. He has indeed, the unquenchable and vindictive spirit
of an inquisitor, but wanting all power, it is harmless and contemptible -- The
ridiculous vanity of this man, and his ignorance of his true situation in this
country and of the kind of value or use that has been put upon him, has lead
him into an opinion that his voice is the voice of fate, either with regard to
public measures and character, or to private reputation. This however is an
error which it lies with the public to correct; and they will find their
interest and their honor, deeply concerned in doing it speedily and
effectually. God forbid that my country should have sunk so low, that an
opposition to such a wretch as this, will be deemed unfriendly to our
government. When tempests agitate the ocean to its foundation, and rock it in
convulsions, numerous noxious animals are thrown up, which would otherwise
never have seen the light; so in a troubled state of things, wretches are cast
up from the very dregs and slime of the community, who, in more happy times,
would have lived and rotted in obscurity.

The attack made on Dr. Rush is of the most deadly and violent kind that malice
could invent, or abandoned depravity execute -- He is accused of murder, or
destroying the lives of his fellow citizens, in a time of dreadful calamity --
It is then fair and necessary to enquire --

1. What was the conduct of Doctor Rush during that calamity -- has it merited
reproach or applause -- If the former, the offense of W. C. is extenuated,
though not justified; if the latter, it is aggravated beyond all example.

2. What inducement or motive had W. C. for this attack -- If a desire to
inform the public mind on an interesting subject, his offense is extenuated,
but not justified -- if private and political malice, it is aggravated.

Dr. Rush's reputation is not confined to the narrow circle of his patients,
nor his applause to the clamours of old women and nurses. His fame has spread
as extensively as our commerce. He has added a fresh and a blooming laurel to
the head of American genius -- he has done much to rescue the American name
from obloquy and contempt, which some of the proud Philosophers of Europe would
cast upon us, ranking us as inferior to themselves in the order of beings. From
the East Indies and from the West -- from almost every part of Europe, he has
received honors and compliments; and we are different from all the people on
the face of the earth, if these honors reflect not some pride and some pleasure
into our breasts. -- This participation in the honors and fame of our
countrymen is coeval with the existence of the passions of men, and he that
does not feel it must want a social temper, and the true spirit of patriotism.
Nor, has the private character and deportment of Dr. Rush forfeited that esteem
which his public services and fame should command. Where is the man whose
dispositions are more mild, whose temper is less virulent, whose affections,
more warm and sincere. -- From my soul, I believe him to be among the most
unoffending and most benevolent of mankind; so that in the wide range of
creation you cannot find too beings more unlike each other than Dr. Benjamin
Rush and William Cobbett -- Even when, day after day, this vile source of
falsehood and pollution, vomited forth the blackest venom of slander upon his
name, he stood like a suffering martyr, and dipped not his pen in the gall of
controversy. -- And yet it is known that Dr. Rush can write -- his pen has
often been drawn in the service of his country, never to blacken the name of
his neighbor or wound the feelings of innocence. He did not even wipe away by
contradiction the filth with which he was covered; determined that the hands of
his country alone shall either cleanse him from these foul aspersions, or sink
him deeper in disgrace.

When pestilence and death, walking hand in hand, swept away the people of
Athens with the besom of destruction, the immortal Hippocrates threw himself
undaunted into the midst of the danger, and endured the extremes of fatigue and
distress to assist and deliver his perishing fellow citizens. How like this was
the conduct of Dr. Rush in the memorable and dreadful year 1793. He then stood
foremost and almost alone to encounter and arrest the ravages of death.
Hundreds of our fellow citizens, sinking under the unparalleled calamities of
poverty and disease, sought relief as well from the christian charity and
benevolence of his heart as from the powerful application of his skill. If
there be any who sought his attention in vain; if there be any who were
repelled with unfeeling insolence or mortifying neglect, let them declare it.
For those who received from him the relief they sought, we ask them not to
speak, it is not the applause of men or the tears of the grateful that he
requires. The voice of conscience speaks a louder tone of applause, which the
approbation of his God will render eternal -- but, gentlemen, let us not forget
the days of difficulty and distress, they have returned and may again return
and utter dreadful reproach to the ungrateful. This flourishing city, where
health, business and pleasure gave joy to every heart and ornamented every
countenance, became at once silent as a wilderness, the solemn the joyless
habitation of disease and death; no longer the noise of business was heard
through our streets, or the sprightly notes of mirth, but the dull sounds of
the heavy hearse, and the lamentations of the wretched struck an uneasy terror
to the soul "making night heidous." The day and the night were now the same.
The rising sun brought no comfort, no joy to the afflicted, nor night its usual
rest; all was sadness ruin and despair; commerce bent her sails for happier
ports; your warehouses no longer received or distributed the wealth of nations;
the temples of God were closed, and it was dangerous to meet together even to
implore from divine mercy an issue to our sufferings -- WHERE THEN WAS DR.
RUSH? Where was this man, and HOW WAS HE EMPLOYED, who has been treated as a
very cut throat, or a worthless and abandoned vagabond, who disgraces the
community which tolerates his existence? Need I tell you where he was -- God
forbid that you should have forgotten -- separated from a large and an amiable
family, and exposed daily to a separation from them forever, he seemed at once
to have forgotten the husband, the father, and all those tender ties and
exquisite sensibilities which form the happiness of such a man, and to have
contemplated himself only as a citizen of Philadelphia. He seems to have lost
sight of the duties he owes to his family, and to have been devoted to the more
godlike duties he owes to his country.

Twice he found himself languishing on the bed of sickness, and gasping at the
gates of death, distant from his family, and almost deserted by every friend --
Scarcely had he recovered strength to move, when he resumed his dangerous
duties; and often did he totter into the infected chambers of the sick, when he
could not ascend to them without stopping to recover his exhausted strength. --
It was for the poor and helpless too that he thus exposed himself to
destruction. The rich had generally fled -- How like is this to the conduct of
Hypocrates -- I wish I could add how like Philadelphia to Athens. Athens heaped
honors and wealth on her Physician and his posterity; but contumely and
defamation have been the reward of ours. What are the rewards that Dr. Rush is
justly entitled to, ought not perhaps to be decided by his friends or enemies;
but nearly all must agree that he has not deserved the treatment he has
received from William Cobbett. It has been strangely suggested by some (for
this suit has been a subject of pretty general conversation and concern) that
Dr. Rush's character is too well known and established to be injured by the
attacks of Cobbett, who is not worth his serious attention, and therefore he
should recover no damages in this action. I am sure I think as highly of Dr.
Rush, as any of those who would in this manner palliate the conduct of Cobbett,
or weaken the claims of the plaintiff to redress. But, Gentlemen, there are few
characters so pure and so impenetrable as to receive the constant, unceasing
attack of malicious slander, exerted in every possible form and to every
possible point, without stain or injury. Of a physician this is most
emphatically nice. His reputation is a fabric delicate as air, the slightest
gust of popular prejudice or caprice dissipates it, even suspicion destroys it;
if he is distrusted he is ruined. This notion that the purity of the object
attacked is to justify or lessen the crime of the assailant, is quite novel in
morals and in law. Is the virtue of the injured, to be the defense of the
injurer? Should it not rather be the protection of the just? Have you a
daughter of spotless virtue and discretion? Is it then no offense to proclaim
her a prostitute? are you unquestionably upright and honest? Is it therefore no
offense to publish you a swindler and a thief, while the real prostitute and
the convicted thief would be entitled to exemplary damages? -- Why, gentlemen,
doctrines of this sort are so absurd, so repugnant to every sentiment of
justice and propriety, that the honest heart shrinks from them as from its
bane? Let us see to what they would lead us. To slander a man is simply no
offense; to villify a man pre-eminently wise and useful, is something better
than merely an offense; and to blaspheme the all pure and perfect God must be
highly meritorious. But to return to Dr. Rush's ability to withstand the blows
that have been aimed at him: It is not gentlemen this single paragraph or that
one that carries with it the deadly weight, and brings the intended victim to
the ground. It is a regular concerted system of defamation, an uninterrupted
and persevering attack of calumny and scurrility, in every form which they can
assume. Shmetimes it is made under some dark, mysterious paragraph, and
sometimes in the open language of denunciation. Now fear is alarmed with a bold
assurance of danger, and now ridicule is exacted by the point of a jest. Thus a
net is thrown out for every weakness, passion or prejudice that is afloat in
the community, and few escape the entanglement. This, gentlemen, is what
scribblers call, writing a man down, and is a most abominable species of
assassination.

Besides, although Dr. Rush's actual loss from the defendant's conduct must
necessarily have been very important; yet it is not the only consideration in
the case that calls for heavy damages. The utility of these actions is not
merely to reimburse the pecuniary injury a man may have sustained; to pay for
his character, which can have no price, but to correct vice, and give
countenance to virtue; to confine the licentious within proper bounds; and give
the worthy and good citizen a safe and respectable station; to preserve the
peace and purity of society -- The second question then arises: --

From what motive or inducement has William Cobbett made his flagitious attack
-- was it a desire to inform the public mind?

The nature of the publications show this was not the case. They do not consist
of any examination of the system and principles of Dr. Rush's practice, but
merely of violent and low personal abuse.

But, gentlemen, although the entire want of every thing like a just cause of
attack on Dr. Rush would justify us and you in ascribing a base one to it, yet
we shall not rely even on this legal and reasonable presumption. We shall be
able, by the light of living testimony to trace the low malice of the defendant
to its true source. We shall trace it to personal hartred, grounded on
political prejudice. You may remember, that some time past, an eulogium was
delivered, by the appointment and direction of the Philosophical Society, on
the late David Rittenhouse; that this eulogium was delivered by Dr. Rush. Here,
then originated the first excitement of resentment in the mind of Cobbett
against Dr. Rush. We shall show you, as I am instructed, that, from that moment
he determined on the attack. Long he waited for an opportunity to gratify this
grovelling resentment, and discharge the venom that rankled in his heart.

From the testimony of a respectable witness we shall also show you that the
defendant did not himself pretend that his attack on Dr. Rush was commenced
with a view to give useful information to the public on an interesting
question, to correct any errors in Dr. Rush's system or treatment of his
patients, or dispense any public benefit whatever; but that he avowed to be
personal against the Dr. and not against his system, that he avowed his
ignorance whether the system was right or wrong, and declared he should have
said nothing about it, had any other man than Dr. Rush brought it forward.
Where, then, can be the defense, were the justification, where the apology for
the infamous slanders he has heaped upon a worthy and honor able citizen? Does
he not stand the most barbarous, the most wanton, the most impudent defamer
that has ever existed?

Slander is a headlong torrent that rushes over the land -- like a mighty water
rolling from the mountain's top, it spreads and strengthens as it goes -- the
palace and the cottage are involved in its common ruin -- nothing is so high
that it cannot reach it, or so mean that it will not descend to it -- let not
the great promise themselves security in the unblemished dignity of their
characters, nor the humble expect safety in their obscurity -- like death it
comes to every man's door. What is there so pure, or what so sacred that it has
escaped this cormorant of defamation. From the highest magistrate to the
meanest vagabond nothing has been secure; all men and all nations have been
called with an equal tone of authority to the bar of his reproach, and every
law, liberty and institution has undergone his modest animadversions. He has
assumed a haughty and tyranical jurisdiction over every thing public or
private; political or domestic; religious or moral, not only within the United
States, but in every quarter of the globe. His arrogant vanity is as disgusting
as his crimes are detestable. William Cobbett is indeed a phenomenon even in
the courts of defamation.

He may look back on the endless list of his predecessors in the offices of
scandal who have, at different times, infested society, and, although, he will
find many superior in talents, learning and wit, he will discover few equal in
boldness and scurrility. His opinion is the great law from whence there must be
no appeal; his assertion, the high authority from whence there must be no
enquiry. Despotic dogma usurps the place of just knowledge, and the most
loathsome vulgarity is offered as a substitute for wit. The eye of decency can
seldom read his pages without offense, and virtue turns from them with
indignation and disgust. Is there a species of editorial pollution that has not
blackened them? If there be, it is because it has escaped the laborious
industry, and acuteness of this strange man.

There is, gentlemen, no subject of political enquiry that has excited more
anxiety among the people of every free country; there are few subjects that
have employed more able pens, or received more frequent discussions in every
possible form of argument than the Liberty of the Press -- and yet perhaps,
there is no subject now more remote from a general understanding or settled
opinion. It is so difficult to draw the just and safe line between the proper
use and the insufferable abuse of this liberty; so difficult to fix its legal
or its reasonable bound; to say "thus far shall thou go and no farther;" to
say, here flow the wholesome waters of Liberty, and there begins the poisoned
torrent of Licentiousness; that all that has been said, and I fear all that
will ever be said, on the subject, has but little effect to produce an unity of
sentiment, or establish the point sought after. Another reason may be offered
for the universal uncertainty and disagreement on this subject.

The discussion is conducted, the inferences are drawn, and the judgment is
formed more by the passions and particular interests, than by the just reason
of the several advocates and enquirers. While this shall continue to be the
case, and while the passions and interests of men shall continue to drive them
to different wishes and different objects, no coalition can be hoped for on
this subject. But, gentlemen, this mighty uproar about the liberty of the
press, and all the violence, declamation and invective that it has excited,
touch not the case of private slander. By a common principle of self
preservation, by a common principle of unquestionable justice, by a common
appreciation of the value of character, and by the dictates of honesty and
sound policy, all men have agreed that this admits of no defense. No writer, no
declaimer, however mad with popular enthusiasm, has yet been wild and absurd
enough to claim or defend a right of wanton abuse of his neighbors character.
The dispute has been how far, and in what manner, public men in their public
capacities, and public measures in their public tendency, are to be
investigated and reproached at the bar of the public, through the medium of the
press. But no dispute has ever been had upon the sanctity of private reputation
and happiness. -- No question has arose, whether a vindictive enemy may, with
wanton falsehood and ungovernable rage, attack, through the press, the
character of the object of his hate; may distort truth and invent falsehood, may
set every engine of malice, ingenuity and ridicule to work to render him
contemptible and detested; to scatter misery through an unoffending and amiable
family, and bring them down from a fair station in society to contumely,
wretchedness and want. Yet such have been the views and wishes of William
Cobbett in this case, and to accomplish them none of his vast resources in this
way have been unemployed.

I profess myself, gentlemen, a zealous and devoted friend to the true liberty
of the Press. I view it as a lofty citadel from whence the people overlook the
conduct of their governors; encourage, approve and reward the virtuous, and
crush the daring effects of ambitious oppression or unprincipled designs. The
wicked stand appalled before it, and the good flourish and rejoice. But, permit
me to say that the safety of this citadel in this country at least, is more
endangered by the treachery, malignity and arrogance of pretended friends, than
from the violence of open foes. Such friends, possessing themselves of this
important station, and protected under its sacred walls, use this high
privilege for the most abandoned purposes. That which was intended for the
public good, is the prostituted instrument of private malice -- that which was
erected for the salvation of a people, becomes the foul avenger of a villain's
wrath. That thunder which stood ready to assert violated rights, and protect
the liberties of millions, is pointed with deadly vengeance against the
domestic happiness of some virtuous family, the private peace of some deserving
citizens. Nay, against the very enclosures of social order and harmony and the
ramparts of religion and morality? Is this the Liberty of the Press? Are these
the ends for which it was instituted and preserved? You must not, gentlemen, be
made to believe that the Liberty of the Press is attacked or endangered,
whenever a scurrilous printer is prosecuted and brought to justice for some
malicious and profligate attack upon an unoffending neighbor. These are truly
the only means of preserving it pure, valuable and undefiled. By these means
only will it continue to be a blessing -- to be a terror to evil doers, and a
praise and protection to those that do well. Let not the fair fabric be
defiled; and by becoming the base engine of malignant persecution, become the
just object of universal detestation. Preserve it in its exquisite beauty; its
elegant proportions, and its impenetrable strength; and let not its foundations
be sapped by treacherous guardians, till its high walls totter and fall. These
high toned and pretended sons of Liberty, who bawl incessantly about the Rights
of the Press, while they blacken it with their detestable crimes; who tell you
it is sacred, while they are plunging it in disgrace; who under its name and
sanction practice the most abandoned licentiousness, and invade our most
important and valuable rights, must be laid low, or they will work a fatal ruin
to the liberty they abuse; pretending to be its friends, they are its most
deadly foes; pretending to protect, they inevitably destroy it. To preserve the
Liberty of the Press from ruin and contempt it is necessary to bring down these
wretched impostors. While frequent prosecutions against the Press, are some
times the refuge of tyranny shrinking from investigation, it must be
remembered, they may also be the symptoms of approaching extreme depravity and
licentiousness among a people. When the latter is the case, the evil is to be
corrected by exposing every atrocious offender, to severe and exemplary
punishment, and not by shielding him under the Liberty of the Press. To make
defamation dangerous and detestable, is the only mode of preserving the press
from detestation. Let this liberty and defamation never be classed together!
Ask me, what are the evidences of the decay of religion and morals among a
people, of the approaching disregard of every social law and duty, of the
entire prostration of truth, honor and honesty, of the tottering state of
government, of the bursting of the social compact and of the consequent scenes
of bloodshed, revolutions and warring chaos, and I will tell you, it is a
boundless multiplication of licentious libels, a public encouragement of
malicious defamation, and unpunished ravage upon reputation.

When good character loses its value and protection in society, when it is
fallen into ridicule and contempt, why should any man labor to obtain it? It is
excess that is the great destroyer of all things: human excess of health
sometimes shatters the human frame, and bursts the strong ligaments of life.
Excess of despotism has humbled the most powerful monarchs; and excess of
liberty has subverted the firmest republics. Seldom has a tyranny been
overthrown by the mere spirit of liberty among the people, unless first roused,
assisted and goaded to action by the insolent and insufferable oppression of
overgrown power, and never has the freedom of a republic been destroyed by the
bare strength of the arm of the usurper, unless favored by those disorders,
distractions and consequent weakness and disunion, which the corruption and
licentiousness of liberty never fail to produce. Permit me, gentlemen, to make
a few more observations on this liberty of the press. Is not this at once
absurd and insulting to an intolerable degree? a printer will spend months and
years in unprovoked, unceasing exertions to destroy the character and fortune
of a fellow-citizen, to bring him into public hatred and contempt, to overturn
every fair prospect in life, and reduce him and his family to poverty and
disgrace; but this is not persecution; it is liberty, the sacred liberty of the
press. If the oppressed individual seeks redress for his insufferable injuries,
and endeavors to avert the threatening ruin; if he calls upon his slanderer in
the most decent and dignified manner to support his charges; if conscious of
innocence, and martyrs under injuries, he determines even to put his character
in issue against his vile and lurking defamer; this indeed is persecution, the
whole country is alarmed and inflamed; the liberty of the press is attacked;
the great palladium of our rights, the sacred and unalienable pledge of freedom
is threatened with immediate destruction; and the poor innocent, unoffending
printer, loudly demands universal sympathy, and public protection from
persecution. Can we listen a moment to such impudent absurdity and nonsense, to
such a horrid perversion of the eternal dictates of truth and justice? If Dr.
Rush is guilty of persecution in applying to the tribunal of his country for
the justification of his character, and the redress of his wrongs; if he is
guilty of persecution when he calls his assassin to open, fair and dignified
ground, to the courts of justice of his country, making the great issue between
them TRUTH, and consenting to stand or fall, to be justified or disgraced by
this infallible arbiter; when he puts this issue on trial before a jury of his
fellow-citizens, just and impartial -- I say, if this is persecution, what
term, what language is vile, is base, is indignant enough to express a just
sentiment of the conduct of a printer who attacks his neighbor with deadly
weapons, condemns and destroys him, unheard, undefended; who, without remorse,
will plant thorns in the hearts of unoffending children, and a tender wife, and
tear down, with ruthless hands, the peace and prospects of an extensive,
respectable and amiable family.

It is equally astonishing and absurd in this man, so loudly and so frequently
to assert, that the American press is the most tame, humble and abject in the
world, while his own daily publications, and those of his competitor, the
AURORA, give so flat a contradiction to the assertion; while, from those
presses there incessantly issues a pestilential deadly vapor of the most low
and vile defamation; and these things are not only winked at by the law, but
too much applauded by the people. -- But the press of Great Britain, he says,
is more free and unshackled. If it be so, so much the greater the curse. But
the fact is not so. Their restraints on this most abominable species of
licentiousness are wholesome and severe. I say, it is false, that the just and
desirable liberty of the press is more cherished or protected in England, or
any where else, than here. I say this to defend the constitution and laws of my
country from the groundless assertion. We know what the constitutional liberty
of the press is here, and do not our books inform us what it is in England? Is
not page after page and volume after volume loaded with private actions and
public prosecutions for libels and slanders? Do not we see the most exemplary
punishments inflicted for them, and very properly too: and are not the rights
of reputation a special object of protection with English law. Is not
defamation resisted and depressed, as a most dangerous foe to the order and
existence of society, tending to the introduction of the most enormous crimes,
the fatal excesses of revenge. Indeed, does not Mr. Cobbett himself applaud the
severity and vigilance of the English courts of jurisprudence in punishing the
publisher of Paine's infamous libel on religion and morality; and in the same
book boast of the licentious latitude which printers enjoy in England -- Do we
not know that men have there expiated on the pillory, exposed to the ferocity
and insult of a mob, the offense of libelling; and most justly and deservedly
too: Have we not seen a member of the House of Commons, driven from his seat
and not only so, but declared ever after ineligible for the offense of
libelling. And I rejoice that he was so. To discountenance and punish even to
excess, indecent obscene and defamatory publications is the best proof of the
virtue and purity of a people, and of the energy and stability of their
government.

I shall not, Gentlemen, detain you much longer! I feel that I have already
trespassed too much on your patience. But suffer me to turn your attention for
a moment to the situation of the plaintiff in this cause. He has a tender and
affectionate wife, who fully participates in all his misfortunes, injuries, and
mortifications. The blow that pierces his character and happiness, opens a deep
wound in her heart, tearing with remorseless rage all the fine fibers and
delicate sympathies of conjugal love. Have these no value, that they shall be
the wanton sport of base malignity? He has an amiable and valuable young family
just rising into that age of nice feeling and generous sensibility, when the
reputation of a parent, they have ever deemed immaculate (if this be weakness,
where is the virtuous child that is not weak?) is peculiarly dear and
interesting! and when every attempt to blacken or degrade it, corrodes their
feelings with poisonous rancor, shocks with new horror, and excites a boundless
indignation. Are these things of no importance, that they shall be done with
impunity? What a scene for a husband and a father? By what crimes has he
merited these things? But manlier passions swell, agitate and inflame the
breasts of his sons. -- They burn, they burst with indignation, rage, revenge,
drive them headlong to desperate deeds, accumulating woe on woe. With
difficulty the prudential advice, the parental command of the father restrain
their fury -- With difficulty they are prevented from taking immediate
vengeance on their cruel oppressor -- Be patient my children, said he, I am
deeply injured, but the laws of my country offer me justice, and point out the
road to redress. It is tardy, but it is certain and ample. Delay may be painful
to you, but the duties of a good citizen require it. This suit then, Gentlemen,
and the hope of the justice that you will administer, may have been the
guardian angels of the defendant.

To conclude -- Volumes need not be unfolded to inform you, Gentlemen, what
slander is. It is unnecessary to disgorge our libraries upon you to show what
forms of words have or have not been deemed actionable by other courts. Ask the
honesty of your own hearts, consult the light of your own understandings, and
let it be answered whether in a state of civilized society, where the actions
of men are amenable to government and to law; where protection is pledged to
the unoffending, and redress to the injured, an outrageous member of that
society, in the mere sport of wanton wickedness, may attack with malignant and
unprovoked virulence, the peace of another; may destroy that good reputation,
which the unceasing merit of many years, and the labors of countless hours of
toil, which, indeed, a whole life spent in public service and unblemished
private virtue, had accumulated; may diffuse mortification and pain through an
amiable family; may snatch from the father the bread with which he would feed
his children; may be guilty of these enormities, may pursue and glory in them,
and owe no redress to the bleeding victim of his malice, no expiation to the
insulted justice of the country -- The honesty of your hearts will swell with
virtuous indignation against a wretch so l^^t and vile; the light of your
understanding will readily inform you, that the government and law where such
things are tolerated, must very soon fall into merited contempt; that the
society where they prevail, hangs but loosely together, and must speedily
dissolve into anarchy and misery. If the injured seek in vain, for redress; if
the promised protection to our lives, property and reputation, is but a dead
letter, a cruel jest; if the triumphant despoiler is to go laughing from your
courts, and the prayer of the injured be rejected, what is the inevitable
consequence? An immediate, nay, a justifiable resort to private vengeance for
private wrongs; an immediate and a necessary introduction of murder and
assassination. I feel and you feel that no man has a right from God, from
Nature, or from Law, to injure us without just retribution. I discover that
that retribution is not to be expected from the justice of my country; that he
that injuries is borne off in triumph, and he that complains is laughed to
scorn.

The alternative is obvious and inevitable. To myself and my own exertions I
must apply for that justice which my country idly promises and shamefully
denies. If such damages are not given, then, in this case, as will check such
offenses, as will convince your fellow-citizens, that this is the place where
justice is fully administered, and the injured satisfied, you take upon
yourselves all the dreadful consequences that may follow. Will I give credit to
my government; will I call myself protected by it, because I can recover a debt
of 20 shillings by its authority, or obtain possession of an acre of land,
while I am denied the peaceable pursuit of an honorable and useful profession,
and the enjoyment of an honest and well-earned reputation; while the feelings
of myself and my family are given up as a sacrifice to wanton and malignant
defamation. Let me call upon you, then, gentlemen, by the just heavens, to
consider this as no common case. Let me call upon you to feel yourselves
entrusted with one of the most important decisions that has ever yet been
submitted to any court in any country. By your decision we stand or fall. By
your decision is every man to know on what tenure be holds his character and
happiness. By your decision the base and lawless are to be taught
subordination, and the good citizen to hold his just rank and safety in
society. By your decision, the honor and dignity of this your highest tribunal
of justice, the respectability of your government, and the character of your
country are to be vindicated or lost. The injured father of an amiable family,
the worthy citizen, the useful philosopher now sues before you -- Professional
science implores that countenance and protection without which she must wither
and die -- Virtue, bleeding at every pore, calls for justice on her despoiler,
and the anxious heart of every honest man pants with impatience to meet in you,
THE DEFENDERS OF VIRTUE, AND THE SCOURGERS OF VICE.

Omission in Mr. Hopkinson's speech: -- in page 12, line 15, after the word
things -- read, "and the defendant has done much to produce them."

TESTIMONY. DR. JAMES MEASE,
WAS then called, who deposed upon his oath, that about the middle of April,
1798, while he resided at the Marine Hospital, Mr. Cobbett came down to the
Hospital with a Capt. Young Husbands, who came to see a man that was landed
from on board his ship, with a chronical disease. While the Captain went to see
the man, Mr. Cobbett remained in the parlor with the witness; conversation
being introduced about Dr. Rush's dispute with Cobbett, the defendant rose upon
his feet, and with much warmth said "Damn him, he had better withdraw his
cause," the witness believed clinching his fist, and he appeared much agitated.
He continued -- "or I will persecute him while living, and his memory after his
death." On which the witness told the defendant he was very wrong in his
attacks upon Dr. Rush's method of treatment, for he (Dr. Mease) was a living
witness of its efficacy, and in his practice he had found it, under Providence,
the means of saving hundreds, and he believed thousands had been saved by the
mode of treatment recommended by Dr. Rush.

Mr. Levy -- Did he repeat these words more than once?


Witness -- Upon my telling him he was wrong, he repeated, "damn him, let him
withdraw his cause."


-- Did Mr. Cobbett go into any discussion of the propriety, or impropriety of
the practice?


Witness -- No.


DR. WILLIAM DEWEES being sworn,

Deposed, that a few days after Dr. Rush had delivered his eulogium to the
memory of Dr. Rittenhouse, he happened to be at the house of Mr. Cobbett, whom
he asked if he had heard the eulogium. The defendant answered no, but he had
read it. I asked him how he liked it? He answered that the doctor had better
have confined himself to medicine, and have let politics alone. I asked him
what displeased him in it? On which he went up stairs and brought down the
book, showing me the passage he disliked, but I cannot now recollect what it
was. Having read it, he said, Damn him, I will attack him for it. -- He did not
say in what view, or to what effect he would attack him.

Mr. Harper. -- Did you not understand him to mean that Dr. Rush had advanced
some political opinions which he would attack, and endeavor to overthrow?


Witness. -- I thought he meant he would attack him on account of his
principles. He gave me to understand that the complexion of it was "too
republican" for him -- this was his own phrase.


Mr. Ingersol -- In the division of opinions among Gentlemen of your profession
in this city, is Dr. Rush one of those who are for the free use of the Lancet?


Witness. -- Yes.


-- Of which class have you yourself been?


-- With that of Dr. Rush.


-- Who was William Cobbett's family physician?


-- I cannot tell; I attended his family myself, though never in the yellow
fever.


Mr. Hopkinson -- Did you use Dr. Rush's practice in Mr. Cobbett's family?


Witness. -- Yes.


Mr. Ingersol. -- Is that practice or system confined to the disease called the
yellow fever?


Witness. By no means.


Mr. Rawle. How long did you attend Mr. Cobbett's family?


Witness. -- From the return of the citizens in 1798.


Mr. Ingersol. Have you been ever recommended by Mr. Cobbett to any other
families since that period?


Witness. Yes frequently.


Some conversation here occurred about what was the meaning of "the free use of
the lancet."

Mr. Dewees explained it to be wherever the use of the lancet was necessary: as
inflammatory cases.

Mr. Ingersol. You adopted Dr. Rush's system generally?


Witness. Yes.


DR. COX, was sworn.
He deposed that on the 2d of October, 1797, a gentleman who had just arrived
from the West Indies called upon him, and after some conversation told him he
was soon going to sail for England; but wished before he went, to see Peter
Porcupine, (the defendant) who had rendered himself so celebrated. He asked the
witness to inform him where he lived; upon which he, (the witness) accompanied
him to his house, having occasionally been in the habit of stepping into his
shop. -- After some general conversation had passed, the witness expressed to
the defendant his disapprobation of his publications respecting the use of the
lancet, and respecting Dr. Rush in particular, as this remedy had been
recommended by him in certain cases. -- He replied to my observation, said the
witness, that his writing could be of very little consequence, or have no
effect upon the public mind; I replied that I thought it was impossible he
should imagine what he said, for he must know that all he wrote must have a
very considerable effect, particularly at the time the mind of the public was
so distracted. He returned the same reply adding that as he was not a
physician, people would naturally suppose that he knew nothing of the subject.
I observed to him then, that the effect was certainly produced; he replied that
he did not believe he should ever have said so much on bleeding or mercurials,
if Dr. Rush had not been the author of it.

An article entitled THE POTENT QUACK, was then read in evidence of the design,
and persistence of the defendant, from Porcupines Gazette, of October 5, 1797,
which he introduces in these words:

[ The following are Mr. Fenno, junior's remarks on Dr. Rush's letter to Brown,
announcing that he had entered actions against Fenno and me.]

Here follows the letter from Fenno's paper.

After which the defendant introduces his remarks in these words:

[ I defy the Grand Empiric, aided by all his legion of subaltern quacks, to
compose a paragraph like this that closes young Fenno's remarks. -- These are
cutting truths for the Doctor. -- They leave the mark.]

The words referred to in the latter part of Fenno's remarks are as follow:

"The fact is, and I have before glanced at it, that a loved scheme of the
Doctor's ambition met a rough blow in 1793, and in 1797 a repetition, which
threatens in progress to cast the scheme and its author into the shades of
obscurity. This has been effected through the medium of the press, and the
press, therefore, is the first object whereon his vengeance is to be wreaked.
-- Conscious as I am, of the purest motives, and most upright intentions, I
shall wait with entire composure the issue of a trial, which I have no doubt
will complete the downfall of quackery and empiricism: and will at least be
valuable in one point of view, as it will serve to show on what ground stands
the liberty of the press, whether it is in America an empty name, or a valuable
reality -- whether that to which the country owes every possession of which it
can boast, aye! even its liberty and independence, shall be trampled under foot
by groundless prosecutions; and all those barriers erected by the spirit of
freedom, as entrenchments round poverty and obscurity, against the pride of
wealth and the insolence of power, are to be rudely thrust down, and a
liberticide medical tribunal established on the ruins of reason and the wrecks
of common sense."

A letter inserted in Porcupine's Gazette of October 6, 1797, was also read in
evidence which related a cure of the Yellow Fever by a soldier's accidental
immersion in Tar. The editor, William Cobbett, makes the following inferrence:

[ This seems an odd kind of a remedy; but I would rather Tar with the addition
of Feathers, than venture my life against the lancet of Dr. Rush.

An extract was also read in evidence from Porcupine's Gazette of October 20,
1797.

The prosecution being opened and the evidence to substantiate it read,

MR. RAWLE Addressed the Jury to the following effect:
With submission to your Honors,
I stand up, Gentlemen of the Jury, much more impressed with difficulty on
account of the extraordinary and unusual manner with which the gentleman who
preceded me has thought proper to open his cause, than of any danger in which
my client stands from the accusations on which this prosecution is grounded.

It has not fallen to my lot, since I have had the honor of appearing in the
character of an advocate, or since I began my endeavors to obtain a knowledge
of the law, to hear such serious animadversions made, or such strong stigma
used on the character of any man, as that gentleman has used in reference to my
client, the defendant. I could not help being struck with the comparison of
that address and the publications which it was meant to implicate. -- In that
comparison I declare I can perceive none which deals in so strong epithets --
none bordering so much on abuse, as those are with which the gentleman has
amused you. If it were possible to commit this opening address to paper, there
would be no difficulty in discriminating which was most deserving the
appellation of slander. -- Gentlemen, if you believe the declarations of my
opponent, you must be brought to believe William Cobbett to be the most
insignificant and worthless reptile in creation, and that under the shape of a
man, he has stalked abroad a very monster -- that for him, no justice ought to
be had -- that he is to be expunged from all ranks of society, that he is to
remain an eternal mark for hatred, and courts of Justice are never to consider
him as even the object of mercy! -- Mercy, that which we all claim, that which
we think we are all entitled to, seems not to be his due! Gentlemen, even your
opinions and your passions too have been assaulted, and called forth in a
manner, which to me, has hitherto been perfectly unknown. This human monster --
this most unheard of being -- every thing that is entitled to the terms of vile
and base, has been represented as the destroyer of the public peace and
happiness; as the disturber of the harmony of society.

But permit me to say, that this is not the way to appeal to the justice of a
Jury. Justice is what even this man has a right to demand of you, base as he
has been made to appear. You have a right to stand indifferent to the common
received, or represented state of any man's character, who shall be brought
before you. You are to possess no prejudices no opinions -- no prepossessions.
I trust justice will be your only impression in the present case. But although
every effort has been used to endeavor to excite your prepossession against the
defendant, every other sensation that that of strict equity, ought to be left
at the door, the moment you enter this court.

On the contrary, you have heard the Gentleman amusing himself, and no doubt,
agreeably entertaining his audience with representing the highly superior
character of the Plaintiff; -- he is superior to men in general -- nay any man
-- he is an angel from God, clothed with every virtue -- with every
qualification, while Mr. Cobbett is nothing but a demon from the infernal
regions. With you it is not left to judge of the distinction, but to you they
stand on equal grounds.

Dr. Rush stands before you as a respectable citizen, who has done much to
increase the good of society; but permit me say, society have rewarded him for
it. This is his happiness, and I am not inclined to say it is not his desert.
While we are entertained with such a striking and affecting picture of the
calamity which has distressed our city, and the general distress experienced
thereon, we are told that this good angel went from door to door, communicating
his assistance freely, but no doubt, every man who so exposed himself, whatever
general good he might administer, received an adequate compensation. If he has
bravely faced death, he has met the lot of his profession. The common sailor,
who has shipped himself on board a vessel of war, might, in the hands of my
eloquent opponent, be represented as a man who has faced the cannon ball,
inured himself to the dangers and hardships of the boisterous ocean, and met
danger at every avenue of his calling; but what would his oratory amount to
more, than that others did so, and it was their profession. Dr. Rush ought to
have every merit which he deserves: but let it not be forgotten that William
Cobbett ought to have every merit he deserves, and every privilege to which he
is entitled -- let him have every censure he deserves, and yet, I repeat, both
stand upon equal ground before you. Cobbett puts himself upon the issue, and
you are to decide according to evidence, and thus only.

Gentlemen, to the declaration filed, we have pleaded not guilty. We are
charged with having maliciously written such and such things, in order to
destroy the good name that Dr. Rush has heretofore borne among his
fellow-citizens. We deny the malicious part of the accusation, and to obtain
our right, we put ourselves upon a jury of our country, and unless it can be
proved that the publications laid to our charge are of the nature designated,
to wit, malicious, we are entitled to your acquittal in the action.

The malice of a libel is collected, in general, either from its necessary
construction, plainly apparent on the face of a publication, or from some
circumstances easily deducible from the nature of the case.

We have heard, upon the present occasion, the testimony of some medical
gentlemen brought forward, alleging, that at periods subsequent to this
prosecution being entered, the defendant used words, tending to show that these
publications proceeded from personal malice. To me, the whole of the
publications and charges appear to be free from personal, private or domestic
malice. How could they issue from personal malevolence? I ask whether it has
been proved, in any case, that Cobbett has endeavored to intermeddle with the
family concerns of Dr. Rush? or whether, on the other hand, the whole of the
publications have not been so far justifiable, in as much as they treated only
on a subject of public enquiry? Most true it is that every man has a property
in his own reputation -- most true it is that the law has spread about the
reputation of every man all the assistance possible; but there is another thing
demands your consideration: he who exists in community, has a property and
interest equally valuable in the happiness, safety and peace of that community.
To every man, these are important considerations: every man is bound by them,
and his own welfare is in them -- every man is punishable for a neglect of
them. It is of consequence to a man, that in the society he has selected for
his residence, he should see prosperity about him, otherwise he can have but
little hope of prosecuting his own means for his own benefit. In order to
procure this object, he will exhort all the citizens of the same system, who
enjoy a common cause with him, to adopt what is good, and leave what is evil.
Where such have been the efforts of a man, he is undoubtedly entitled to
respect. This principle is consistent with the constitution of Pennsylvania,
Sect. 3. Art. 9. And there exists no law of the state or general governments
that restrains a full and free investigation of the merits of any question in
which the public are interested. If in the course of this investigation
expressions are used, and observations made which may fall heavy on the
concerns of the person about whom he is writing, it is sufficient for the
person accused, if he can show that he has not been guilty of untruths, nor
entered into the family or moral connections of his accuser; but that he has
only thrown his mite into the public stock of information.

Gentlemen, there are few offices in society of more public importance than
that of a physician, few on whom so much depends the happiness of the
community. A good, skilful, laborious, honest physician, is a very valuable
member of society. But, on the contrary, an unskilful, avaricious, indolent
physician deserves, not only public disapprobation, but, public contempt.
Private compensation, and public confidence is the sure reward of the
meritorious practitioner; but you have heard this man's character even exalted
above humanity; superior to humanity indeed must he be, if in the whole of his
extensive practice he never committed some error; if he never for a moment
adopted some mistaken principle, and perhaps tenaciously, not to say
obstinately adhered to it! Such instances in every profession, in men the most
celebrated we have known, and I presume shall continue to know. If on the
public labors of any man in society, animadversion is admissible, on which can
it be so properly exercised as on the man in whose hands, in some sense, is
life and death? Who so fit an object on whom to exercise the liberty of the
press? I sincerely trust we never shall see the day when any public character,
how especial soever the qualifications of his head or heart, or how bad soever,
as to exclude him from enjoying the common advantages of his good character, or
secure him from just odium for his reprehensible conduct, and I trust we never
shall see the time when any man, however base his character may be, should be
denied that justice which our constitution and laws make the common right of
all men.

Gentlemen, the Fever of 1793, it is well remembered, was truly serious and
awful, a disease then almost unknown among us, so that the most wise was at a
loss how to act. Different modes of treatment, and different experiments were
made, but notwithstanding great numbers deserted the city, and notwithstanding
the utmost exertions and ingenuity of the Physicians, about one fourth of the
people who remained died. Of the number who remained Dr. Rush was one. I need
only appeal to your recollections how unlimited were the publications which
succeeded that fever, so unaccountable and various were the attacks, and so
difficult and various the modes of treatment, that it was considered a
justifiable subject of public discussion. To some of these publications I might
appeal, and show you how strong, how acrimonious was the language, used even
between the members of that learned profession. The subject continued thus, for
a long time a subject of public controversy, and much warmth was used. Finally,
by the interposition of divine Providence, more than the united attempts of
men, the disorder disappeared, and for four years we happily remained free from
its dreadful ravages, conceiving ourselves quite secure from its return.
However it again made its appearance in 1797. What was a subject of so much
public discussion in 1793, was resumed in the subsequent attack, at that time
others, besides the unfortunate defendant, who, it appears to me, is
sufficiently paid for his temerity by the accusations brought against him,
others took the liberty to declare, as all mankind ought to encourage them to
do, what their opinions were of the topic. At this period we find issue from
the press of Mr. Cobbett what it has been thought proper to ground this
prosecution on -- not for assailing the private character of Dr. Rush; not
tearing open his connections, nor meddling with his family concerns, but for
discussing a public question, in such a manner as others had thought proper to
do before him, and were then doing. The topics of public discussion were the
free use of the lancet, and mercurial purges. And who so natural, so likely to
be attacked as the person who was well known to be at the head of this system
of treatment, a system peculiarly adopted and recommended by Dr. Rush, and
followed by his pupils. Hence the name of Dr. Rush, and the use of bleeding and
Mercury in the Yellow Fever came into public notice at one period. We know that
the two learned bodies in this city, who were incorporated for the purpose of
establishing public confidence, by an unanimity of system, (I refer to the
academy of medicine and the college of Physicians) -- Those two bodies
established different systems in the treatment of this disease. This certainly
gave to Mr. Cobbett, allowing that he is a man entitled to the use of his
faculty of reason, and the common privilege enjoyed in the United States, this
surely gives to him the privilege of expressing his opinion, as applicable, not
barely to the principle, but to the practice used: and what might encourage him
the more, he thought that whatever he might advance, as appeared in the
evidence, could do no injury, not being a medical man himself, and if he was
wrong he should only expose his ignorance, which he was willing to hazard,
hoping however that he might eventually do good.

Doctor Rush was at that time a very public character, and exercising an
important public function: Mr. Cobbett was unquestionably exercising his
constitutional right to do at that time, what others did, to examine his public
transactions, in which he thought he was on the side of humanity. -- Suppose we
see an individual, or a number of persons running headlong toward a precipice,
down which they must inevitably fall, shall I be blamed if I say to them stop,
listen not to the man who advised you to take that road: I will give you solid
advice, go the other way. They escape the danger, and I have done my duty.
Gentlemen, however the conduct of Mr. Cobbett may appear in the subsequent
part, it is plain that the system established by Dr. Rush, has not produced all
the good effects he wished.

[Mr. Rawle here read a letter written in August 1798 from Drs. Physic and
Cooper at the hospital, requesting advice in cases of the fever, to which Dr.
Rush wrote an answer acknowledging the uncertainty of any precise method of
treatment in all cases, and that bleeding and mercurials were not, in every
stage, and every appearance of the fever, a proper mode of treatment. He
concludes, acknowledging the difficulties those Physicians had to meet,
scarcely ever having an opportunity of commencing their treatment until an
advanced state of the disease, much of the success in which, depended on a
particular hour of application. Some, he said, "in 1797 he occasionally lost,
even after the application of bleeding and mercurials.] -- From which it
appears that the new system of treatment, was not the infalliable cure which
was supposed. But whether this medicine was found to answer the Doctor's
expectation, I know not, my object is to prove that there was more than one
method of counteracting that disease, and that it was the business of those who
had the misfortune to be exposed to the danger, to make their observations,
with freedom on those various modes, as much as experiment was the privilege of
the practitioners. I take the principle of the Law to be, that your minds
should be well satisfied, either from an internal evidence of the publication,
or from concomitant circumstances, that the writer had a malicious intent. This
principle is well established in the books: see Buller's Nisi Prius p. 8. Where
it is plain that the git of the expression must be MALICE, in order to
constitute it a crime in the eye of the law. And again p. 110. same book "the
words must be malicious, as well as false, to support an action for slander."
If it is justifiable to show that words used with a sincere and liberal
intention, in order to prevent mischief, is harmless, is not that man
justifiable, who seeing a dangerous system likely to predominate, who prevents,
as much as lies in his power, that system being put into action? This I
consider as a very essential ground of our defense.

We contend that Mr. Cobbett exercised a right given him by the laws and
Constitution of this State; no law required him to publish, but he had liberty
so to do, and he is far from deserving that odium with which he is now
stigmatized. That men's language, and modes of expression will differ according
to their talents and education, I presume you will all allow. When I say this,
I hope you will not conceive me to mean that the whole of this man's merit
consisted in the scurrility with which he treated his opponent. Here I may
justifiably apply the observation of Dr. Johnson, that "those who think
profoundly will express themselves differently from the common acceptance."
This profundity of thought could not be supposed to be an attribute of my
client; no doubt, he spoke from his momentary sensations. But for communicating
these observations to the public, is the law to be appealed to in this solemn
and expressive manner? Is the strong arm of justice to be called up, because
the little forms of society are supposed to be attacked by an individual! No,
such is not the fixed principle of the law, nor of common justice. The law will
be found to state it as a principle, that in no instance where the party has
gone wrong through the impulse of passion -- beyond the bounds of strict
decency and propriety, that for this cause alone, the plaintiff is to recover
damages. Salkeld 693 says, that "to say a justice is a fool, an ass, a
blockhead, or a bufflehead, is not indictable, unless the words are in
themselves such as show an intention to deprive the party getting his
livelihood." These are rough expressions, but it appears not indictable.

[Some distinction was here remarked by the court to exist between words that
are "indictable," and words that are "actionable."]

Mr. Rawle contended that unless the party could show that he had sustained
some injury by the using of the words, no damages could be laid; but he
observed that their opponents had not thought proper to prove any special
damages, from which it must be deducted by a jury that none were sustained.

In discussing a matter of public interest, the amount of damages, if the jury
should think proper to find for the plaintiff, must depend on the situation and
ability of the person who undertook to discuss it. Besides, the powers of men's
minds are not always alike. Truth is frequently attacked by ridicule, much less
can we expect a public profession to remain exempt. Pope says Safe from the
Bar, the Pulpit and the Throne,
But truth is touched by "ridicule" alone.


The enquiry always is in the case of scandal. "Is it a matter in which the
interests of the nation are implicated?" If it is not; if it is a matter of
public discussion, as in the present case, it has ever been considered as
harmless, though perhaps poignant ridicule. We find nothing in the declaration
but words which relate to the public practice and medical system of Dr. Rush.
We were told that proofs of the malicious design of our client would be
produced; we have heard the evidence of three persons brought here to prove the
malice asserted. But neither of them has related an item whereupon to found
that accusation. A clear proof to me, and must be to you, Gentlemen, that no
malicious design, a temper and disposition absolutely necessary to the
conviction of the defendant -- no malicious design did exist.

The effort made to support malice from the evidence of Dr. Dewees, respecting
the eulogium on Dr. Rittenhouse, to me, is very feeble; for, from the words of
the witness and the concomitant circumstances, it is clear the attack was to be
of a political nature, on account of political principles publicly delivered.
Change it, and say it was to be against the man, it must be proved to have been
carried into execution.

Another gentleman relates a conversation with Mr. Cobbett in Oct. 1798, about
the consequences of his publications. Mr. Cobbett then declared that he did not
think his writing could have any effect, and at last he declares that he should
not have attacked the practice of Dr. Rush, if the Doctor had not been the
author of it. The true meaning of that expression, it will be difficult for you
to ascertain: but if you understand it not fully, you are not to receive the
least impression from it. Perhaps it was this: if it was an obscure
practitioner, a man of no note, it would not be worth my notice. But mark the
difference. If a man, such as the Doctor has been held up to you, -- not only
the first in America, but almost, if not quite, in the whole universe; such a
man inculcates principles, and draws others into the adoption of them: a new
system in the hands of such a man merited Mr. Cobbett's attention, in his
editorial capacity; and I think he was justifiable in thinking him a proper
person for attack. Gentlemen, there must be something more than mere
suggestion; there must be something to prove the visciosity of the writings; or
you must give a verdict for the defendant.

Our client is absent, he has rested his case with you to give your decision
upon his rights of publication; we claim that right for him, a right which
every free man is entitled to at your hands, and for him, I think we shall not
claim of you in vain. The farther examination into the publications and the
evidences produced, I shall leave to my colleagues, who I have no doubt will be
able to prove to you that no such malice as is charged, is intended or is any
way included. I will only remind you of one apparent inconsistency in the
reasoning of our opponent; If the system and practice of Dr. Rush has been so
useful, so infallible, as you have been made to suppose, in order that you may
give judgment for large damages, it is natural to suppose that the feeble
efforts of Mr. Cobbett could not destroy his celebrity, or injure that system,
and therefore it could be but little or no offense for him to express his
opinion.

With you I shall leave the weight of my arguments; we have no evidence to
produce, but I trust you will see the justice of our defense.

HON. MR. HARPER.
Gentlemen of the Jury,
THE question in this case is not whether the plaintiff is a physician of
eminence, a man of worth, a peaceable citizen, a good father, or a tender
husband, -- was this the point to be discussed, we must shrink from the
opposition, and allow the claim to be in his favor, nor is it whether our
client has offended against decorum, and every principle of civility and good
manners, -- or it would be equally difficult to make out a defense. The
question is, whether, in these publications, contained in the declaration,
which has been read, the defendant was actuated by a design to injure Dr. Rush
in his personal character, or to injure him as a physician, or to run down and
laugh out of countenance a practice which he considered would have a
mischievous tendency. Gentlemen as you must be of one or the other of these
opinions, your verdict must be for the plaintiff or for the defendant: If from
the whole of the testimony you should be of opinion that the defendant, in
making these publications, was induced merely by a desire to overthrow a system
of medicine which he thought mischievous, you are bound to give him your
verdict. And, why? Because this action is brought for the malicious design with
which it is said he used those expressions.

What is malice?

Malice in its present application must be an attempt and design to injure the
plaintiff in his personal, or in his professional character. When this
ingredient is not made out, either from its appearance on the very face of the
action, or by direct inference, the action of slander cannot be supported. This
is an obvious and incontrovertable fact. No man has a right to attack another
in his professional pursuits, so as to rob him of the fruits of his industrious
efforts, but every man has a right to attack a ruinous system, and whether a
system is ruinous or mischievous, he who makes the attack, and he alone is to
be the judge, because if I lift my hand against a set of opinions or practices
which I hold to be evil to society, I must first suppose my liberties or
privileges, or those of society to be in danger, before I should exercise my
freedom of opinion.

I will admit that if, in the combat of opinions or practices, I throw any
unnecessary personal reflections, and attack the individual holding those
opinions, if I go beyond his opinions, and abuse his person; if I go beyond his
person, and traduce his character, then indeed the pretense that I meant only
to attack his opinions, would not avail me in a court of justice; it would be
supposed merely a cloak, merely a fallacious excuse, and therefore would fairly
be actionable, and subject me to punishment. The question, then, will recur
whether William Cobbett meant to attack Dr. Rush's system, or his personal and
professional character? If the latter should appear to be his design, he surely
has stepped beyond due bounds. The utmost latitude of admission that I shall
grant in this case is, that if attempts are made to bring a physician into
general disrepute, then the injured party may claim retribution from the laws
of his country. Having gone thus far, let us enquire how far these ingredients
exist in the present case. Whether there be, in the paragraphs upon which this
action is founded, any thing from which malice can be fairly and properly
deducted, or whether the only design of the defendant was to overturn, if he
could by argument, that part of the practice of Dr. Rush which consisted in
"BLEEDING" and "PURGING" in the yellow fever.

We will read the paragraphs, compare the evidences with them, and see whether
this disposition is contained in them.

[Mr. H. here read the paragraph of September 19th, 1797.]

Before I enter into the examination, I will admit that the same studied
language which well-bred men ought to use, is omitted, and that the same style
and decorum is not used which, if I were to combat a public system, I should
think it right to use. -- But are we to wonder at it? Are we to wonder that
writers, in a controversy, in which they had excited so much acrimony, even
among the members of the faculty themselves, should be led too far? Nay, have
we not heard it strikingly exemplified in the conduct of the Gentleman who
opened this cause! Gentlemen in the Legislature do not always avoid this
unbecoming practice of personal abuse. But although that fact would not justify
the man, ought we not to look with some little excuse upon the author of a
newspaper? If this consideration ought not to pardon the offense, it ought at
least to extenuate it.

Laying aside what is merely indecorus; what is merely harsh language, let us
enquire what is the substance and meaning, and the total amount of the charges.

Having read the article entitled "Medical Puffing," Mr. H. asked if there was
any thing like slander in that piece; if so, hardly a newspaper which was
printed in the United States, but might be made a subject of enquiry by a Jury.
-- I do not, resumed Mr. H. justify the language; but what does it amount to?
It calls an eminent physician a remorseless bleeder. What is that? It is that
he pursued bleeding too far. But have not some of the most respectable medical
men said that it is remorseless and destructive? There are such. The idea
conveyed is nothing to you; whether bleeding in his practice, is pushed too
far, or whether it is not a subject of your enquiry; but whether this man meant
more than to expose that system which was extreme in his view is a proper
subject for your enquiry. Was it not wrong that a ruinous system should have
been persisted in, when human life was so materially connected? This was so
considered by him, and he thought it his duty to expose it. I am well convinced
that it was not only unbecoming language, but I believe it to be very untrue,
but is it a slander? No, it is merely unmeaning ribaldry. Suppose, I say, a man
is in the habit of getting himself puffed in the paper: he may be laughed at,
but could do nothing in it. He might get himself puffed, and yet be a very able
physician.

"Blood, blood, they cry more blood."

To be sure this is very hyperbolical, but strip it of its exaggeration, and is
it not true? Was it not common, during that period, for these ideas to be
reiterated through the papers and pamphlets of the city day after day? The free
use of the lancet, the free use of the lancet, was constantly repeated by the
medical men in favor of that system.

As to calling a man a shameless silly puff, and in general, the letter of Dr.
Tilton, wherein he is called a sour wry-faced democrat, I do not know how it
came to be introduced, or what it has to do with an action brought by Dr. Rush!
I have heard a very good character of Dr. Tilton, but if he is "a sour
wry-faced incorrigible democrat," I am sorry for it. As to the epithet of
"Master bleeder," I see no harm in its introduction; it is no slander, but an
high eulogium, raising him to a pre-eminence, rather than giving any abuse. The
question respecting mercurial purges is then introduced, "Is it good for Sans
culottism, Doctor?" I wish it was, gentlemen, for if so, it would be a ready
cure for a great number of persons, who, I fear, are now utterly incurable.
Comparing mercury to Sampson, and speaking of its ravages, Mr. Harper did not
conceive it personally applicable to Dr. Rush, but to the system, which was
particularly pointed at in reference to the "Rushites."

Not Dr. Rush but his partisans, which amounted to nothing. Is it slander, said
Mr. Harper, to say to a gentleman, when we contend in another place, (Congress
Hall) that certain political opinions go to the subversion of Government, or in
other instances tend to rob the country, etc. No, far otherwise, a great
distinction is always held between a man, personally, and his principles.
Miserable would be the times, were it not so, and much more miserable would it
be if we could not be permitted to call in question the practice of a
physician, without being subjected to an expensive action for slander. The only
meaning of these words is, that it is a mistaken principle to attach to certain
practice the virtue it has not, for that it has occasioned the death of many,
rather than recovered them from disease. If the words had been that Doctor Rush
killed more than he cured, it would have been actionable on good grounds, but
it is only vaguely the "Rushites," etc.

The next paragraph is in 25 September, signed "a tavern keeper." Here we only
find Dr. Rush's name mentioned as having published a book on the yellow fever,
and his being a great patron of the art of blood-letting. This is known to all
America and Europe, it has never been denied, but it is not slander. It might
with propriety be called a piece highly ridiculing the practice of
blood-letting: I believe it was so intended -- but shall such a piece of
ridicule be made the foundation of an action of slander? If so, some of the
most admired productions in every age ought to be considered as slanders. In
every age ridicule of this sort has been resorted to, and where it does not run
into scandal it is approved. But I say this does not, and I know you will say
by your verdict, that it does not run to that length.

Mr. Harper then read the article inserted September 26, 1797, which he
contended contained nothing injurious to the reputation of Dr. Rush as a
physician, nor as a man, nor would it tend in the least to deprive him of a
livelihood, one of which must be proved in order to substantiate the action. As
to the terms "potent quack," and "medical puffer" -- the words are very
indecent, but it is always a principle of observation that such low, unmeaning
ribaldry always recoils on its projector. Far be it from me to justify, or even
extenuate such language, but that it is no offense in a law view is easy to
prove. Contempt is the only punishment it can have.

Next Mr. Harper took up the article of September 29, 1797, preface "A PUFF
equal to Dr. Rush's." Here Mr. H. said was a puff introduced the most
ridiculous and absurd which could be conceived, and he called it EQUAL to Dr.
Rush's. Surely he said it was EQUAL, and it could be no slander to say so. It
was very indecorous to be sure, to bring in the name of so respectable a
character as Dr. Rush, when such an extravagant piece was introduced, but it
did not tend to lessen the man in his reputation and fame, and therefore could
be no slander. This Spilsbury had invented a remedy to cure impurities of the
blood, but was it not a more perfect cure to let out that foul blood? Certainly
so. The indecent epithet of master Sangrado he could not defend; it was very
unbecoming to apply it to so respectable a character. But suppose a man was
called after in the street by this name, could he support an action for slander
upon it? No, actions of slander are not to be brought for abuse but injury. --
This Sangrado is mentioned in a novel as a famous quack, who used to take blood
and give water to his patients until he brought them to the grave.

Mr. Harper again contended, that from the whole sum of the evidence it was
clear that not the man, but the mode of practice, which he considered
dangerous, was the object of attack. He then took up the article inserted in
Porcupine's Gazette, Oct. 5, 1797, extracted from Fenno's Gazette, subsequent
to the action being entered, which he said, the greater part of it, was only an
extenuation, because it expressly says, that none of the paragraphs made the
foundation of the action, were meant more than to combat "an erroneous system."
This printer considered himself to be unjustly assailed by the action, and
therefore it is no wonder if the subsequent publications are acrimonious; but
is this a proof of his criminality in the first instance? Even those subsequent
publications go principally to the system, and say very little about the man
himself. If the malice was intended at the time he ushered the publications for
which he was sued, he would not have waited to display it in the future ones.
-- Gentlemen, the subsequent publications cannot support the action, as they
took place since the action was commenced, and flow only from the resentment
natural to a man who considered himself unjustly prosecuted; they cannot
therefore be called as a proof of the motive with which the first were written,
except the malice had been plainly expressed in them, which is not the case.

Verbal testimony is next produced: three gentlemen of respectability for their
age, appear in court, but I am sorry the action could not be supported without
resorting to private conversations, perhaps used in confidence, and certainly
without a view of its going farther than the spot where it was used. This
particularly referred to the two first. But it may be laudable in the gentlemen
to come and volunteer themselves in support of a man, their friend and patron,
whom they consider assailed. I will admit that the expressions used by the
defendant, was proof of his vindictive spirit, and were very improper, but I
ask what influence it can have on the action now before you? This strong
resentment was in consequence of his being sued by Dr. Rush. If it proves any
thing, it is that the defendant was certain of the injustice of the action, he
having, legally speaking, done no harm, at which his mind revolted, and being
very much agitated at the mention of the suit by Dr. Mease, the ebullition of
his inflamed mind burst forth into an unwarrantable expression. Is this the
mark of malice, settled, cool, deliberate malice? Malice speaks less and does
more, than is apparent in any part of the defendant's conduct. You may call him
ill tempered, unamiable, harsh, etc. if you please; in so doing you do him
justice, but to call an hasty expression, malice, is a perversion of terms.

The testimony of Dr. Dewees amounts to less than the last. The defendant was
displeased at certain passages in an eulogium spoken by Dr. Rush, and he said
the Doctor had better have confined himself to medicine. This to be sure was
very impertinent, for he had nothing to do with it; but it was not criminal.
What he meant by its being "too republican" does not appear. I have read it,
and with pleasure; but he or any man certainly had a right to find fault with
it, if they disliked it. He farther said he would attack the Doctor about it.
Does this mean that he would commence a vindictive attack upon the Doctor, and
endeavor to wound him in his reputation or profession? No, gentlemen, this is
not to be inferred. It was a determination to attack the principle advanced, to
expose it to ridicule, so that it should not have the effect which it was
intended to have. It could not possibly refer to any attack on his business,
and therefore cannot stamp a malicious intent upon words used for another
purpose so long afterward. It appears that Mr. Cobbett did afterward employ
Dr. Dewees in his family, and recommended him to some of his friends. I am very
glad of it, I believe him to have merited that recommendation, but this is no
proof that it was not to the system, but the man that Cobbett aimed at, for
although Dr. Dewees was employed by him in other cases, he might not have done
it, had the yellow fever came into his family, if he had, it would have changed
the question, and proved the scandal.

The evidence of Dr. Cox goes only to prove the opinion of Cobbett that all he
could say would do no harm, since the attack upon the bleeding was well known
not to have flowed from professional knowledge. This was paying homage to the
character of Dr. Rush. -- If a man of no note had introduced the system, he
would not have said a word about it, but since a man of Dr. Rush's talents, had
advocated it, it was an object worth attacking with all his might. But wherein
is the coincidence between this testimony, and that related by Dr. Dewees? The
circumstance of the eulogium occurred in December, '96, or in January
following, but the evidence of Dr. Coxe relates what did not occur until the
September following, that if Dr. Rush had not been the promoter of this purging
and bleeding system, he should not have thought it worth while to say much
about it. There can be no relation or connection between the two, because one
refers to expressions which he denominated "too republican" for which he meant
to attack him; but the other is wholly bent toward his system of physic. It
was the weight of authority, so great a man as Dr. Rush being at the head of
that disapproved system, which called forth, not his malice, but his
animadversions. It does appear to me that there was no appearance of the
ingredient which the law calls malice, and which is necessary to vitiate his
conduct, through the whole progress of the discussion, and that this man was
not injured in his name, fame or reputation: in his name as a man in society,
or in his domestic connections; in his fame as a man of skill and profession;
or in his reputation as a Physician, and consequently there is no slander to
his character.

We have heard much of the family of the plaintiff, and of the keen feelings of
his respectable wife, of which not a doubt can be entertained. I should never
have thought it my duty to have hazarded my respectability by standing here to
advocate a man who should slander so eminently useful a character as Dr. Rush,
or his very respectable wife or family: far be it from me, I should rather have
consigned him and his cause to the fate it would deserve. My professional name
should never have borne the blot such conduct would justly attach to it. But
this I conceive not to be the case. That my client has overstepped the bounds
of good manners and decorum, I have admitted, but that he had a right to run
down what he believed to be a mischievous system, I have contended for, and
still wish to impress upon your minds. His conduct must meet with strong
disapprobation, but agreeable to the rules of law and justice he merits your
verdict, because neither a breach of good manners, nor harsh opprobrious
epithets can be construed to mean slander. How reprehensible soever his
conduct, if he has not slandered the good name, same or pursuits in life of Dr.
Rush, I repeat that William Cobbett has a demand of justice at your hands, and
that is to acquit him of the declaration.

MR. MOSES LEVY. BY YOUR HONORS' LEAVE.
Gentlemen of the Jury,
THE enquiry before us is of a nature to demand our most serious consideration.
From the attention which has been given to it throughout the discussion, by you
and the Court, the utmost candor is evident, and a just conclusion certain. The
suit you are now to consider should be perfectly open to your understanding;
its nature should be explained, and some of the errors corrected which have too
generally escaped from the counsel for the defendant, though, I presume without
intention.

This is not legally a special action for slander; it is true the action is to
recover damages for grievous and unprovoked slander, but in its nature, this is
an action for a libel. An action for slander and an action for a libel is
differently understood in courts of justice.

Words may irritate and rankle; they may even blast the character of a man upon
whom they are spoken, but they perish the moment they pass out of the mouth of
the speaker, and the shortness of their duration lessens their importance. But
what is committed to paper, -- what is printed, has a lasting impression, and
is capable of much, and universal mischief. It exists through ages, and is not
confined to the seat of its birth, but may extend even to the remotest parts of
the earth. There can be no bounds of its effects. If slander, then, is
punishable by the law, with how much more nicety should reputation and private
honor, be guarded from attacks by writing. For words, however public, the law
has therefore provided no punishment: the law does not consider the public
peace so far injured thereby, as to command the public officer to issue
prosecution. But words committed to paper demands more attention, because more
extensive are its effects. Taking notice, therefore, as the law does by this
pointed distinction between words spoken and slander committed to the press,
the offense is defined.

In relation to words spoken, see 3 Blackstone 123, "Words which may impair, or
hurt a man's trade or livelihood, as to call a tradesman a bankrupt, a
physician a quack, or a lawyer a knave." These are an exception to the general
proposition which I have laid down, that words are harmless. These words are
considered as a good ground for action, because they attack in a vulnerable
point, and it remains with time defendant to show that there was no malice
intended in the use of them. Thus we find that the burden is put on the
defendant.

Another way of attacking a man's reputation, and a more serious one is by
printing, writing, exhibiting pictures or signs, etc. so as to set any one in
an odious and diminutive light, see 3 Black. 125. Every libel has a tendency to
breaking the peace, by provoking the person libelled to break it. It is
unnecessary to multiply authorities to prove the law is pointedly against the
defendant, he having written what would have been a libel even if spoken. I
shall take it for granted then, that this newspaper attacking of Dr. Rush, as
"quack," "potent quack," "grand empyric," etc. "who had slain his tens of
thousands," is a gross and infamous libel, except it should be made to appear
otherwise by extenuating, and giving it a mild aspect.

Gentlemen, the principles of law laid down by my colleague, in his opening
address were just, and consistent with the English books of law. If, for a
moment, his zeal carried him into a state of effervescence, for which he is
blamed by our opponents, it is what the most moderate man, who is warmly
attached to reputation and character, who has read what was inserted against
the plaintiff, can scarcely refrain from showing. Who could restrain a warmth
of expression at seeing a worthy, valuable citizen so lavishly abused without
provocation; without ever appearing to have spoken with the defendant, or even
glanced at his principles or conduct. Farther, we find this malevolent
intention repeatedly pursued in, even after a prosecution was commenced. -- It
certainly will not be, nor has it been contended, that character is not a
sacred thing; no one shall touch it with impunity. Character is the road to
private happiness and public confidence and honor. Destroy the characters of
men, and it dissolves the union which blends together society, nor wealth, nor
real merit can conceal contempt. So careful is the law to preserve character
inviolable, that even the memory of the deceased is sacred, and the offense of
traducing that memory is punished by law. It is not enough, then, to prove that
the slander cannot operate to injury; no, the imputation cast upon the memory
of the dead, might lead to acts of violence between the living, and thus the
peace be broken. Such a libel as this upon the character of a man, even after
he had been dead fifteen years, would be sufficiently atrocious to justify an
indictment and punishment.

If the importance of reputation is so expressly acknowledged by the laws of
this country, and if these laws are deemed so essential to the public peace,
how are they to be carried into effect, but in one of two ways, legally. --
First by public prosecution, in which the defendant is not at liberty to give
the truth of the libel in evidence, or secondly by an action for slander, in
which he is at liberty to prove the truth, which if he can do, exculpates him
from legal blame. Of these two, Dr. Rush was not at a loss to know which was
most proper for him to adopt: it was reason enough for him to commence a civil
action, because it gave the defendant an opportunity to bring forward the truth
in justification, if he could do it. This civil action being commenced, you are
the organs through whom alone we claim justice. A jury taken from the mass of
the people, is a permanent and invaluable institution: they can best estimate
the value of private or public character, and dispense justice in proportion to
the quality of the offense. The office of a jury is permanent; however the
persons composing it, may vary or die, yet the institution ever remains, and
they are the judges on whom the law has rested property, personal liberty, and
personal character. In cases where a jury estimate damages too high, wherein
damages can be easily estimated, the court have a controlling jurisdiction over
their verdict, by ordering a new trial, and referring it to another jury. But
in an action which refers to character, to chastity, or to the honor of an
individual, you are the uncontrolled judges. Matters of property the court is
supposed to be able to estimate, but of the value of character, etc. the jury
are supposed to be able to give the best judgment. If therefore the character
of a valuable and respectable man is wantonly and wickedly attacked, it lies
with you, as the guardians of your fellow citizens, to estimate the damages.
You have characters of your own, and you know the importance of preserving them
inviolate; all of you follow some business, and you cannot be ignorant of the
violence and effects of an attack on the means you use to execute that
business. You, who are merchants, must conceive the danger a newspaper
publication, declaring you a bankrupt would be to you: it would wound your
reputation so as to effectuate your ruin, by stopping your* credit and your
trade. It would be no excuse to your opponent to say it was but a jest, because
the defamation would be effected, and you must suffer. Picture to yourselves,
if you can, how you would feel, if precisely situated as is the defendant! of
what avail would it be to you to be told that it was only ridicule? Suppose an
infamous picture was put before your door -- suppose a pair of horns,
describing the conduct of your wife, and that repeatedly, would you be
satisfied at being told it was " a test of truth" and that " ridicule could do
you no injury?" -- Suppose it was a label put, that you were guilty of this or
that species of swindling, or worse, suppose this to be inserted in the
newspapers, -- suppose that instead of low, indecent, and russian-like
vulgarity, you were attacked with a keen satire, -- would it be to your benefit
that you were cut with a sharp knife? No, it must have a direct tendency to
ruin, or material injury, and notwithstanding the utmost use of philosophy in
calming the mind, to say it is only ridicule will not avail to compensate the
injury.

Let us enquire what was the situation of Dr. Rush at the time this slander was
circulated. He resided in Philadelphia, and it was at a period when most had
deserted it who possessed property sufficient to make their escape, from a
sense of the danger to which they should otherwise expose themselves. He had
property to fly, but he chose to remain. Can you suppose, Gentlemen, that he
remained here unruffled? His object in staying could not be to enhance his
private property, for it could not be profitable for him to stay when most or
all of his profitable patients had gone. No, his object in staying was the
general good -- to mark the steps of the disorder, and the sensible effects of
the remedies which he applied, and to lay before the public a series of facts
and observations which might in future, either keep the pestilence out of our
land, or if invaded again, restrain its progress. -- Yes, at this important
moment, in the execution of a great service; when every citizen of Philadelphia
ought to have acknowledged their obligations to the man who would brave Death
for the general good -- instead of public thanks, the great points for which he
was contending, and the great labors he was executing, were attacked in a
public newspaper with the most degrading ridicule, scurrility and vulgar jest.
Yes, the defendant then infamously attacked his professional skill, in order to
bring the man into derision, and depress his name as one of the most dangerous
of the human race. -- Gentlemen, what does such a man deserve; a man who does
not claim the honor of a single stick among us; a man who has taken the
presumption of degrading the most respectable characters of our country, from
the President of the United States to the lowest citizen, whenever their
sentiments have happened to come in contact with his. In the course of this
cause, he has sworn himself an Alien, and in another cause he has declared his
intention of returning to his own country. Yet this man who professedly
declares himself of no country, pretended to wish Dr. Rush had stuck to his
medical profession, and have let alone politics! This man could not be supposed
to be interested in the politics of our country; he no doubt would have taken
the part of his own country, when in collusion with this, for he glories that
he is not the citizen of a republic. And shall he be permitted to revile a
respectable citizen of this country for doing that, which, if he had not done
he would have merited censure, or at least not merited that good name now so
justly given him. Dr. Rush had uttered some sentiments which were "too
republican" for Mr. Cobbett. This furnished a clue to the subsequent attack
which he made, not with a view to correct the medical practice; not to prevent
the introduction, or stop the ravages of a dreadful disease -- no, he stopped,
as far as he was able, any examination into the truth; as much as he possibly
could, he weakened the force of the mind engaged in those useful researches by
clamor and abuse, and the ground was, because he was a republican! What could
he mean by this declaration, that he would attack him for it? The result will
answer. While his republican opinions gave the offense, why did he not attempt
to show that those opinions were founded upon wrong ideas of government? But
not one word was ever seen upon that head. No, his attack was designed to be on
a part more useful to his vicious designs, and more injurious to the man -- on
his reputable name as a Physician. This will account clearly for the distance
of time between the threat and its accomplishment. In January 1797 he
threatens, and keeping in his mind the offense, he began not to put it in
execution until September following. The arrow which, was stuck in his side, he
did not attempt to draw out at the moment of resentment, but there remaining it
grew stronger as it grew older -- it must remain until a fit period for making
it felt. None so fit as when his practice of Physic was at its height, and the
mind of his patients the most weak and susceptible. -- Men differ much in
opinions; to attack him therefore upon the republican principles, he had laid
down would not do; that was an injury not sufficiently extensive, he would not
attack him there; he would wound him to effect. Accordingly at the moment of
trepidation and confidence he cries out "Dr. Rush has been the death of
thousands." Thus he produced by skill, what argument would never have effected.

It is said Cobbett has the same right to offer his opinions, and to the
liberty of the press which others enjoy, and to examine public questions, etc.
for which the constitution is appealed to; but permit me to state to you the
principle that though a right to examine into the conduct of public officers
and discussing public questions is there given, a right of responsibility for
that examination is likewise given, in case of the abuse of that liberty. Admit
that he has the right, (though in another case it has been declared that aliens
have not similar rights with citizens) there is still much reason for jealousy,
because, as he has not the same interest at heart with citizens, not expecting
to spend his days here, his discussions of public questions should be carefully
looked to. Indeed I think the "cloven foot" is plainly observable in his
writings. There is a something appears at the bottom, though it might not
comport with his interests to avow it. Suppose this man was investigating a
system, or searching after truth, which he had a right to do, are these
researches to be made with vulgarity, defamation, and scurrility? Is this the
way to come at truth? Are not justifiable researches made by others, and with
success, without it? Surely you must all think this the most likely way to
defeat his pretended object. The true mode, if I wish to convince of an
opinion, is to reason with the understanding, and not traduce the character,
and opinions of my pupil or opponent. What would the American people be thought
of, if they could not be convinced without low abuse? And what our Courts of
Justice, if this slanderous usage was to be permitted with impunity?

The press is of incalculable benefit; it is the great road to information. The
nature of man is formed to aspire after truth, but it cannot be expected by
initiation, it must come into the minds of men by a series of steps, one
leading to another: the press is a very important help to this progress,
because by it we discover in one part of the world what has transpired at the
most distant part from it. Thus improvements in arts and science are made. It
is for its inestimable general use we value it. Do we value it because it
furnishes any man, who is able to purchase a set of types, and paper, with
means to blacken another man's character, so that old age, virtue nor chastity
cannot throw a shield round the victim of his envy? -- It is necessary to
encourage the press, but shall it be done at the hazard of character -- of all
that is dear to man, his very means of subsistence? If so, instead of
increasing our knowledge and happiness, it would operate as the greatest curse
upon frail humanity: There is no principle in government, in Philosophy, or in
religion, that is so sacred but the fangs of envy might successfully attack
through the licentious use of the press. But if the aim of an individual is to
improve the sciences, or the happiness of man in any way, whatever be his mode,
he ought to be protected and encouraged. If his reasoning is fair and candid;
if his arguments are addressed to the understanding; if he shows a design of
increasing the mass of knowledge among mankind, -- to him the press ought to be
free. It is by this means man is wrested from ignorance, and made as near to
angelic as his nature will admit. If the defendant had taken these means to
obtain his object -- to destroy what be thought a ruinous system, as is
pretended, far would it have been from the plaintiff even to have blamed him,
much less commenced a suit against him. The opinions of Dr. Rush were
circulated from an idea that they were just; he submitted them to public search
and enquiry. How were they to be answered? who were the people to be convinced
of their propriety or impropriety? Do the mass of the people know how to form a
just judgment on it? As for myself, my education, habit of life, nor leisure
has enabled me to form any judgment upon it; and I presume few of you are able
to say whether the system of Dr. Rush is false or true. At the period alluded
to, Philadelphia was in a distressed state, and owing to the prevalence of the
same disease in several parts of the union, commerce and wealth have been
considerably impaired. Did this man endeavor to lessen that affliction? were
his efforts directed to promote public happiness, or to satisfy personal
animosity? Gentlemen, you must determine these points. Did he accompany his
arguments with a single scientific remark, or give a single argument as to the
origin or necessary treatment of the disease, as though he wished to alleviate
the prevailing distress? Every thing proves that he wished not to improve the
system, and why should be? he had no incitements; he declared his design not to
spend his life amongst us, and of course had no common interest with us. To him
it was not an object whether Philadelphia was desolated or not. Perhaps,
indeed, the reduction of trade here would give him pleasure: the diminution of
the growing wealth of the principal cities of the United States, might afford
him gratification, since his own country must otherwise receive impressions
from our prosperity. No, it is evident he did not wish to develope error, to
convince men, or increase public happiness, or he would have used arguments to
show the fallacy of the practice established. But he knew not, nor cared any
thing about it.

I shall now proceed to prove, by the most irrefragible evidence, the previous,
concomitant, and subsequent malice of William Cobbett, from the testimony you
have heard.

There was a previous intention of attack. Before the writings issued, the
design was formed. Whenever an act shall appear, that corresponds with a
previous declaration, we may justly conclude a coincidence therefrom. Thus,
should a man say, "I will raise such an army, and oppose such a law:" if in
nine months after, such things are done, the circumstances are blended
together, and it is supposed to be treason. As we observed before, the
circumstances of January and September, '97 are coupled so as to be impossible
to part them. He then really fulfilled his promise, endeavoring to make Dr.
Rush appear as odious as possible. I can see no excuse for such epithets under
the name of ridicule, but I will say, any writing that tends to set a man in a
ridiculous light is a libel. The words used to ridicule the plaintiff, might
excite a laugh, but that is not all it ought to excite, as the honorable
Gentleman supposes, who spoke just now. Shall the attick salt, the elegance of
language, or the keenness of a satire, excuse a man's abuse? Of what comfort
would you think it to be cut with a sharp knife, and should the offender be
excused, because the weapon was keen? Shall a man dare to bring the President
of the United States, or the Congress into contempt, and he be excused under
the name of ridicule and ribaldry? No, the laws of the United States, and of
the States, provide that notwithstanding the keenness of the expressions, a
libel shall be punished. It is not justifiable merely because it is calculated
to excite a laugh. Does not the defendant represent the plaintiff in an odious
point of view, and ascribe to him the murder of his fellow creatures, by the
use of bleeding and mercury? Can there be a more severe attack upon a medical
man, or upon his art than this? What kind of man must he be, who follows a
particular system with callous heart and murderous hands, when he sees direful
effects attending that system? Who would follow such a system of slaughter as
this is represented, but the most abandoned and unfeeling wretch; and who would
employ the man that should so embrue his hands in blood? -- This "potent
quack;" this "murderer;" this unfeeling empyric, rejoices at the murder of his
fellow-citizens, and has no other way of getting over his misanthrophy, than by
eulogizing himself, or getting some weak men of his own profession to eulogize
him! -- Gentlemen, I ask if this does not set the plaintiff in a ridiculous
point of view, -- a fit object for the detestation of the world?

With respect to Spilsbury's antiscorbutic bill, it is an exemplary specimen of
quackism -- an universal nostrum worthy universal contempt. "There master
Sangrado, beat that if you can." Meaning, by writing letters, and getting
eulogistic answers purposely to puff yourself. In my opinion these words, and
the words "a puff equal to Dr. Rush's" means no more nor less than that Dr.
Rush has equalled it, and therefore is an empyric. On the second of October Dr.
Cox called on Cobbett, when he advised him to withold his publications, as he
could not calculate on the injury they did. Notwithstanding this evidence of
their ill effects he went on publishing on the 5th, 6th and 20th of October,
increasing the aggravation of his crime. He said if any other man than Dr. Rush
had done it, he should not have so gone on. Was it that he thought Dr. Rush
high in his profession, and therefore the most proper object whereby to attack
the system? No, I think it quite otherwise. Could any man hear the gentleman
who spoke last, complimenting Dr. Rush on this pre-eminent station to which Mr.
Cobbett had exalted him, without laughing? Can any man think him sincere? I
agree it was all the honorable gentleman could say, because a case like this
must necessarily put ingenuity to its last shift, and leave genius without even
a plausible resource. No, we know better. He had called the Doctor "Sangrado"
"potent quack, etc:" he has aspersed him with "killing his tens of thousand by
his preposterous practice" and can it be supposed, after all this, that his
writings were directed against the Doctor for his eminent skill, and that it
was honorable to him? No, we can trace it but to one cause -- private, personal
malice, without the least regard to public duty, or public good. He declared he
would attack, but little did he expect that this avowal would ever come against
him.

"Let him withdraw his action, or I will persecute him while living, and his
memory after he is dead."

What an heart has this man? My colleague has been blamed for keen expressions,
and violence of attack. But what is violence? Gentlemen of the Jury, I wish you
to remember that what is violence without evidence, is truth with evidence. To
call murder only assault and battery would be a perversion of terms. To call
malice, "fun" is as much so. To say that the defendant had malice at heart when
he used these words, I therefore contend is evident without a doubt. Perhaps he
used this violence for another purpose. I could name a person who fell a victim
to the malice indefatigably thrown at him through this very news paper. A man
that should use such threats, could not be supposed to use his weapons but to
the most base intentions. And shall a man of this base disposition teach
Americans politics? Shall this man deal about the Theorems and Aphorisms of the
medical art, and examine systems of practice which he does not even pretend to
understand? Can there be any case of malice more express than these words
convey, or a better key found whereby to explain his writings? If express
declarations are ever admitted as proofs of the meaning of writings, (and
certainly they are) there can be no doubt, here, of the existence of the overt
act in six or even eight instances: if it was possible to give a more bright
coloring to the transaction, it was done by the subsequent publications in
which the respect which every man owes to the Law, is highly violated.

We live in a land where the public transactions, and the officers of
government are to be regulated by written rules; these are well known; these
rules give to the people their duty of obedience to the Laws, and submission to
the higher authorities; it limits to every man in society, how far he can go;
it punishes transgression in the one class, and violation in the other. If any
individual, therefore, shall dare transgress these laws, he subjects himself to
the punishment they inflict. Therefore if any action is brought against a man,
he is not thereby to be irritated! Upon the doctrine advanced by the honorable
gentleman, as imprisonment would undoubtedly irritate any man, he would have a
right to break prison, and murder any persons who should stand in his way. An
action would be a great irritation if justice was less certain than we happily
enjoy. Well, instead of submission to the operation of the law, what does he
do? He continues to issue out from his press, new libels, calculated to
increase his crime. The suit was commenced in the beginning of October 1797,
the whole of the publications of the 5th, 7th and 20th of October were
subsequent to the commencement of the suit. Can there be a doubt, then, that
the true cause of Mr. Cobbett's publications against Dr. Rush, originated, not
with a view to improve the medical practices, but to disgrace and villify the
individual? Was Cobbett capable of judging of, or is he acquainted with the
structure of the system, or its relative parts? Can he point out how the
different treatments operate on that or any other disease? Can he show how a
certain mode of administration would relieve one, while it would destroy
another? Was he skilled in the science of anatomy or medicine? He does not
pretend to be; Nay, he declared that he had no knowledge of it at all! He
plainly confessed that his essays were not to inform the public mind, but to
ridicule a certain system, for he supposed nobody would take notice of his
writings. Gentlemen, his hardihood has left every act and declaration upon
which he is called to answer, or which proves the charge, without a single
equivoke on which the mind of any man can hesitate.

We do not contend that Dr. Rush has established the true mode of practice: he
thinks so, and has given to the world his reasons for thinking so. But the case
does not rest upon that point, it is all one to you whether his practice is
right or wrong. Did Cobbett say that he knew a better mode? No. He endeavored
to rise a public laugh upon Dr. Rush, and put him forth in a most degrading
point of view, at a moment when drooping humanity found no longer a basis in
its own surface; when the state of the city was enough to appal the stoutest
heart; when the confidence of men in general was placed on the advice of this
man; -- at that moment his reputation is pulled down; his mode of treatment,
almost the only one then practiced, is destroyed, and no effort is made to put
another in its place! Dr. Rush does not pretend to say he is right; he thinks
so: But the superior genius of Cobbett does presume to declare that he is
wrong, and that he has killed his tens of thousands, though at the same time he
declares he does not know whether the mode is right or wrong. The true system
is not discovered perhaps, nor ever might be: it might be like the dreadful
earthquake that desolates the world, no means ever found to arrest its awful
progress. It lies behind a veil through which the human sight cannot, and never
might penetrate. But our duty and our interest requires that, though we may
never find the cause and cure, we should be indefatigable in our endeavors to
do it: perhaps we may only find the mode of avoiding, by keeping out of its
way. But is it probable we shall ever be able to discover any means of
prevention or cure, if the man who stays making those researches in times of
imminent danger, in addition to the natural alarm distracting his mind, which
mind at that moment ought to be the most strong and penetrating, to spread all
its sails and catch every, even the most minute idea -- How, I say can we
expect the fever to be subdued, or kept away from our doors, if an individual
shall be suffered to vend his malice on such a man at a period so momentous?
Suffer that with impunity, and no efforts will ever in future be made to appal
this foul destroyer, no man will fortify himself for the illiberal attack.
Gentlemen, consider this in a public, or in a private point of view, can there
ever be an instance in which a plaintiff can come before you more entitled to
your just verdict, or a defendant with less claim to your verdict? Can a case
occur in which there is less to plead even for extenuation or excuse or the
crime? Gentlemen, reputation is sacred: an injury done to honor can scarcely be
redressed. How can youth acquire prosperity or affluence, or age
respectability, if that character, which is the foundation of success in every
profession, may be attacked with impunity? If upon property there is
protection, but there is no protection for character, justice is but partially
administered, and it is time now, if for the first time, for an American court
of justice to show the world that character is property, and a property most
sacred. But I hope our courts of justice have proved this whenever called upon
so to do. Who can say when a man is attacked in his reputation how numerous the
chinks through which he may sustain injury? When this shaft is directed by
malice and ridicule, how are we to depreciate the value of the injury done? How
much might it not prevent a young man progressing in business? And does the
attack upon age lessen the crime: a time when the experience is matured, and
studied labors become eminently useful? Who knows but this scandal might have
prevented thousands from applying to Dr. Rush for advice? We see the defendant
stand upon the high ground of boasting of his income, from the number of
persons who bought and read his papers: we may thence conclude that this
slander extended very wide, and therefore to attempt at forming an estimate of
special damages, would be fruitless. To prove this negative, would be
impossible* and therefore cannot be expected from us, for who would come to Dr.
Rush and say, "I should have employed you, had not I read such a character of
you; you have murdered thousands, and therefore I could not trust my life with
you." To estimate damages must be your province agreeable to circumstances.

Gentlemen, the question of damages often came before the courts in England, of
which we have some some accounts in the books, and they are not always guided
by pecuniary circumstances, but more to enforce the law, and show example. The
law has there estimated the fine for seducing a man's wife at ten thousand
pounds sterling. Here is no pecuniary injury sustained, but a very heavy fine
laid; for often it may happen that a man has a bad wife, and her loss is a real
profit to him, but this is not the measure of the fine. Though less than that
sum is usually laid, yet it is always exemplary. We find other cases mentioned
in the books. 2 Wilson, 206. A journey man printer, in the office of the North
Briton, was seized for publishing No. 45 of that paper. He was seized by an
order of the secretary of state, and detained but six hours in custody, and
during that time treated with beef stakes and beer. On examining this in a
court, to which it was referred, the jury gave 300l. sterling damages. The fact
was, not the pecuniary injury sustained by the man was considered, but the
political consequences -- the liberty of the subject, and therefore the award
received the approbation of the court. In 244 same book, 1000l. was awarded for
a false imprisonment of six days; also p 252 there is a case of assault and
battery. In all these, the consequences were considered. 3 Blackstone 126,
notes there was 4000l. damages laid for a reflection on the chastity of a lady.
These, gentlemen, are instances of exemplary damages, and that is what we ask
for in the present case, your verdict. Doctor Rush has a wife and children
arrived to ages capable of reading newspapers. Can any man set by with
patience, when he sees his children crying, or his wife in tears in consequence
of the perpetual newspaper abuse lavished upon a tender husband and a loving
father? -- abuse and reproach the most heart-rending -- no less than a murderer
and a quack. Suppose yourselves for a moment in his situation, and say whether
the measure of this newspaper libelling ought to be confined merely to the
damages any individual could sustain from it, or whether it ought not to be
made a public example of, on account of the principle. It is high time to
rescue the American character from the indifference which has too long
prevailed amongst us, while we see the characters of our unoffending
fellow-citizens consigned to infamy. If it has hitherto been too much
disregarded, let not this be so, for surely it is time to punish crimes so
daring. This man has declared, that he would "persecute the defendant while
living, and his memory after his death." How can you check this vindictive
spirit, but by timely and exemplary punishment? Let him be taught that he has
wantonly attacked, and that with cool deliberate malice, an unoffending
individual, and though he has removed himself out of the jurisdiction of this
court, yet that he is a marked man, and that a respectable jury of Philadelphia
have studied only principles of truth and justice with impartiality. Let others
be taught by his punishment to avoid his offense.

On the other hand, let not Dr. Rush be a marked man for defamation, and his
name be remembered with scorn. Let it not be said to him "your character is so
infamous that no slander can defame it." Nor let it be said that the immaculacy
of character, against which he drew his shaft, was such as to excuse or protect
the insolent offender from damages. If Cobbett has never injured the character
of Dr. Rush, it is evident he has attempted to do it, and with his utmost
efforts -- but I think he has injured it. He certainly has wounded his
feelings; he has hurt his health, and he has wounded him in his family. There
cannot be a doubt but he has wounded his fame and reputation, and of course his
pecuniary interest. As I think you must be of the same opinion with me in these
particulars, I shall content myself with confiding this case to you, and as I
am sure nothing in the conduct of Dr. Rush has merited such infamous treatment,
so sure am I you will do him satisfactory justice.

MR. TILGHMAN
READ a letter written by Dr. Rush to Dr. John Rogers, from the Philadelphia
Gazette of October 3, 1793, in which he describes the symptoms of the yellow
fever then prevalent, and also the method he conceived the most proper to cure
it.

He also read extracts from two pamphlets lately published, containing
observations on the origin, etc. of the malignant billious or yellow fever.

MR. LEWIS read extracts from Porcupine's paper of October 19, and 21, 1797,
wherein are extracts from Gil Blas, where a conversation occurs between Gil
Blas and Sangrado. The latter extract is headed thus: "To Doctors Rush and
Caldwell."

MR. TILGHMAN then addressed the jury as follows:

Gentlemen of the Jury,
I AGREE most heartily with the council for the plaintiff that if you came into
the bar, previous to being sworn with any prejudice whatever, you ought to lay
it perfectly aside, and consider the cause, which you are called to try, fairly
between man and man: you should come with minds, in the language of the law
"like blank paper," and receive such impressions only as law and evidence must
make.

William Cobbett, my client, though an alien, is entitled all the advantages
which law and justice can bestow; and if he can satisfy you that damages ought
not to be recovered from an American standing in his place, no damages are to
be given against him. -- The plaintiff demands damages of my client for certain
publications written by him, said to be libellous, on his professional
reputation and character, to support which much has been said, but what
deserves particular notice is, that the plaintiff's council are tremblingly
alive as to the character of Dr. Rush, while Mr. Cobbett is treated in terms
utterly destructive of all character and reputation.

This was not what I expected in any case whatever, and especially from the
gentlemen whence it came, whom I much respect. Gentlemen, you are not to pay
regard to the contemptuous light in which the defendant is held by the
plaintiff's council: you are not to measure your verdict by their resentment.
One gentleman in order to show the contemptuous light in which he holds
Cobbett's opinion, has said he must extend his duty beyond the ordinary limits.
There can be no doubt but his zeal for his client induced him to go an
extravagant length, or he would not have styled the defendant an assassin
(which he has twice done) and a noxious animal thrown up from the very dregs
and slime of obscurity, a being which has no equal in society, taking his
tigers strides to do mischief, and guilty of every species of editorial
pollution. Farther he condemns him for his litigious disposition. Where, I ask
is the evidence of this disposition? It is not before the court, nor has it
appeared in his conduct, for he has not appealed to the law to redress his
wrongs, but has used another weapon, his pen. So far has my friend's zeal
carried him, that he declared he could name an individual who was brought to
the grave by this man's publications. These are vague and unproved assertions:
words which have no tendency but to inflame your minds, but I can only impute
it to a zeal, the improprieties of which they know as well as I am able to
inform them. May we not suppose, after all this that Mr. Cobbett is a man more
sinned against, than sinning? For while abuse and detestation is his lot, Dr.
Rush is daubed with praises so lavishly that he must almost have blushed to
hear them. He was compared to Hypocrates, at Athens, having done so much as to
be entitled to public thanks, and yet the public are much divided as to the
efficacy of his means of treatment, but more particularly so as to his opinion
of the origin of that fatal disease.

Further. The defendant is said to be an alien, and to owe no allegiance to our
government, and that his discussions of public questions show the cloven-foot.
-- With respect to country, it is a principle that every alien who comes here,
does owe allegiance -- a temporary allegiance. So long as he stays to receive
the benefit of our laws, so long he is answerable to them, and is bound to
respect them. I am far from contending that the defendant is immaculate or
infallible, yet I must say that he is not without some merit. He certainly did,
(whatever his motive, whatever cloven-foot he might have had concealed) at a
critical period, give a very seasonable and proper alarm to this country; an
alarm which did much toward uniting our citizens in an attachment to preserve
the honor of our country, and which tended much to rescue us from European
influences and attachment. As he began, so he persevered, and we are not
without experiencing its good effects. Twice were bills of indictments sent to
grand juries, who proved his innocence of the charges exhibited against him by
his opponents, by returning both of them ignoramus. However, all this is
foreign to the question at present, but the plaintiff's council having departed
to derogate, we may be allowed to extenuate.

I agree with Mr. Levy in his statement of the law; he certainly has stated it
with precision and accuracy, and I must do honor to his talents and candor. It
formerly became my duty to state to this court, that every writing is on the
face of it independent of collateral matter (which does not appear upon the
face) either criminal or innocent.

First, If it appears on the face of it to be innocent, or not libellous, still
it becomes criminal and libellous, if written with a particular intent of a
criminal nature -- then such intent must be proved.

Secondly. If it appears, from the face of it to be criminal or libellous,
there may, from the occasion, be justification or excuse.

In each case, the criminality or innocence depends on collateral matter, not
appearing on the face of the paper.

Lawful excuse is justifiable either in legal proceedings; -- Representations
of an injury, etc. even when the publication is in a newspaper: From a sense of
duty, and not with a malicious intent: -- Or in confidence, or with a view to
reform and amend.

Generally. Publications must include MALICE or a CRIMINAL INTENT either
express or implied.

I agree that if the jury should find the words themselves to be libellous,
then the plaintiff can recover damages, to prevent which, it would be his duty
to show that the intention was innocent.

A case to exemplify these doctrines, is found in a Burrows, 807. "This was an
action upon the case for speaking and publishing defamatory, false, malicious
and libellous words, of and concerning the plaintiff, Sir John Astley."

The defendant applied to the plaintiff (a justice of the peace) for a tavern
license, and was refused: on which account, words were used by the defendant,
which were supposed libellous.

Lord Mansfield in the case spoke thus, page 810:

"The charge against the defendant is made upon oath, and supported by the
affidavit of Sir John Astley, and of the defendant in answer to his complaint:
he mentioned the charge, and denies it with this conclusion, calling it "what
Sir J. A. has so FALSELY sworn against him."

"Now in every dispute in a court of justice upon oath, where one by affidavit
charges a thing, and the other by affidavit denies it, the case is, ordinarily,
much the same (in effect) with the present, and each party might bring a civil
action against the other; for it TOO often happens that the affidavit and
evidence are in terms DIRECTLY OPPOSITE each other.

"As to the reason of the thing, there can be no SCANDAL if the allegation is
material, and if it is not, the court before whom the indignity is immaterial
scandal, may order satisfaction, and expunge it out of the record, if it be
upon the record."

Thus we see that thought the defendant was charged with swearing that Sir John
Astley had "forsworn himself, and be (the defendant) would not do it for his
whole estate," yet, although the expression "falsely" was rather too rough, it
was not taken notice of.

I must agree with the gentlemen, that had I been engaged in opposing Dr.
Rush's opinions, I should have deemed it very improper to have used such coarse
expressions. This brings me to a more close and immediate view of the subject.

The fever of 1793 you well remember. Dr. Rush staid in the city, no doubt,
from a sense of duty: no doubt this operated strongly with him, but it cannot
be supposed that he had no sense of the profit: he expected to be paid for his
labor, but notwithstanding that, his exertions did him very great honor. I do
not pretend to justify such as attack on the system he practiced, but I do not
think that condemning the system was libellous. I am sure that when he came to
take even 70 or 80 ounces of blood he was under the most perfect conviction
that it was necessary to save the life of his patient, and that in all his
practice he was actuated by the most honest motives. But the most sensible,
ingenuous and ardent man; the most indefatigable in his exertions, is most
strongly impressed with new systems and ideas, when they come plausibly
supported. Inquisitive minds, like that of Dr. Rush, are not of a cast to
^oggle at adopting strong measures, especially when convinced of their utility.
To us it was new: the use of mercurial purges and bleeding, to so vast an
amount, was entirely unheard of by us, and therefore it was no wonder that the
practice should spread an alarm of nearly as serious a nature as the fever
itself.

Doctor Rush was so confident of the success of his system, that in a letter
addressed to his fellow-citizens on the 12th of September, 1793, he assures
them there is no more danger from it, when these remedies have been used in the
early stage, than there is from the measles or influenza. But with all his
success, and though he stood foremost, and nearly alone, as his counsel say,
there was a destruction in that year of nearly 5000 persons. Notwithstanding so
many perished, though he stood almost alone, and notwithstanding the novelty of
the remedies, and the great applications of bleeding and mercury, the public
mind was extremely agitated and divided as to the efficacy of them. What was
still more extraordinary, there is no man whose persuasive softness and
tenderness of manners is more likely to attract the confidence and acquiescence
of either pupils or patients than those of Doctor Rush. But stories of bleeding
and purging were much exaggerated in the relation, so as to harrass the public
mind extremely. Indeed the physicians themselves were much divided, and even
parties were formed to support the different systems. The event of this was a
creation of animosity and newspaper contention. Of course this increased the
public alarm, and dreadful was our situation. One set of Doctors contended this
was the true mode, and the other another. In this state of uncertainty and
indecision things remained until the fever again unhappily broke out in 1797,
and with it the Doctors' quarrels, on account of which numerous publications
issue forth. Nor even were the respectable learned institutions exempt: the
College of Physicians and the Medical Academy. I believe the difference between
those bodies still exist. The difference was explained to exist at present only
as to the origin, whether by importation or of domestic source. With respect to
treatment they now both agree with the system of Dr. Rush.
Doctor Rush staid again, and much to his honor. It is said that the great
point for which he staid was frustrated.

Gentlemen I ask by whom it was frustrated? Can it be believed that it was
frustrated by Cobbett? Whose opposition to Dr. Rush was most serious, that of
Cobbett, or that of the Doctors? As you are not sure it was by Cobbett, but
must have good ground for believing the other more potent, there can be no
doubt where his disappointment originated. Or, I would ask, was it frustrated
at all? No doubt the Doctor did much good by staying, and as the dispute was so
undecided, I do not believe that any person would be prevented from applying to
Doctor Rush for assistance on account of Cobbett's publications.

In September 1797, out comes Cobbett's first publication. I do not mean to
vindicate the manner of the attack, but my client has been charged with calling
the defendant a murderer. Now, Gentlemen, I appeal to your consciences, can any
man who reads the publication look upon it as any thing like a serious charge
against Dr. Rush as a murderer? I am very sure that you will all allow with me
that he meant no more than a ludicrous attack upon the system of which he
certainly was the head.

What is murder? It is to kill a man by malice prepense. It cannot be supposed
that the defendant had an idea of so serious a charge. There were numerous
skirmishes among the Doctors, and he skirmished among the rest with the only
weapon he possessed: Ridicule. In this sense "ridicule is surely the test of
truth," however the ingenuous gentleman may have used it. I ask, then, did this
proceed from cool deliberate malice, or was it ridiculing a system which he
supposed to be ill founded? If he had meant that Doctor Rush went on
murderously rejoicing at the direful effects of his system, it surely would
have been a libel of the most egregrious nature, but the idea cannot be proved,
even by the greatest ingenuity. That William Cobbet had a right to attack that
system or any other we contend is indubitable, however small the stake he had
among us, or however short his intended stay, if he used no improper words in
making that attack. I allow, with Mr. Levy, that it is incumbent on the
Defendant, when brought into the court, to prove that he did not use the words
with an evil intention; with respect to this, we contend that if he exercised
his abilities with a view to the public safety, he exercised them not only
innocently but laudably. I submit to you that the publications include no
design to render Dr. Rush, in his person odious, or to injure him in his
business. However free he has been in his attack upon Dr. Tilton, or any other
person, he has here only attacked mercury and blood letting. If he ever
disapproved of the private character of the defendant, he has not exemplified
it: the physicians were the main battle, and great was the shock, but Cobbett
was a mere skirmisher, on the practice and not on the man.

I speak in reference to the publications mentioned in the declaration, for
though the plaintiff's council have a right to read any other publications, it
is only to show the quo animo, or design with which the others were written.

But the malice of this man is said to be deep, antecedent, concomitant and
subsequent. -- All this I deny. The testimony of Dr. Dewees is called to prove
that it was antecedent -- Sometime in 1796, Doctor Rush delivered, on occasion
of the departure of Dr. Rittenhouse from this life, an elegant eulogium -- too
elegant to be forgotten.

However, there was some little of that sort of spice in it which was not
pleasing to Mr. Peter Porcupine. It was too republican for his taste. I do not
know what Dr. Rush's political sentiments are, but if they are of one sort, I
should dislike them as much as Cobbett. If of another sort, I should approve of
it, and perhaps not think it too republican. But that is to be no measure for
him; he had a right to attack them. In a conversation about the merits of that
eulogium, he says "Damn him, I will attack him for it." This, to be sure is
very illiberal, but he did not say in what way he would attack him, on that he
meant more than to attack him as a political man. There is no evidence of any
private malice that Peter had in his heart, nor can it be contended that this
eulogium was the ground of his attacks, mentioned in the declaration, for had
it been so it would not have rested so long in silence as from January 'till
September. No, from the representation of gentlemen themselves, he was of too
combustible a matter to keep it so long. If it made any impression at all, it
was not solid, for if it had, I think it would have been out of the power of
bleeding and drastic purges to do it away. He was angry, and expressed his
anger in a very coarse way. Well. -- In September came the attack. Is into the
man or the system? It has appeared that Dr. Dewees practiced upon the system of
Dr. Rush, and yet he attended Cobbett's family. This is brought to prove the
man, and not the system was the object of attack! I ask whether, if there had
come an alarm of the fever during Dr. Dewees's attendance upon Mr. Cobbett's
family, he would have been suffered to use Dr. Rush's system? If that had been
done, then indeed there would have been reason to conclude the man was
attacked. I cannot but consider this circumstance respecting the Eulogium to be
an attempt to draw the attention of the Jury from the real merits of the case,
tending to establish a belief that there was deep settled malice, which he kept
in his breast during that period, growing deeper and stronger in proportion to
the time it existed in the mind, and therefore, gentlemen, you are earnestly
instructed to give verdict for the plaintiff. On the same account also, the
question is asked why Cobbett should wish a reform in medicine? and it has even
been hinted that he might wish to leave the disease without a cure, and might
not be displeased with the misfortunes of Philadelphia, because it would
diminish the commerce, and probably serve his own country. This surely is too
much to say of any man, but though serious, I have no doubt you will put the
whole of these insinuations upon a candid footing, and decide only upon facts.
As to his wishing to leave the disease without a cure, it is absurd, for he
stayed in Philadelphia during the fever of '97, in which situation, he
subjected himself to be the first victim of his ownenvy! This is what I think
you will scarcely believe.

In the evidence of Dr. Mease it appears that Cobbett made use of a very
intemperate expression, but having been sued, he might be idle enough, knowing
himself to be master of a very bitter weapon the pen -- he might think he could
thereby induce Doctor Rush to withdraw his action. If so, he was guilty of a
very great misconclusion. He was very wrong, but I rather think it must have
been the effect of haste, without any evil intention. Gentlemen, upon your
oath, try if you can couple these words with those spoken to Doctor Dewees! I
think you cannot.

As to the words to Mr. Cox, I am of the same opinion with Mr. Harper: that he
would "not have written against the system, if Dr. Rush had not been the author
of it." It was paying a very great compliment to Doctor Rush. This appears to
have taken place about the time the suit was commenced, and to have been
pressed upon him by Doctor Cox. Doctor Cox himself seems to believe it to be an
attack upon the system. His view was no doubt to preserve the life, and health
of his fellow creatures, many of whom, in his opinion, suffered from this mode
treatment, and therefore he did his utmost to point out the danger.

Upon this part I shall not remain longer, since I think neither "keen,
private, nor personal malice," as has been pretended, can be proved. Gentlemen
view the whole together as Mr. Levy said, and if you see all this "fixed, keen,
private, personal malice" against Doctor Rush, then you must give verdict for,
the plaintiff. But I consider that the great alarm which existed in the public
mind at that time, many deeming the practice in question to be no less than
poison, and death -- If such was the alarm, and such the apprehension, for
which I appeal to your recollections -- then, I say it was not improper to
point the shaft of ridicule against the system so replete with danger.

But, Gentlemen, suppose you should be of opinion that the Plantiff has been
injured by those publications, and damages ought to be awarded, the next
question that occurs to you is what ought those damages to be? It has been a
question asked by the plantiff's counsel "Who knows how many have been
prevented from applying to Dr. Rush"? How a negative can be proved I cannot
conceive; neither he nor I can tell who has been prevented; that is entirely in
the dark. Doctor Rush's Counsel, when they drew up the declaration drew it upon
special damages. Near the conclusion of the declaration are these words! (The
said Benjamin") is also thereby greatly prejudiced in his business practice and
profession of Physician, and practitioner as aforesaid, many persons have been
induced to withdraw their confidence from the said Benjamin, as Physician,
aforesaid, and the following persons, who were previously accustomed to employ
the said Banjamin a Physician as aforesaid to wit:

"The mountains are in labor, and a rediculous mouse creeps forth"!!

Where, then, are the instances in which Doctor Rush has received damages?
Wherein is he injured? -- all the industry of those Gentlemen could not find
out special damages, or a customer withdrawn. It appears that such was Dr.
Rush's reputation, that he is not injured. You know what this reputation and
character is at present. I do not mean by this that, if you discover the
expressions to have proceeded from malice you are to give any damages; but you
must be guided by the injury sustained in a great manner. Has not Doctor Rush
from 1793 to 1797 and from 1797 to 1799 been in as great business as he could
do?

Plaintiff's Counsel. -- We say No. -- We can prove from his books that his
business has materially lessened since this newspaper attack commenced on him.

Mr. TIGHLMAN. -- It is said that Mr. Cobbett violated the law by subsequent
publications. I grant that, from the moment the suit was commenced he has done
wrong in doing or saying any thing until the trial. So far he was liable to
punishment, but not in this way, nor at this time. He was liable for contempt
of Court, and if Dr. Rush had complained, he could have been committed for that
contempt. The moment a suit takes place the law says the parties ought both to
be silent, because every thing ought to come before a Jury, who shall not have
their passions raised, or be prepossessed in favor of either party. Therefore,
this does not prove that he shall recover aggravated damages.

One of the Counsel has supposed libels to be the sources of numerous evils,
and laid down the position that to secure good government you must punish
libels severely; thus severe punishment would be the best criterion of a good
government? I trust this will never be a law principle; that no person will
ever be punished, not even an alien, to prove how good the government is. How
fatal would be the administration of Justice if this was law! To what severe
ties would it not lead!

It has been said, that you are the uncontrolled Judges of damages. In matters
of debt or property, there can be no difficulty as to the estimate of damages
proper, and then the Court will not suffer what is easily perceivable to be an
extreme award. But, in civil suits, as in an action for Slander, when damages
are uncertain, and difficult, the ascertainment of those damages are more
peculiarly the province of the Jury, though in that they are not perfectly
uncontrolled; but the Court will not grant a new trial, unless the damages
given are "outrageous;" unless, "at the first blush, all mankind would revolt
against it." Farther, they are not uncontrolled, because they are to consider
the Plaintiff's suffering, and the Defendant's ability to pay. Would you give
against William Cobbett the same damages as against a man with an hundred times
the property? Surely not. You must consider the circumstances of the man. There
has been no evidence adduced in respect to the circumstances of the defendant,
but it is a rule in Courts to fine the party not to his ruin.

The Counsel has told you, that if a Physician's character is suspected, it is
ruined. Then may I say that Dr. Rush's is not only not ruined, but in as high
credit and reputation as can attend a physician, and therefore not even
suspected, and if not suspected, he is not injured.

It has been said, that if damages were not given sufficiently high, persons
would take the law into their own hands, and the Jury must take the
consequences, therefore you must give high damages to avoid being implicated
yourselves! Gentlemen, pay regard only to justice, and leave the consequences;
measure the degree of injury received on the one hand, and the ability to pay
on the other, and thus estimate your damages. Remember, that although the
doctor may have a right to damages, his reputation will not in the least be
affected by your not giving him large damages.

I pass by the gentleman's appeal to the just heavens, and his piteous scene of
crying children and a weeping wife, because I know you can only estimate this
as an appeal to your passions. I shall, therefore, only proceed to examine the
cases referred to you.

The case in 2 Wilson 206 was a flagrant violation of the liberty of the
subject, by unjust imprisonment, and 300L was not too high an award, though the
imprisonment was short, and the treatment good. The Secretary of State was
there exercising arbitrary power by taking the man up upon a general warrant.
Thus it struck the jury. To enter a man's house by virtue of a nameless warrant
is worse than the Spanish inquisition: a daring attack; -- an attempt to
violate magna charta, said Lord Campden. -- A more dissimilar case to the
present cannot possibly be cited.

The other case p. 244 of the same book is also on a general warrant. The case
252 called the turtle case, was an unprovoked and unreasonable assault and
battery, where the damages ought to be great, but the defendant was able to pay.

It is disagreeable for me to make any observations on the letter which I was
impelled by my duty to read at the commencement of my defense. You will collect
from that letter a few ideas which I think may prove that the Doctor has not
only been intemperately, but uncommonly severe upon every one who had the
misfortune to differ from him in practice. He has said "As well might there be
two suns or two moons, as to suppose that two sorts of lever prevailed in that
year," although so many different symptoms made their appearance. His treatment
of the Health Laws is extremely severe, he does not only speak against the
physicians, but against the Legislature itself. One solitary instance of good
might happen therefrom, but upon the whole he declares the laws very
destructive. Though he does not handle the objects of his attack in strains so
strong as Cobbett does, yet he is extremely severe. If he suffers himself to be
led to such great lengths in his attacks, upon his brethren, the Physicians,
and upon the Legislature itself, I trust you will not consider him entitled to
as great damages as though he had been silent.

Gentlemen, with these remarks, I leave the cause to your decision, and repeat
that I hope, if you should consider the plantiff deserving of damages, you will
consider how little injury he has sustained, and what are the defendant's
circumstances; but I trust you will believe, with me, that none of these
publications flowed from malice, and that nothing in them was meant to injure
the Doctor as a man or as a Physician, but to attack his system. If these are
your opinions, you must give a verdict for the defendant.

MR. INGERSOL. With your Honors' leave.
Gentlemen of the Jury,
THE Counsel for the Defendant have dwelt much on an observation which is very
trite, but certainly very true; that the understanding is not to be trusted
when the passions are engaged.

I will therefore endeavor at present, to suppress my feelings; -- the honest
indignation which, in spite of my efforts is ready to burst forth; and examine
calmly the facts; I will approach your passions through the fair and honest
medium of your understandings, and if I succeed, as I think I shall, in showing
that every tittle of our declaration is supported by the clearest proofs, then
I contend that your sensibility ought to be excited. For, give me leave to say
that any man who can believe the testimony we have produced; he who reflects on
the particulars stated, with a full conviction of their truth, and then remains
wholly unmoved, must be callous, and lost to every honest sentiment of humanity.

What, Gentlemen, is the nature of our complaint? Is it of a common, or of a
peculiarly aggravated nature? Wearing himself out in the duties of his
profession, the Plantiff, like a saving Angel, arrested the arms of Death,
exposing himself, when it was difficult which most to admire, the profundity of
his professional skill, or the vigor and benevolence of his mind, that bore him
up against the dread of infectious scenes, which the stoutest Hero could not
have approached without trembling. While thus employed, the foul attack is
made; he is announced to the world as a "Quack -- Empyric -- Potent Quack." and
"Grand Empyric," and the confidence of his Patients is withdrawn; he is
represented as either by design or ignorance, destroying "thousands and tens of
thousands" of his fellow citizens. He is represented by this printer, as the
exterminating Angel, going through the streets and heaping dead bodies on each
other, and practicing little arts and tricks to support his reputation, which
would disgrace even a moutebank.

This is only an Epitome -- The particulars I will detail to you as I go along.

One of two things you must do; you must either say that the character given by
Cobbett of Dr. Rush -- that he is a Quack, Mountebank, etc. is just, that he
has, either from ignorance or a bad motive, destroyed his fellow citizens, and
deserves to be banished not only this city, but society; or the alternative
presents itself -- You must believe the suggestion is false and malicious, that
his well earned character has been wrested from him, for which the offender
should pay damages; -- compensatory they cannot be -- out exemplary -- such as
should mark him hereafter as the most aggravated calumniator, and detestable of
characters: one whom neither sense of honor, of duty, or of propriety will
restrain. Let the offender know that though the Law has Leaden feet, yet it has
Iron hands: that though slow in its operations, it is direful when once it
catches its prey.

The charge consists of these particulars: First, The Publications. Secondly,
Its Falsehood. Thirdly, its Malice.


With regard to the publications, when you take the papers out with you, you
will find them to be a burden of defamation, so that his press groaned under
the weight of -- not to say "ribaldry" but the most severe, atrocious and
indecent personal abuse. You will please to observe that in this instance we do
not pursue a Journeyman Printer, as in the case of Genesis Hamilton at N. York.
There was some pretense urged for pity; but here we bring before you the
Printer and Editor; not the printer only, who may suffer an innocent victim,
from the concealed name of his correspondent, whom a sense of honor may induce
him to secret, but the editor himself, who made it his constant practice to
vilify and traduce the unoffending, and in these instances, the man whose
upright conduct, and useful labors would have been supposed to remove him far
even from suspicion of ill fame.

Instead of resorting to an Indictment where Dr. Rush might be a witness, we
come fairly into the field with an action which puts the parties upon an equal
footing. The question is not now whether the truth may or may not be given in
evidence, but we invite the conflict If William Cobbet can substantiate any
thing against Dr. Rush, he may now come and do it; or he may come and justify
himself if he can, but that he pretends not to do; the publications are not
denied, although loaded with such atrocious villainy.

The defendant had his choice to take one of several courses; he might say all
these things were true, and pretend to substantiate them, or he might say he
did not mean it as it has been construed; or he might say "I have been very
rash and unguarded in my treatment of an injured man, and upon reflection, I am
at war with myself as much as you can be with me." But what has he done? He has
undertaken to justify himself in the acts. I appeal to your honors whether it
has not always been the practice in Pennsylvania, when a defendant has not
endeavored to prove his disavowal, but persisted in a justification of himself,
and aggravation of his offense -- whether in such a case, the guilt appearing
plain, the jury does not always give exemplary damages? One of his Counsel
speaks of Dr. Rush as all but supernatural -- another hints and insinuates,
and damns by feint praise; and a third acknowledges that the publications
contain many untruths; that they are "Stuff, Nonsense and Ribaldry;" but he
wishes to ease his client from the legal consequences. If he contends that we
do not put the right meaning upon his publications, then it must at last be
left for us to understand their true meaning, except he can convince us
otherwise. I therefore ask you Gentlemen, where there is any thing to justify
or palliate or whether they do not come up to the very climax of abuse and
vulgarity, more than I hope will ever appear again, either in this, or any
other country.

A perfectly accurate idea of these publications, then, becomes indispensibly
necessary; and here, so far, I will accede to the wishes expressed by my
learned opponents. I will not wander from the publications; they shall form my
text, and I will keep close to it.

I will analize it; I will dissect it; I will contemplate it in different
points of view, and reason upon these points; I will follow the defendant
through all his windings, and at every turn prove malice upon him. These
publications furnish an exhaustless fund of observation, and should I speak a
week there would yet remain more to be said.

Two positions stated by the first Counsel who spoke for the defendant must be
kept constantly in view through this cause; That Doctor Rush dispensed his
medicines, and administered the healing art to the best of his great abilities,
and without even suspicion as to his integrity. -- That the defense rests upon
this ground that the defendant has made a public discussion of a question of
general concern, free from personal abuse of the plaintiff's moral or
professional character. The gentleman then, as if apprehensive that his
concessions might furnish a weapon against himself, immediately adds that a
little acrimony mixed with the disquisitions does not render it scandal, and
that acrimony existed even among the Physicians themselves.

Much depends upon what name we give a thing. What the gentlemen calls
acrimony, I call slander and personal abuse, with a deliberate design of
demolishing the reputation of Dr. Rush. -- God's Providence is by some called a
lucky hit, Piety superstition, Seduction and Debauchery gallantry, violence
spirit, and the whole storehouse of defamation, here ransacked for epithets of
reproach, is denominated Acrimony! We may call any thing by a soft name, but
that does not alter the nature of the thing. The Counsel in admitting the
eminence in point of skill, and the purity of Heart of the Plaintiff, takes
from the defendant all possibility of defense in attempting to lay its
foundation. If Doctor Rush is thus deservedly eminent, and if there can be no
suspicion of his integrity, and he has acted so uprightly in his attendance
upon a disease, the most fatal that ever Providence inflicted upon a guilty
world, with what temper ought a man to come forward and speak of him? Certainly
it ought to be with much deference and respect to his character and conduct.
But even supposing he did fall into an error, shall he be held up to the world
as the most remorseless of murderers?

We are told by the learned counsel on the other side that "Ridicule is the
test of truth." I deny the position. This was the favorite position of that
Arch Deist Shaftesbury -- driven from the field of Reason and Argument, this
was his only subterfuge in his attacks on Christianity. It is possible, to be
sure, to render truth a ridicule; in the same manner you may dress a wise man
in a fool's cap. This maxim, so long ago exploded by the greater part of
mankind, must now be revived -- its revival is worthy of the cause of the
defendant! -- The very gospel of Heaven, by distorting its sense, and by
partial representations, may be made to appear ridiculous: But this is no test
of its intrinsic merits.

The law, however, has resolved this question: "You shall not, by a libel, or
by writing, set a man in a ridiculous light" -- the reason forms a part of the
rule -- it goes on, "and thereby diminish his reputation." 3 Blackstone 125.
The same doctrine is exemplified in the other books, and the law says
expressly, that "you shall not make a representation even to impute to a man
BOASTING and VAIN GLORY." -- This is a principle laid down in Hawkins. Slander
endeavors to creep behind every covert battery, and assumes every form --
sometimes it even pretends to praise and commend a man, for the very purpose of
introducing its venom. Gentlemen, the law says this is a libel; judges have
said so throughout the annals of every court, and shall we and juries affect
not to understand what every illiterate man understands to be libellous?

The principle of innocence in these publications, on account of their
pretended disquisitions on the yellow fever, is not just; but if it was
established, it would not help the defendant. What discussion on the system, or
what respecting the treatment, or what that tends to show that system to be
ridiculous, do you find in these publications? I will defy the counsel to point
out a single syllable either as to the nature, origin or treatment of the
yellow fever; not a word even to ridicule the positions laid down!

Does the ridicule appear to be aimed at the system or the professional
reputation and character of the physician! that, says Mr. Harper, is the
question. You may not, says he, combat the system by destroying the reputation
of the practitioner. -- So far we agree. To this test, thus furnished by the
opponents counsel I appeal -- If the defendant did enter into the nature and
application of the remedies, I am quite uninformed; but I think he did not. Let
us see how he attacked the system and not the man, as is pretended. The first
publication introduced begins with two lines, wherein it is represented that
Dr. Rush is one quack holding conversation with another. Now, gentlemen, I
would submit one question to your understanding: -- is it the system that he
calls a Potent Quack, or is it Dr. Rush? Is it the system that he has
stigmatized with the degrading epithet of Don Sangrado, or is it Dr. Rush
personally?

Who was this Don Sangrado? -- Mr. Harper has told you in part -- A Quack
damned to everlasting fame, in the novel of Gil Blas. -- What could be the
meaning when it was applied to Dr. Rush? What would you think of it, if you
were to be called Moses Castello? -- a man who practicing merchandise, was
arraigned and convicted of a fraud in this court. Would you put up with the
insult, merely because the person who called you so, should say "I was only
discussing a question of commerce?" If this was to be done in a public paper,
would you treat it with silent contempt?

William Cobbett, at the time he made these publications, whatever defense he
has now set up to the contrary, did not mean to adopt the subterfuge which is
now used. He meant to put it beyond all kind of doubt who he meant; for lest
all these names should not be perfectly understood; as if some persons would
still be at a loss to know who he meant that dishonored his profession, and was
not worthy the public confidence; he proceeds on to the introduction of
Spilsbury's advertisement, which pretends with the same remedy to cure all
manner of diseases, however different their nature, calling it first, "a puff
equal to Dr. Rush's," and concluding "there, beat that if you can." Thus, you
see, this Quack, this ridiculous Empyric is, forsooth, put upon the same
footing with Dr. Rush! -- It would insult your understandings to insinuate that
this was not to degrade Dr. Rush. Nay, he expressly says in one of his public
papers that he would demolish the fortress of his reputation.

Now, gentlemen, I ask you whether it is the system or the man attacked? he
loads the Dr. with all kinds of epithets which malice and ill nature could
possibly invent; holding him up as a vain puffer; when the language of the law
is express that "you may not impute to a man vain boasting." A child could not
be at a loss to understand the meaning of these attacks. -- The idea of
attacking the system was an after thought; it originated in the ingenuity of
the counsel; because the defendant has never once said that he understood it,
or was able to produce an argument against it. It was not the system which he
attacked, when he ascribed to Dr. Rush the vain boasting practice of courting
and making encomiums upon himself, and raising a reputation which he did not
deserve, by writing letters and answering them himself, etc.

What would you think of a man who would interfere in the decision of a cause,
in which property to the amount of millions was depending, or in a case of life
and death, that would tell you at the same time, he neither understood the
cause, nor had studied the merits of it, nor the guilt or innocence of the
accused, and afterward say he was only in jest, he was only laughing; would
you not declare lie was like the man in holy writ, who "threw firebrands,
arrows and death, and said, I am only in sport?"

Gentlemen, the questions which have been made, and which the learned counsel
have exerted themselves so much to overthrow, are answered by Cobbett himself.
In the dialogue between him and Dr. Cox, does he speak as though he wished to
convince the public; as though he was attacking the system only? No, he does
not pretend to have spent a moments reflection either as to the system, or the
cause, but that he knew nothing at all about it, he was only laughing about it,
as his learned counsel say! Here the "cloven foot" plainly appears, he
acknowledges that if it had not been Dr. Rush who supported the mode of
treatment, he should not have troubled himself about it.

"Out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks." Little thought he that
he was furnishing evidence against himself at the trail.

In September, 1797, he sets out stigmatizing him with the epithet of "QUACK."
Was not this the way to destroy his reputation, by writing him down, by making
the people believe he was a quack? Will gentlemen contend this is not
actionable? If he is a quack in the yellow fever, is he not to be presumed a
quack in every other disease? If a man undertakes to be a physician when he
does not understand the nature or the cure of the disorder, is that man to be
trusted?

It has been said that Dr. Rush's person was not attacked because his family
was not. Who could be ignorant of the contemptible point of view in which Dr.
Rush was held up at this time, and surely his family must be very anxious as to
his fate, and the insults he underwent. This, to me, is a good proof that it
was the medical skill of Dr. Rush that was attacked, for we find in other parts
of the publications that "Rush and the Rushites" are held in a very
contemptible point of view, not being able to distinguish between the small pox
and the yellow fever, and the declaration is made, that pregnant women were
sent by them to the hospital, thus suggesting but in terms which cannot be
mistaken, the gross ignorance of this "Master Bleeder," this "Potent Quack."

But say the Plaintiff's Counsel this is not particularly aimed at Dr. Rush; it
refers to a whole class. But, Gentlemen, is it the less criminal because the
insinuations extend to a whole class, instead of one individual? It is more a
discussion of the system on that account. No, it cannot act as an extenuation,
but an aggravation of the slander. -- Can you conceive that the introduction of
Dr. Tilton, and this letter concerning him was necessary to the mere discussion
of the system? It Is true that no action has been brought by Dr. Tilton, but
Cobbett appears to be following up his abuse upon Dr. Rush by that
circumstance, representing Dr. Tilton as a violent party man; mentioning him as
ill formed, and that his judgment was wrong in as much as he mistook a bruise
on the arm of a woman for the yellow fever. He attacks him as a Rushite and a
"Bleeder." -- As one of the exterminating Demons. Insinuations, with so much
explanation, are fully equal to direct attacks. What means the insinuation
"that dead men tell no tales," etc. but that he delighted in destroying his
fellow creatures. That they are insinuations does not deduct from the
criminality. It is far worse than open attack, because it adds meanness to
malice.

The words "Empyric" and "Quack," are used through his whole reflections on Dr.
Rush. We may therefore, ask what means the word "Quack?"

"A boastful pretender to an art which he does not understand; -- a vain
boastful pretender to Physic; one who proclaims his own medical abilities in
public places. So the learned Addison explains it. Pope calls it "an artful
tricking practitioner in physic." -- "a mountebank; a bold and ignorant
pretender to the art of physic." It is a word of a determined, ascertained
meaning, more so than even bankrupt to a merchant. -- Thus illiberally has he
treated Dr. Rush, but has not explained when bleeding ought, or ought not to be
used; what is moderate and what excessive bleeding; nor an idea of the evils of
the practice; but with the most inquisitorial meanness, has blackened what he
could not attempt to confute. Can it be pretended that he was not well
acquainted with the meaning of the words he used? No, for at another period we
perceive him boasting of his classical ^ading. He has designedly called Dr.
Rush a boastful pretender to physic, an art which he did not understand; and
this will appear from his false representation of the Doctor's conduct in
writing letters, etc. Indeed in one place he says, the "citizens were duped" by
that gentleman's conduct. It therefore cannot be doubted that he has been
guilty of a libel.

While this profusion of abuse is heaping on an innocent head, his counsel
think to lessen his criminality by calling Doctor Rush a man as great as he is
good. If they believe so, how inconsistent is their defense of the assassin of
that great and good character!

If you wish information whether these words are in themselves actionable or
not, the law is very explicit on that head. The very words are selected out in
the elementary treatises; they are these: "words are in themselves actionable
which injure a man in his trade or profession; such as charge a want of honesty
or ability, etc." To call a "physician a quack," is afterward selected
particularly. William Cobbett, who is stated by his counsel to be a man of
ability and learning, no doubt knew this, and therefore, used the very
expressions forbid by the law, to defy the utmost power of the object of his
attack. The words go on, "or that he has killed a patient with his physic." --
He has selected these two parts which are actionable; he has called him "a
quack," and then he has gone on to the comparative and superlative degree -- "a
potent quack and mountebank," and in order to complete the degradation, he adds
that in his mode of treatment he has "killed his thousands and tens of
thousands."

But says my learned friend, this does not mean that he murdered them, but many
died from this mode of treatment, and therefore it is only an attack upon the
system. What says may authority? "If a man says a Physician has killed his
patients by his physic" the words are actionable. Though a man does not charge
mudrer on the Physician, he is not excused, it is enough, if it implies that
persons were killed through ignorance; because thereby he is not entitled to
the confidence of his fellow citizens. The laws are not to be eluded by artful
and ingenious constructions; you are the Judges, and can easily understand the
expressions. Malice adopts an equivocal ambiguous style, but if the "cloven
foot" is discovered, if the veil is seen through, if the disguise is
discovered, the law strips the sheep's clothing from the wolf, and exposes him
to indignation in his own natural deformity.

But, say gentlemen, whatever might have been said, Dr. Rush has as much
business as he can do, and therefore he is not injured. -- Does this appear in
evidence? -- Is it fact? -- I am authorized to say that his business has
sensibly diminished since the period at which the attack took place. But of
this presently.

It is enough for me if I prove that the words are actionable in themselves.

It is said that much dispute and acrimony was used in the controversy among
the Physicians, and that it was no wonder if Cobbett forgot decency when Dr.
Rush himself treated his opponents with so much acrimony and severity in his
animadversions.

I do not see the force of this argument. If Doctor Rush had been guilty of
even scandal in that disquisition, would that justify Cobbett to do so too? If
he has been guilty of scandal, let him suffer for it from a due course of law.
But has Dr. Rush, from the beginning to the end of what has been read of his
discussion of the system, stigmatized any Physician as a Quack? No, but he
respectfully calls them his brethren and treats them with tenderness. He was
learned on the subject, and was a proper person to lead the public opinion: if
therefore he has occasionally forgotten himself in speaking of a countrary
system, he may be excused in part.

I say again if no injury, why take these methods if an injury, why not redress
by law? My character -- my professional and moral character attacked with the
venom and art of a demon -- my daily bread about to be taken from me -- the
subsistence for my family in danger of being lost to me -- a head covered with
gray hairs -- fortune gone in paper money -- prime of life passed in the
revolutionary army -- and law allow me no remedy: then the bands of society are
rent asunder -- I am in a state of nature, let me seek my private revenge, and
I am satisfied without the aid of courts -- Oh no if these measures are pursued
I shall be punished -- William Cobbett however ready to violate the law himself
we know is in the habit of appealing to law for his protections against force
and even against (...).

The counsel for the defendant then softened and we are told that the only
consolation left us under all this injury is silent contempt -- strange
inconsistency -- if a man takes my purse, value of one shilling -- laws and
courts and juries give me remedy -- but if he robs me of my good name, which
never enriches him, but makes me poor indeed, my only redress it is said is
silent contempt.

If the evil extended, only to myself, the remedy the gentleman prescribed,
though much worse than bleeding or mercury, might be more palatable; but if I
allow myself to be brought into disrepute in my profession, to be considered as
a Quack, as a pretender to knowledge in Physic which I don't possess, my
business will leave me, and my family starve -- my wife be reduced to distress
-- my daughters exposed to seduction, my sons be deprived of education and
myself left a miserable object of delusion and pity.

It is true, as the learned gentleman observed the same words, if spoken are
not actionable which are so when written or printed and published -- the poison
is in that way infinitely more disseminated -- 3 Blackstone 126, words spoken
to me in the streets, may not be actionable, which if reduced to writing, are
so, the words in the instance of the young lady, who recovered L4000 sterling
damages, would not have been actionable if they had merely been spoken, the
publication of actionable words imply malice, unless explained by the defendant.

It is necessary however that we should show the circumstances of the case, in
order to estimate the nature of the offense. These positions laid down, I shall
undertake to show that the defendant was determined to ruin Dr. Rush as a
Physician, because he was a "Republican."

I think it is perfectly evident that he was not actuated by any motive to
discuss any system for the cure of the yellow-fever. -- Let us examine the
facts. The defendant began his press early in 1796: the sentiments of Dr. Rush
and his mode of treatment were perfectly notorious in 1793. I call upon the
counsel, even at this late hour, to show one word about Dr. Rush in that paper
previous to the eulogium in December 1796 -- immediately afterward the
defendant thinks him "too republican," and he says "damn him, I will attack him
for it." I argue, the medical system of Dr. Rush being well known in 1793, why
did he wait till the spring of 1797 before he threatened, and till the
September following before he executed his threat? Not a single word about his
republican principles! I know the ingenious turn that was endeavored to be
given to these words -- that he would attack the principle. No, gentlemen, the
witness would not give the answer in that way: no, said he, he disapproved of
the principle and he would attack HIM for it.

I trust we are all Republicans -- Is there a man who hears me that does not
feel and indignation in his breast that an alien should abuse him because he is
a republican! The citizen of the United States who is not a republican, is a
traitor. I am by choice a republican; -- I am so by oath: The constitution of
the United States is a republican form of government, and a republican form of
government is guaranteed to each State.

But says the gentleman, there is a sense in which republicanism is assumed, it
may mean democrat or sans cullotte: But I ask, do they show any paragraph in
his writings or any action of his life in which he does not avow himself a
republican, not in forced, but in the constitutional sense of the word. When a
term is used, of determinate sense in the constitution of my country, I ought
to be understood in that sense. And has Dr. Rush from the memorable day on
which he voted for, and signed the declaration of our independence, till the
present moment ever proved himself to be any other than a republican in the
constitutional sense? The insinuations of his deviation might have been spared,
since they are totally void of foundation. But republicanism is the whole
extent of the offense for which he is to be persecuted while living, and his
very ashes raked up to obtain a vindictive satisfaction upon his mangled memory
after his death! And for all this shall we say, Go, and take a boxing match
with William Cobbett? No, gentlemen, courts and juries will give a righteous
and honorable decision.

I do not wonder at his resentment against Dr. Rush: he is one of those who in
the language of the President of the United States, have done too much,
suffered too much, and succeeded too well in our glorious struggle for liberty,
ever to be forgiven. Gentlemen, I conceive an appeal to your feelings to be
fair, because by temperate deductions I have established facts: -- I see the
sun shine, and the showers descend -- I afterward see the grass grow: I thence
form a natural conclusion that one is the cause, the other the effect. The
ingenious evasion of the gentlemen, that it was the political opinion he
threatened to Dr. Dewees to attack, will not do: no, he must approach under a
masked battery: the political sentiment was the real ground of the offense.
When the threat was made, the opportunity to execute it was wanting; he
therefore suffered the malice to lie in his breast, until one the most fit that
could possibly occur made its appearance: one which could not possibly at the
time of the threat have entered into the contemplation of the defendant. But
the measure was resolved on -- the death warrant was prepared -- a more fit
opportunity could not have been wished for than the fever of 1797 in one
respect, nor one less fit in another. We cannot reflect on the situation of our
deplorable city at that period, and not be struck with horror at the
recollection. We see the patient in extreme distress, stretched on his bed of
sickness; physicians themselves at a loss how to relieve that distress. It was
at this eventful period. William Cobbett began his malevolent attacks; tending
to withdraw the confidence of the unhappy patients from their physician, and
thus doubling their affliction.

Farther. This attack was not only threatened, but with violence; he assigns
his reason, "Damn him, I will attack him for it." -- The reputation of Dr. Rush
was intimately connected with his political sentiments, and therefore he
attacks the physician. -- It is observable, that when he first threatens the
attack, so far was he from being actuated by a wish to repel an improper mode
of practice in Dr. Rush as a physician, that in that character he speaks of him
as liable to no exception: He wishes him to confine himself wholly to his
practice as a physician, and not to meddle with politics. But Dr. Rush was his
object. "Malice rankles in his heart," and a few expressions which find their
way out now and then, prove it to be deep rooted. -- He confessed he knew
nothing about the practice.

Doctors Griffith and Physic, commonly made use of the medicine and practice of
Dr. Rush, and to as great a degree, but they had spoken no eulogium; they had
made no use of any republican expressions, and therefore they escaped without a
single remark. Farther than that, Cobbett employed a family physician of the
same school: Dr. Dewees, who followed the same mode of treatment, attended on
the family. All this proves the meaning of the words used to Dr. Cox: that if
it had not been supported by Dr. Rush, he should not have troubled himself
about it.

For these reasons, gentlemen, I think I may presume, without the possibility
of a doubt, that you will be of the opinion, that the action is well founded:
that the words are, in themselves, actionable, and that they imply malice. But
we have not rested on the legal ground, as we might with safety: we have gone
farther, we have shown that personal resentment instigated to the malicious
attack, and that it was the sole and entire motive.

Gentlemen, I do not wish to introduce domestic scenes unnecessarily; but
surely when we contemplate injuries and damages sustained, we may, at least,
relate what effect it might probably have on the family. Doctor Rush was
engaged amidst scenes of danger and death; not only exposed to, but actually
attacked by that dreadful disease. His family were residing in the country.
Instead of receiving letters from him, his affliction was so severe he could
not write, suppose they receive these papers, in which he is stigmatized a
"murderer" and "quack" and though he might survive the contagion, his character
should remain aspersed and his memory after his death. So undeserving public
confidence. -- Would this have no effect on his family?

We have heard much about the liberty of the press. I think I would not yield
to any man in sincere estimation of that invaluable right; I consider it the
eye of our political body, and I would much rather a speck a small blemish
should remain, than that by a rash and unskilful operation the noble organ
itself should receive an injury. But it is difficult to run the precise line in
composing the happy medium which the constitution has formed for the support of
every thing which is dear to a citizen. In the constitution formed for Corsica,
vide annual register of 1794 p. 90 are these words: "The liberty of the press
is decreed, but the abuse of it is left to the law." Private reputation and
character is protected by the constitution, the great fundamental law of this
state.

Gentlemen, I acknowledge that this case, now about to be decided by you, is
one of the most important ever entrusted to a jury of this country. It is true
that for a long time past the licentiousness of the press has been extreme:
neither the government nor individuals have escaped: no merit of character has
screened the individual from attack through that medium. It is therefore that
you ought to keep a steady watch over those intrusions upon the good order of
society, for it is with you to protect character and government, which if you
neglect, like the droppings of rain on a stone, it will wear it imperceptibly
away: though the progress be slow, the effect is certain.

Gentlemen, you must take human nature as you find it, and we should not better
it had we the power of formation: of the law does not give satisfaction for
injuries, it is a sentiment written on the heart of man that he will obtain it,
and no law will then stop his resentment. Of what avail, it will be argued, was
it for me to restrain the impetuosity of my temper and a await the course
pointed out by the laws of my country: In vain do I respect them unless damages
are given sufficient to stop the progress of a gross offense. -- You will have
no more complaints of this sort, but they will be obtained in another, and most
fatal way, if the law is not sufficiently strong to curb it.

In England we find that juries understood this subject perfectly well. -- Mr.
Tilghman says it was a general warrant which affected the individual liberty
which made them so severe in the cases referred to. The judge said it ought to
be exemplary in order to protect the magnacharta: so we say. So ought you to
say in your verdict: it is not the injury sustained by Dr. Rush by the number
of patients he has lost. The gentleman read the declaration and made some
observations upon the blanks. He says no special damages are laid. Are we to
run about to enquire who never came to Dr. Rush on this account? If that is
required, it may as well be said at once that we shall have no damages, and
that men shall publish what they please with impunity!

As I observed before, in England juries understand this matter perfectly well.
If a libel involves the public peace and good, specific injuries are not
considered. In the case of a young lady whose chastity was attacked, 40^0L was
awarded.

I hope Dr. Rush will not have to say as a gentleman in Scotland once said, Oh
that I had brought forward this trial in England, for there the Jury would take
care the verdict should be such as would do honor to their impartiality.
Gentlemen, the precedent cannot fail to have a desirable effect, if you give
suitable damages. Instances seldom occur in Pennsylvania of this nature, but in
one not long since the Jury proved that they will knew the importance of
private character: a person was proceeded against ex part by one of the German
religious societies, and excluded. The proceeding was entered upon the books of
the Society. As it was an attack upon character, the man brought an action, and
the Jury gave a verdict for the plaintiff of 500L. damages. Cafe, Stock against
the German corporation.

Gentlemen, consider the situation of Dr. Rush at the time of attact; -- a
Physician of considerable ability in his art -- at a period when his whole
attention was doubtless engaged for the advantage of a deplorable city: when
not an Herb nor Drug escaped his utmost researches; when not a part of the
Human System but he pryed into; all his learning, all his ingenuity on the full
stretch. The life of thousands in his hands, an important charge! Surrounded
with difficulties, and thus indefatigably engaged he is represented as the most
despicable of the human race. I ask you, gentlemen, whether this did not
disable him from prosecuting his important pursuits? much of cure in such
deplorable situations, depend on the confidence of the patient in his
Physician, often more than in medicine: we know how much small shocks affect
the mind so weakened by disease. -- Who can tell what numbers perished from
these publications in this way?

We are told that though Dr. Rush has his merit, he no doubt had his reward. I
ask how he could receive his reward? among what class of persons did his
practice extend? We well know that the rich had left the city, and therefore
the thousands upon whom he attended could not pay him: it would have been to
his advantage to have left the city, for a man of his eminence could have
commanded business any where, but his point was to discover if possible, an
alleviation of the general distress by examining and exploring this new species
of disease, which has so often baffled the utmost skill of talents.

As to the merit of the defendant. It is said that he was of great use at a
certain time in giving an alarm to the citizens of this country against foreign
influence. I will tell you how far he went, and no farther: He did not wish to
destroy, but to change this foreign influence. He wished to destroy it when it
came from one foreign country, and place it on another. But to Americans
sensible of the high destinies of their country, what is it from whom the
influence comes? it ought to be wholly destroyed, come whence it may from
France or from Britain.

I do not know that I need take up your time in referring to the opinion (...)
of the plaintiff in other countries: suffice it to say that almost every
Philosophical and medical society in the world have honored his character. He
is an honorary member of almost every society in Europe, or in the world. Dr.
Trotter, the celebrated Physician in England speaks of him in terms strongly
indicative of the veneration in which he is held abroad.

Although so great is his character and reputation, yet I acknowledge that the
case is between A. plaintiff and B. defendant. But although your verdict must
be according to evidence and justice, yet you must not be unmindful of
character in order duly to estimate the damages. If Dr. Rush had not obtained a
well earned reputation, I should not be pressing upon you to bear testimony to
that character by exemplary damages, but the malevolent design, the spite and
the ill nature is much blackened by the uprightness of character procured and
preserved for many year by the plaintiff.

Gentlemen I thank you for your attention -- I must in my conclusion beg you to
consider the great evils of slander. Permit me to attempt its definition.
Amongst all the offenses that degenerate mankind can commit is one of the
greatest: there is nothing that an honest and brave man has so much to fear.

Man need not dread a worse foe -- it stabs with a word -- It is the PESTILENCE
walking in darkness, spreading CONTAGION far and wide, which the most cautious
traveller cannot avoid. -- COURAGE cannot defend against its insidious attacks
-- It is the heart searching DAGGER of the dark ASSASSIN. -- It is the poisoned
ARROW whose wound is incurable. -- It is the mortal sting of the deadly ADDER:
-- nor GOVERNMENT nor OFFICER nor INDIVIDUAL can resist its fatal effects
without the aid of LAW. -- MURDER is its employment; INNOCENCE and MERIT its
prey, and RUIN its SPORT.


