[CHEAP REPOSITORY. Number 36.]

Bear ye one another's Burdens; OR, THE VALLEY OF TEARS:

A VISION.



PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED BY B. and J. JOHNSON, NO. 147, HIGH STREET.

1800.

Bear ye one another's Burdens.
ONCE upon a time methought I set out upon a long journey, and the place
through which I traveled appeared to be a dark Valley which was called the
valley of Tears. It had obtained this name not only on account of the many
sorrowful adventures which poor passengers commonly meet with in their journey
through it; but also because most of these Travelers entered it weeping and
crying, and left it in very great pain and anguish. This vast valley was full
of people of all colors, ages, sizes, and descriptions. But whether white or
black, or tawney, all were traveling the same road; or rather they were taking
different little paths which all led to the same common end.

Now it was remarkable that notwithstanding the different complexions, ages,
and tempers of this vast variety of people, yet all resembled each other in
this one respect, that each had a burden on his back which he was destined to
carry through the toil and heat of the day, until he should arrive by a longer
or shorter course at his journey's end. These burdens would in general have
made the pilgrimage quite intolerable, had not the Lord of the Valley, out of
his great compassion for these poor Pilgrims, provided among other things, the
following means for their relief.

In their full view over the entrance of the Valley, there were written in
great letters the following words*

Bear ye one another's Burdens. Now I saw in my vision that many of the
Travelers hurried on without stopping to read this instruction, and others,
though they had once read it, yet paid little or no attention to it. A third
sort thought it very good advice for other people, but very seldom applied it
to themselves. In short I saw that too many of those people were of opinion
that they had burdens enough of their own, and that there was therefore no
occasion to take upon them those of others; so each tried to make his own load
as light, and his own journey as pleasant as he could, without so much as once
casting a thought on a poor over loaded neighbor. Here however I have to make
a rather singular remark, by which I shall plainly show the folly of these
selfish people. It was so ordered and contrived by the Lord of this valley,
that if any one stretched out his hand to lighten a neighbor's burden, in fact
he never failed to find that he at that moment also lightened his own. Besides,
the obligation to help each other, and the benefit of doing so were mutual. If
a man helped his neighbor it commonly happened that some other neighbors came
by and by and helped him in his turn; for their was no such thing as what we
call independence in the whole Valley. Not one of all these Travelers, however
stout and strong, could move on comfortably without assistance, for so the Lord
of the Valley, whose laws were all of them kind and good, had expressly
ordained.

I stood still to watch the progress of these poor wayfaring people, who moved
slowly on, like so many Ticket porters, with burdens of various kinds on their
backs; of which some were heavier, and some were lighter, but from a burden of
one kind or other, not one Traveller was entirely free.

The Widow.
A sorrowful Widow, oppressed with the burden of grief for the loss of an
affectionate husband, would have been bowed down by her heavy load, had not the
surviving children with great alacrity stepped forward and supported her. Their
kindness after a while, so much. lightened the load which threatened at first
to be intolerable, that she even went on her way with cheerfulness.

The Husband.
I next saw a poor old man tottering under a burden then so heavy, that I
expected him every moment to sink under it. I peeped into his pack, and saw it
was made up of (...) articles; there was poverty, oppression, sickness, debt,
and what made by far the heaviest part, undutiful children. I was wondering how
it was he had got on even so well as he did, till I spied his wife, a kind,
meek, Christian woman, who was doing her utmost to assist him. She quietly got
behind, gently laid her shoulder to the burden, and carried a much larger
proportion of it than appeared to me when I was at a distance. She not only
sustained him by her strength, but cheered him by her counsels. She told him
that "through much tribulation we must enter into rest," that "he that
overcomes shall inherit all things." In short, she so supported his fainting
spirit, that he was enabled to "run with patience the race that was set before
him."

The kind Neighbor.
An infirm blind woman was creeping forward with a very heavy burden, in which
were packed sickness and want, with numberless other of those raw materials,
out of which human misery is worked up. She was so weak that she could not have
got on at all, had it not been for the kind assistance of another woman almost
as poor as herself; who, though she had no light burden of her own, cheerfully
lent an helping hand to a fellow traveller who was still more heavily laden.
This friend had indeed little or nothing to give, but the very voice of
kindness is soothing to the weary. And I remarked in many other cases, that it
was not so much the degree of the help afforded, as the manner of helping that
lightened the burdens. Some had a coarse, rough clumsy way of assisting a
neighbor, which, though in fact it might be of real use, yet seemed, by
galling the Travelers, to add to the load it was intended to lighten; while I
observed in others that so cheap a kindness as a mild word, or even an
affectionate look made a poor burdened wretch move on cheerily. The bare
feeling that some human being cared for him, seemed to lighten the load. But to
return to this kind neighbor. She had a little old book in her hand, the
covers of which were worn out by much use. When she saw the blind woman ready
to faint she would read her a few words out of this book, such as the following
-- "Blessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven."
"Blessed are they that mourn, for they shall be comforted." "I will never leave
thee nor forsake thee." "For our light affliction, which is but for a moment,
works out for us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory."

The Clergyman.
A pious Minister, sinking under the weight of a distressed parish, whose
worldly wants he was totally unable to bear, was suddenly relieved by a good
widow, who ^^me up and took all the sick and hungry on her own shoulders. The
burden of the parish thus divided became tolerable. The Minister, being no
longer bowed down by the temporal distresses of his people, applied himself
cheerfully to his own part of the weight. And it was pleasant to see how those
two persons, neither of them very strong, or rich, or healthy, by thus kindly
uniting together, were enabled to bear the weight of a whole parish; though
singly, either of them must have sunk under the attempt. And I remember one
great grief I felt during my whole journey was* that I did not see more of this
union and concurring kindness, by which all the burdens might have been so
easily divided. It troubled me to observe, that of all the laws of the Valley
there was not one more frequently broken than the law of kindness.

The Negroes.
I now spied a swarm of poor black men, women and children, a multitude which
no man could number; these groaned, and toiled, and sweated, and bled under far
heavier loads than I had seen. But for a while no man helped them; at length a
few white travelers were touched with the sorrowful sighing of those millions,
and very heartily did they put their hands to the burdens; but their number was
not quite equal to the work they had undertaken. I perceived, however, that
they never lost sight of those poor heavy laden wretches and as the number of
those generous helpers increased, I felt a comfortable hope, that before all
the blacks got out of the Valley, the whites would fairly divide the burden,
and the loads would be effectually lightened.

Among the travelers, I had occasion to remark, that those who most kicked and
struggled under their burdens, only made them so much the heavier; for their
shoulders became extremely galled by those vain struggles. The load, if borne
patiently, would in the end have turned even to the advantage of the bearers
(for so the Lord of the Valley had kindly decreed) but as to these grumblers
they had all the smart and none of the benefit. But the thing which made all
these burdens seem so very heavy was, that in every one without exception,
there was a certain inner packet, which most of the Travelers took pains to
conceal, and carefully wrap up; and while they were forward enough to complain
of the other part of their burdens, few said a word about this; though in truth
it was the pressing weight of this secret packet which served to render the
general burden so intolerable. In spite of all their caution, I contrived to
get a peep at it, I found in each that this packet had the same label; the
word SIN was written on all as a general title, and in ink so black that they
could not wash it out. I observed that most of them took no small pains to hide
the writing; but I was surprised to see that they did not try to get rid of the
load but the label. If any kind friend who assisted these people in bearing
their burdens, did but so much as hint at the secret packet, or advise them to
get rid of it, they took fire at once, and commonly denied they had any such
article in their portmanteau; and it was those whose secret packet swelled to
the most enormous size, who most stoutly denied they had any.

I saw with pleasure, however, that some who had long labored heartily to get
rid of this inward packet at length found it much diminished, and the more
this packet shrunk in size, the lighter was the other part of their burdens
also.

Then, methought, all at once, I heard a voice as it had been the voice of an
angel, crying out and saying, "Ye unhappy Pilgrims, why are ye troubled about
the burden which ye are doomed to bear through this Valley of tears? Know ye
not that as soon as ye shall have escaped out of this Valley, the whole burden
shall drop off, provided ye neglect not to remove that inward weight of SIN
which principally oppresses you? Study then the whole Will of the Lord of this
Valley. Learn from him how this heavy part of your burdens may now be lessened,
and how at last it shall be removed for ever. Be comforted. Faith and Hope may
cheer you even in this Valley* The passage, though it seems long to weary
Travelers, is comparatively short; for beyond it there is a Land of
everlasting Rest, where ye shall hunger no more, neither thirst any more, where
ye shall be led by living fountains of water, and all tears shall be wiped away
from your eyes."

Z.

THE VALLEY OF TEARS.
PART II.
NOW I had a second vision of what was passing in the Valley of Tears.
Methought I saw again the same kind of travelers whom I had seen in the former
part, and they were wandering at large through the same vast wilderness. At
first setting out on his journey, each Traveller had a small lamp so fixed in
his bosom that it seemed to make a part of himself, but as this natural light
did not prove to be sufficient to direct them in the right way, the king of the
country, in pity to their wanderings and their blindness, out of his gracious
condescension promised to give these poor wayfaring people an additional
supply of light from his own Royal Treasury. But as he did not choose to lavish
his favors where there seemed no disposition to receive them, he would not
bestow any of his oil on such as did not think it worth asking for. Ask and ye
shall have, was the rule he laid down for them. Many were prevented from asking
through pride, for they thought they had light enough already, preferring the
feeble glimmerings of their own lamp to all the light from the king's treasury.
Yet it was observed of those who rejected it, as thinking they had enough, that
hardly any acted up to what even their own light showed them. Others were
deterred from asking, because they were* told that it not only pointed out the
dangers and difficulties of the road, but by a certain reflecting power, it
turned inward on themselves, and revealed to them ugly sights in their own
hearts, to which they rather chose to be blind* for those Travelers chose
darkness rather than light, because their deeds were evil. Now it was
remarkable that these two properties were inseparable, and that the lamp would
be of little outward use, except to those who used it as an internal reflector.
A threat and a promise also never failed to accompany the offer of this light
from the king, a promise that to those who improved what they had, more should
be given, and a threat that from those who did not use it wisely, should be
taken away even what they had.

I observed that when the road was very dangerous, when terrors and
difficulties and death beset the faithful traveller, then on their fervent
importunity, the king voluntarily gave large and bountiful supplies of light,
such as in common seasons never could have been expected; always proportioning
the quantity given to the necessity of the case, as their day was, such was
their light and strength.

Though many chose to depend entirely on their own lamp, yet it was observed
that this light was apt to go out (...) left to itself. It was easily blown out
by those violent gusts which were perpetually howling through the wilderness,
and indeed it was the natural tendency of that unwholesome atmosphere to
extinguish it, just as you have seen a candle go out when exposed to the
vapors and foul air of a damp room. It was a melancholy sight to see
multitudes of Travelers heedlessly pacing on, boasting they had light enough,
and despising the offer of more. But what astonished me most of all was, to see
many, and some of them too accounted men of first rate wit, actually busy in
blowing out their own light, because while any spark of it remained, it only
served to torment them, and point out things which they did not wish to see.
And having once blown out their own light, they were not easy till they had
blown out that of their neighbor's also; so that a good part of the wilderness
seemed to exhibit a sort of universal blindman's buff* each endeavoring to
catch his neighbor, while his own voluntary blindness exposed him to be caught
himself, so that each was actually falling into the snare he was laying for
another, till at length, as selfishness is the natural consequence of
blindness, "catch he that catch can," became the general cry, throughout the
wilderness.

Now I saw in my vision, that there were some others who were busy in strewing
the most gaudy flowers over the numerous bogs, precipices, and pitfalls, with
which the wilderness abounded, and thus making danger and death look so gay,
that poor thoughtless creatures seemed to delight in their own destruction.
Those pit-falls did not appear deep or dangerous, because over them were raised
gay edifices with alluring names, in which were singing men and singing women,
and dancing, and feasting, and gaming, and drinking, and jollity, and madness.
But though the scenery was gay, the footing was unsound. The floors were full
of holes, through which the unthinking merry-makers were continually sinking.
Some tumbled through in the middle of a song, many at the end of a feast, and
though there was many a cup of intoxication wreathed with flowers, yet there
was always poison at the bottom. But what most surprised me was, that though no
day past over their heads in which some of those merry-makers did not drop
through, yet their loss made little impression on those who were left. Nay,
instead of being awakened to more circumspection and self denial by the
continual dropping off of those about them, several of them seemed to borrow
from thence an argument of a direct contrary tendency, and the very shortness
of the time was only urged as a reason to use it more sedulously for the
indulgence in sensual delights. Let us eat and drink for tomorrow we die. Let
us crown ourselves with rose-buds before they are withered. With these and a
thousand other such little mottos, the gay garlands of the wilderness were
decorated. Some admired poets were set to work to put the most corrupt
sentiments into the most harmonious tunes* these were sung without scruple,
chiefly indeed by the looser sons of riot, but not seldom also by the more
orderly daughters of sobriety, who were not ashamed to sing to the sound of
instruments, sentiments so corrupt and immoral, that they would have blushed to
speak or read them; but the music seemed to sanctify the corruption, especially
such as was connected with love or drinking.

Now I observed that all the travelers who had so much as a spark of light
left, seemed every now and then, as they moved onwards, to cast an eye, though
with very different degrees of attention, toward the happy land, which they
were told lay at the end of their journey: but as they could not see very far
forward, and as they knew there was a dark and shadowy valley which must needs
be crossed before they could attain to the happy land, they tried to turn their
attention from it as much as they could. The truth is, they were not
sufficiently apt to consult a map which the king had given them, and which
pointed out the road to the happy land so clearly, that the wayfaring man
though (...) could not err. This map also defined very correctly the boundaries
of the happy land from the land of misery, both of which lay on the other side
of the dark and shadowy valley; but so many beacons and light-houses were
erected, so many clear and explicit directions furnished for avoiding the one
country and attaining the other, that it was not the king's fault, if even one
single Traveller got wrong. But I am inclined to think that in spite of the
map, and the king's word, and his offers of assistance to get them thither,
that the Travelers in general did not heartily and truly believe after all,
that there was any such country as the happy land; or at least the paltry and
transient pleasures of the wilderness so besotted them, the thoughts of the
dark and shadowy valley so frightened them, that they thought they should be
more comfortable by banishing all thought and forecast.

Now I also saw in my dream, that there were two roads through the wilderness,
one of which every Traveller must needs take. The first was narrow, and
difficult and rough, but it was infallibly safe. It did not admit the Traveller
to stray either to the right hand or the left, yet it was far from being
destitute of real comforts or sober pleasures. The other was a broad and
tempting way, abounding with luxurious fruits and gaudy flowers to tempt the
eye, and please the appetite. To forget this dark valley, through which every
Traveller was well assured he must one day pass, seemed indeed the object of
general desire. To this grand end, all that human ingenuity could invent was
industriously set to work. The Travelers read, and they wrote, and they
painted, and they sung, and they danced, and they drank as they went along, not
so much because they all cared for these things, or had any real joy in them,
as because this restless activity served to divert their attention from ever
being fixed on the dark and shadowy valley.

The king, who knew the thoughtless temper of the Travelers, and how apt they
were to forget their journey's end, had thought of a thousand little kind
attentions to warn them of their dangers. And as we sometimes see in our
gardens written on a board in great letters, BEWARE OF SPRING GUNS -- MAN TRAPS
ARE SET HERE; so had this king caused to be written and stuck up before the
eyes of the Travelers, several like notices and cautions, such as Broad is the
way that leads to destruction -- Take heed lest ye also perish -- Woe to them
that rise up early to drink wine -- The pleasures of sin are but for a season.
etc. Such were the notices directed to the broad-way Travelers, but they were
so busily engaged in plucking the flowers, sometimes before they were blown,
and in devouring the fruits, often before they were ripe, and in loading
themselves with yellow clay, under the weight of which millions perished, that
they had no time so much as to look at the king's directions. Many went wrong
because they prefered a merry journey to a safe one and were terrified by
certain notices chiefly intended for the narrow-way Travelers, such as (...)
shall weep and lament, but the world shall rejoice; but had these foolish
people allowed themselves time or ^^tience to read to the end which they seldom
would do, they would have seen these comfortable words added, but your sorrow
shall be turned into joy, also, your joy no man takes from you, and they that
sow in tears shall reap in joy.

Now I also saw in my dream, that many travelers who had a strong dread of
ending at the Land of misery, walked up to the Strait Gate, hoping that though
the entrance was narrow, yet if they could once get in, the road would widen;
but what was their grief, when on looking more closely they saw written on the
inside narrow is the way; this made them take fright, they compared the
inscription with which the whole way was lined, such as, be ye not conformed to
this world -- deny yourselves, take up your cross, with all the tempting
pleasures of the wilderness. Some indeed recollected the fine descriptions they
had read of the Happy Lana, the Golden City, and the Rivers of Pleasures, and
they sighed: but then, those joys were distant, and from the faintness of their
light they soon got to think that what was remote might be uncertain, and while
the present good increased in bulk by it is nearness, the distant good receded,
diminished, disappeared! Their faith sailed, they would trust no farther than
they could see; they drew back and got into the Broad Way, taking a common but
sad refuge in the number and gaiety of their companions. When these
saint-hearted people, who yet had set out well, turned back, their light was
quite put out, and then they became worse than those who had made no attempt to
get in. "For it is impossible, that is, it is next to impossible, for those who
were once enlightened, and have tasted of the heavenly gift, and the good word
of God, and the powers of the world to come, if they fall away, to renew them
again to repentance."

A ^ew honest humble Travelers not naturally stronger than the rest, but
strengthened by their trust in the king's word, came up by the light of their
lamps, and meekly entered in at the Strait Gate; as they advanced farther they
felt less heavy, and though the way did not in reality grow wider, yet they
grew reconciled to the narrowness of it, especially when they saw the walls
here and there studded with certain jewels called promises, such as he that
endures to the end shall be saved. And my grace is sufficient for you. Some
when they were almost ready to faint, were encouraged by seeing that many
niches in the Narrow Way were filled with statues and pictures of Saints and
Martyrs, who had borne their testimony at the stake, that the Narrow Way was
the safe way; and these Travelers, instead of sinking at the sight of the
painted wheel and gibbet, the sword and the furnace, were animated by these
words written under them, those that wear white robes came out of great
tribulation, and be ye followers of those who, through faith and patience,
inherit the promises.

In the mean time there came a great multitude of Travelers* all from
Laodicea; this was the largest party I had yet seen: these were neither hot nor
cold, they would not give up future hope, they could not endure present pain;
so they contrived to deceive themselves by fancying that they resolved to keep
the happy land in view, yet that there must needs be many different ways which
led to it, no doubt all equally sure, without being all equally rough; so they
set on foot little contrivances to attain the end without using the means, and
softened down the spirit of the king's directions to fit them to their own
practice. Sometimes they would split a direction in two, and only use that half
which suited them. For instance, when they met with the following rule, Trust
in the Lord, and be doing good, they would take the first half, and make
themselves easy with a general sort of trust, that through the mercy of the
king all would go well with them, though, they themselves did nothing; and on
the other hand, many made sure that a few good works of their own would do
their business, and carry them safely to the happy land, though they did not
trust in the Lord, nor place any faith in his word. Thus some perished by a
lazy faith, and others by a working pride. A large party of Pharisees now
appeared, who had so neglected their lamp, that they did not see their way at
all, though they fancied themselves to be full of light; they kept up
appearances so well, as to delude others, and most effectually to delude
themselves with a notion that they might be found in the right way at last. In
this dreadful delusion they went on to the end, and till they were finally
plunged in the dark valley, never discovered the horrors which awaited them on
the dismal shore. It was remarkable that while these Pharisees were often
boasting how bright their light burnt, in order to get the praise of men, the
humble travelers, whose steady light showed their good works to others,
refused all commendation, and the brighter their light shined before men, so
much the more they insisted that they ought to glorify not themselves, but
their father which is in heaven.

I now set myself to observe what was the particular let, molestation, and
hindrance, which obstructed particular* Travelers in their endeavors to enter
in at the Strait Gate. I remarked a huge portly man who seemed desirous of
getting in, but he carried about him such a vast provision of bags full of
gold, and had on so many rich garments which stuffed him out so wide, that
though he pushed and squeezed, like one who had really a mind to get in, yet he
could not possibly do so. Then I heard a voice crying, woe to him that loadeth
himself with thick clay. The poor man felt something was wrong, and even went
so far as to change some of his more cumbersome vanities into others which
seemed less bulky, but still he and his pack were much too wide for the gate.
He would not however give up the matter so easily, but began to throw away a
little of the coarser part of his baggage, but still I remarked that he threw
away none of the vanities which lay near his heart. He tried again* but it
would not do; still his dimensions were too large. He now looked up and read
these words, "how hardly shall those who have riches enter into the kingdom of
God." The poor man sighe^ to find that it was impossible to enjo^ his fill of
both worlds, and went away sorrowing. If he ever afterward cast a thought
toward the happy land, it was only to regret that the road which led to it was
too narrow to admit any but the meagre children of want, who were not so
encumbered by wealth as to be too big for the passage. Had he read on he would
have seen that with God all things are possible.

Another advanced with much confidence of success, for having little worldly
riches or honors, the gate did not seem so strait to him. He got to the
threshhold triumphantly, and seemed to look back with disdain on all that he
was quitting. He soon found, however, that he was so bloated with pride, and
stuffed out with self sufficiency, that he could not get in. Nay, he was in a
worse way than the rich man just named; for he was willing to throw away some
of his outward luggage, whereas this man refused to part with a grain of that
vanity and self-applause which made him too big for the way. The sense of his
own worth so swelled him out, that he stuck fast in the gateway, and could
neither get in nor out. Finding now that he must cut off all those big thoughts
of himself if he wished to be reduced to such a size as to pass the gate, he
gave up all thoughts of it. He scorned that humility and self-denial which
might have shrunk him down to the proper dimensions; the more he insisted on
his own qualifications for entrance, the more impossible it came, for the
bigger he grew. Finding that he must become quite another manner of man before
he could hope to get in, he gave up the desire; and I now saw that though when
he set his face toward the happy land he could not get an inch forward* yet
the instant he made a motion to turn back into the world, his speed became
rapid enough, and he soon got back into the broad way.

Many, who for a time were brought down from their usual bulk by some
affliction, seemed to get in with ease. They now thought all their difficulties
over, for having been surfeited with the world, during their late
disappointment, they turned their backs upon it willingly enough. A fit of
sickness perhaps, which is very apt to reduce, had for a time brought their
bodies into subjection, so that they were able just to get in at the gateway;
but as soon as health and spirits returned, the way grew narrower and narrower
to them; they could not get on but turned short, and got back into the world. I
saw many attempt to enter who were stopped short by a large burden of worldly
cares; others by a load of idolatrous attachments; but I observed that nothing
proved a more complete bar than that vast bundle of prejudices with which
multitudes were loaded. Others were fatally obstructed by loads of bad habits
which they would not lay down, though they knew it prevented their entrance.
Some few, however, of most descriptions, who had kept their light alive by
craving constant supplies from the king's treasury, got through at last by a
strength which they felt not to be their own. One poor man, who carried the
largest bundle of bad habits I had seen, could not get on a step; he never
ceased however, to implore for light enough to see where his misery lay, he
threw down one of his bundles, then another, but all to little purpose, still
he could not stir. At last striving as if in agony (which is the true way of
entering) he threw down the heaviest article in his pack; this was selfishness,
the poor fellow felt relieved at once, his light burnt brightly and the rest of
his pack was as nothing.

Then I heard a great noise as of carpenters at work. I looked what this might
be, and saw many sturdy travelers, who finding they were too bulky to get
through, took it into their heads not to reduce themselves, but to widen the
gate; they hacked on this side and hewed on that; but all their hacking, and
hewing, and hammering, was to no purpose, they got only their labor for their
pains; it was possible they might have reduced themselves, but they could not
widen the way.

What grieved me most was to observe that many who had got on successfully a
good way, now stopped to rest, and to admire their own progress. While they
were thus valuing themselves on their seize, their light diminished.
While these were boasting how far they had left others behind, who had set out
much earlier, some slower Travelers, whose beginning had not been so
promising, but who had walked carefully, now out stripped them. These last
walked, "not as though they had already attained, but this one thing they did,
forgetting the things which were behind they pushed forward toward the mark for
the prize of their high calling." These, though naturally weak; yet, by laying
aside every weight, finished the race that was set before them. Those who had
kept their light burning, who were not wise in their own conceit, who laid
their help on one that is mighty, who had chosen to suffer affliction rather
than to enjoy the pleasures of sin, came at length to the happy land. They had
indeed the dark and shadowy valley to cross; but even there they found a rod
and a staff to comfort them. Their light, instead of being put out by the damps
of the valley of the shadow of death, often burnt with added brightness. Some
indeed suffered the terrors of a short eclipse; but even then their light, like
that of a dark lanthorn, was not put out; it was only hid for a while, and even
these often finished their course with joy. But be that as it might, the
instant they reached the Happy Land* all tears were wiped from their eyes, and
the King himself came forth and welcomed them into his presence, and put a
crown upon their heads, with these words, Well done good and faithful servant,
enter thou into the joy of thy LORD.

Z.

Next week will be published, The Black Prince a true story.

