[CHEAP REPOSITORY.]

THE Shepherd of Salisbury Plain. PART I.



PHILADELPHIA PRINTED BY B. and J. JOHNSON, NO. 147 HIGH STREET. [Price 4d. Or
2s. 9d. per do^*]

THE SHEPHERD OF SALISBURY-PLAIN.
MR. JOHNSON, a very worthy charitable Gentleman, was traveling some time ago
across one of those vast Plains which are well known in Wiltshire. It was a
fine summer's evening, and he rode slowly that he might have leisure to admire
God in the works of his creation. For this Gentleman was of opinion, that a
walk or a ride, was as proper a time as any to think about good things, for
which reason, on such occasions he seldom thought so much about his money, or
his trade, or public news, as at other times, that he might with more ease and
satisfaction enjoy the pious thoughts which the visible works of the great
Maker of heaven and earth are intended to raise in the mind.

His attention was all of a sudden called off by the barking of a Shepherd's
dog, and looking up he spied one of those little huts, which are here and there
to be seen on these great Downs; and near it was the Shepherd himself busily
employed with his dog in collecting together his vast flock of sheep. As he
drew nearer he perceived him to be a clean, well-looking, poor man, near fifty
years of age. His coat, though at first it had pr^bably been of one dark
color, had been in a long course of years so often patched with different
sorts of cloth, that it was now become hard to say which had been the original
color. But this, while it gave a plain proof of the Shepherd's poverty,
equally proved the exceeding neatness, industry, and good management of his
wife. His stockings no less proved her good housewifery, for they were entirely
covered with darns of different colored worsted, but had not a hole in them;
and his shirt, though nearly as coarse as the sails of a ship, was as white as
the drifted snow, and neatly mended where time had either made a re^t, or worn
it thin. This is a rule of judging, by which one shall seldom be (...). If I
meet with a labourer, hed^ing, (...), or mending the highways with his
stockings and shirt tight and whole, however mean and bad his other garments
are, I have seldom failed, on visiting his cottage, to find that also clean and
well ordered, and his wife notable, and worthy of encouragement. Whereas a poor
woman, who will be lying a-bed, or gossipping with her neighbors when she
ought (...) be fitting out her husband in a cleanly manner, will seldom be
found to be very good in other respects.

This was not the case with our Shepherd: And Mr. Johnson was not more struck
with the decency of his mean and frugal dress, than with his open honest
countenance, which bore strong marks of health, cheerfulness, and spirit.

Mr. Johnson, who was on a journey, and somewhat fearful from the appearance of
the sky, that rain was at no great distance, accosted the Shepherd with asking
what sort of weather he thought it would be on the morrow. -- "It will be such
weather as pleases me," answered the Shepherd. Though the answer was delivered
in the mildest and civilest tone that could be imagined, the Gentleman thought
the words themselves rather rude and surly, and asked him how that could be,
"Because," replied the Shepherd, "it will be such weather as shall please God,
and whatever pleases him always pleases me."

Mr. Johnson, who delighted in good (...) and good things, was very well
satisfied with his reply. For he justly thought that though an hypocrite may
easily contrive to appear better than he really is to a stranger; and that no
one should be too soon trusted, merely for having a few good words in his
mouth; yet as he knew that "out of the abundance of the heart the mouth
speaks," he always accustomed himself to judge favorably of those who had a
serious deportment and solid manner of speaking. "It looks as if it proceeded
from a good habit," said he, "and though I may now and then be deceived by it,
yet it has not often happened to me to be so. Whereas, if a man accosts me with
an idle, dissolute, vulgar, indecent, or profane expression, I have never been
deceived in him, but have generally on inquiry found his character to be as bad
as his language gave me room to expect."

He entered into conversation with the Shepherd in the following manner. Yours
is a troublesome life, honest friend, said he. To be sure, Sir, replied the
Shepherd, it is not a very lazy life; but it is not near so toilsome as that which
my GREAT MASTER led for my sake and he had every state and condition of life at
his choice, and chose a hard one -- while I only submit to the lot that is
appointed me. -- You are exposed to great cold and heat, said the Gentleman: --
true, Sir, said the Shepherd; but then I am not exposed to great temptations;
and so throwing one thing against another, God is pleased to contrive to make
things more equal than we poor, ignorant, short sighted creatures are apt to
think. David was happier when he kept his father's sheep on such a plain as
this, and singing some of his own Psalms perhaps, than ever he was when he
became king of Israel and Judah. And I dare say we should never have had some
of the most beautiful texts in all those fine Psalms, if he had not been a
Shepherd, which enabled him to make so many fine comparisons and similitudes,
as one may say, from a country life, flocks of sheep, hills, and valleys, and
fountains of water.

You think then, said the Gentleman, that a laborious life is a happy one. I
do, Sir, and more so especially, as it exposes a man to fewer sins. If King
Saul had continued a poor laborious man to the end of his days, he might have
lived happy and honest, and died a natural death in his bed at last, which you
know, Sir, was more than he did. But I speak with reverence, for it was divine
Providence overruled all that, you know, Sir, and I do not presume to make
comparisons. Besides, Sir, my employment has been particularly honored --
Moses was a Shepherd in the plains of Midian. -- I was to "Shepherds keeping
their flocks by night," that the angels appeared in Bethlehem, to tell the best
news, the gladdest tidings, that ever were revealed to poor sinful men: often,
and often has the thought warmed my poor heart in the coldest night, and filled
me with more joy and thankfulness than the best supper could have done.

Here the Shepherd stopped, for he began to feel that he had made too free, and
had talked too long. But Mr. Johnson was so well pleased with what he said, and
with the cheerful contented manner in which he said it, that he desired him to
go on freely, for that it was a pleasure to him to meet with a plain man, who
without any kind of learning but what he had got from the Bible, was able to
talk so well on a subject in which all men, high and low, rich and poor, are
equally concerned.

Indeed I am afraid I make too bold, Sir, for it better becomes me to listen to
such a Gentleman as you seem to be, than to talk in my poor way; but as I was
saying, Sir, I wonder all working men do not derive as great joy and delight as
I do from thinking how God has honored poverty! Oh! Sir, what great, or rich,
or mighty men have had such honor put on them, or their condition, as
Shepherds, Tent-makers, Fishermen, and Carpenters have had?

My honest friend, said the Gentleman, I perceive you are well acquainted with
scripture. Yes, Sir, pretty well, blessed be God! through his mercy I learnt to
read when I was a little boy; though reading was not so common when I was a
child, as, I am told, through the goodness of Providence, and the generosity of
the rich, it is likely to become now adays. I believe there is no day for the
last thirty years, that I have not peeped at my Bible* I defy any man to say he
cannot find time to read a verse; and a single text Sir, well followed and put
in practice every day, would make no bad figure at the year's end; three
hundred and sixty-five texts, without the loss of a moment's time, would make a
pretty stock, a little golden treasury, as one may say, from new year's day to
new year's day; and if children were brought up to it, they would look for
their text as naturally as they do for their breakfast. No laboring man, it is
true, has so much leisure as a Shepherd, for while the flock is feeding, I am
obliged to be (...) at such times I can now and then tap a shoe for my children
or myself, which is a great saving to us, and while I am doing that I repeat a
bit of a chapter, which makes the time pass pleasantly in this wild solitary
place. I can say the best part of the Bible by heart, I believe I should not
say the best part, for every part is good, but I mean the greatest part. I have
led but a lonely life, and have often had but little to eat, but my Bible has
been meat, drink and company to me, as I may say, and when want and trouble
have come upon me. I don't know what I should have done indeed, Sir, if I had
not had the promises of this book for my stay and support.

You have had great difficulties then? said Mr. Johnson. Why, as to that, Sir,
not more than neighbors fare, I have but little cause to complain, and much to
be thankful; but I have had some little struggles, as I will leave you to
judge. I have a wife and eight children, whom I bred up in that little cottage
which you see under the hill about half a mile off. What, that with the smoke
coming out of the chimney, said the Gentleman. O no, Sir, replied the Shepherd
smiling, we have seldom smoke in the evening, for we have little to cook, and
fireing is very dear in these parts. It Is that cottage which you see on the
left hand of the Church, near that little tuft of hawthorns. What that hovel
with only one room above and one below, with scarcely any chimney, how is it
possible you can live there with such a family! O! it is very possible and very
certain too, cried the Shepherd. How many better men have been worse lodged!
how many good christians have perished in prisons and dungeons, in comparison
of which my cottage is a palace. The house is very well, Sir, and if the rain
did not sometimes beat down upon us through the thatch when we are a-bed, I
should not desire a better; for I have health, peace, and liberty, and no man
makes me afraid.

Well, I will certainly call on you before it be long; but how can you contrive
to lodge so many children? We do the best we can, Sir. My poor wife is a very
sickly woman, or we should always have done tolerably well. There are no gentry
in the parish, so that she has not met with any great assistance in her
sickness. ^he good curate of the parish who lives in that pretty parsonage in
the valley, is very willing, but not very able to assist us on these trying
occasions, for he has little enough for himself and a large family into the
bargain. Yet he does what he can, and more than many richer men do, and more
than he can well afford. Besides that, his prayers and good advice we are
always sure of, and we are truly thankful for that, for a man must give, you
know, Sir, according to what he has, and not according to what he has not.

Are you in any distress at present? said Mr. Johnson. No, Sir, thank God,
replied the Shepherd. I get my shilling aday, and most of my children will soon
be able to earn something; for we have only three under five years of age.
Only! said the Gentleman, that is a heavy burden. Not at all; God fits the back
to it. Though my wife is not able to do any out of door work, yet she breeds up
our children to such habits of industry, that our little maids before they are
six years old can first get a halfpenny, and then a penny a day by knitting.
The boys who are too little to do hard work, get a trifle by keeping the birds
off the corn; for this the farmers will give them a penny or twopence, and now
and then a bit of bread and cheese into the bargain. When the season of crow
keeping is over, then they glean or pick stones; any thing is better than
idleness, Sir, and if they do not get a farthing by it, I would make them do it
just the same, for the sake of giving them early habits of labor.

So you see, Sir, I am not so badly off as many are; nay, if it were not that
it costs me so much in Potecary's stuff for my poor wife, I should reckon
myself well off. Nay, I do reckon myself well off, for blessed be God, he has
granted her life to my prayers, and I would work myself to a 'natomy, and live
on one meal a day to add any comfort to her valuable life; indeed I have often
done the last, and thought it no great matter neither.

While they were on this part of the discourse, a fine plump cherry-cheek
little girl ran up out of breath, with a smile on her young happy face, and
without taking any notice of the Gentleman, cried out with great joy -- Look
here, father, only see how much I have got today! Mr. Johnson was much struck
with her simplicity, but puzzled to know what was the occasion of this great
joy. On looking at her he perceived a small quantity of coarse wool, some of
which had found it is way through the holes of her clean, but scanty and ragged
woollen apron. The father said, this has been a successful day indeed, Molly,
but don't you see the Gentleman? Molly now made a curtsey down to the very
ground; while Mr. Johnson enquired into the cause of the mutual satisfaction
which both father and daughter had expressed, at the unusual good fortune of
the day.

Sir, said the Shepherd, poverty is a great sharpener of wits. -- My wife and I
cannot endure to see our children (poor as they are) without shoes and
stockings, not only on account of the pinching cold which cramps their poor
little limbs, but because it degrades and debases them; and poor people who
have but little regard to appearances will seldom be found to have any great
regard for honesty and goodness; I don't say this is always the case; but I am
sure it is so too often. Now shoes and stockings being very dear we could never
afford to get them without a little contrivance. I must show you how I manage
about the shoes when you condescend to call at our cottage, Sir; as to
stockings, this is one way we take to help get them. My young ones who are too
little to do much work, sometimes wander at odd hours over the hills for the
chance of finding what little wool the sheep may drop when they rub themselves,
as they are apt to do, in the bushes. This piece of fru^al industry is not
imaginary, but a real fact, as is the character of the Shepherd, and his
uncommon knowledge of the scriptures.
These scattered bits of wool the children pick out of the brambles, which I
see, have torn sad holes in Molly's apron today; they carry this wool home,
and when they have got a pretty parcel together, their mother cards it; for she
can sit and card in the chimney corner, when she is not able to wash, or work
about house. The biggest girl then spins it; it does very well for us without
dying, for poor people must not stand for the color of their stockings. After
this our little boys knit it for themselves, while they are employed in keeping
crows in the fields, and after they get home at night. As for the knitting the
girls and their mother do, that is chiefly for sale, which helps to pay our
rent.

Mr. Johnson lifted up his eyes in silent astonishment at the shifts which
honest poverty can make rather than beg or steal; and was surprised to think
how many ways of subsisting there are which those who live at their ease little
suspect. He secretly resolved to be more attentive to his own petty expenses
than he had hitherto been; and to be more watchful that nothing was wasted in
his family.

But to return to the Shepherd. Mr. Johnson told him that as he must needs be
at his friend's house, who lived many miles off that night, he could not as he
wished to do, make a visit to his cottage at present. But I will certainly do
it, said he on my return, for I long to see your wife and her nice little
family, and to be an eye witness of her neatness and good management. The poor
man's tears started into his eyes on hearing the commendation bestowed on his
wife; and wiping them off with the sleeve of his coat, for he was not worth a
handkerchief in the world, he said -- Oh! Sir, you just now, I am afraid,
called me an humble man, but indeed I am a very proud one. Proud! exclaimed Mr.
Johnson, I hope not -- Pride is a great sin, and as the poor are liable to it
as well as the rich, so good a man as you seem to be, ought to guard against
it. Sir, said he, you are right, but I am not proud of myself, God knows, I
have nothing to be proud of. I am a poor sinner, but indeed Sir, I am proud of
my wife: She is not only the most tidy, notable woman on the Plain, but she is
the kindest wise and mother, and the most contented, thankful christian that I
know. Last year I thought I should have lost her in a violent fit of the
rheumatism, caught by going to work too soon after her lying-in, I fear; for
it is but a bleak coldish place, as you may see, Sir, in winter, and sometimes
the snow lies so long under the hill, that I can hardly make myself a path to
get out and buy a few necessaries in the next village; and we are afraid to
send out the children, for fear they should be lost when the snow is deep. So,
as I was saying, the poor soul was very bad indeed, and for several weeks lost
the use of all her limbs except her hands; a merciful Providence spared her the
use of these, so that when she could not turn in her bed, she could contrive to
patch a rag or two for her family. She was always saying, had it not been for
the great goodness of God, she might have had the palsy instead of the
rheumatism, and then she could have done nothing -- but nobody had so many
mercies as she had.

I will not tell you what we suffered during that bitter weather, Sir, but my
wife's faith and patience during that trying time, were as good a lesson to me
as any Sermon I could hear, and yet Mr. Jenkins gave us very comfortable ones
too, that helped to keep up my spirits.

One Sunday afternoon when my wife was at the worst, as I was coming out of
Church, for I went one part of the day, and my eldest daughter the other, so my
poor wife was never left alone. As I was coming out of Church, I say, Mr.
Jenkins the minister called out to me, and asked me how my wife did, saying he
had been kept from coming to see her by the deep fall of snow, and indeed from
the parsonage-house to my hovel it was quite impassible. I gave him all the
particulars he asked, and I am afraid a good many more, for my heart was quite
full. He kindly gave me a shilling, and said he would certainly try to pick out
his way and come and see her in a day or two.

While he was talking to me, a plain farmer-looking Gentleman in boots, who
stood by, listened to all I said, but seemed to take no notice. It was Mr.
Jenkins's wife's father, who was come to pass the Christmas holidays at the
parsonage-house. I had always heard him spoken of as a plain frugal man, who
lived close himself, but was remarked to give away more than any of his
show-away neighbors.

Well! I went home with great spirits at this seasonable and unexpected supply
for we had tapped our last sixpence, and there was little work to be had on
account of the weather. I told my wife I was not come back empty handed. No, I
dare say not, says she, you have been serving a master "who fills the hungry
with good things, though he sends the rich empty away." True, Mary, says I:
we seldom fail to get good spiritual food from Mr. Jenkins, but to day he has
kindly supplied our bodily wants. She was more thankful when I showed her the
shilling, than I dare say, some of your great people are when they get an
hundred pounds.

Mr. Johnson's heart smote him when he heard such a value set upon a shilling;
surely, said he to himself, I will never waste another; but he said nothing to
the Shepherd, who thus pursued his story.

Next morning before I went out, I sent part of the money to buy a little ale
and brown sugar to put into her water gruel; which you know, Sir, made it nice
and nourishing. I went out to cleave wood in a farm yard, for there was no
standing out on the plain, after such a snow as had fallen in the night. I went
with a lighter heart than usual, because I had left my poor wife a little
better; and comfortably supplied for this day, and I now resolved more than
ever to trust in God for the supplies of the next. When I came back at night,
my wife fell a crying as soon as she saw me. This, I own I thought but a bad
return for the blessings she had so lately received, and so I told her. O, said
she, it is too much, we are too rich; I am now frightened, not lest we should
have no portion in this world, but for fear we should have our whole portion in
it. Look here, John! So saying she uncovered the bed whereon she lay, and
showed me two warm, thick, new blankets. I could not believe my own eyes, Sir,
because when I went out in the morning, I had left her with no other covering
than our little old thin blue rug. I was still more amazed when she put half a
crown into my hand, telling me she had had a visit from Mr. Jenkins, and Mr.
Jones, the latter of whom had bestowed all these good things upon us. Thus,
Sir, have our lives been crowned with mercies. My wife got about again, and I
do believe, under Providence, it was owing to these comforts; for the
rheumatism, Sir, without blankets by night and flannel by day, is but a baddish
job, especially to people who have little or no fire. She will always be a
weakly body; but thank God her soul prospers and is in health. But I beg your
pardon, Sir, for talking on at this rate. Not at all, not at all, said Mr.
Johnson; you shall certainly see me in a few days, Good night. So saying, he
slipped a crown into his hand, and rode off. Surely, said the Shepherd,
goodness and mercy have followed me all the days of my life, as he gave the
money to his wife when he got home at night.

As to Mr. Johnson, he found abundant matter for his thoughts during the rest
of his journey. On the whole he was more disposed to envy than to pity the
Shepherd. I have seldom seen, said he, so happy a man. It is a sort of
happiness which the world could not give, and which I plainly see, it has not
been able to take away. This must be the true spirit of Religion. I see more
and more, that true goodness is not merely a thing of words and opinions, but a
Living Principle brought into every common action of a man's life. What else
could have supported this poor couple under every bitter trial of want, and
sickness? No, my honest Shepherd, I do not pity, but I respect and even honor
thee; and I will visit thy poor hovel on my return to Salisbury with as much
pleasure as I am now going to the house of my friend.

If Mr. Johnson keeps his word in sending me the account of his visit to the
Shepherd's cottage, I shall be very glad to entertain my readers with it, and
shall conclude this first part.

(Z.)

The Lancashire Collier Cirl. A TRUE STORY.


IN a small village in Lancashire there lived a few years ago, an industrious
man and his wife, who had six children. The man himself used to work in a
neighboring colliery, while the wise took care of the family, attended also to
their little farm, and minded the dairy, and when all her other work was done,
she used (...) to sit down to spin. It (...) supposed that the children (...) a
moth^r, even when very young, (...) not suffered to be idle. The eldest
daughter worked with the mother at the spinning-wheel, which she learnt to
think a very pleasant employment, and she sometimes accompanied her work with a
cheerful hymn, or a good moral song, which her parents had taken care to teach
her.

But the second daughter of the name of Mary is the chief subject of the
present story: when this girl was nine years old, the honest collier finding
that he had but little employment for her above ground, took her to work with
him down in the coal-pit together with one of his boys, who was then no more
than seven years of age. These two children readily put their strength to the
basket; dragging the coals from the workmen to the mouth of the pit; and by
their joint labors they did the duty of one of those men, who are commonly
called "the drawers," clearing thereby no less than seven shillings a week for
their parents. It must be owned to be not impossible, that they may have
sometimes exerted themselves even beyond their strength; which is now and then
the case with little children, through the fault of those who (...) act the
work from them; but since in ^his case the father had an eye to them during the
hours of labor, while they had a prudent and tender mother also, to look after
them at home, there is no particular reason to suppose, that at the time of
which we are now speaking, they were ever much over-worked.

Here then let us stop to remark how different was the case of this numerous
family from that of many others, in the same humble situation of life. Mary and
her brother, so far from being a burden, were bringing a little fortune to
their parents, even when they were eight or ten years old; all the family were
getting forward by the help of these little creatures, and their worldly
comforts were now increasing on every side.

But alas! in the midst of this cheerful and contented diligence, on one fatal
day, while the good man was in the act of fixing a basket, in order to its
being wound up, the children standing near him in the coal-pit, some stones
fell from the top of the pit, one of which fell on the father's head, and
killed him on the spot. What a melancholy event was this! some dismal
circumstances also remain to be told, which were the consequences of it; but in
order to relieve the pain of my reader, I will here remark, that the most
grievous afflictions are often appointed by providence, to be the means, in one
way or other, of calling some extraordinary virtue into exercise; and
accordingly we shall see that the calamity which is now spoken of, will
introduce Mary, the young collier girl, to the farther good opinion of the
reader.

The mother, on hearing the news of her husband's death, together with the
description of the sad accident which gave occasion to it, received such a
shock, that her mind was not able to bear up under it; she became disordered in
her understanding, nor did she to the end of her life recover her senses. Being
now rendered extremely helpless, she was separated from her children by the
parish officers, who continued to take the charge of her for the space of five
years. A short time after the father's death, the eldest daughter, (the
spinner) married, and went from home; two of the brothers, (of the ages of nine
and seven,) were bound apprentices by the parish, which also took the charge of
two others, (one three years old, the other an infant) until they should be
sufficiently grown up to be bound out also.

In this place I cannot avoid observing, what a blessing it is to poor people
in this country, that parish officers are obliged, in all such cases of
necessity as that of which I am now speaking, to give maintenance to those,
who apply to them, and what a pity it is that this wise and merciful provision
of our laws should ever be abused. Mary, the girl of whom we are giving the
history, haing been already trained to industry, was by no means disposed to
seek any unnecessary help from the parish, and being now between eleven and
twelve years old, she determined to maintain herself, like a little independent
woman, by her usual work in the coal pit, where she was generally able after
this time to earn at least a shilling a day; in three or four years afterward
earning no less than two shillings. And now I would ask my young female
readers, what they think was the manner in which she employed all this fruit of
her industry? Do you imagine that she laid it out in vanity of dress, in nice
eating and drinking, or other needless expense? or do you suppose that she
would now indulge herself in idleness on one or two days in the week, because
she had got enough for herself to live upon during the four or five working
days? no: I trust you will have formed no such expectation: I hope you will be
well aware what Mary did with her money, by having already reflected what you
would have done with it in the like case. She in the first place released the
parish from the burden of maintaining her mother, which she did as soon as she
was arrived at the age of sixteen, being extremely anxious to take this poor
disordered helpless parent home to live with herself: she then relieved the
parish officers from the charge of one of her brothers, and she continued to
provide for him, until he died. Having been taught never to consider her duty
as done, while any part of it seemed to be left undone, she afterward
undertook the maintenance of one of her other brothers, who remained with her
during sixteen weeks illness, at the end of which period she followed him to
the grave, burying him at her own expense. After about seven years the mother
died also, and was buried in like manner by this dutiful child, without any
assistance from the parish.

If any of my readers should here inquire how it could be possible for so young
a child to support all these relations, many of them being also occasionally
very burdensome through their sickness? the answer is, that in the case of
these extraordinary calls upon her, she used to betake herself to extraordinary
labor, sometimes earning no less than three shillings and sixpence in the
four and twenty hours, by taking what is called "a double turn" in the
coal-pits.

The ready submission of Mary to her parents when she was in early life, is so
pleasing a part of her character, that it may be proper in this place again, to
make a remark upon it. Let my young readers recollect that in submission to the
command of her father, or rather to that law of God which enjoins parental
obedience, she cheerfully followed him down into the coal-pit, burying herself
in the bowels of the earth, and there at a tender age, without excusing herself
on account of her sex, she joined in the same work with the miners, a race of
men rough indeed, but highly useful to the community, of whom I am also happy
to say that they have the character of being honest and faithful, as well as
remarkably courageous, and that they have given moreover some striking
instances of their readiness to receive religious instruction, when offered to
them. Among these men to their honor be it spoken, Mary's virtue was safe, and
after the death of her father, she is even said to have received protection, as
well as assistance from them; her fatigue having been sometimes lessened,
through their lending her a helping hand, with great feeling and kindness.

But though Mary's mind was naturally strong, and her constitution of body was
very stout also, yet toward the end of the period which has been spoken of,
she began to be bowed down in some measure, by the afflictions and labors which
she had endured. It was evident that she had now been led to exert herself
beyond her strength. How lamentable is it, that while so many people in the
world are idle, and are contracting diseases both of body and mind, from the
abundance of their riches, and from want of some wholesome and useful exercise,
there should be any bending like Mary, under their work, hidden in coal-pits,
or from some cause or other removed from observation! what a pity is it I say,
that the former should not employ a little of their time and money in
endeavoring to find these distressed objects! And I may also add, how
lamentable a thing is it, that while so many poor people are seen, who are apt
to complain too soon, there should be any, who do not tell their distresses to
those who can help them (which I trust however does not often happen) till it
is almost too late!

I was observing that Mary began about this time evidently to lose her
strength, and her head was also troubled by some of those strange and
unpleasant imaginations, which are known by persons conversant with the
diseases of the poor, to be no unusual consequence of bad food, and great
bodily fatigue, joined with excessive grief. At first she was not aware that
she labored under any disorder, for she had seldom experienced ill health,
while her relations were alive; and it seems probable that the comfort which
she derived from the reflection of affording them support, and the pleasing
sensations which arose during the exercise of her attention to them had served
both to keep up her spirits, and to prevent her constitution from breaking down.

I trust it is not superstitious to suppose that when sincere christians come,
as Mary now did, into very trying circumstances, they may hope, notwithstanding
any appearances to the contrary, to experience still in one way or other, the
peculiar blessing of Heaven; I do not expect that such persons will be free
from pain, poverty, or sickness, or other worldly evils, for it is often quite
the contrary, but then I believe that these very afflictions will be made the
means of increasing their trust in God, and prove in the end, (I mean either
here or hereafter) to have been entirely designed for their good. The
calamities of Mary were now risen to such a height, that those who are not
accustomed to view things in this religious and most comforting light, might be
ready to imagine that the Almighty had forsaken her, and that there is little
use in serving him. Let us here number up her afflictions. She had seen with
her own eyes the dreadful death of her father, she had for a long time
witnessed the affecting condition of her mother, who used to follow her about
the house, without knowing the hand by which she was supported; Mary, besides
this, had attended the long and drooping sickness of her two brothers; and now
having fallen sick herself, being both weak in body, and sadly enfeebled in her
mind, she was dwelling all alone in a little comfortless habitation, having
been deprived by death of every one of those dear relatives, the sight of whom
had many a time cheered her spirits, while the idea of supplying them with a
comfortable subsistence, had been used to sweeten her employment, and lighten
the severity of her toil.

It was at this period of her extremity that it pleased God to raise up for her
some kind friends, in the manner which I shall now describe.

A lady of the same village heard that a servant's place was vacant in a
neighboring family, and advised Mary, feeble as she was, to present herself
there, as a candidate to fill this comparatively easy and comfortable
situation. Accordingly the poor girl, with an anxious heart, went to offer her
services; she mentioned with her usual honesty, what had been the habits of her
former life, and what was the state of her health also* ^t seemed undoubtedly
much against her interest to do so, but it was perfectly right; and how can any
of us hope for the blessing of God, or expect any true comfort in our minds
when we fall into affliction, if we fly to unfair means of rescuing ourselves
out of it; and instead of trusting in God, trust to our own little frauds, and
crooked contrivances.

The answer made to Mary's application was unfavourable, for it was thought,
and indeed it was gently hinted, that a young woman, hitherto so much exposed
as she had been, was not likely to prove a very fit inmate in a sober private
family.

Mary felt very keenly this unhappy suspicion against her character; but what
could she do? she walked very quietly away, with a down-cast look, and with a
mind quite broken down by this fresh affliction and disaster. The owners of the
mansion happened however to observe her countenance, and the peculiar modesty
of her manner, as she was taking her departure, for her patient and silent
grief touched them far more sensibly than any loud complaints could have done
and they therefore determined to make some inquiries concerning her. The
gentleman went himself on the same day to the colliery, where the master of the
pit replied to his questions, nearly in the following terms. "Sir, said he, she
is a poor girl that has over-worked herself, for she has undertaken what we
call task work, which is very hard labor; she is one of the best girls that
ever I knew, and is respected by all the colliers, and though (added he) I
cannot deny that now and then my men take a cup too much, which is apt to make
the^ sometimes quarrelsome, yet they never suffer a bad (...) to be spoken or
an affront to be offered to a girl in the pit, without punishing the fellow who
may be guilty, and making him heartily ashamed of himself."

This rule of decency and propriety toward young women, established by a set
of coarse miners, is here recorded for the benefit of some of those persons,
who are pleased to call themselves their betters.

The Gentleman, after a very minute and full examination, was so well satisfied
of the good character of Mary, that she was received into his service, in which
she has now been living comfortably for about the space of six years. Her
health is recovered, her habits of diligence are still very great, and she is
said to be of a remarkably modest, humble and contented spirit. It may not be
improper to mention, that the master of the house in which she is, has
furnished all the materials of this story.

I will now take leave of my readers, by remarking, that the little tale which
I have been reciting, seems to me to hold out the following useful lessons.

In the first place, I think it may teach the poor, that they can seldom be in
any condition of life so low, as to prevent their rising to some degree of
independence, if they choose to exert themselves, and that there can be no
situation whatever so mean, as to forbid the practice of many noble virtues. It
may instruct the rich not to turn the poor from their doors, merely on account
of first appearances, but rather to examine into their character, expecting
sometimes to find peculiar modesty and merit, even in the most exposed
situations. This story also may encourage the afflicted to serve and trust God
in every extremity: and finally, it may teach all descriptions of persons, who
may have to pass through dangerous and trying circumstances, that they may
expect the divine protection and blessing, provided they are not needlessly
throwing themselves in the way of temptation, but are endeav^^^ng like Mary to
learn and labor truly to get their own living, and to do their duty in that
state of life, unto which it has pleased God to call them.

FINIS.

