Rev. Mr. Buckminster's Sermon, DELIVERED ON THE 22d February, 1800.

RELIGION AND RIGHTEOUSNESS THE BASIS OF NATIONAL HONOR AND PROSPERITY.

A SERMON, PREACHED TO THE North and South Parishes IN PORTSMOUTH, FRATERNALLY
UNITED IN OBSERVANCE OF THE 22d February, 1800; The day appointed by Congress
to pay tributary respect TO THE MEMORY OF Genesis Washington.

BY JOSEPH BUCKMINSTER, A. M.

PORTSMOUTH, NEW HAMPSHIRE, PRINTED AT THE UNITED STATES ORACLE-OFFICE, BY
CHARLES PIERCE. 1800.

A SERMON.
BRETHREN, AND FELLOW-CITIZENS: --
THIS day is rendered illustrious in the annals of our country, by giving birth
to a citizen, whom it has pleased GOD to honor with distinguished honors, and
to render uncommonly acceptable to the multitude of his brethren.

The early presages, which he gave of martial bravery, skill, and prudence,
have been more than answered, in his successfully leading the armies of his
country to repel her aggressors, secure her rights, and establish her in the
enjoyment of peace and independence. The country that he defended, at the head
of a band of heroes, he rescued from confusion and imbecility, at the head of a
band of patriots, by conciliating their affections, and combining their
interests, in a constitution of government, which, in its operation, has
justified the eulogies of speculation, and rendered our country, probably, the
freest and happiest in the world. Nobly divesting himself of all civil or
military distinction, he retired to the walks of private life, obtaining a
triumph in self conquest, that few mortals have obtained. But the unanimous
suffrages of his country drew him, reluctant, from his retreat, and placed him
at the head of the administration of our government. In this novel station,
during an eight years presidency, at an epoch, most momentous to America, in
its foreign relations and internal interests, he proved himself the wise
politician, the discerning, firm, and disinterested patriot, the inviolable
friend of his country, and guardian of her rights.

National gratitude and affection have for several years influenced the
citizens of America to distinguish the birthday of so illustrious a
Benefactor, by festive celebrations and sentimental tributary acknowledgments.
But, alas! this mode of celebration is no more! Neither dignity nor usefulness
exempt from death. The Sovereign LORD of life, a few weeks since, summoned from
his intercourse with mortals, this Father of his country, our shield in war,
our pride in peace.

The supreme council of our nation, in token of respect to the memory of the
deceased, and to quicken our attention to the voice of Providence, have
separated this anniversary to national mourning, and devotion. In obedience to
their summons, we are assembled to mingle our tears and condolence, to humble
ourselves at the feet of unerring wisdom and righteousness, to unite our
supplications and thanksgivings to him who gives and who takes away, earnestly
begging that the hand that has broken, would bind us up, and cause a harvest of
national blessings to arise from a nation's tears.

I have sincerely hoped that some municipal arrangement would have excused me
from a part in this day's exercises; that we should have been favored with the
efforts of other talents; this I have the rather hoped, as I have already
mingled my mite with the offerings of the rich, which the partiality of friends
has drawn from its obscurity.

In contemplating the duties of the day, I have been utterly at a loss as to
what would be proper or expedient. The voluntary tributes of respect, that have
flowed from the highest sources, have left scarce any thing to be added on this
anniversary; 'and what can the man do that comes after the king.' My first
resolution was only to have read on this occasion, that admirable address of
our late worthy President, poured forth with such parental affection and
solicitude, in the dignified attitude of disrobing himself of the insignia of
office, and retiring to the rank of a private citizen. My resolution is
changed, not from an apprehension that any thing can be offered you so worthy
your attention, but from the reflection that this is already in the hands of
most, and will be perused and reperused, with leisurly attention, while a spark
of enlightened patriotism warms our bosoms. Relying upon your usual, candid and
patient attention, I have concluded to attempt an illustration of a subject at
all times interesting, at the present, peculiarly so.

That Religion and Righteousness are the Basis of National Honor and
Prosperity, and the surest mean of National Security and Peace. Will such a
subject, be deemed altogether foreign to the design of the day? It harmonizes
with the principles, spirit, and letter, of our invaluable political legacy;
and if our deceased patron retains a wish for his country, I doubt not it is,
that it would distinguish itself as much by its piety and righteousness, as it
has been distinguished by the favor and benediction of heaven. For he now
perfectly knows what, while living, he sublimely taught, That "OF ALL THE
DISPOSITIONS AND HABITS WHICH LEAD TO POLITICAL PROSPERITY, RELIGION AND
MORALITY, ARE INDISPENSABLE SUPPORTS."

The portion of scripture selected as the theme of our discourse, is a part of
the charge of Moses, that venerable patriot, and leader of the children of
Israel; when he viewed his dissolution at hand, and would make every effort to
secure to the people whom he loved, national honor and happiness. The words you
will read

DEUTERONOMY, IV. 6. Keep therefore and do them, for this is your wisdom and
your understanding in the fight of the nations which shall hear all these
statutes, and say, surely this great nation is a wise and understanding people.
THE striking resemblance, in a great variety of particulars, between this
renowned leader of Israel and the venerated character whose loss we this day
deplore, has been happily made the subject of tributary respect to the memory
of the latter.

In nothing, does there appear a more striking resemblance, than in the
disinterestedness of their patriotism, and their concern that the people of
their charge should be prosperous and happy after their decease. The illusions
of fancy and affection aside, the palm must be given to Moses in every respect,
for he had supernatural intercourse with Heaven, was clothed with commission
and power from on high, and on trying emergencies had sensible testimonies and
aid from GOD. But if our beloved WASHINGTON, from similarity of circumstances,
was lead to make this Jewish leader his pattern, he has been a most honorable
and dignified copyist.

When Moses perceived his dissolution at hand, he summoned the tribes of Israel
around him, and addresses them upon their national hopes and prospects -- gives
a general summary of their history since they came out of Egypt, repeats the
statutes and judgments that GOD had given, charging them to keep and do them if
they would be wise, respectable, or happy. If the terms used by this Jewish
Legislator are not perfectly synonimous, statutes may refer to their religious
obligations, and judgments to their civil and political, in the sacred
observance of which they should secure prosperity at home, and renown abroad
among the nations. For Religion and Righteousness are the surest Basis of
National Honor and Prosperity, and the direct means of Tranquillity and Peace.

To national honor and glory, a due proportion of eminent talents, and of
laudible acquirments in knowledge and virtue, are necessary. And they will
excel, who have the most brilliant talents, happily united to most
unsophisticated integrity. Though men's talents are not originally of their own
choosing, yet what they are to society, is generally the result of education.

If there were no object of religion, and no moral government exercised over
the world, yet the impressions and effects produced upon the human mind and
heart, by the belief and contemplation of infinite perfection, have a natural,
and almost mechanic tendency, to form the human character to great and noble
conceptions, and to stimulate to worthy actions and achievements. The mind in
contemplating elevated and enlarged objects, is, from principles inseparable
from our nature, itself elevated and enlarged. The universe of being affords no
object worthy to be compared, in elevation and dignity, with him whose name
alone is JEHOVAH, and the only object of religious homage. The exercises and
affections which the due contemplation of his adorable perfections, excite,
strengthen and invigorate the faculties of the man, repress and regulate the
disorderly propensities, and form a basis for distinguished mental and bodily
exertions.

If to a speculative belief of the existence of a GOD, be added a consciousness
of a state of friendship and reconciliation with him, and of interest in his
perfections, the force of motive to virtuous deeds, and of restraint from
vicious ones, is complete. What sacrifices have been made, what dangers have
been hazarded, what feats of valor have been achieved, for the benefit of
nations, in the belief of the approving smiles of heaven, and in the hope of
rewards which GOD only can bestow? That in the nature of things, religion, as
it consists in the belief of a GOD, and in exercises and affections that such a
belief excites, forms instruments of national honor and prosperity, and is
calculated to secure those objects so interesting and important to any people.
And on the contrary, the sentence of an inspired pen upon the grosser sensual
indulgencies, is, in its measure, true of every species and degree of impiety
and immorality, 'They take away the heart.' They enervate and unman the body.
They effeminate and debase the mind. They bring on premature decrepitude and
death. In the vortex of sensuality, luxury, and impiety, most nations have
first ingulphed their national honor, strength, and valor; and then their
national existence.

The natural tendency of religion to promote the honor and prosperity of a
people, and to secure their peace and tranquillity, receives infinite occasion
by its securing to them the supernatural influence and benediction of heaven.

Whatever attempts have been, or may be made, to obliterate a sense of Deity,
or efface impressions of his existence from the human mind, the proofs of his
existence are, and ever will be, as numerous as the creatures that exist. "The
invisible things of him, from the creation of the world, are clearly seen,
being understood by the things that are made, even his eternal power and
Godhead." God's providential inspection and government are the necessary
result of his existence and perfections; which government must be accommodated
to the nature and capacities of its respective objects. As man is a rational
and moral agent, the providential government of GOD, as it respects man, must
be of the moral kind. And as nations exist, in their social and national
capacities, only in this world, so the dispensations of heaven toward them
will be influenced by their religious and moral character and conduct. "Those,
who honor GOD, he will honor, but those who despise him, he will lightly
esteem." The prevalence of virtue, piety, and righteousness, in a nation,
secure the favor of him, whose it is to build and to plant, whose it is to make
great, and give strength unto all. His favor is life to a nation, no less than
to an individual, and his loving kindness is the source of their honor,
prosperity, and peace. "They, whom he blesses, are blessed;" and none can
disannul it. They, upon whom he frowns, must wither; for none can arrest, or
divert the effects of his displeasure. So just and natural are these deductions
and conclusions of reason, that a most eminent, correct and judicious writer
has thought it proper to put the following expressions into the lips of a
heathen: "If there is a power above us, and that there is, all nature cries
aloud in all her works. He must delight in virtue, and that which he delights
in, must be happy."

But should a doubt remain, respecting the correctness of these conclusions, it
must be wholly removed by explicit declarations from the source of unerring
truth, of which innumerable might be adduced, similar to these: "The eyes of
the Lord are upon the righteous, and his ears are open to their cry; but the
face of the Lord is against them that do evil." "Righteousness exalts a
nation; but sin is the reproach of any people." Nay JEHOVAH himself has
condescended to publish to us the rule of his administration toward nations.
By the prophet Jeremiah, we hear him saying. "At what instant I shall speak
concerning a nation, and concerning a kingdom, to pluck up, to pull down, and
to destroy, if that nation against whom I have pronounced, turn from their
evil, I will repent of the evil that I thought to do unto them. And at what
instant I shall speak concerning a nation, and concerning a kingdom, to build
and to plant it, if it do evil in my sight, that it obey not my voice, I will
repent of the good wherewith I said I would benefit them." If this rule of
administration was more appropriate to the nation to whom GOD gave his oracles
direct, yet the terms in which it is expressed forbid our confining it to them,
and the history of GOD'S dealings with the nations of the earth; so far as it
can be collected from authentic data, justifies its universal application.

In the history of GOD'S ancient people, flowing from an inspired source, we
find a scrupulous observance of this rule. While they regarded the laws,
statutes, and ordinances of the Lord, "He suffered no man to harm them, yea, he
reproved Kings for their sakes; saying touch not mine anointed, and do my
Prophets no harm." "He gave them rest on every side, made them to ride upon the
high places of the earth; he fed them with the finest of the wheat, and caused
them to abound with all rich treasure." Their renown went forth among other
nations, and disposed them to say, "What nation is so great, that has GOD so
nigh them." "What nation is so great, that has statutes and judgments so
righteous." But on the other hand, when they forsook GOD, and bowed down to
idols; when they disregarded his statutes, transgressed his commandments, and
neglected his ordinances, wild and portentous clouds darkened their political
hemisphere, their strength withered, the neighboring nations exacted upon them,
and the sword, the famine, or the pestilence bespoke the displeasure of heaven,
and called upon them to consider from whence they had fallen, to repent, and
return to the LORD. No part of the Jewish history, in any period of their
existence, is destitute of illustrations of these remarks: But the times of the
Judges afford the most striking comment upon the words of our text, and the
fullest confirmation of the truth of our proposition: That religion and
righteousness are the surest basis of national honor and prosperity, and the
direct means of tranquillity and peace.

Happy would it be for every nation, who, to the law that was given by Moses,
have superadded the grace and truth that came by Jesus Christ, to revive an
attention to this subject, and regard the charge of this renowned leader of
Israel, to the people, who were to him dear as his own soul. Thrice happy would
it be for the people of this land, who in various respects resemble GOD'S
ancient Israel, over whom the arm of power and mercy has been marvellously
displayed, to harmonize their views, sentiments, and feelings in an enlightened
belief, and sacred regard of this inspired charge, this incontrovertible maxim
of sound policy.

An unpleasant diversity of sentiment and difference of opinion have arisen in
this country respecting the line of political conduct, most directly tending to
secure our national honor, prosperity, and peace. National antipathy, and
passionate national attachment have doubtless had their influence in
originating and cherishing this state of public sentiment, the principal ground
of hope to our enemies, of fear and anxiety to the disinterested patriot;
which, the discerning eye of our revered President foreseeing, his faithful
tongue has thus addressed us. "Inveterate antipathies against particular
nations, and passionate attachments for others, should be excluded; and in the
place of them just and amicable feelings toward all should be cultivated. The
nation, which indulges toward another an habitual hatred, or an habitual
fondness, is in some degree, a slave. It is a slave to its animosity or
affection, either of which is sufficient to lead it astray from its duty and
its interest." Upon which subject our departed sage continues to discourse in
sentiments and expressions which deserve to be indelibly engraven on all our
memories. While not perfectly harmonious in our views and apprehensions, which
in this state of imperfection, is hardly to be expected.

It is a pleasing and promising consideration that the advocates of the
respective opinions equally profess to be warmed by the fire of patriotism, to
be animated by a love to their country, and a desire to secure and promote its
best interest. If this be so, the unhappy division is only the result of the
power of such prejudices as are consistent with integrity, and which time and
reflection, candor and condescension will remove.

But however accurate our sentiments, or just our views, respecting the line of
political conduct that this country ought to pursue, it is a truth, sanctioned
by experience, and confirmed by the voice of GOD, that it is only by combining
with them religion and righteousness, a sacred regard to GOD and his authority,
that we shall be established, and preserve our name and praise among the
nations of the earth: In contempt or neglect of these, no line of policy, can
procure for us, or secure to us, the necessary requisites to national
prosperity and glory. How accurately, upon this subject, thought and spoke our
beloved WASHINGTON. "Of all the dispositions and habits which lead to political
prosperity, religion and morality are indispensable supports. In vain would
that man claim the tribute of patriotism, who would labor to subvert these
great pillars of human happiness, these firmest props of the duties of men and
citizens. The mere politician, equally with the pious man, ought to respect and
cherish them. A volume could not trace all their connections with public and
private felicity. -- And let us with caution indulge the supposition, that
morality can be maintained without religion. Whatever may be conceded to the
influence of refined education, on minds of a peculiar structure; reason and
experience both forbid us to expect that national morality can prevail, in
exclusion of religious principles."

"It is substantially true that virtue or morality is a necessary spring of
popular government. The rule indeed extends with more or less force to every
species of free government. Who that is a friend to it can look with
indifference upon attempts to shake the foundation of the fabric."

If then our bosoms glow with the ardor of patriotism, if we are animated by a
love of our country, and a sincere desire to promote her prosperity and glory
-- let us lose all party feuds, animosities, and contentions, in a
conscientious veneration of the great object of worship, and an exemplary
observance of all his precepts, and let the only contest among the enlightened
citizens of America be, who shall excel in rational piety and exemplary virtue,
and so rival his competitors in exalted patriotism. "They who thus honor GOD,
he will honor". "The meek he will guide in judgment, the meek he will teach his
way." And wherein any err in judgment, under the secret influence of prejudice
or affection, he will in time reveal it to them.

A vicious, wicked and unprincipled man, who casts off the fear of GOD, and
ridicules the obligations of religion and righteousness, though he may rejoice
in national prosperity and peace, roils the fountain head of their existence,
and poisons the channel through which they are conveyed. The pious fearers of
GOD and workers of righteousness are the chariots of a nation and the horsemen
thereof. The piety of Joseph in the house of Potipher, and in the court of
Pharaoh, procured to that family and nation a train of providential blessings.
The impiety of Manasseh pulled down upon the nation of Israel tokens of divine
displeasure for several generations. Had there been but ten righteous persons
in the land of Sodom, for their sake its awful destruction would have been
averted.

While these remarks apply to all nations of the earth, they have a special
emphasis and energy with reference to our own. The manner in which America was
settled; the character, principles and views of our ancestors, impose upon us
special obligations to regard the statutes and judgments of GOD. The purity in
which GOD has preserved his revealed religion to us, the extensive religious,
as well as civil privileges that he has indulged us; the remarkable answers of
prayer that he has given to his people in their exigencies, and manifestations
of his power in their mounts of difficulty, would greatly aggravate their
guilt, should they turn from the Lord, and despise his ordinances: and our
folly as well as guilt would be without a parellel, if, with the instructive
admonition of the effects of infidelity upon the nations of Europe before our
eyes, we should rush headlong in the career, which has pulled down such
accumulated vengeance on their heads.

A spirit of infidelity, displayed in a studied endeavor to loosen and
dissolve the obligations of revealed religion, has long infected the nations of
Europe, originating probably in high station, it has descended through every
grade, and has more or less leavened the whole lump. If some nations have been
more active or zealous in the attempt, yet, according to the decision of the
Savior in another case, no one in this could have a face to cast a stone at his
neighbor. Had we an inspired historian, who, while relating and describing
events as they have arisen, could also declare the secret moral and remote
causes of them. I doubt not, we should hear him addressing the nations of
Europe, under the awful calamities that threaten their existence, in language
like this "Have you not procured th^se things unto yourselves, in that you have
forsaken the LORD your GOD, and have despised his statutes and contemned his
ordinances, your own wickedness corrects you, and your backslidings reprove
you; know therefore and see that it is an evil thing and bitter that you have
forsaken the LORD your GOD."

While we see little attempt in national humiliations, penitence, or
reformations to remove the cause of the LORD'S controversy, we may justly
tremble at the probable issue, for when GOD contendeth, he will overcome. Nor
is their any counsel, understanding or might, against the LORD. But we should
be more anxiously concerned, and feelingly alive to prevent or remove a similar
cause of divine controversy with ourselves.

The seeds of infidelity have been long scattered in our country, a variety of
causes have conspired, within a few years past, to manure and cherish them, and
they have sprung up and spread with threatening aspect. No longer confined to
the retreats of speculation, nor to the amusement, of the disputatious circle;
the principles have infected almost every rank, and shed a baneful practical
influence. But with so solemn an example as the dreadful state of Europe before
our eyes; and with such repeated tokens of GOD'S displeasure in pestilential
desolations, heightened by the late sudden removal of eminent characters; shall
we not receive warning? shall we not be awakened to consideration, be excited
to return from whence we have aposta^ised, and recover the pristine American
veneration for GOD and his government, and practical regard to that glorious
system of truth and duty which he has given and preserved to us? This would be
our wisdom and understanding, this would be the means of our renown among the
nations of the earth; and, what is more, it would secure to our rising
Republic, the guiding care, and protecting benediction of him whose it is to
make great and give strength unto all.

May we not be encouraged to this duty by the fond, and, I would flatter
myself, not enthusiastic hope, that GOD designs America as the happy instrument
of supporting his banner against the flood of infidelity that has deluged so
great a part of the civilized world. Do not the views and principles with which
this country was settled; its situation with respect to the nations of Europe;
The remarkable dispensations of Heaven toward it with reference to her
religious, as well as political interests, give rational ground for this hope?
Is it not strengthened by the reflection, that GOD reserved an asylum here for
rational and constitutional liberty. He honored and succeeded the bold attempt
of freemen to secure their rights in a government of laws of their own making,
administered by men of their own choosing, and will GOD suffer the most
essential prop of such a government so soon to fail? Without a prevalence of
virtue, republics cannot exist; without religion, virtue cannot prevail; and no
religion affords so firm a basis, or exhibits such animating motives, to the
prevalence of virtue as that which brings life and immortality to light, and
holds forth rewards and punishments stamped with eternity. If we retain any
reverence for revelation, we must believe that GOD will preserve his Church in
the world. He may remove it from one place, but it shall settle in another. The
gates of hell shall not prevail against it. "The Kings of the earth may set
themselves and the rulers take counsel together, against the LORD and against
his anointed, they may, presumptuously say, "Let us break their bands asunder
and cast away their cords from us:" but in the inimitable language of
scripture, "He that sits in the heavens will laugh, the LORD shall have them
in derision; then shall he speak to them in his wrath, and ^ex them in his sore
displeasure. From these considerations, may not the friend of religion, of good
order, of liberty and of righteousness, encourage a rational hope that GOD will
yet maintain his throne among us, and display his banner, because of truth, and
may not every such dignified patriot be encouraged in every rational exertion
to revive a practical regard to the statutes and judgments of the LORD our GOD.

Let it not then be thought a vain repetition, if I again exhort my enlightened
and reflecting fellow-citizens, to soften all their unpleasant feelings, and
embosom all their party views in a united veneration for GOD and his
government; and in a conscientious and exemplary observance of his laws and
institutions. Thus shall we prove, that though we are men, and liable to err
under the impressions to which humanity is subject, yet we are indeed the
friends of our country, and would do every thing in our power to secure to it
the shield and benediction of him, "who can make a little one to become a
thousand, and a small one a strong nation."

If then there is any confidence to be placed in the deductions of reason, or
any credit to be given to the declarations of scripture: We learn, from this
subject, who are the true friends of any country, and the mean of securing to
it national honor and prosperity. They are those who, rationally and devoutly,
reverence, adore, and fear GOD, who keep his righteous judgments, and
conscienciously walk in his statutes and ordinances. I would not be understood
to insinuate that men void of religious principle; and even contemners of
religious duties, may not have an attachment to their country, and a desire for
its civil and political prosperity and glory; nay, they may expose themselves
to great dangers, and make great sacrifices to accomplish these objects. But by
their impiety and profaneness they weaken the energy of those inspiring
principles that serve to ennoble, invigorate, and enlarge the mind, and
introduce practices that enervate and corrupt. They take away the heavenly
defense and security of a people, and render it necessary for him who rules
among the nations by righteous things in judgment, to testify his displeasure
against those that despise his laws and contemn his ordinances. One sinner
destroys much good, and may be the occasion of incalculable evil. In the
present state of the world Fleets and Armies are a necessary mean of security
and defense; but they will eventually prove a broken reed to the nation that
despises the GOD of armies, and pours contempt upon his authority. "There is no
counsel, understanding or might against the LORD." He can disappoint the best
concerted plans of the wise Ahithophels, and shroud their flattering prospects,
in wild confusion. The true fearer of GOD, and worker of righteousness is the
friend of his country and the mean of her defense, and when such is the
character of the rulers of any nation, her renown will go forth among her
neighbors, and she may calculate upon national honor, and prosperity.

This subject directs the honest, independent, and patriotic citizen, in the
exercise of his high birthright as a freeman, in giving his suffrages for
civil rulers. This, though a natural right of man, is enjoyed but by a very
small proportion of our race. They, who are dignified by the high privilege,
ought to honor themselves by a dignified exercise of it, and not carelessly
despise their birthright, much less sell it, at a less premium, than a mess of
pottage, to answer the purposes of pride, or passion; of envy or ambition.

The character of a nation is justly decided by the character of their rulers,
especially in a free and elective government. And they have a mighty influence
in confirming or changing the character of a people. If the rulers of a people
are men of principle, who fear GOD and observe his statutes, the nation will be
owned in this approving light by him who superintends the affairs of nations,
and it will give a train to his providential dispensations. Every friend to his
country, in the choice of civil rulers, ought to have his eye upon the faithful
of the land, upon such as fear GOD and regard his statutes. It is to be
expected, other things being equal, that we should give our suffrages for men,
whose political views and apprehensions accord with our own. Yet scarcely could
that man vindicate his claim to the m^^d of patriotism, who should give his
suffrage for a Candidate, who had no other claim to the dignified station of a
civil ruler, or who was destitute of the commanding influence of religious
principle.

Jethro's advice can never be controverted in principle, nor disregarded in
practice with impunity, "choose out from among all the people able men, men of
truth, such as fear GOD and hate coveteousness," -- and to them confide the
administration of your affairs.

Our Constitutions of Government have happily formed no religious
establishments, nor excluded any man of honorable integrity, from office; yet
by their invariably instituting oaths as introductory to offices and
qualifications for them. The enlightened citizens of America loudly proclaim
their sense of the importance of religious principle. For what security is
there for the faithful discharge of any office, if a sense of religious
obligation desert the oaths that bind the subject to his duty. It is but
echoing the general voice of America therefore, to say, that as any nation
would be safe and happy, it is of the first importance that they should raise
to office, in their respective grades, men who reverence and adore a GOD, who
acknowledge themselves accountable to him, who respect th^^^ institutions of
worship, whose beneficial (...) upon society, ages of experience can (...), who
expect a day of judgment, and a state of retribution. For such characters we
should devoutly pray, to such we should endeavor to form the rising hope of
America, on such should our eyes be placed, and to them should we give our
suffrages.

We live in an eventful period of the world and the nations; who have heard our
fame, gaze upon us; with peculiar advantages we are acting a great part in the
scale of empires. Let us be concerned to secure his favor, who, though he has
caused grief and spread a cloud upon our brightness, will have compassion
according to the multitude of his tender mercies. This we can do only by
keeping his statutes and judgments. This will be our wisdom and understanding
in the sight of all nations, and will eventually produce this honorable
testimony from them, Surely this great Nation is a wise and understanding
People.

FINIS.

