Anniversary Sermon, ON THE DEATH OF Genesis Washington.

A DISCOURSE, DELIVERED IN THE SOUTH, AND IN THE NORTH CHURCH IN PORTSMOUTH,
DECEMBER 14, 1800: THE ANNIVERSARY OF THE DEATH OF George Washington, LATE
PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES, AND COMMANDER IN CHIEF OF THEIR ARMIES.

BY JOSEPH BUCKMINSTER, A. M.

THE MEMORY OF THE JUST IS BLESSED. -- Solomon. PORTSMOUTH, NEW HAMPSHIRE,
PRINTED AT THE UNITED STATES' ORACLE-OFFICE BY CHARLES PIERCE. DECEMBER 1800.

A Discourse, etc.
JUDGES XIth, PART OF THE 39th and 40th VERSES. And it was a custom in Israel,
that the daughters of Israel went yearly to lament the daughter of Jephthah the
Gileadite.
ANNIVERSARY commemorations of interesting and affecting events are, probably,
as ancient as society on earth. They are, however, of early observance. If they
did not originate in divine direction and appointment, they receive countenance
from the institutions of heaven, for GOD strictly enjoined that the annually
returning night, which was so fatal to the first born of Egypt, and so
propitious to the first born of Israel, should be observed as a solemn,
religious, and joyful festival, by the Israelites, throughout all their
generations. Our text records a mournful anniversary, observed by the daughters
of Israel, in commemoration of the untimely death of one of their sex, who
nobly consented to die in obedience to the sacred, and solemn, though rash vow
of her father, when he returned in triumph from conquering his countries
enemies.

The particulars of this strange event, as related in scripture, are simply
these. -- The children of Israel, thrown into great consternation, by a
threatened invasion of the children of Ammon, apply to Jephthah, whom they had
before exiled, to return, take the command of their armies, and lead them forth
against the Ammonites. Jephthah upbraids them with the injury they had done him
but yields to their request, upon condition, that at his victorious return,
they would submit to him as their Judge and Ruler; to this they unanimously
agree.

Jephthah, placed at the head of his forces, addresses a rational and manly
remonstrance to the Ammonites, admonishing them to desist from their hostile
intentions and array. The king of the children of Ammon would not hearken to
the words that were sent him. "And the spirit of the LORD came upon Jephthah,"
and he passed through the coasts of Israel to meet the Ammonites. But before he
gave them battle, "Jephthah vowed a vow unto the LORD, and said, if thou will
without fail deliver the children of Ammon into my hands, then it shall be,
that whatsoever comes forth of the doors of my house to meet me, when I return
in peace from the children of Ammon, shall surely be the LORD's, and I will
offer it up for a burnt offering." God gave him victory over his enemies. The
children of Ammon were subdued under him; and in all the pride of conquest,
Jephthah was now returning to his house in Mizpeh. But, what transitions are
there often in human hopes and expectations! While he was approaching the seat,
which he, doubtless, fondly imagined would be the abode of honor and happiness,
behold, his daughter, with timbrels and dances, came out to meet her revered
Parent, to welcome his return, and celebrate his victory. She was his only
child: beside her, he had not son or daughter. In recollection of his vow, what
must have been the feelings of a parent's heart! He rent his clothes, to
express his anguish, and cries, "Alas! my daughter, thou have brought me very
low; for I have opened my mouth to the LORD, and I cannot go back." With filial
deference and affection -- with an ardor of heroic patriotism, perhaps without
a parallel, she meets the anguish of her father, and says, "My Father, if thou
have opened thy mouth to the LORD, do to me, according to that which has
proceeded out of thy mouth: Forasmuch as the LORD has taken vengeance for thee
on thine enemies, even of the children of Ammon." After the indulgence of one
small request, that her life might be spared for two months, her father did
unto her according to his vow! "And it was a custom in Israel, that the
daughters of Israel went yearly to lament the daughter of Jephthah the
Gileadite," or, they went to celebrate the praises of the daughter of Jephthah,
and to mourn for her.

There might be much curios inquiry, as there has been much warm contention,
respecting the obligation of this vow, or the lawfulness of the action
consequent upon it; but after all, how could any accurate decision be formed
without a more thorough knowledge of the improvement of Jephthah's mind, or of
the means he had enjoyed of acquiring just ideas, or of rising superior to the
power of superstition, from the idolatrous practices of the neighboring
nations, among whom, probably, he had been an exile? It was at this time the
custom of nations to sacrifice their children to their idols. The power of
superstition, over minds unenlightened, is beyond conception. There can be no
scruple that Jephthah thought himself bound in conscience to fulfill his vow;
nothing but this could have influenced him to such a sacrifice. And it is
equally evident that his daughter was fired with a noble spirit of patriotism,
and filial deference, to yield, with such a grace, to such a disposal of
herself, and become a voluntary sacrifice on the altar of her country, for its
happy deliverance from threatened invasion, in the entire overthrow of its
enemies. But though, upon this subject, censure or panegyric may be mistakingly
applied, yet admiration is a just tribute; and we certainly must applaud the
annual testimony of respect paid by the daughters of Israel to the memory of
this female patriot. Will then a distant and partial imitation of their example
awaken censure, or provoke reprehension, when the season returns, that, to us,
was marked with the most interesting and affecting event?

This is the anniversary of the death of GEORGE WASHINGTON, that first of
Pariots -- the friend of man -- the father of his country -- and, under GOD,
its protector and deliverer. On this day, the last year, death obtained one of
his greatest conquests, in triumphing over one, who had before rison above his
enemies, above his cotemporaries; had obtained an entire conquest over himself,
and stood unconquerable by all, but death. And though the incense of his praise
then perfumed the whole country, and nations beside his own eulogized his
memory, yet, as this first anniversary since his decease occurs upon the day in
which we are called together to worship GOD, and to notice his providence as
well as his word, would it not wear the guise of public ingratitude, and
criminal forgetfulness or omission, to let it pass without some public notice.

I hope, and believe, we are all above paying undue honors to man, or raising
any mortal above the style of humanity. We are all formed of the dust, and
molded out of the clay; and perfection is a claim that no mortal can support.
Though there are that are called Gods, many, and Lords, many, yet to us, let
there be but one GOD, even the father of our LORD JESUS CHRIST, the father of
mercies and the GOD of all grace; and him only let us honor with divine honors.
Yet there is a secondary and subordinate honor due to those whom GOD has
dignified in the administration of his providence, and whom he has made the
instruments of public and extensive blessings. Honor is due to such characters
while they live, their memories should be dear when they are gone, their
virtues and exploits ought to be held in grateful remembrance, and their
counsels and admonitions treated with deference and respect. It is mentioned in
the sacred volume, much to the reproach of the cotemporary generation, that,
when a poor wise man, by his wisdom, delivered a city, that was besieged by a
great and powerful enemy, no man remembered that same poor man, but forgot him.
And it is a charge of Apostolic authority, "Remember them that have the rule
over you." Can we then be censured in devoting a few moments to the melancholy
and grateful recollection of the virtues that adorned -- of the exploits that
signalized -- and of the counsels that crowned the life, of that first of men,
and most illustrious of Patriots, who was once all our own, and who may still
be ours, if we will listen to his counsels, and imitate his example.

GEORGE WASHINGTON seemed originally designed of heaven as an eminent public
benefactor. He was born for others, and not for himself. And, in coincidence
with this design, he was denied those objects of paternal affection which are
so apt to divide and distract the heart; and introduce rival interests to the
public good. In personal qualifications, which, though of inferior moment, are
not without their use, he was distinguished. His size, air, attitude,
deportment, and general expression were such as to command respect, and
prepossess the beholder with favorable sentiments: but these were far exceeded
by the talents and virtues of the immortal inhabitant.

It is not to be disputed, that there have been individuals who have rivalled
the great and good WASHINGTON in some individual talent, or human excellence;
but they have been usually balanced by great defects in other talents necessary
to form the eminent (...). General WASHINGTON was endowed with (...) uncommon
portion of all the virtues and talents that dignify and adorn the human
character, and render men useful to their fellow men: and it would be hard to
decide in which he excelled.

Many there have been who have had minds more cultivated and improved by a
regular attention to a systematic education; and more thoroughly versed in the
abstruser parts of science: but where will you find a man possessed of a
greater fund of useful knowledge, or who knew how to make a better use of it
upon all proper occasions. His correspondencies and communications, whether in
his public or private capacities, would do honor to the first of scholars, and
most polished of men; no man ever knew better the how and the when; no man ever
discovered greater address in rendering them subservient to his governing
object, the public good.

If there was a talent that was preeminent in General WASHINGTON, and in which
he excelled all others, was it not a talent of conciliating clashing interests,
of meeting and directing public opinion, without any zealous interference with
the course of things? His native, inviolable, integrity and fidelity; his
steady, uniform, and unperverted patriotism seconded the influence of this
talent; and his firm belief of the overruling providence of GOD, and of his own
accountableness to the Judge of quick and dead, secured to his country all the
good that could be derived from such a talent, and guarded it from all the evil
to which it would expose, in the breast of unprincipled, or aspiring ambition.
By this, more than by any thing else, was that uncommon man formed and
qualified to act the great and novel part assigned him on the theater of time;
to harmonize and concentrate the sentiments of distant and diversified states,
to create and form defensive armies collected from these several states, to
soften their jealousies, amalgamate their manners, and render them bands of
brethren, animated by one common spirit, and directing their energies to one
common object. By this was he also admirably qualified to preside in Council,
and lead the intrigues of designing subtilty, and the errors of mistaking
judgment, to the same eventual happy issue. But time will permit only to
mention a few of the more prominent features in the character of this excellent
man, whose days were numbered and finished, the last fourteenth of December.

The deeds and exploits of the illustrious WASHINGTON were numerous and various
as his virtues; and he might be many times hailed the instrumental Savior of
his country: early called into her service, he acquitted himself with honor and
dignity: for though his military career commenced with less happy auspices, and
savage ambush and dexterity put to slight the army with which he was connected,
yet the scattered remains were principally indebted to his valor and address
that any of them escaped the fate of their brethren.

When our revolutionary struggle became of so serious a nature, that we must
either repel our exactors, or be under tribute; the presence of General
WASHINGTON at the head of our armies, while it gave order, life, and dignity to
them, raised the drooping spirits of the country, and like an electric shock,
vivified the whole continent. And not only in his whole military career, and
its happy issue, in our peace and independence, must he be acknowledged our
first Benefactor: But in a variety of instances he seems to have been our only
shield and deliverer. On that memorable Christmas eve, when his diminished,
disbanding, and deserted army, were retreating before a flushed, an indignant,
and exulting foe -- when every face gathered paleness, and almost every heart
failed with fear, how did his unexpected, heroic, and successful attack at
Trenton change the face of things, and spread gleams of light upon our national
horizon? He might then be called the Savior of his country. But, not to
multiply instances from his military career; his rising superior to the attacks
of slander and intrigue; his remaining unmoved and steady to his purpose,
notwithstanding the ungenerous and humiliating desertions and returns he
experienced, which would have soured, if not destroyed, almost any patriotism
but his, are so many instances, in which he may be called the Savior of his
country.

When the revolutionary army was about disbanding, having defended their
country, vindicated her rights, and secured to her the enjoyment of peace and
independence, the influence and address of their illustrious commander
disconcerted and suppressed an insidious and artful design, formed and ripened
by some of the aspiring officery, of turning their arms against the country,
unless Congress complied with conditions, that were at that time, absolutely
impracticable; here, again he was the savior of his country.

Retiring from the field, surrounded with glory, that few conquerors have
acquired, he is soon called to preside in that illustrious assemblage of
Patriots, who were delegated to form a new constitution of government for
confederate America. And the name of WASHINGTON stands first on the resplendant
roll to that Constitution of government, which was the instrument of saving the
country from imbecility, confusion and contempt.

Being summoned to the chief magistracy, by the unanimous suffrage of his
country, at a period most eventful, when a political foreign tempest was just
bursting forth, which has shaken and affected almost every nation; in which
state of things, he could find no aid to his judgment but in his inviolable
integrity, and enlightened patriotism, which were assailed by every artifice:
He chose for his country, that neutral station which has hitherto repelled the
force of the tempest, and raised her in wealth, reputation, and happiness. Here
again WASHINGTON may be hailed the savior, of his country. And, would the time
permit, instances might be multiplied, in which his signature, no less than his
sword, has been the mean of averting portentous evils, of procuring to his
country momentous blessings; for which the justice of posterity will fully
accredit him.

These are few of the virtues and exploits, that formed the character, and
dignified the life of that first of men, of heroes, and of patriots, whom GOD
raised up to be the champion of Liberty, the defender of his country, and the
benefactor of mankind. In what human character was there ever combined a
greater assemblage of useful and ornamental virtues? What hand was ever the
instrument of more eminent or various political and civil blessings? What
channel was ever more replete with providential benedictions? But they, who are
called Gods, must die like men. This fourteenth of December saw the great and
good WASHINGTON fall like one of the people: his memory and his virtues are
justly dear to grateful country, and ought to be frequently recollected with a
mournful pleasure. But he can now be of no farther use to us, than as we imbibe
his spirit, and cover ourselves with his mantle, by listening to his counsels
and imitating his example.

"Say thou, America, thou mournest great WASHINGTON?"

"Says life the same?"

"He mourns the dead, who lives as they desire."

Peculiarly fortunate for us, we are not left to conjecture or collect the
wishes and desires of our deceased father and benefactor, from his general
character, or diversified communications at different periods of life; he has
furnished us with them, at a time, and in circumstances, when they could flow
from nothing but a spirit of disinterested patriotism: when no hopes, or fears
could influence him to keep back any thing that he thought could be profitable
to us: and when the love of his country, a parental solicitude, for its honor
and welfare, were, not only professedly, but most manifestly, the predominant
passions of his heart. The wishes and desires of parental solicitude, the
counsels and cautions of enlightened patriotism, he has left us in an address,
which is justly styled a political legacy, of greater value to this country
than a mountain of Gold, or a mine of Diamonds; so long as justice and wisdom
are esteemed virtues on earth, or liberty and order have any votaries, it
cannot fail to be esteemed and eulogized. And would to GOD, that, being
annually read, it might regulate the sentiments, and influence the practice of
the enlightened citizens of America to the latest generations. The experience
we have had, in the few years that have elapsed since it was delivered, must
have increased our ideas of its importance to us, and exalted our admiration of
the enlightened and discerning patriotism of its author, if it does not lead us
to imagine that, raised to the style of a prophet, he was favored with a vision
of the impending dangers of his country.

Presuming that the love of liberty was so "interwoven with the ligaments of
our hearts," that it could not be lost but with the dissolution of our frame,
our deceased Counselor begins by assuring us "it is of infinite moment that we
should properly estimate the immense value of our national union, to our
collective and individual happiness," and that we should indignantly frown upon
the first dawning of every attempt to shake or enfeeble it; or to disturb that
unity of government, which is the palladium of our political safety and
prosperity.

In contemplating the causes that might disturb our union, he cautions against
those that may arise from characterizing parties by geographical
discriminations, which may convey the idea, that there is a real difference of
local interests and views; and says, "The name of American, which belongs to
you, in your national capacity, must always exalt the just pride of patriotism,
more than any appellation derived from local discriminations." He admonishes us
to cherish an enlightened confidence in the government we have established; and
to give it our decided support; asserting that "respect for its authourity,
compliance with its laws, and acquiescence in its measures, are duties enjoined
by the fundamental maxims of true liberty," and that all "obstructions to the
execution of the laws, all combinations and associations, under whatever
plausible character, with the real design to direct, control, counteract, or
awe the regular deliberation and action of the constituted authorities, are
destructive of this fundamental principle, and of fatal tendency." All real
evils should be redressed in a constitutional way, and all innovations and
changes effected in the way that is prescribed by the constitution itself.

He describes in frightful colors the evils, both foreign and domestic, that
arise from parties in a State; and, with parental solicitude, exhorts us to
watch against them; for when they prevail, there is confusion and every evil
work; and the public good is made but a tennis ball tossed from the mouth of
party to party, only with a view of securing them the victory. And a greater
than WASHINGTON has said, "that a kingdom or house divided against itself,
cannot stand, but comes to desolation."

He cautions those entrusted with the administration of government, to confine
themselves within their constitutional spheres, avoiding in the exercise of the
powers of one department, to encroach upon another.

He admonishes of the evils that will arise from passionate national
attachments, or national antipathies, and exhorts us, with a spirit of
impartiality, to treat all nations with dignified respect, national integrity,
and commercial hospitality; avoiding permanent alliances with any nation.

"Against the insidious wiles of foreign influence, (I conjure you to believe
me, fellow citizens) says he, the jealousy of a free people ought to be
constantly awake;" "But that jealousy, to be useful, must be impartial; else it
becomes the instrument of the very influence to be avoided."

He admonishes us to cherish public credit; to avoid occasions of expense; but
cheerfully and seasonably meet them, as they necessarily arise; that we may not
load posterity with an encumbered patrimony, or render it a bequest scarcely
worth their receiving. After all,

This great and good man was fully sensible, that all his counsel and advice,
his cautions and admonitions, would be of no avail, without a respectful and
national regard to the duties and obligations of religion and morality. This,
therefore, he enjoins upon us as of most momentous consequence; asserting, that
no citizen can claim the tribute of patriotism, or be justly entitled to the
confidence of man, who endeavors to subvert, or does not use his influence to
support "these great pillars of human happiness; these firmest props of the
duties of men and citizens," and he unites the voice of reason and experience
against the delusive, though fashionable idea "that national morality can
prevail in exclusion of religious principle."

Thus, as with his dying breath, admonished and warned, counseled and advised,
that wife, enlightened, tried and approved patriot, who being all his
country's, and having done all that mortal could do, to secure and perpetuate
her independence and prosperity, laid down the burden of mortality, the last
fourteenth of December, and joined his kindred spirits. His memory will ever be
deservedly most dear, and the sons and daughters of America may yearly mourn
for him, and celebrate his praises. But in vain do we pretend to revere his
memory, or pour the grateful incense on his name, unless we respect his
counsels and imitate his virtues.

O that GOD would cause a double portion of his spirit to descend and rest upon
all the officers of our government, in their respective grades, and successive
elevations; that he would animate the breast of every citizen of America, with
a principle of as pure and disinterested patriotism, as that which glowed and
triumphed in the breast of WASHINGTON: then might we adopt the exclamation of
the Psalmist, "Happy is the people that is in such a case, happy the people
whose GOD is the LORD."

As the death of this great man most loudly proclaimed the vanity of all human
glory, and forced a conviction of the impropriety of placing confidence in any
being blow GOD, or of leaning upon any arm but the arm of the Almighty; so the
return of the anniversary should renew the conviction, and influence us to
"cease from man whose breath is in his nostril, for wherein is he to be
accounted of." Happy is that individual, happy that people, who, taught by the
discipline of Providence, and the counsels of wisdom, have all their
expectations from him, who rules in the kingdoms of men, and gives them to
whomsoever he pleases. He plants, and he plucks up; he builds, and pulls down.
Amidst all the wild confusion that has marked the administration of his
providence over this apostate world, GOD is carrying on his own purposes, and
accomplishing his own designs; and will bring them to an eventful issue, in the
entire change and dissolution of this visible frame of things. But there shall
be a new heavens, and a new earth wherein righteousness shall dwell. GOD has
founded a kingdom that cannot be shaken, a dominion that shall last forever.
Let us be concerned to become subjects of this kingdom, and heirs of the glory
that shall be there displayed. This honor and happiness is secured, only by
believing in CHRIST, by obeying his gospel, and keeping his commandments, who
is not the savior of a country merely, but, of the whole world. To him with
the Father and Holy Ghost be glory and honor, praise and dominion, forever and
ever,

AMEN.

