[CHEAP REPOSITORY.] [No. VI.^

THE Two Wealthy Farmers; Or, the History of Mr. BRAGWELL.

PART II.



PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED BY B. and J. JOHNSON, No. 147 HIGH STREET.

1800.

[Price 4 Cents Or 2^. 4d. (...) doz.]

THE Two Wealthy Farmers, etc
PART II.
Bragwell. What do you want to make me believe that there are two ways of
keeping the commandments.


Worthy. No! but there may be two ways of understanding them.


Bragwell. Well! I am not afraid to be put to the proof, I defy any man to say
I do not keep at least the four first that are on the left side of the altar
piece.


Worthy. If you can prove that, I shall be more ready to believe you observe
those of the other table, for he who does his duty to God will be likely to do
his duty to his neighbor also.


Bragwell. What! do you think that I serve two Gods? Do you think then that I
make graven images, and worship stocks or sto^^es? Do you take me for a Papist
or an Idolator?


Worthy. Don't triumph quite so soon master Bragwell. Pray is there nothing in
the world you prefer to GOD, and thus make an idol of? Do you not love your
money or your lands, or your crops, or your cattle, or your own will, and your
own way rather better than you love GOD? Do you never think of these with more
pleasure than you think of Him, and follow them more eagerly than your
religious duty?


Bragwell. O there is nothing about that in the 20th chapter of Exodus.


Worthy. But Jesus Christ has said. "He that loves father or mother more than
me is not worthy of me." Now it is certainly a man's duty to love his father
and mother, nay, it would be wicked not to love them, and yet we must not love
even these more than our Creator and our Savior. Well, I think on this
principle, your heart pleads guilty to the breach of the first and second
commandments, let us proceed to the third.


Bragwell. This is about swearing, is it not!

Mr. Worthy, who had observed Bragwell guilty of much profaneness in using the
name of his maker, (though all such offensive words have been avoided in
writing this history) now told him that he had been waiting the whole day for
an opportunity to reprove him, for his frequent breach of the third commandment.

Good L -- d, I break the third commandment; said Bragwell, no indeed hardly
ever. I once used to swear a little to be sure, but I vow to G -- d I never do
it now except now and then, when I happen to be in a passion: and in such a
case, why good G -- d, you know the sin is with those who provoke me and not
with me, but, upon my soul, I don't think I have sworn an oath these three
months; no not I faith, as I hope to be saved.


Worthy. And yet you have broken this holy law no less than five or six times
in the last speech you have made.


Bragwell. Lord bless me. Sure you mistake. Good heavens, Mr. Worthy, I call G
-- d to witness I have neither cursed nor swore since I have been in the house.


Worthy. Mr. Bragwell this is the way in which many who call themselves very
good sort of people deceive themselves. What is it no profanation of the name
of God to use it lightly, irreverently and familiarly as you have done? Our
Savior has not only told us not to swear by the immediate name of God, but he
has said, swear not at all, neither by heaven nor by the earth, and in order to
prevent our inventing any other irreligious exclamations or expressions, he has
even added, but let your communication be yea, yea, and nay, nay, for
whatsoever is more than this simple affirmation and denial comes of evil.


Bragwell. Well, well, I must take a little more care I believe, I vow to
heaven I did not know there had been so much harm in it, but my daughters
seldom speak without using some of these words, and yet they wanted to make me
believe the other day that it was monstrous vulgar to swear.


Worthy. Women, even gentlewomen, who ought to correct this evil habit in their
fathers, and husbands, and children, are too apt to encourage it by their own
practice. And indeed they betray the profaneness of their own minds also by it,
for none who truly venerate the holy name of God, can either profane it in this
manner themselves, or hear others do so without being exceedingly pained at it.


Bragwell Well, since you are so hard upon me I believe I must even give up
this point -- so let us pass on to the next, and here I tread upon sure ground,
for as sharp as you are upon me, you cannot accuse me of being a
sabbath-breaker, since I go to church every Sunday of my life unless on some
very extraordinary occasion.


Worthy. For those occasions the gospel allows, by saying, "the sabbath was
made for man and not man for the sabbath." Our own sickness or attending on the
sickness of others are lawful impediments.


Bragwell. Yes, and I am now and then obliged to look at a drove of beasts, or
to go a journey, or to take some medicine, or perhaps some friend may call upno
me, or it may be very cold, or very hot or very rainy.


Worthy. Poor excuses Mr. Bragwell, I am afraid these will not pass on the day
of judgment. But how is the rest of your Sunday spent?


Bragwell. O why I assure you, I often go to church in the afternoon also, and
even if I am ever so sleepy.


Worthy. And so you finish your nap at church I suppose?


Bragwell. Why as to that to be sure we do contrive to have something a little
nicer than common for dinner on a Sunday; in consequence of which one eats you
know a little more than ordinary; and having nothing to do on that day, one has
more leisure to take a cheerful glass; and all these things will make one a
little heavy you know.


Worthy. And don't you take a little ride in the morning, and look at your
sheep when the weather is good, and so fill your mind just before you go to
church with the thoughts of them, and when you come away again don't you settle
an account, or write a few letters of business?


Bragwell. I cannot say but I do, but that is nothing to any body as long as I
set a good example by keeping to my church.


Worthy. And how do you pass your Sunday evenings?


Bragwell. My wise and daughters go a visiting of a sunday afternoon. My
daughters are glad to get out at any rate, and as to my wife, she says, that
being ready dressed it is a pity to lose the opportunity, besides it saves her
time on a week day; so then you see I have it all my own way, and when I have
got rid of the ladies, who are ready to faint at the smell of tobacco, I can
venture to smoke a pipe and drink a sober glass of punch with half a dozen
friends.


Worthy. Which punch being made of smuggled brandy, and drank on the Lord's day
in very vain, as well as profane and worldly company, you are enabled to break
both the law of GOD and that of your country at a stroke: and I suppose when
you get together, you speak of your cattle or of your crops, after which
perhaps you talk over a few of your neighbors faults, and then you brag a
little of your own wealth or your own atchievments.


Bragwell. Why you seem to know us so well, that any one would think you had
been sitting behind the curtain, and yet you are a little mistaken too, for I
think we have hardly said a word for several of our last Sundays on any thing
but politics.


Worthy. And do you find that you improve your Christian charity by that
subject?


Bragwell. Why to be sure we do quarrel 'till we are very near fighting, that
is the worst on it.


Worthy. And then you call names and swear a little I suppose.


Bragwell. Why when one is contradicted and put in a passion you know flesh and
blood cannot bear it.


Worthy. And when all your friends are gone home what becomes of the rest of
the evening?


Bragwell. That is just as it happens, sometimes I read the newspaper; and as
one is generally most tired on the days one does nothing, I go to-bed earlier
than on other days, that I may be more fit to get up to my business the next
morning.


Worthy. So you shorten Sunday as much as you can, by cutting off a bit at both
ends I suppose, for I take it for granted you lie a little later in the morning?


Bragwell. Come, Come. We shall not get through the whole ten tonight if you
stand snubbing one at this rate. You may pass over the fifth, for my father and
mother have been dead since I was a boy, so I am clear of that scrape.


Worthy. There are however many relative duties in that commandment; unkindness
to all kindred is forbidden.


Bragwell. O if you mean my turning off my nephew Tom, the plowboy, you must
not blame me for that, it was all my wife's fault. He was as good a lad as ever
lived to be sure, and my own brother's son, but my wife could not bear that a
boy in a carter's frock should be about the house who called her aunt. We
quarrelled like dog and cat about it; and when he was turned away we did not
speak for a week.


Worthy. Which was a fresh breach of the commandment, a worthy nephew turned
out of doors, and a wife not spoken to for a week, are no very convincing
proofs of your observance of the fifth commandment.


Bragwell. Well I long to come to the sixth for you don't think I commit murder
I hope.


Worthy. I am not sure of that.


Bragwell. What kill any body.


Worthy. Why the laws of the land indeed and the disgrace attending it are
almost enough to keep any man from actual murder; let me ask however, do you
never give way to unjust anger, and passion, and revenge? as for instance, do
you never feel your resentment kindle against some of the politicians who
contradict you on a Sunday night? and do you never push your animosity against
somebody that has affronted you, further than the occasion will justify?


Bragwell. Harkee Mr. Worthy, I am a man of substance, and nobody, shall offend
me without my being even with him. So as to injuring a man, if he affronts me
first there is nothing but good reason in that.


Worthy. Very well! only bear in mind that you wilfully break this commandment,
whether you abuse your servant, are angry at your wife, watch for a moment to
revenge an injury on your neighbor, or even wreak your passion on a harmless
beast; for you have then the seeds of murder working in your breast; and if
there were no law, no gibbet to check you, and no fear of disgrace neither, I
am not sure where you would stop.


Bragwell. Why Mr. Worthy you have a strange way of explaining the
commandments, so you set me down for a murderer merely because I bear hatred to
a man who has done me a hurt, and am glad to do him a like injury in my turn.
-- I am sure I should want spirit if I did not.


Worthy. I go by the scripture rule, which says, "he that hates his brother is
a murderer," and again "love your enemies, bless them that curse you, and pray
for them that despitefully use you and persecute you." Besides, Mr. Bragwell
you made it a part of your boast that you said the Lord's prayer every day,
wherein you pray to God to forgive you your trespasses as you forgive them that
tresspass against you. -- If therefore you do not forgive them that trespass
against you, in that case, you pray daily that your own trespasses may never be
forgiven.


Bragwell. Well, come let us make haste and get through these commandments. The
next is, "thou shall not commit adultry," thank God neither I nor my family can
be said to break the seventh commandment.


Worthy. Here again, remember how Christ himself has said, "whosoever looks on a
woman to lust after her, has already committed adultry with her in his heart."
These are no far fetched expressions of mine. Mr. Bragwell, they are the words
of Jesus Christ. I hope you will not charge him with having carried things too
far, for if you do, you charge him with being mistaken in the religion he
taught, and this can only be accounted for by supposing him an impostor.


Bragwell. Why upon my word, Mr. Worthy, I don't like these sayings of his,
which you quote upon me so often, and that is the truth of it, and I cannot say
I feel much disposed to believe them.


Worthy. I hope you believe in Jesus Christ. I hope you believe that creed of
yours, which you also boasted of your repeating so regularly.


Bragwell. Well, well, I Will believe any thing you say rather than stand
quarrelling with you.


Worthy. I hope then you will allow, that since it is committing adultry to
look at a woman with even an irregular thought, it follows from the same rule,
that all immodest dress in your daughters, or indecent jests and double
meanings in yourself, all loose songs or novels, and all diversions also which
have a like dangerous tendency, are forbidden by the seventh commandment; for
it is most plain from what Christ has said, that it takes in not only the act
but the inclination, the desire, the indulged imagination, the act is only the
last and highest degree of any sin, the topmost round as if it were of a
ladder, to which all the lower rounds are only as so many steps and stages.


Bragwell. Strict indeed, Mr. Worthy, but let us get on to the next, you wont
pretend to say I steal. Mr. Bragwell I trust was never known to rob on the
highway, to break open his neighbor's house, or to use false weights or
measures.


Worthy. No, nor have you ever been under any temptation to do it, and yet
there are a thousand ways of breaking the eighth commandment besides actual
stealing, for instance, do you never hide the faults of the goods you sell, and
heighten the faults of those you buy? Do you never take advantage of an
ignorant dealer, and ask more for a thing than it is worth? Do you never turn
the distressed circumstances of a man who has something to sell, to your own
unfair benefit, and thus act as unjustly by him as if you had stolen? Do you
never cut off a shilling from a workman's wages under a pretense which your
conscience cannot justify? Do you never pass off an unsound horse, for a sound
one? Do you never conceal the real rent of your estate from the overseers, and
thereby rob the poor rates of their legal due?


Bragwell. Pooh! these things are doing every day. I shall not go to set up for
being better than my neighbors in these sort of things, these little matters
will pass muster. -- I don't set up for a reformer. -- If I am as good as the
rest of my neighbors no man can call me to account; I Am not worse I trust, and
I don't pretend to be better.


Worthy. You must be tried hereafter at the bar of God, and not by a jury of
your fellow creatures; and the scriptures are given us, in order to show by
what rule we shall be judged. How many or how few do as you do, is quite aside
from the question; Jesus Christ has even told us to strive to enter in at the
strait gate, so that we ought rather to take fright, from our being like the
common run of people, than to take comfort from our being so.


Bragwell. Come, I don't like all this close work -- it makes a man feel I
don't know how -- I don't find myself so happy as I did -- I don't like this
fishing in troubled waters -- I Am as merry as a grig when I let these things
alone -- I Am glad we are got to the ninth. But I suppose I shall be lugged in
there too head and shoulders. Any one who did not know me, would really think I
was a great sinner, by your way of putting things; I don't bear false witness
however.


Worthy. You mean, I suppose, you would not swear away a man's life falsely
before a magistrate, but do you take equal care not to slander or backbite him?
Do you never represent a good action of a man you have quarrelled with, as if
it were a bad one? or do you never make a bad one worse than it is, by your
manner of telling it? even when you invent no false circumstance, do you never
give such a color to those you relate, as to leave a false impression on the
mind of the hearers? Do you never twist a story so as to make it tell a little
better for yourself, and a little worse for your neighbor, than truth and
justice warrant.


Bragwell. Why as to that matter, all this is only natural.


Worthy. Aye much too natural to be right I doubt. Well now we are got to the
last of the commandments.


Bragwell. Yes, I have run the gauntlet finely through them all, you will bring
me in guilty here I suppose, for the pleasure of going through with it, for you
condemn without judge or jury, master Worthy.


Worthy. The culprit I think has hitherto pleaded guilty to the evidence
brought against him. The tenth commandment however, goes to to the root and
principle of evil, it dives to the bottom of things, this command checks the
first rising of sin in the heart, teaches us to strangle it in the birth as it
were, before it breaks out in those acts which are forbidden: as for instance,
every man covets before he proceeds to steal, nay many covet who dare not steal
left they should suffer for it.


Bragwell. Why lookee, Mr. Worthy, I don't understand these new fashioned
explanations; one should not have a grain of sheer goodness left, if every
thing one does is to be frittered away at this rate, I am not I own quite so
good as I thought, but if what you say were true, I should be so miserable, I
should not know what to do with myself. Why, I tell you, all the world may be
said to break the commandments at this rate.


Worthy. Very true, all the world, and I myself also, are but too apt to break
them, if not in the letter at least in the spirit of them. Why then all the
world are (as the scripture expresses it) "guilty before God." and if guilty
they should own they are guilty, and not stand up and justify themselves as you
do, Mr. Bragwell.


Bragwell. Well according to my notion, I am a very honest man, and honesty is
the sum and substance of all religion say I.


Worthy. All truth, honesty, justice, order and obedience, grow out of the
christian religion. The true christian acts, at all times and on all occasions,
from the pure and spiritual principle of love to God; on this principle, he is
upright in his dealings, true to his word, kind to the poor, helpful to the
oppressed. In short, if he truly "loves God," he must "do justice," and cannot
help, loving mercy. Christianity is an uniform consistent thing. It does not
allow us to make up for the breach of one part of GOD's law by our strictness
in observing another. There is no sponge in one duty, that can wipe out the
spot of another sin.


Bragwell. Well, but at this rate, I should be always puzzling and blundering,
and would never know for certain whether I was right or not, whereas I am now
quite satisfied with myself, and have no doubts to torment me.


Worthy. One way of knowing whether we really desire to obey the whole law of
God is this; when we find we have as great a regard to that part of it, the
breach of which does not touch our own interest as to that which does. For
instance, a man robs me; I am in a violent passion with him, and when it is
said to me, "do thou well to be angry?" I answer, "I do well." Thou shall
not steal is a law of God, and this fellow has broken that law. Aye, but says
conscience, it is thy own property which is in question. -- He has broken thy
hedge -- he has stolen thy sheep -- he has taken thy purse. Art thou therefore
sure whether it is his violation of thy property, or of GOD's law which
provokes thee? I will put a second case -- I hear another swear most
grievously: or I meet him coming drunk out of an alehouse; or I find him
singing a loose profane song. If I am not as much grieved for this blasphemer,
or this drunkard, as I was for the robber; if I do not take the same pains to
bring him to a sense of his sins which I did to bring the robber to justice,
"how dwells the love of GOD in me?" Is it not clear that I value my own sheep
more than God's commandments? That I prize my purse more than I love my Maker?
In short, whenever I find out that I am more jealous for my own property than
for GOD's law; more careful about my own reputation than his honor, I always
suspect I am got upon a wrong ground, and that even my right notions are not
proceeding from a right principle.


Bragwell. Why what in the world would you have me do?


Worthy. You must confess that your sins are sins. You must not merely call
them sins, while you see no guilt in them; but you must confess them so as to
hate and detest them; so as to be habitually humbled under the sense of them;
so as to trust for salvation not in your freedom from them, but in the mercy of
a Savior; and so as to make it the chief business of your life to contend
against them, and in the main to forsake them. And remember that if you seek
for a deceitful gaiety, rather than a well grounded cheerfulness, if you prefer
a false security to final safety, and to go away to your cattle and your Farm,
and dismiss the subject from your thoughts lest it should make you uneasy; I am
not sure that this simple discourse may not appear against you at the day of
account, as a fresh proof that you "loved darkness rather than light" and so
increase your condemnation.


Mr. Bragwell was more affected than he cared to own. He went to-bed with less
spirits and more humility than usual. He did not however care to let Mr. Worthy
see the impression which it had made upon him; but at parting next morning, he
shook him by the hand more cordially than usual, and made him promise to return
his visit in a short time.

Mr Bragwell when he returned home from his visit to Mr. Worthy found that he
was not quite so happy as he had formerly been. The discourses of Mr. Worthy
had broken in not a little upon his comfort. And he began to suspect that he
was not so completely in the right as his vanity had led him to believe. He
seemed also to feel less satisfaction in the idle gentility of his own
daughters, since he had been witness to the simplicity, modesty, and usefulness
of those of Mr. Worthy. And he could not help seeing that the vulgar violence
of his wife did not produce so much family happiness at home, as the humble
piety and quiet diligence of Mrs. Worthy produced in the house of his friend.

Happy would it have been for Mr, Bragwell, if he had followed up those new
convictions of his own mind, which would have led him to struggle against the
power of evil principles in himself, and to have controuled the force of evil
habits in his family. But his convictions were just strong enough to make him
uneasy under his errors, without driving him to reform them. The slight
impression soon wore off, and he fell back into his old practices. Still his
esteem for Mr. Worthy was not at all abated by the plain dealing of that honest
friend. It is true he dreaded his piercing eye. He felt that his example held
out a constant reproof to himself. Yet such is the force of early affection and
rooted reverence, that he longed to see him at his house. This desire, indeed,
as is commonly the case, was made up of mixed motives. He wished for the
pleasure of his friend's company; he longed for that favorite triumph of a
vulgar mind, an opportunity of showing him his riches; and he thought it would
raise his credit in the world to have a man of Mr. Worthy's character at his
house.

Mr. Bragwell, It is true, still went on with the same eagerness in gaining
money, and the same ostentation in spending it. But though he was as covetous
as ever, he was not quite so sure that it was right to be so. At Christmas,
indeed, while he was actually engaged abroad in transactions with his dealers,
he was not very scrupulous about the means by which he got his money; and while
he was indulging in festivity with his friends at home, he was easy enough as
to the manner in which he spent it. But a man can neither be making bargains
nor making feasts always; there must be some intervals between these two great
objects for which worldly men may be said to live; and in some of these
intervals the most worldly, form perhaps some random plans of amendment. And
though many a one may say in the fullness of enjoyment, "tomorrow shall be as
this day, and more abundant;" yet hardly any man perhaps allows himself to say,
even in his most secret moments, "I will never retire from business -- I will
never repent -- I will never think of death. Eternity shall never come into my
thoughts." The most that such a one probably ventures to say is, "I need not
repent yet. I will continue such a sin a little longer, it will be time enough
to think on the next world when I am no longer fit for the business or the
pleasures of this."

Such was the case with Bragwell. He set up in his own mind a general distant
sort of resolution, that some years hence, when he should be a few years older,
and a few thousands richer; when a few more of his present schemes should be
completed, he would then think of altering his course of life. He would then
certainly set about spending a religious old age; he would reform some
practices in his dealings, or perhaps quit business entirely; he would think
about reading good books, and when he had completed such and such a purchase,
he would even begin to give something to the poor, but at present he really had
little to spare for charity. The very reason why he should have given more, was
just the cause he assigned for not giving at all, namely, the hardness of the
times. The true grand source of charity, self-denial, never came into his head.
Spend less that you may save more, he would have thought a shrewd maxim enough.
But spend less that you may spare more, never entered into his book of Proverbs.

At length the time came when Mr. Worthy had promised to return his visit. It
was indeed a little hastened by notice that Mr. Bragwell would have in the
course of the week, a piece of land to sell by auction; and though Mr. Worthy
believed the price was likely to be above his pocket, yet he knew it was an
occasion which would be likely to bring the the principle Farmers of that
neighborhood together, some of whom he wanted to meet. And it was on this
occasion that Mr. Bragwell prided himself, that he should show his neighbors
so sensible a man as his dear friend Mr. Worthy.

Worthy arrived at his friend's house on the Saturday, time enough to see the
house and garden and grounds of Mr. Bragwell by daylight. He saw with pleasure
for he had a warm and generous heart, those evident signs of his friend's
prosperity, but as he was a man of a sober mind, and was a most exact dealer in
truth, he never allowed his tongue the license of immodest commendation, which
he used to say either savoured of flattery or envy. Indeed he never rated mere
worldly things so highly as to bestow upon them undue praise. His calm
approbation somewhat disappointed the vanity of Mr. Bragwell, who could not
help secretly suspecting that his friend, as good a man as he was, was not
quite free from envy. He felt, however, very much inclined to forgive this
jealousy, which he feared the sight of his ample property, and handsome
habitation, must naturally awaken in the mind of a man whose own possessions
were so inferior. He practiced the usual trick of ordinary and vulgar minds,
that of pretending himself to find fault with those things which were
particularly deserving praise, when he found Worthy disposed to pass them over
in silence.

When they came in to supper, he affected to talk of the comforts of Mr.
Worthy's little parlour, by way of calling his attention to his own large one.
He repeated the word snug, as applied to every thing at Mr. Worthy's, with the
plain design to make comparisons favorable to his own more ample domains. He
contrived, as he passed by to his chair, by a seeming accident, to push open
the door of a large beaufet in the parlour in which all the finery was most
ostentatiously set out to view. He protested, with a look of satisfaction which
belied his words; that for his part he did not care a farthing for all this
trumpery; and then smiling and rubbing his hands, added with an air of no small
importance, "what a good thing it is, though for people of substance, that the
tax on plate was taken off. You are a happy man, Mr. Worthy, you do not feel
these things, tax or no tax it is all the same to you." He took care during
this speech, by a cast of his eye, to direct Mr. Worthy's attention to a great
profusion of the brightest cups, salvers, and tankards, and other shining
ornaments which crowded the beaufet. Mr. Worthy gravely answered, "Mr,
Bragwell, it was indeed a tax which could not affect so plain a man as myself,
but as it fell on a mere luxury, and therefore could not hurt the poor, I was
always sorry that it could not be made productive enough to be continued. A man
in my midd^^ng situation, who is contented with a good glass of beer, poured
from a handsome earthen mug, the glass, the mug, and the beer, all of English
manufacture. will be but little disturbed at taxes on plate or on wine, but he
will regret, as I do, that many old taxes are so much ^^aded, that new ones are
continually brought on to make up the deficiencies of the former."

During supper the young ladies sat in disdainful silence, not deigning to
bestow the smallest civility on so plain a man as Mr. Worthy. They left the
room with their Mamma as soon as possible, being impatient to get away to
ridicule their father's friend.

The Dance; or, the Christmas merry-making.
As soon as they were gone, Mr. Worthy asked Bragwell how his family comforts
stood, and how his daughters, who he said, were really fine young women, went
on. "O, as to that," replied Bragwell. "pretty much like other men's handsome
daughters, I suppose, that is worse and worse. I really begin to apprehend that
their fantastical notions have gained such a head, that after all the money I
have scraped together, I shall never get them well married. Betsey has just
lost as good an offer as any girl could desire, young Wilson, an honest
substantial grazier as any in the county. He not only knows every thing proper
for his station, but is pleasing in his behavior, and a pretty scholar into
the bargain; he reads history books and voyages of a winter's evening to his
infirm father, instead of going to the card assembly in our town; neither likes
drinking nor sporting, and is a sort of favorite with our parson, because he
takes in the weekly numbers of a fine bible with Cuts, and subscribes to the
Sunday School, and makes a fuss about helping the poor, these dear times as
they call them. but I think they are good times for us, Mr. Worthy. Well, for
all this, Betsy only despised him and laughed at him; but as he is both
handsome and rich, I thought she might come round at last. And so I invited him
to come and stay a day or two at Christmas, when we have always a little sort
of merry-making here. But it would not do. He scorned to talk that palavering
stuff which she had been used to in the marble covered books I told you of. He
told her indeed, that it would be the happiness of his heart to live with her,
which I own I thought was as much as could be expected of any man. But Miss had
no notion of marrying one who was only desirous of living with her. No no,
forsooth, her lover must declare himself ready to die for her, which honest
Wilson was not such a fool as to offer to do. In the afternoon, however, he got
a little into her favor by making a Rebus or two in the Lady's Diary, and she
condescended to say she did not think Mr. Wilson had been so good a scholar,
but he soon spoilt all again. We had a bit of a hop in the evening. The young
man though he had not much taste for those sort of gambols, yet thought he
could foot it a little in the old fashioned way. So he asked Betsey to be his
partner. But when he asked what dance they should call, Miss drew up her head,
and in a strange gibberish, said she should dance nothing but a Minuet de la
Cour, and ordered him to call it; Wilson stared, and honestly told her she must
call it herself, for he could neither spell nor pronounce such outlandish
words. I burst out a laughing, and told him, I supposed it was something like
questions and commands, and if so, that was much merrier than dancing. Seeing
her partner standing stock still, and not knowing how to get out of the scrape,
the girl began by herself, and fell to swimming, and sinking, and capering, and
flourishing, and posturing, for all the world just like the man on the slack
rope at our fair. But seeing Wilson standing like a stuck pig, and we all
laughing at her, she resolved to wreak her malice upon him; so with a look of
rage and disdain, she advised him to go down country bumpkin, with the dairy
maid, who would make a much fitter partner, as well as wife, for him than she
could. "I am quite of your mind, Miss," said he with more spirit than I thought
was in him; "you may make a good partner for a dance, but you would make a sad
one to go through life with. I will take my leave of you, Miss, with this short
story. I had lately a pretty large concern in hay-jobbing, which took me to
London. I waited a good while in the Hay-market for my dealer, and to pass the
time I stepped into a sort of singing playhouse there, where I was grieved to
the heart to see young women painted and dizened out, and capering away just as
you have been doing. I thought it bad enough, and wondered the quality could be
entertained with such indecent mummery. But little did I think to meet with the
same paint, finery, and tricks in a farm house. I will never marry a woman who
despises me, nor the station in which I should place her, and so I take my
leave. Poor girl! how she was provoked! to be publicly refused and turned off,
as it were, by a grazier! But it was of use to some of the other girls who have
not held up their heads quite so high since, nor painted quite so red, but have
condescended to speak to their equals.

"But how I run o^! I forget it is Saturday night, and that I ought to be
paying my workmen, who are all waiting for me without."

Saturday Night; or, the Workmen's Wages.
As soon as Mr. Bragwell had done paying his men, Mr. Worthy said to him, "I
have made it a habit, and I hope not an unprofitable one, of trying to turn to
some moral use, not only all the events of daily life, but all the employments
of it too. And though it occurs so often, I hardly know one that sets me
thinking more seriously than the ordinary business you have been just
discharging. Aye," said Bragwell, "it sets me thinking too, and seriously as
you say, when I observe how much the price of wages is increased." "Yes, yes,
you are ready enough to think of that," said Worthy, "but you say not a word of
how much the value of your land is increased, and that the more you pay, the
more you can afford to pay. But the thoughts I spoke of are quite of another
cast. When I call in my laborers on a Saturday night to pay them, it often
brings to my mind the great and general day of account, when I, and you, and
all of us, shall be called to our grand and awful reckoning, when we shall go
to receive our wages, master, and servants, farmer and labourer. When I see
that one of my men has failed of the wages he should have received, because he
has been idling at a fair; another has lost a day by a drinking bout, a third
confesses that though he had task-work, and might have earned still more, yet
he has been careless and has not his full pay to receive; this, I say,
sometimes sets me on thinking whether I also have made the most of my time. And
when I came to pay even the more diligent who have worked all the week; when I
reflect that even these have done no more than it was their duty to do, I
cannot help saying to myself, night is come, Saturday night is come. No
repentance or diligence on the part of these poor men can now make a bad week's
work good. This week is gone into eternity. Tomorrow is the season of rest;
working time is over. My life also will soon be swallowed up in eternity; soon
the space allotted me for diligence, for labor, will be over. Soon will the
grand question be asked, 'what have thou done? Did thou use thy working days
to the end for which they were given?' With some such thoughts I commonly go to
bed, and they help to quicken me to a keener diligence for the next week.

Some Account of a Sunday in Mr. Bragwell's Family.
Mr. WORTHY had been for so many years used to the sober ways of his own
well-ordered family, that he greatly disliked to pass a Sunday in any house of
which religion was not the governing principle. Indeed he commonly ordered his
affairs, and regulated his journies with an eye to this object. "To pass a
Sunday with an irreligious family," said he, "is always unpleasant, often
unsafe. I seldom find I can do them any good, and they may perhaps do me some
harm. At least I am giving a sanction to their manner of passing it, if I pass
it in the same manner. If I reprove them, I subject myself to the charge of
singularity, and of being righteous over much; if I do not reprove them, I
confirm and strengthen them in evil. And whether I reprove them or not, I
certainly partake of their guilt if I spend it as they do."

TO BE CONTINUED.

