To The Rev. JOHN I. CARLE,
SIR,
WE are deputed by the Citizens -- military Officers, and uniform Corpse, who
formed the Procession, on Sabbath last, to wait on you -- return you their
warmest Thanks for the FUNERAL SERMON which you delivered on the no less
afflicting Event, than the Death of our late worthy, and illustrious GENERAL
WASHINGTON, and request that you will furnish us with a Copy of the same for
Publication.

ON THE PART OF THE CITIZENS,
STEPHEN JACKSON, THOMAS CONGER,
ON THE PART OF THE MILITARY.
JOSEPH JACKSON, BERNARD SMITH, Jun.

ROCKAWAY, December 30, 1799.
A FUNERAL SERMON, PREACHED AT ROCKAWAY, December 29, 1799, ON THE MUCH
LAMENTED DEATH OF General George Washington, WHO DEPARTED THIS LIFE December
14, 1799, AT MOUNT VERNON, IN THE Sixty-Eighth Year of his Age.

BY JOHN I. CARLE, A. M. PASTOR OF THE PRESBYTERIAN CHURCH AT ROCKAWAY.

Know ye not that a Great Man is this Day fallen in Israel? II SAM. iii. 38.
Morris-Town: PRINTED BY JACOB MANN. 1800.

A FUNERAL SERMON ON THE DEATH OF General George Washington.
DEUTERONOMY XXXIV. 8. And the Children of Israel wept for Moses in the Plains
of Moab Thirty Days, so the Days of weeping and mourning for Moses were ended.
IT has ever been customary to show respect, by funeral rites, to the memory of
the deceased, who have been eminently useful in the world. The manner of
observing ceremonies, in honor of the dead, and to express grief and mourning
on their account, has been various, in different ages and nations: Even the
same people have varied in the manner and degree of their mourning, according
to the character or station of the deceased, and the degree in which they have
been useful. God's chosen people were accustomed to observe such rites; several
instances of which are upon record in the scriptures. When Jacob died, even the
Egyptians mourned for him three ^^^re and ten days, GENESIS 1. 3. And when the
children of Israel and the Egyptians went to bury him in the land of Canaan,
they mourned for him seven days, in the threshing-floor of A^ad, with a
grievous mourning, Verses 10, 11. when Josiah died, all Judah and Jerusalem
mourned for him, and Jeremiah lamented for Josiah, and all the singing-men and
singing-women spoke of Josiah in their lamentations to this day, and made them
an ordinance in Israel; and, behold, they are written in the lamentations, 11.
CHRON. XXXV. 25. A very great burning was made in honor of Asa, king of Judah,
11 CHRON. xvi. 14. When Aaron died, all the house of the children of Israel
mourned for him thirty days, NUMBER. XX. 29. So, also, the children of Israel wept
for Moses, in the plains of Moab, thirty days.

It may be said that this is paying too much respect to man: I would reply,
that it is not to man, but to worth -- not to any one, merely as a man, but as
a worthy and good man, and one deserving such respect. It may also be objected,
that it is a mere waste of time and expense. So, when the woman came, with an
alabaster-box of very precious ointment, and poured it on our Savior's head,
which he deemed a good work, his disciples had indignation, saying, To what
purpose is this waste? But she did it for his burial, MAT. xxvi. 13. It may be
said also that those rites were observed in times of ignorance and
superstition: But they have not been confined to those ages; the more on
enlightened, and the most polished people have, in some way, expressed their
veneration for illustrious men after their decease. In the present century,
there has been an instance of one, whose death was noticed in a religious
manner throughout England and America, the Rev. GEORGE WHITEFIELD, who departed
this life on the 30th of September, 1770, in New England. Many funeral sermons
were preached on the occasion, containing high eulogiums of his piety -- zeal,
and usefulness.

Another great star has fallen in America: A great man has departed this life,
in several respects, the greatest man that has graced the present century, in
any part of the world, his Excellency General GEORGE WASHINGTON, late Commander
in Chief of the armies of the United States: He died at Mount Vernon, on
Saturday, the 14th instant, "mature in years, covered with glory, and rich in
the affections of the American people." It is not in our power to speak his
worth, or fully express our grief, yet it would be criminal to decline the
attempt, however feeble. We shall, therefore, endeavor to improve the affecting
and mournful occasion, by attending to the words before us, in the manner
following:

I. By drawing a parallel between the characters of Moses and Washington.

II. By showing the propriety of a general mourning throughout the United
States, on the present occasion.

First -- We shall endeavor to improve the occasion, by drawing a parallel
between these two illustrious characters. They bear a great resemblance, as to
their personal virtues, and their public usefulness. 1. These great men may be
compared with respect to the government of the passions. Moses was a meek man;
there were but few instances of his yielding to the government of his passions,
although he had much to try him, and was a man of like passions with other men.
It was undoubtedly a just indignation which moved him to slay the Egyptian who
was barbarously smiting one of his burdened brethren. Stephen seems to justify
him, in ACTS vii. 24, And seeing one of his brethren suffer wrong, he defended
him, and avenged him that was oppressed, and slew the Egyptian. Moses cannot,
however, be justified for his conduct at the waters of Meribah Kadesh: He
trespassed against the Lord; they provoked his spirit so that he spoke
unadvisedly with his lips. But, considering his trials and provocations, he
well deserved to be styled a meek man; and one or two instances of passion
ought not to deprive him of that character.

Those of you, my brethren, who were acquainted with the character of General
Washington, have undoubtedly anticipated what may be said of his resemblance to
Moses in this respect: He had like trials, and like passions, yet he was
equally calm and tranquil. It is said he was naturally passionate; but, from
his youth, he so governed his passions, as very seldom to discover them at all.
The only noted instance that I recollect, was in the year 1776, on York-Island,
when a part of the army, stationed in a breast-work, to oppose the landing of
the British, in a dastardly and confused manner, fled before an inferior force:
He was so irritated at the cowardice of his men, and so affected with a sense
of the danger and disgrace to which his country was thereby exposed, that be
hazarded his own person, in rear of his men, facing the enemy for a
considerable time: But when we consider the importance of the cause in which he
was engaged, and all the surrounding circumstances, we cannot but overlook this
single instance of passion. 2. These sages also resembled each other in
self-denial. Moses had great inducements to continue in the Egyptian court, but
he refused to be called the son of Pharaoh's daughter, choosing rather to
suffer affliction with the people of God, than to enjoy the pleasures of sin
for a season. And how great was the self-denial of the ever-venerable
Washington, in forsaking the splendour -- enjoyment, and tranquillity of his
independent estate, and submitting to the fatigues -- sufferings, and dangers
of the army. 3. These patriots may be compared, also, on account of the work
that each performed, in conducting a nation to freedom, and independence. Moses
was the great instrument, by which the Israelites were brought from under the
unjust and cruel Egyptian bondage. And who, that saw the American revolution,
is not sensible that Washington was ^qually instrumental in leading us to
freedom, from under the British yoke.

We may here take notice of one or two circumstances which bear considerable
resemblance in their great work. 1. The number of people, which each of these
heroes conducted to liberty, was nearly the same: The number of the children of
Israel was about three millions; and that was nearly the number that were born
to freedom in the day of the American revolution. 2. These men conducted not
only the military, but also the civil concerns of their respective nations. It
is abundantly evident, from the sacred history, that Moses was, under God,
almost the sole director in both those departments, to the Israelites. So,
Washington, while he superintended the army, and fought our battles, during
that tedious struggle, in which we arose into existence as a nation, by
epistolary communication, afforded, unto Congress, much light and assistance,
especially in cases of difficulty and perplexity; and in a considerable measure
guided our councils while he led our armies. 4. These great men were much alike
as warriors. The Israelitish hero, at all times of danger, manifested great
firmness, prudence, and courage; one instance of which, was when the Israelites
were encamped by the Red Sea: Closely pursued by the Egyptians, the people were
sore afraid, and murmured against Moses, saying, Wherefore have thou dealt thus
with (...); have thou taken us away to die in the wilderness? But his heart did
not faint; he said unto the people, Fear ye not, stand still, and see the
salvation of the Lord. In several instances, during the war between
Great Britain and America, there were seasons as dark and gloomy as that of the
Israelites, and the people were as sorely afraid; but the American Moses hushed
the murmurs of the people -- dispelled the gloom, and opened a passage through
the waters. Fully to describe the martial talents which Washington displayed in
the seven years of that war, would require much time, and a masterly pen. 5.
They may be compared for their patriotism or ardent love to their countrymen.
Moses loved his brethren more than his own life. When they had made the image
of a calf, and worshipped it, the anger of the Lord waxed hot against them, and
he threatened to destroy them; but Moses stepped in, and stood between them and
the devouring wrath: Yea, he plead with God the attachment between him and
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob: He plead also that they were God's people, whom he
had brought out of the land of Egypt, with great power, and likewise, what
their enemies would say of all this work, if they were destroyed: He also plead
the promise and oath of God, that he would multiply the seed of Abraham, and
give them the promised land: Moreover, he offered his own life a ransom for
them: -- If thou will forgive their sin, and if not, blot me, (...) pray thee,
out of thy book which thou have written, EXODUS xxxii. 32. Greater love has no
man than this, that a man lay down his life for his friend: And how often did
our immortal chief put his life in his hand, and step forth between us and
danger. If there be any signification to actions, and certainly there is more
than to words, Washington expressed as great love to his country as could be
expressed; yea, he gave all the manifestations that could be given, that he was
a real and true patriot, in the strictest and highest sense of the word. 6.
Washington may be compared to Moses, on account of the meekness -- firmness,
and tranquillity with which he bore the reproaches of those for whom he
hazarded his life, and devoted his time and talents. The murmurs of the
children of Israel, against Moses, were as frequent as their trials of any
kind; yet, with what meekness and patience did he meet them: It was so with our
commander in chief: Though he pursued the wisest measures that could have been
adopted, in his circumstances, he was reproached as traitorous, cowardly, and
deficient in martial skill; all which he bore with more than manly fortitude
and patience: For, like Moses, he seemed to know, that what the people
complained of, they would afterward see to be most advantageous.

It is presumed that it will be no disparagement to either character, to
mention some circumstances in which the resemblance does not hold. 1. Moses was
a prophet of the Lord, and perhaps the greatest of a mere man, that was ever in
the world, and an eminent type of Christ. By the spirit of prophecy, he said
unto the people, The Lord thy God will raise up unto thee a prophet from the
midst of thee, of thy brethren, like unto me, DEUTERONOMY. xviii. 15. With which of
the other prophets has Christ been thus compared? Moses was then, at least,
among the greatest of the prophets: But to this character Washington made no
pretensions. 2. There was a difference as to their appointment to office: Moses
became the leader of the children of Israel by Divine appointment; and the
people consented to it not, until they were convinced that God had chosen him:
-- Washington was chosen by the people; and succeeding events have abundantly
manifested that Heaven approved, and ratified the appointment. There was,
indeed, a great resemblance in the manner of their accepting their
appointments: -- Diffidence in their own abilities to accomplish such great and
arduous undertakings, which always accompanies real greatness of soul, was
expressed by them both, and, not withstanding their local and conjugal
attachments, they made to other objection; but, with an ardent zeal for their
oppressed countrymen, and with a pious confidence in the God of Hosts, they
accepted their appointments. 3. There is a difference, also, as to the
completion of the great work, in which each of them was engaged, of leading a
nation to liberty, independence, and glory. Moses, indeed, brought the children
of Israel from under the yoke of Egyptian bondage, and they might be said to be
free when they were in the wilderness, but he had not the honor, nor happiness,
to lead them into the promised land, and see them regularly settled, in a state
of rest, upon their own soil. But Washington, after leading to victory --
disbanding his army, and, Cincinnatus-like, returning to his farm, had the
happiness to see his fellow-citizens dwell, every man under his vine, and under
his fig tree, and none to make them afraid.

Secondly -- I am to speak of the propriety of a general mourning throughout
the United States, on the present occasion.

If it was proper to mourn for one, there is such a similarity in their
characters, and usefulness, that it must, also, be proper to mourn for the
other. The propriety of a general mourning, on account of the death of General
Washington, will appear, when we consider our obligations for his services --
the loss we have sustained, and what that providence seems to portend by which
he was removed 1. His services to our country, lay us all under obligations to
pay this respect to his memory. He might, with great propriety, be styled the
savior of his country. Under God, he was our great deliverer from British
tyranny, and our preserver from the wreak of that vengeance, which, by
contending for our rights, we had provoked We have obtained liberty --
independence -- a name, and a standing among the nations of the earth, greatly
through his instrumentality: -- And what returns have we made for the dangers
and fatigues he underwent for us, and the benefit we received? -- Pecuniary
compensation he would not accept; he chose rather to be rewarded by the
affection and respect of his fellow-citizens: And, my brethren, such is the
nature of a sincere affection and respect, for a man of real merit, that it
will be lasting: It dies not with the object; but lives with the surviving
subject, and ought to be expressed in a suitable manner: Yes, my brethren, his
name and memory will be honored and respected, and his matchless feats
rehearsed as long as there is a pen to write, or a tongue to speak. 2. The
propriety of a general mourning, on the present occasion, will appear, when we
consider the loss our nation has sustained. It is now a time when all the
nations of Europe, seem uncommonly eager for conquest and domination, and to
delight in war. We may not flatter ourselves, that so extensive and rich a
country as America escapes their notice, or is beyond the reach of their
avarice and ambition. The man who was our greatest human dependence, and the
greatest terror to all our foes, is no m^re! As to the influence of his
character abroad, our loss is irreparable; and as yet, we know not a Joshua who
has the spirit, or can fill the place of the American Moses. Weep and mourn,
then, Americans, for great is your loss. 3. The propriety of this will appear,
also, when we consider what that providence seems to portend, by which he was
removed. It becomes us to consider the death of that illustrious man, as
providential, and to view the hand of God in the dispensation: Though it may
have been in mercy to him, yet we cannot but consider it as a judgment upon
this nation. If the righteous are taken away from the evil to come, we have
reason to apprehend, that his virtuous and patriotic soul is removed from
approaching national calamities. We may then weep for our sins, which have
drawn down this judgment upon us, and humble ourselves, and mourn in sackcloth
and ashes, at the prospect of the approaching calamities which this providence
forebodes. Some may think it more proper to consider his death as merely the
necessary result of what is called the course of nature, especially since he
had arrived nearly to the age which is appointed unto man: But although he was
almost sixty-eight years of age, yet he had lived so temperate a life, that his
constitution was unimpaired, and his bodily and mental faculties remained in
full vigor. It might be said of him, as it is of Moses, in the verse
immediately preceding the text, viz. His eye was not dim, nor his natural force
abated. Had he lived to the age of four-score, in all human probability, he
would have been, in case of war, like Moses, when he held up his hands while
Joshua fought with Amalek. We have then great reason to mourn; and our mourning
should be sincere and universal. As his services were equally beneficial to the
whole, the loss affects all, and one is threatened with danger, as well as
another: And as he was no partizan, but a friend and father to the whole of the
American people, so all should join, on this mournful occasion, and mingle the
tears of filial affection and orphan grief.

But, my brethren, although it is not only proper, but a duty incumbent on us,
to weep and mourn for our loss, yet there should be due limits to our sorrow,
and, in a proper season, our mourning should be ended, or the external badges
of it taken off; for time cannot entirely efface the memory, of one so dear to
us as Washington, from the minds of Americans. It appears, from the latter
clause of our text, that the children of Israel ceased, after thirty days, from
observing any funeral rites or ceremonies, on account of the death of Moses,
although there was no man, whose memory was more dear to them than his. This
is, at least, a circumstantial evidence of the impropriety of establishing
anniversary mournings. The Israelites were not accustomed to appoint an annual
observance of any day, in memory of their departed heroes and sages, as they
were on some other occasions; but, in general, when they had mourned a proper
season, the days of their mourning were ended. Lamentations for Josiah were
indeed made an ordinance in Israel, and were written in the Lamentations; but
it does not appear that this ordinance consisted in an anniversary mourning.
The daughters of Israel, also, went yearly to lament the daughter of Jepthah,
the Gileadite, four days in a year, JUDGES xi. 40. But this seems to have been
on account of the very extraordinary circumstances of her death, rather than of
any distinguishing merit in her.

One great reason why such establishments of anniversary mournings, would be
improper, is, that succeeding generations cannot so sensibly feel the loss, as
to observe the day in sincere mourning; thus the object of the establishment
would be lost, and the day converted into a season of revelling and
licentiousness. We have sufficient evidence of this, from the instances of
saint-days that have been appointed by the Papists: We have seen in what manner
they have been abused, even to such a degree as to become a disgrace to the
once honored saints.

IMPROVEMENT.
I. The subject, and the occasion, both lead us to contemplate our own
mortality, and the uncertain and transitory nature of all temporal blessings.
Nothing is more certain, than that we all must die; neither wealth, nor honor
-- worth, nor talents, can shield us against the arrows of death. The greatest
-- the wisest, and the best of men have been obliged to yield to the king of
terrors: Your fathers, where are they? and the prophets, do they live forever?
Moses, and Aaron, once so useful, and so necessary to the existence of a
nation, have long -- long lain darmant in the silent grave: Even WASHINGTON,
who, but the other day was the pride and glory of America, is now no more.

If men, so useful to society -- so great a blessing to their nation, and so
ornamental to the human race, must return to dust, and virtually say unto
corruption, 'thou art my father,' and to the worm, 'thou art my mother and my
sister,' surely, you, and I, may not expect to be exempted: No, my brethren,
there is no discharge in that war: The grave is the house appointed for all
living; therefore, be ye also ready.

We may, hereby, be led also to contemplate the uncertain and transitory nature
of all temporal blessings: Our nearest kindred -- dearest friends -- men whom
we hold in the highest estimation, and even the desire of our eyes, are liable
to be taken away at a stroke.

II. Let us, for a moment indulge, on this solemn occasion, in sincere and
undissembled mourning: It is justifiable; yea, duty commands that we now mingle
the tears of affection and sorrow.

GEORGE WASHINGTON, America's best friend, is gone forever: Can it be true,
that the dearly, and universally beloved WASHINGTON has bid a final adieu to
his favorite Columbia? Alas! it must be so -- Great WASHINGTON is dead!!! Let
every class of citizens, and men of every age, mourn and weep for our loss. In
an especial manner, military gentlemen are bound to solemnize the present
occasion.

Gentlemen Officers, and Soldiers,

We have consecrated the present hour to the discharge of the duty incumbent on
us, of manifesting our affection and respect, in a religious manner, to the
name, and memory of your departed Commander in Chief: You have lost the best of
officers; perhaps the greatest General that the world has ever produced. There
are none who have fought under his banner, or regaled under the shade of his
laurels, but have the highest veneration for his character, and will most
sincerely lament his death. He was, as a man -- a soldier, and an officer, a
complete, and excellent pattern, which each of you should strive to imitate: I
would earnestly recommend it to you, especially to follow his example in
temperance -- purity -- prudence, and the government of the passions. To his
temperance, we may impute, in a great degree, the long continuation of his life
-- his health, and the vigor of his faculties. Intemperance would have
shortened his days -- (...) his usefulness -- made him more liable to
imprudences, and tarnished all his glory: If you would follow his example, and
imitate (...), in other respects, it is absolutely necessary that you do in
temperance. And his purity, in life and manners, was essential to his honor.
None could charge him with any breach of the laws of morality -- decency, or
politeness.

How differently do we view the character of those heroes, or great men, who
are immoral -- indecent -- profane, or vulgar? If, then, you would be really
honored by mankind in general, and especially by all the wise and good, you
should carefully demean yourselves in a christian, and gentleman like manner.

He was remarkable for prudence in every station of life, as a private citizen
-- an officer -- a victorious hero, and a statesman. If you desire to be
honored as he was, prudence is an essential step. As much as any thing, he
deserves to be honored and applauded for the government of his passions. To
what difficulties -- mortification, and disgrace, do ungoverned passions often
subject us; they deprive us of the exercise of our rational faculties, and
cause us to act more like furies than like men: If, then, you would be thought
worthy to govern the men under your command, manifest it by keeping your
passions in due subordination. All of you, who sit under your vine, and under
your fig tree,

Should most affectionately remember, and most sincerely mourn for the loss of
him, by whose instrumentality you were led to the free, and peaceable enjoyment
of your possessions; and now drop a tear of gratitude, as your last tribute of
respect and esteem. B. o. s.

Ye Daughters of Columbia,

Weep, and mourn for the loss of your protector, and friend: For you, he
forsook his ease -- endured the fatigues of the army, and hazarded the dangers
of battle; and while he lived, not withstanding his advanced age, he stood
ready to meet the foe who should dare to threaten your virtue -- your
prerogatives, or your peace. Let, then, your tender hearts be suitably affected
on this mournful occasion.

III. Let us not lose sight of what this melancholy dispensation of Divine
Providence portends. It seems to be an alarming denunciation that the God of
Heaven is angry with the inhabitants of these United States; and we have reason
to apprehend, that heavy and awful judgments are ready to be poured out upon
us. O that this dispensation of Providence, might so alarm our whole nation, as
to lead us all to repent of our sins, in sackcloth and ashes, and to turn from
our evil ways. Let us, as individuals, and as a congregation, arise, and call
upon our God, if so be he will think upon us, that we perish not.


