THE TWO TRIALS OF JOHN FRIES, on an Indictment for TREASON; TOGETHER WITH A
BRIEF REPORT OF THE TRIALS OF SEVERAL OTHER PERSONS, FOR Treason and
Insurrection.

In the Counties of Bucks, Northampton and Montgomery, IN THE CIRCUIT COURT OF
THE UNITED STATES, Begun at the City of Philadelphia, April 11, 1799; continued
at Norristown, October 11, 1799; -- and concluded at Philadelphia, April 11,
1800; before the Hon. Judges, IREDELL, PETER'S, WASHINGTON, and CHASE.

TO WHICH IS ADDED, A copious Appendix, containing the evidences and arguments
of the counsel on both sides, on the motion for a new trial; the arguments on
the motion for removing the case to the county where the crime was committed,
and the arguments against holding the jurisdiction at Norristown.

TAKEN IN SHORT HAND BY THOMAS CARPENTER.

[ COPY-RIGHT SECURED.]

PHILADELPHIA: Printed and sold by WILLIAM W. WOODWARD, No. 17 Chestnut near
Front street. 1800.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THE following very important and interesting trial, and the law arguments on
the different motions made to the court, has been long kept from the public
eye; but no longer than inevitably necessary -- It would have been imprudent,
(if not unlawful) to have published a first trial, when a second was pending.
The reporter has curtailed the second trial as much as possible -- not
repeating, but referring to the testimony given on the first trial; but he has
given at length all new evidence that occurred. The testimony is accurately
reported -- he believes the arguments and opinions to be so, and, to make it
so, wherever opportunity offered, he has submitted it to the inspection of the
gentlemen themselves: when he could not, he trusts unimportant inaccuracies, if
any, will be pardoned.

It is probable, several of the names are wrong spelled, but, without more
trouble than necessity demanded, it could not well be otherwise.

ERRATA.
Page 157, note, dele "no."

CONTENTS.
CHARGE to the Grand Jury Page 1 Indictment of John Fries Page 17 Names of the
Jurors Page 18, 17^ Exordium of Mr. Sitgreaves Page ibid Exordium of Mr. Rawle,
on the second trial Page 17^ Testimony of William Henry, Esquire Page 24,82, and
180 Testimony of William Barnet Page 23, 182 Testimony of John Barnet Page 31,
182 Testimony of Christian Winters Page 34, 183 Testimony of Christian Roths
Page 35 Testimony of William Nichols, Esquire Page 37, 184 Testimony of Philip
Sehlaugh Page 41, 183 Testimony of Joseph Horsefield, Esquire Page 41 Testimony of
John Mohollan, Esquire Page 44 Testimony of Jacob Eyerley, Esquire Page 45, 84
Testimony of Samuel Toon Page 52, 183 Testimony of Andrew Shiffert Page 56, 184
Testimony of John Dillingher Page 57, 185 Testimony of William Thomas Page 5^,
187 Testimony of George Mitchel Page 64, 191 Testimony of James Chapman Page
67, 84, 187 Testimony of John Rodrick Page 70, 187 Testimony of Cephas Child's
Page 73, 84, 189 Testimony of Judge Peter's Page 79, 84 Examination of John
Fries Page 80 Testimony of Jacob Steinher Page 83 Law points to support the
charge, produced by Mr. Rawle Page 85 Mr. Dallas in the defense Page 8^
Witnesses called by the prisoner.
John Jamieson Page 110 Jacob Huber Page 113 Israel Roberts Page ibid, 189
Everhard Foulke, Esquire Page 115, 188 Mr. Ewing, in behalf of the prisoner Page
117 Mr. Sitgreaves, for the prosecution Page 121 Mr. Lewis, in answer Page 135
Mr. Rawle, in summing up the evidence Page 151 Charge by Judge Peter's Page 204
Charge by Judge Iredell Page 164
SECOND TRIAL Page 177 Testimony of Christian Heckavelter Page 185 Testimony of
John Romick Page ibid Testimony of John Oswald Page 186 Testimony of Isaac
Schymer, Esquire Page ibid Testimony of James Williamson, Esquire Page ibid Testimony
of Daniel Wiedner Page 190 Charge of Judge Chase Page 196 Address to the
prisoner, and sentence Page 200
Conrad Marks arraigned -- his jury and the verdict Page 209 George Gettman and
Frederick Hainey arraigned -- their Jury and verdict Page 210 Sentence Anthony
Stahler arraigned -- his jury and the verdict Page 211
MISDEMEANORS,
Persons tried and sentenced May 10th, 1799. Page 212 Charge of Judge Iredell
to the jury Page 215 Address to the prisoners Page 218 Sentence Page 219 Trial
of Jacob Eyerman (the minister) October 16, 1799 Page 220 Charge of Judge
Washington to the jury Page 224 Submissions and sentences of several persons to
the court, May 1st, 1800 Page 226
APPENDIX No, I, after the trials.
Motion that the trial ought to have been held in the proper county where the
crime was committed Page 1
APPENDIX No. II.
Motion for a new trial Page 11 Depositions and oral testimony of Nicholas
Mayer and others, to prove the disqualification of a juror, John Rhoads Page 21
Deposition and testimony of John Rhoad, in answer Page 27, 38 Argument upon the
evidence Page 29 Testimony of George Yone, confronted with John Rhoad Page 40
Judge Peters' opinion, on the mo^ion for a new trial Page 208 Motion against
jurisdiction at Norristown Page 46
A CHARGE
Delivered to the GRAND JURY of the UNITED STATES, for the District of
Pennsylvania, in the Circuit court of the United States for said district, held
in the city of Philadelphia, April 11th, 1799, by JAMES IREDELL, one of the
Associate Justices of the Supreme Court of the UNITED STATES.
GENTLEMEN OF THE GRAND JURY,
THE important duties you are now called upon to fulfill, naturally increase
with the increasing difficulties of our country. But however great those
difficulties may be, I am persuaded you will meet them with a firm and intrepid
step, resolved, so far as you are concerned, that no dishonor or calamity (if
any should await us) shall be ascribable to a weak or impartial administration
of justice.

If ever any people had reason to be thankful for a long and happy enjoyment of
peace, liberty and safety, the people of these states surely have. While every
other country almost has been convulsed with foreign or domestic war, and some
of the finest countries on the globe have been the scene of every species of
vice and disorder, where no life was safe, no property was secure, no innocence
had protection, and nothing but the basest crimes gave any chance for momentary
preservation; no citizen of the United States could truly say that in his own
country any oppression had been permitted with impunity, or that he had any
grievance to complain of, but that he was required to obey those laws which his
own representatives had made, and under a government which the people
themselves had chosen. But in the midst of this envied situation, we have heard
the government as grossly abused as if it had been guilty of the vilest
tyranny, as if common sense or common virtue had fled from our country, and
those pure principles of republicanism, which have so strongly characterized
its councils, could only be found in the happy soil of France, where the sacred
fire is preserved by five Directors on ordinary occasions, and three on
extraordinary ones -- who, with the aid of a republican army, secure its purity
from violation by the Legislative representatives of the people. -- The
external conduct of that government is upon a par with its internal. --
Liberty, like the religion of Mahomet, is propagated by the sword. Nations are
not only compelled to be free, but to be free on the French model, and placed
under French guardianship. French arsenals are the repository of their arms,
French treasuries of their money, the city of Paris of their curiosities; and
they are honored with the constant support of French enterprises in any other
part of the world. Such is the progress of a power which began by declarations
that it abhorred all conquests for itself, and sought no other felicity but to
emancipate the world from tyrants, and leave each nation free to chase a
government of its own. Those who take no warning by such an awful example, may
have deeply to lament the consequences of neglecting it.

The situation in which we now stand with that country is peculiarly c^itical.
Conscious of giving no real cause of offense, but irritated with injuries, and
full of resentment for insults; desirous of peace, if it can be preserved with
honor and safety, but disdaining a security equally fallacious and ignominious
at the expense of either; still holding the rejected Olive Branch in one hand,
but a sword in the other -- we now remain in a sort of middle path between
peace and war, where one false step may lead to the most ruinous consequences,
and nothing can be safely relied on but unceasing vigilance, and persevering
firmness in what we think right, leaving the event to Heaven, which seldom
suffers the destruction of nations, without some capital fault of their own.

Among other measures of defense and precaution which the exigency of the
crisis, and the magnitude of the danger, suggested to those to whom the people
have entrusted all authority in such cases, were certain acts of the
legislature of the United States, not only highly important in themselves but
deserving of the most particular attention, on account of the great discontent
which has been excited against them, and especially as some of the state
legislatures have publicly pronounced them to be in violation of the
constitution of the United States. I deem it my duty, therefore, on this
occasion to state to you the nature of those laws which have been grossly
misrepresented, and to deliver my deliberate opinion as a Judge, in regard to
the objections arising from the constitution.

The acts to which I refer you will readily suppose to be what are commonly
called the Alien and Sedition acts. I shall speak of each separately, so far as
no common circumstances belonging to them may make a joint discussion proper.

1. The Alien Laws, there being two.

To these laws, in particular, it has been objected.

1. That an Alien ought not to be removed on suspicion, but on proof of some
crime.

2. That an Alien coming into the country, on the faith of an act stipulating
that in a certain time, and on certain conditions, he may become a citizen, to
remove him in an arbitrary manner before that time, would be a breach of public
faith.

3. That it is inconsistent with the following clause in the constitution,
(Art. I. sect. 9.)

"The migration or importation of such persons as any of the states now
existing shall think proper to admit, shall not be prohibited by the Congress
prior to the year one thousand eight hundred and eight? but a tax or duty may
be imposed on such importation, not exceeding ten dollars for each person."
With regard to the first objection, viz. "That an alien ought not to be removed
on suspicion, but on proof of some crime." It is believed that it never was
suggested in any other country, that aliens had a right to go into a foreign
country, and stay at their will and pleasure without any leave from the
government. The law of nations, undoubtely is, that when an alien goes into a
foreign country, he goes under either an express or implied safe conduct. In
most countries in Europe, I believe, an express passport is necessary for
strangers. Where greater liberality is observed, yet it is always understood
that the government may order away any alien whose stay is deemed incompatible
with the safety of the country. Nothing is more common than to order away, on
the eve of a war, all aliens or subjects of the nation with whom the war is to
take place. Why is that done, but that it is deemed unsafe to retain in the
country, men whole prepossessions are naturally so strong in favor of the
enemy, that it may be apprehended they will either join in arms, or do mischief
by intrigue, in his favor? How many such instances took place it the beginning
of the war with Great Britain, no body then objecting to the authority of the
measure, and the expediency of it being alone in contemplation! In cases like
this, it is ridiculous to talk of a crime, because perhaps the only crime, that
a man can then be charged with, is his being born in another country, and
having a strong attachment to it. He is not punished for a crime that he has
committed, but deprived of the power of committing one hereafter to which even
a sense of patriotism may tempt a warm and misguided mind. Nobody who has ever
heard of Major And^e, that possesses any liberality of mind, but must believe
that he did what he thought right at the time, though in ray opinion it was a
conduct in no manner justifiable. Yet how fatal might his success have proved!
If men, therefore, of good characters, and held in universal estimation for
integrity, can be tempted when a great object is in view, to violate the strict
duties of morality, what may be expected from others who have neither character
nor virtue, but stand ready to yield to temptations of any kind? The
opportunities during a war of making use of men of such a description are so
numerous and so dangerous, that no prudent nation would ever trust to the
possible good behavior of many of them. Indeed most of those who oppose this
law seem to admit that as to alien enemies the interposition may be proper but
they contend it is improper before a war actually takes place to exercise such
an authority, and that as to neutral aliens it is totally inadmissible. To be
sure the two latter instances are not quite to plain, the objection I am
considering belongs equally to them all; for if an alien cannot be removed but
on conviction of a crime, then an alien enemy ought not to be removed but on
conviction of treason, or some other crime showing the necessity of it. If,
however, we are not blind to what is evident to all the rest of the world,
equal danger may be apprehended from the citizens of a hostile power, before
war is actually declared as after, perhaps more, because less suspicion is
entertained; and some citizens of a neutral power are equally dangerous with
the others. What has given France possession of the Netherlands, Geneva,
Switzerland and almost all Italy, and enables her to domineer over so many
other countries, lately powerful and completely independent, but that her arts
have preceded her arms, the smooth words of amity, peace, an universal love, by
seducing weak minds, have led to an unbounded confidence, which has ended in
their destruction, and they have now to deplore the infatuation which led them
to court a fraternal embrace from a bosom in which a dagger was concealed.

In how many countries, alien friends as to us, dependent upon them, are there
warm partisans not nominally French citizens but completely illuminated with
French principles, electrified with French enthusiasm, and ready for any sort
of revolutionary mischief! Are we to be guarded against the former and exposed
to the latter? No, gentlemen, If with such examples before their eyes, congress
had either confined their precaution to a war in form, or to citizens of France
only, losing all sense of danger to their country in a regard to nominal
distinctions, they would probably justly have deserved the charge of neglecting
their country's safety in one of its most essential points, and hereafter the
very men who are now clamorous against them for exercising a judicious
foresight, might too late have had reason to charge them, (as many former
infatuated governments in Europe may now fairly be charged by their miserable
deluded fellow citizens) as the authors of their country's ruin. But those who
object to this law seem to pay little regard to considerations of this kind,
and to entertain no other fear but that the President may exercise this
authority for the mere purpose of abusing it. There is no end to arguments or
suspicions of this kind. If this power is proper it must be exercised by
somebody. If from the nature of it is could be exercised by so numerous a body
as Congress, yet as Congress are not constantly sitting, it ought not to be
exercised by them alone. If they are not to exercise it, who so sit as the
President? What interest can he have in abusing such an authority? But on this
occasion, as on others of the like kind, gentlemen think it sufficient to show,
not that a power is likely to be abused (which is all that can be prudently
guarded against), but that it possibly may, and therefore to guard against the
possibility of an abuse of power, the power is not at all to be exercised.

The argument would be just as good against his acknowledged powers, as any
others, that the legislature may occasionally confide to him. Suppose he should
refuse to nominate to any office? or to command the army or navy? or should
assign frivolous reasons against every law, so that no law could be passed but
with the concurrence of two thirds of both houses! Suppose Congress should
raise an army without necessity, lay taxes where there was no occasion for
money, declare war from mere caprice, lay wanton and oppressive restraints on
commerce, or in a time of imminent danger trifle with the safety of their
country, to gain a momentary breath of popularity at the hazard of their
country's ruin! All this they may do. Does any man of candor, who does not
believe every thing they do wrong, apprehend that any of these things will be
done? They have the power to do them because the authority to pass very
important and necessary acts of legislation on all those subjects, and in
regard to which discretion must be lest, unavoidably implies that as it may be
exercised in a right manner, it may, if no principle prevent it, be exercised
in a wrong one. If the state legislatures should combine to choose no more
senators, they may abolish the constitution without the danger of committing
reason. If to prevent a House of Representatives being in existence, they
should keep no law in being for a similar branch of their own, deeming the
abolition of the government of the United States cheaply purchased by such a
sacrifice, they may do this. They have the same power over the election of a
President and vice President. What is the security against abuse in any of
these cases? None, but the precautions taken to procure a proper choice, which,
if well exercised, will at least secure the public against a wanton abuse of
power, though nothing can secure them absolutely against the common frailty of
men, or the possibility of bad men, if accidentally inverted with power,
carrying it into a dangerous extreme. We must trust some persons, and as well
as we can submit to any collateral evil which may arise from a provision for a
great and indispensable good that can only be obtained through the medium of
human imperfection. At the same time it may be observed, that in the case of
the President or any executive or judicial officer wantonly abusing his trust,
he is liable to impeachment, and there are frequent opportunities of changing
the members of the legislature, if their conduct is not acceptable to their
constituents.

The clause in the constitution, declaring that the trial of all crimes, except
by impeachment, shall be by jury, can never in reason be extended to amount to
a permission of perpetual residence of all sorts of foreigners, unless
convicted of some crime, but is evidently calculated for the security of any
citizen, a party to the instrument or even of a foreigner if resident in the
country, who when charged with the commission of a crime against the municipal
laws for which he if liable to punishment, can be tried for it in no other
manner.

The second objection it, "That an alien coming into the country, on the faith
of an act stipulating that in a certain time and on certain conditions he nay
become a citizen, to remove him in an arbitrary manner before that time would
be a breach of public faith."

With regard to this, it may be observed, that undoubtedly the faith of
government ought under all circumstances, and in all possible situations, to be
preserved sacred. If therefore, in virtue of this law, all aliens from any part
of the world had a right to come here, stay the probationary time, and become
citizens, the act in question could not be justified, unless it could be shown
that a real (not a pretended) overruling public necessity to which all
inchoate acts of legislation must forever be subject, occasioned a partial
repeal of it. But there are certain conditions, without which no alien can ever
be admitted, if he stay ever so long; and one is, that during a limited time
(two years in the case of aliens then resident; five in the case of aliens
arriving after) he has behaved at a man of a good moral character, attached to
the principles of the constitution of the United States, and well disposed to
the good order and happiness of the same. If his conduct be different, he is no
object of the naturalization law at all, and consequently no implied compact
was made with him. If his conduct be conformable to that description, he is no
object of the alien law to which the objection is applied, because he is not a
person whom the President is empowered to remove, for such a person could not
be deemed dangerous to the peace and safety of the United States, nor could
there be reasonable grounds to suspect such a man of being concerned in any
treasonable or secret machinations against the government, in which cases alone
the removal of any alien friend is authorized. Besides any alien coming to this
country must, or ought to know, that this being an Independent nation, it has
all the rights concerning the removal of aliens which belong by the law of
nations to any other; that while he remains in the country in the character of
an alien, he can claim no other privilege than such as an alien is entitled to;
and consequently, whatever risque he may incur in that capacity, is incurred
voluntarily, with the hope that in due time by his unexceptionable conduct, he
may become a citizen of the United States. At there is no end to the ingenuity
of man, it has bees suggested that such a person, if not a citizen, is a
denizen, and therefore cannot be removed as an alien. A denizen in those laws
from which we derive our own, means a person who has received letters of
denization from the king, and under the royal government such a power might
undoubtedly have been exercised. This power of denization is a kind of partial
naturalization, giving some, but not all the privileges of a natural born
subject. He may take lands by purchase or devise, but cannot inherit.

The issue of a denizen born before denization cannot inherit; but if born
after may, the ancestor having been able to communicate to him inheritable
blood. But this power of the crown was thought so formidable that it is
expressly provided by act of parliament, that no denizen can be a member of the
Privy Council, or of either House of Parliament, or have any office of trust
civil or military, or be capable of any grant of lands from the crown. Upon the
dissolution of the royal government, the whole authority of naturalization,
either whole or partial, belonged to the several states, and this power the
people of the states have since devolved on the Congress of the United States.
Denization therefore (in the sense here used) is a term unknown in our law,
since the right was not derived from any general legislative authority, but
from a special prerogative of the crown, to which parliamentary restrictions
afterward were applied. So much so, that if an act of Parliament had passed,
giving certain rights to an alien with restriction; exactly similar to those of
a denizen. I imagine he would not have been called a denizen; because the royal
authority was not the source from which his rights were derived. As to acts of
naturalization themselves, they are liable in England, by an express law to
certain limitations, one of which is, that the person naturalized is incapable
of being a member of the privy council, or either house of parliament, or of
holding offices or grants from the crown. Yet I never heard, nor do I believe
that such a person was ever called a denizen; for which, as there is no
foundation in precedent, or in the constitution of the United States, I presume
it is a distinction without solidity. Fixed principles of law cannot be
grounded on the airy imagination of man.

The third objection is, "That it is inconsistent with the following clause in
the constitution, viz.

"The migration or importation of such persons as any of the states now
existing shall think proper to admit, shall not be prohibited by the congress
prior to the year one thousand eight hundred and eight, but a tax or duty may
be imposed on said importation not exceeding ten dollars for etch person."

I am not satisfied, as to this objection, that it is sufficient to overruled
it, to say the words do not express the real meaning, either of those who
formed the constitution, or those who established it, although I do verily
believe in my own mind, that the article was intended only for slaves, and the
clause was expressed in its present manner to accommodate different gentlemen,
some of whom could not bare the name slaves, and others had objections to it.
But though this probably is the real truth, yet, if in attempting to
compromise, they have unguardedly used expressions that go beyond their
meaning, and there is nothing but private history to elucidate it, I shall deem
it absolutely necessary to confine myself to the written instrument. Other
reasons may make the point doubtful, but at present I am inclined to think it
must be admitted; that congress prior to the year 1808, cannot prohibit the
migration of free persons to a particular state, existing at the time of the
constitution, which such state shall, by law, agree to receive. The states then
existing, therefore, till 1808 may (we will say) admit the migration of persons
to their own states, without any prohibitory act of congress. -- This they may
do upon principles of general policy, and in consistence with all their other
duties. The states are expressly prohibited from entering into an engagement or
contract with another state, or engaging in war, unless actually invaded, or in
such imminent danger, as will not admit of delay. The avenues to foreign
connection being thus carefully closed, it will scarcely be contended, that in
case of war, a state could, either directly or indirectly, permit the migration
of enemies. If they did, the United States could certainly without any
impeachment of the general right of allowing migration, in virtue of their
authority to repel invasion, prevent the arrival of such. And as such invasion
may be attempted without a formal war, and Congress have an express right to
protect against invasion, as well as to repel it, I presume Congress would also
have authority to prevent the arrival of any enemies, coming in the disguise of
friends, to invade their country. But, admitting the right to permit migration
in its full force, the persons migrating on their authority must be subject to
the laws of the country, which consist not only of those of the particular
state, but of the United States. While aliens, therefore, they must remain in
the character of aliens; and, of course, upon the principles I have mentioned,
be subject to a power of removal, in certain cases recognized in the law of
nations; nor can they cease to be in this situation, until they become citizens
of the United States; in which case they must obey the laws of the union as
well as of the particular state they reside in. But, gentlemen argue as if
because the states had a right to permit migration the migrants were under a
sort of special protection of the state admitting it, left the United States,
merely to disappoint the purpose of migration, should exercise an arbitrary
authority of removal without any cause at all. It would be just as consistent
to say, that if such migrant was charged with a murder on the high seas, or in
any fort or arsenal of the United States, he should not be tried for it in a
court of the United States, left the court and juries, out of ill will to the
state; should combine to procure his conviction and punishment, in all events,
to defeat the state law. The two powers may undoubtedly be made compatible, if
the legislatures of the particular states, and the government of the United
States do their duty; without which presumption, not an authority given by the
constitution can exist. They surely are more compatible than the collateral
powers of taxation, which, under each government, go to an unlimited extent,
but the very nature of which forbids any other limitation than a sense of moral
right and justice. If we scepticize in the manner of some gentlemen on this
subject, suppose each legislature should tax to the amount of 19^ in the pound;
each has the power; but is such an exercise of it more apprehended than we
apprehend an earthquake to swallow us all up at this very moment? All systems
of government, suppose they are to be administered by men of common sense and
common honesty. In our Country, as all ultimately depends on the voice of the
people, they have it in their power, and it is to be presumed they generally
will choose men of this description: but if they will not, the case to be sure
is without remedy. If they choose fools, they will have foolish laws. If they
choose knaves they will have knavish ones. But this can never be the case until
they are generally fools or knaves themselves, which, thank God, is not likely
ever to become the character of the American people.

Having said what I thought material as to the alien laws, upon the particular
objections to them, I now proceed to discuss the objections which have been
made to what is called the sedition act, one of which equally applies to the
alien laws as well as to this. But I think it proper previously to read the law
itself.

The objections (so far as I have heard them) to this act are as follow:

1. (And this applies to the alien law also) That there is no specific power
given to pass an act of this description, though in the particular specific
powers given there is authority conveyed as to other offenses specially named.

2. That this law is not warranted by a clause in the constitution, conveying
legislative authority, which after designating particular objects, adds:

"And to make all laws which shall be necessary and proper for carrying into
execution the foregoing powers, and all other power vested by this constitution
in the government of the United States, or in any department or officer
thereof." -- Because it is not necessary and proper to pass any such law in
order to carry into execution any of those powers.

3. That admitting the former positions are not maintainable, yet the exercise
of this authority is compatible with the following amendment to the
constitution, viz.

"Congress shall make no law respe^ting an establishment of religion, or
prohibiting the full exercise thereof; or abridging the freedom of speech, or
of the press, or the right of the people peaceably to assemble, and to petition
the government for a redress of grievances."

With regard to the first objection, I readily acknowledge, that soon after the
constitution was proposed, and when I had taken a much more superficial view of
it than I was sensible of at the time, I did think Congress could not provide
for the punishment of any crimes but such as are specifically designated in the
particular powers enumerated. I delivered that opinion in the convention at
North Carolina, in the year 1788, with a perfect conviction, at the time, that
it was well founded. But I have since been convinced it was an erroneous
opinion, and my reasons for changing it I shall state to you as clearly is I am
able.

It is in vain to make any law unless some sanction be annexed to it, to
prevent or punish its violation. A law without it might be equivalent to a good
moral sermon, but bad members of society would be as little influenced by one
as the other. It is, therefore, necessary and proper, for instance, under the
constitution of the United States, to secure the effect of all laws which
impose a duty on some particular persons, by providing some penalty or
punishment if they disobey. The authority to provide such is conveyed by the
following general words in the constitution, at the end of the objects of
legislation particularly specified: "To make all laws which shall be necessary
and proper for carrying into execution the foregoing powers, and all other
powers vested by this constitution in the government of the United States, or
in any department or officer thereof." A penalty alone would not in every case
be sufficient, for the offender might be rich and disregard it, or poor, though
a wilful offender, and unable to pay it. A fine, therefore, will not always
answer the purpose, but imprisonment must be in many cases added, though a wise
and humane legislature will always dispense with this, where the importance of
the case does not require it. But if it does, from the very nature of the
punishment, it becomes a criminal, and not a civil offense; the grand jury must
indict, before the offender can be convicted.

This general position may be illustrated by a variety of instances under the
penal code of the United States, which have, I believe, never been objected to
as unconstitutional, though there have never been wanting penetrating and
discerning members who were ready enough to take exceptions where they found
any plausible ground for them. I shall enumerate a few.

In the act entitled, an act for the punishment of certain crimes against the
United States (^ol.1 Swift's edition, p. 100) among other crimes specified, are
the following.

Murder or larceny in a fort belonging to the United States. Misprision of
felony committed in any place und^ the sole and exclusive jurisdiction of the
United States. Stealing or falsifying a record of any court of the United
States. Perjury in any court of the United States. Bribing a judge of the
United States. Obstructing the execution of any kind of process issuing from a
court of the United States.

In the collection act, 1 vol. p. 237, it is provided, that in all cases where
an oath is by that act required from a master or other person having command of
a ship or vessel, or from an owner o^ assignee of goods, wares, and
merchandise, his or her factor or agent, if the person so swearing shall swear
falsely, such person shall, on indictment and conviction thereof, be punished
by fine or imprisonment, or both, in the discretion of the court, before whom
such conviction shall be had, so as the fine shall not exceed one thousand
dollars, and the term of imprisonment shall not exceed twelve months.

In the act laying duties on distilled spirits, (vol. i. p. 324) in the 39th
section it is provided as follows:

"If any supervisor, or other officer of inspection, in any criminal
prosecution against them, shall be convicted of oppression or extortion in the
execution of his office, he shall be fined not exceeding five hundred dollars,
or i^^risoned not exceeding six months, or both, at the discretion of the
court; and shall also forfeit his office."

These instances deserve great consideration; because I believe no candid man
will deny that these provisions were constitutional exercises of authority,
within the scope of the general authority conveyed, though not specially named
as objects which it should be competent for Congress to provide for. And they
certainly derive weight from the consideration, that the principle of them
(which I believe was the case) was never objected to, thou^^ the expediency of
some of the provisions may have been.

In further illustration of this subject, I shall state a case which was
determined in this court -- The United States against Worrell, published in M..
Dallas's reports, p. 384. Where there was an indictment against the defendant
for attempting to bribe Mr. Coxe, the Commissioner of the Revenue. The
defendant was found guilty, and afterward a motion was made in arresting
judgment, assigning, together with some technical objections, this general one,
that the Court had no cognizance of the offense, because no act of Congress had
passed creating the offense and prescribing the punishment, but it was solely
on the foot of the common law. The very able and ingenious gentleman who is the
reporter of that case, and was the defendant's Council in it, in the course of
his argument, makes the following observations, part of which are remarkably
striking and pertinent to my present subject: In relation to crimes and
punishments, the objects of the delegated power of the United States are
enumerated and fixed. Congress may provide for the punishment of counterfeiting
the securities and current coin of the United States; and, may define and
punish piracies and felonies committed on the high seas, and offenses against
the law of nations. Art. i. 8. And so, likewise, Congress may make all laws
which shall be necessary and proper for carrying into execution, the powers of
the General Government. But here is no reference to a common law authority:
Every power is matter of definite and positive grant; and the very powers that
are granted cannot take effect until they are exercised through the medium of a
law. Congress had undoubtedly a power to make a law, which should render it
criminal to offer a bribe to the commissioner of the Revenue; but not having
made the law, the crime is not recognized by the Federal code, Constitutional
or Legislative; and consequently, it is not a subject on which the Judicial
authority of the Union can operate. So far the observations of the defendant's
Counsel Judge Chase, who on that occasion differed from Judge Peter's, as to the
common law jurisdiction of the Court, held, that under the 8th section of the
first article, which I am now considering, although bribery is not among the
crimes and offenses specially mentioned, it is certainly included in that
general provision; and Congress might have passed a law on the subject which
would have given the Court cognizance of the offense. Judge Peter's was of
opinion, that the defendant was punishable at common law; but that it was
competent for Congress to pass a Legislative act on the subject.

I conclude, therefore, that the first objection is not maintainable.

With regard to the second objection, which is, that this law is not warranted
by that clause in the constitution authorizing Congress to pass all laws which
shall be necessary and proper, for carrying into execution, the powers
specially enumerated, and all other powers vested, by the constitution, in the
government of the United States, or in any department or officer thereof:
because, it is not necessary and proper to pass any such law, in order to carry
into execution any of those powers -- it is to be observed, that, from the very
nature of the power, it is, and must be, discretionary. -- What is necessary
and proper, in regard to any particular subject, cannot, before an occasion
arises, be logically defined; but must depend upon various extensive views of a
case, which no human foresight can reach. What is necessary and proper in a
time of confusion and general disorder, would not, perhaps, be necessary and
proper in a time of tranquillity and order. These are consderations of policy,
not questions of law, and upon which the legislature is bound to decide
according to its real opinion of the necessity and propriety of any act
particularly in contemplation. It is, however, alleged, that the necessity and
propriety of passing collateral laws for the support of others, is confined to
cases where the powers are delegated, and does not extend to cases which have a
reference to general danger only. The words are general, for carrying into
execution the special powers previously enumerated, and all other powers vested
by the constitution in the government of the United States, or any department
or officer thereof. If, therefore, there be any thing necessary and proper for
carrying into execution any or all of those powers, I presume, that may be
constitutionally enacted. Two objects are aimed at by every rational
government, more especially by free ones; 1. That the people may understand the
laws, and voluntarily obey them. 2. That if this be not done by any individual,
he shall be compelled to obey them, or punished for disobedience. The first
object is, undoubtedly the most momentous; for, as the legitimate object of
every government is the happiness of the people committed to its care, nothing
can tend more to promote this than that, by a voluntary obedience to the laws
of the country, they should render punishments unnecessary. This can never be
the case in any country but a country of slaves, where gross misrepresentation
prevails, and any large body of the people can be induced to believe that laws
are made either without authority, or for the purpose of oppression. Ask the
great body of the people who were deluded into an insurrect^on in the western
parts of Pennsylvania, what gave rise to it? They ^ill not hesitate to say,
that the government had been vilely misrepresented, and made to appear to them
in a character directly the reverse of what they deserved. In consequence of
such misrepresentations, a civil war had nearly desolated our country, and a
certain expense of near two millions of dollars was actually incurred, which
might be deemed the price of libels, and among other causes made necessary a
judicious and moderate land tax, which no man de^ie^, to be constitutional, but
is now made the pretext of au^thor insurrection. The liberty of the press is,
indeed, valuable -- long may it preserve its lastre! It has converted barbarous
nations into civilized ones -- taught science to rear its head -- enlarged the
capacity -- increased the comforts of private life -- and, leading the banners
is of freedom, has extended her sway where her very name was unknown. But, as
every human blessing is attended with imperfection, as what produces, by a
right use, the greatest good, is productive of the gr^ate^ evil in its abuse,
so this, one of the greatest blessings ever bestowed by Providence on his
creatures, is capable of producing the greatest good or the greatest mischief.
A pen, in the hands of an able and virtuous man, may enlighten a whole nation,
and, by observations of real wisdom, grounded on pure morality, may lead it to
the path of honor and happiness. -- The some pen in the hands of a man equally
able, but with vices as great as the other's virtues, may, by arts of sophistry
easily attainable, and inflaming the passions of weak minds, delude many into
opinions the most dangerous, and conduct them to actions the most criminal. Men
who are at a distance from the source of information must rely almost
altogether on the accounts they receive from others. If their accounts are
founded in truth, their heads or hearts must be to blame, if they think or act
wrongly. But, if their account^ are false, the best head and the best heart
cannot be proof against their influence; nor is it possible to calculate the
combined effect of innumerable artifices, either by direct falsehood, or
invidious insinuations, told day by day, upon minds both able and virtuous.
Such being unquestionably the case, can it be tolerated in any civilized
society that any should be permitted with impunity to tell falsehoods to the
people, with an express intention to deceive them, and lead them into
discontent, if not into insurrection, which is so apt to follow? It is believed
no government in the world ever was without such a power. It is, unquestionably
possessed by all the state governments, and probably has been exercised in all
of them: Sure I am, it has in some. If necessary and proper for them, why not
equally so, at least, for the government of the United States, naturally an
object of more jealousy and alarm, because it has greater concerns to provide
for? Combinations to defeat a particular law are admitted to be punishable.
Falsehoods, in order to produce such combinations; I should presume, would come
within the same principle, as being the first step to the mischief intended to
be prevented; and if such falsehoods, with regard to one particular law, are
dangerous, and therefore ought not to be permitted without punishment -- Why
should such which are intended to destroy confidence in government altogether,
and, thus, induce disobedience to every act of it? It is said, libels may be
rightly punishable in monarchies, but there is not the same necessity in a
republic. The necessity in the latter case, I conceive greater, because in a
republic more is dependent on the good opinion of the people for its support,
as they are directly or indirectly the origin of all (...), which of coar^e
must receive its bias from them. Take away from a republic the confidence of
the people, and the whole fabric crumbles into dust.

I have only to add, under this head, that in order to obviate any probable ill
use of this large and discretionary power, the constitution and certain
amendments to it, have prohibited in express words the exercise of some
particular authorities which otherwise might be supposed to be comprehended
within them. Of this nature is the pro^ibitory clause relating to the present
obje^^t which I am to consider under the next objection.

4. That objection is, ^at the act is in violation of this amendment of the
constitution. (^d vol. Swift's Edition, p, 455. Article 3d.)

Congress shall make no law re^pe^ing an establishment of religion, or
prohibiting the free exercise thereof; or abridging the freedom of speech, or
of the press, or the right of the people peaceably to assemble, and to petition
the government for a redress of grievances.

The question then is,

Whether this law has abridged the freedom of the press?

Here is a remarkable difference in expressions as to the different objects in
the same clause. They are to make no law respecting an establishment of
religion, or prohibiting the free exercise thereof: or abridging the freedom of
speech, or of the press. When as to one object they entirely prohibit any act
whatever, and as to another object only limit the exercise of the power, they
must in reason be supposed to mean different things. I presume, therefore, that
Congress may make a law respecting the press, provided the law be such as not
to abridge its freedom. What might be deemed the freedom of the press, if it
had been a new subject, and never before in discussion, might indeed admit of
some controversy. -- But so far as precedent habit, laws and practices are
concerned, there can scarcely be a more definite meaning than that which all
these have affixed to the term in question.

We derive our principles of law originally from England. There the press, I
believe, is as free as in any country of the world, and so it has been for near
a century. The definition of it is, in my opinion, no where more happily or
justly expressed than by the great Author of the Commentaries on the Laws of
England, which book deserves more particular regard on this occasion, because
for near 30 years it has been the ma^al of almost every student of law in the
United States, and its uncommon excellence has also introduced it into the
libraries, and often to the favorite reading of private gentlemen; so that his
views of the subject could scarcely be unknown to those who framed the
Amendments to the constitution, and if they were not, unless his explanation
had been satisfactory, I presume the Amendment would have been more
particularly worded, to guard against any possible mistake. His explanation is
as follows:

The Liberty of the Press is indeed essential to the nature of a free state.
And this consists in laying no previous restraints upon publications, and not
in freedom from censure for criminal matter when published. Every freeman has
an undoubted right to lay what sentiments ^e pleases before the public; to
forbid this, is to destroy the freedom of the press: but it he publishes what
is improper, mischievous, or illegal he must take the consequence of his own
(...). To subject the press to the restrictive power of a Licenser, as was
formerly done, both before and since the revolution, is to subject all freedom
of sentiment to the prejudices of one man, and make him the arbitrary and
infallible judge of all controversial points in learning, religion, and
government. But to punish (as the law does at present) any dangerous or
offensive writings, which, when published, shall on a fair and impartial trial
be adjudged of a pernicious tendency, is necessary for the preservation of
peace and good order, of government and religion, the only solid foundations of
civil liberty. Thus the will of individuals is still left free; the abuse only
of that free will is the object of legal punishment. Neither is any restraint
hereby laid upon freedom of thought or enquiry: liberty of private sentiment is
still left; the disseminating or making public, of bad sentiments, destructive
of the ends of society, is the crime which society corrects. A man (says a fine
writer on this subject) may be allowed to keep poisons in his closet, but not
publicly to vend them as cordials. And to this we may add, that the only
plausible argument heretofore used for the restraining the just freedom of the
press, that it was necessary to prevent the daily abuse of it, will entirely
lose its force when it is shown (by a reasonable exercise of the laws) that the
press cannot be abused to any bad purpose, without incurring a suitable
punishment: whereas it never can be used to any good one, when under the
control of an Inspector. So true will it be found, that to censure the
licentiousness, is to maintain the liberty of the press. 4 Black. Com. 151.

It is believed, that iv every state in the union the common law principles
concerning libels apply; and in some of the states words similar to the words
of the amendment are used in the constitution itself, or a contemporary bill of
rights of equal authority, without ever being supposed to exclude any law being
passed on the subject. So that there is the strongest proof that can be of a
universal concurrence in America on this point that the freedom of the press
does not require that libellers shall be protected from punishment.

But in some respects the act of congress is much more restrictive than the
principles of the common law, or than perhaps the principles of any state in
the union. For under the law of the United States the truth of the matter may
be given in evidence, which at common law in criminal prosecutions was held not
to be admissible; and the punishment of fine and imprisonment, which at common
law was discretionary, is limited in point of severity, though not of ^^nity.
It is to be observed too, that by the express words of the act both malice and
falsehood must combine in the publication, with the seditions intent
particularly described. So that if the writing be false, yet not malicious, or
malicious and not false, no conviction can take place. This therefore fully
provides for any publication arising from inadvertency, mistake, false
confidence, or any thing short of a wilful and atrocious falsehood. And none
surely will contend that the publication of such a falsehood is among the
indefeasible rights of men, for that would be to make the freedom of liars
greater than that of men of truth and integrity.

I have now said all I thought material on these important subjects. There is
another upon which it is painful to speak, but the notoriety as well as the
official certainty of the fact, and the importance of the danger make it
indispensable. Such incessant calumnies have been poured against the government
for supposed breaches of the constitution, that an insurrection has lately
began for a cause where no breach of the constitution is or can be pretended.
The grievance is the land tax act, an act which the public exigencies rendered
unavoidable, and is framed with particular anxiety to avoid its falling
oppressively on the poor, and in effect the greatest part of it must fall on
rich people only. Yet arms have been taken to oppose its execution: officers
have been insul^ed: the authority of the law resisted: and the government of
the United States treated with the utmost defiance and contempt. Not being
thoroughly informed of all particulars, I cannot now say within what class of
offenses these crimes are comprehended. But as some of the offenders are
committed for treason, and many certainly have been guilty of combinations to
resist the law of the United States, I think it proper to point your attention
particularly to those subjects. The provisions in regard to the former, so far
as they may at present be deemed material or instructive, are as follow:

(Here the passages referred to were read.)

The only species of treason likely to come before you is that of levying war
against the United States. There have been various opinions, and different
determinations on the import of those words. But I think I am warranted in
saying, that if in the case of the insurgents who may come under your
consideration the intention was to prevent by so force of arms the execution of
any a^^, of the Congress of the United States altogether (as for instance the
land tax act, the object of their opposition) any forcible opposition
calculated to carry that intention into effect was a levying of war against the
United States, and of course an act of treason. But if the intention was,
merely to defeat its operation in a particular instance, or through the agency
of a particular officer, from some private or personal motive, though a higher
offense may have been committed, it did not amount to the crime of treason. The
particular motive must however be the sole ingredient in the case, for if
combined with a general view to obstruct the execution of the act, the offense
must be deemed treason.

With regard to the number of witnesses in treason, I am of opinion that two
are necessary on the indictment as well as upon the trial in court.

The provision in the constitution, that the two witness must be to the same
overt act, (or actual deed constituting the treasonable offense) was in
consequence of a const^^^ which had prevailed in England, that though two
witnesses were required to prove an act of treason, yet if one witness proved
one act, and another witness another act of the same species of treason, (as
for instance that of levying war) it was sufficient; a decision which has
always appeared to me contrary to the true intention of the law which made two
witnesses necessary -- this provision being, as I conceived, intended to guard
against fictitious charges of treason, which an unprincipled government might
be ^ed to support and encourage, even at the expense of perjury, a thing much
more difficult to be effected by two witnesses than one.

An act of Congress which I have already read to you (that commonly called the
sedition act) has specially provided in the manner you have heard, against
combinations to defeat the execution of the laws. The combinations punishable
under this act must be distinguished from such as in themselves amount to
treason, which is unalterably fixed by the constitution itself. Any
combinations, therefore, which be^e the passing of this act, would have
amounted to treason, still constitute the same crime. To give the act in
question a different construction, would do away altogether the crime of
treason as committed by levying war, because no war can be levied without a
combination for some of the purposes stated in the act, which must necessarily
constitute a part though not the whole of the offense.

Long, gentlemen, as I have detained you, for which the great importance of the
occasion, I trust, is a just apology, it will be useful to recollect, that ever
since the first formation of the present government, every act which any
extraordinary difficulty has occasioned, has been uniformly opposed before its
adoption, and every art practiced to make the people discontented after it:
without any allowance for the necessity which dictated them some seem to have
taken it for granted that credit could be obtained without justice, money
without taxes, and the honor and safety of the United States only preserved by
a disgraceful foreign dependence. But, notwithstanding all the efforts made to
^^llify and undermine the government, it has uniformily rose in the esteem and
confidence of the people. Time has disproved arrogant predictions; a true
knowledge of the principles and conduct of the government has rectified many
gross misrepresentations; credit has risen from its ashes; the country has been
sound full of resources, which have been drawn without oppression, and
faithfully applied to the purposes to which they were appropriated; justice is
impartially administered; and the only crime which is fairly imputable is, that
the minority have not been suffered to govern the majority, to which they had
as little pretension upon the ground of superiority of talents, patriotism, or
general probity, as upon the principles of republicanism, the perpetual theme
of their declamation. If you suffer this government to be destroyed, what
chance have you for any other? A scene of the most dreadful confusion must
ensue. Anarchy will ride triumphant, and all lovers of order, decency, truth
and justice be trampled under foot. May that God whose peculiar providence
seems often to have interposed to save these United States from destruction,
preserve us from this worst of all evils! And may the inhabitants of this happy
country deserve his care and protection by a conduct best calculated to obtain
them.

Philadelphia, May 15, 1799. SIR,
THE Grand Jury of the Circuit court of the District of Pennsylvania, have
heard with great satisfaction, the Charge delivered to them, on the opening of
the Court.

At a time like the present, when false philosophy and the most dangerous and
wicked principles are spreadig with rapidity, under the imposing garb of
Liberty, over the fairest countries of the Old World -- they are convinced,
that the publication of a Charge, fraught with such clear and just observations
on the nature and operation of the constitution and laws of the United States
will be highly beneficial to the citizens thereof.

With these sentiments strongly impressed on their minds, they unanimously
request, that a copy of the said charge may be delivered to them, for
publication; especially for the information of those, who are too easily led by
the misrepresentations of evil disposed persons, into the commission of crimes,
ruinous to themselves, and against the peace and dignity of the United States.

Isaac Wharton, Foreman, J. Ross, Edward Pennington, Philip Nicklin, Joseph
Parker Norris, Benjamin W. Morris, Thomas M. Willing, Robert Ralston, John
Craig, Samuel Coats, David H. Conyngham, John Perot, James C. Fisher, Daniel
Smith, Gideon Hill Wells, William Mon^^omery, W. Bulkley.

Honorable Judge IREDELL.
To the Gentlemen of the Grand Jury of the United States, for the district of
Pennsylvania. Gentlemen,
I receive with great sensibility the honor of this address, from gentlemen
whom I personally respect so much. Believing, as I have long done, that the
constitution and laws of the United States afford the highest degree of
rational liberty which the world ever saw, or of which perhaps mankind are
capable, I have seen with astonishment and regret, attempts made in the pursuit
of visionary chimeras, to subvert or undermine so glorious a fabric, equally
constructed for public and private security. It cannot but be extremely
pleasing to me, that the sentiments on this subject I delivered in my charge,
should meet with your entire approbation; and as you are pleased to suppose the
publication of them may be of some service in correcting erroneous opinions, I
readily consent to it, considering your sanction of them as giving them an
additional value, which will increase the hope of their producing a good effect.

JAMES IREDELL.
Philadelphia, May 15, 1799.
WEDNESDAY, MAY 1, Ten o'clock A. M.
INDICTMENT.
IN THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, IN AND FOR THE
PENNSYLVANIA DISTRICT OF THE MIDDLE CIRCUIT.
THE GRAND INQUEST of the United States of America, for the Pennsylvania
District, upon their respective oaths and affirmations, do present, That John
Fries, late of the county of Bucks, in the District of of Pennsylvania, he
being an inhabitant of, and residing within, the said United States, to wit, in
the district aforesaid, and under the protection of the laws of the said United
States, and owing allegiance and fidelity to the same United States, not having
the fear of God before his eyes, nor weighing the duty of his said allegiance
and fidelity, but being moved and seduced by the instigation of the devil,
wickedly devising and intending the peace and tranquillity of the said United
States to disturb, on the Seventh day of March, in the year of our Lord one
thousand seven hundred and ninety nine at Bethlehem, in the county of
Northampton, in the district aforesaid, unlawfully, maliciously and
traitorously did compass, imagine and intend to raise and levy war,
insurrection and rebellion against the said United States; and to fulfill and
bring to effect the said traitorous compassings, imaginations and intentions of
him the said John Fries, he, the said John Fries afterward, that is to say, on
the said Seventh day of March in the said year of our Lord one thousand seven
hundred and ninety nine, at the said county of Northampton in the district
aforesaid, with a great multitude of persons, whose names at present are
unknown to the Grand Inquest aforesaid, to a great number, to wit, to the
number of one hundred persons and upwards, armed and arrayed in a, warlike
manner, that is to say, with guns, swords, clubs, staves and other warlike
weapons, as well offensive as defensive, being then and there unlawfully,
maliciously and traitorously assembled and gathered together, did falsely and
traitorously assemble and join themselves together against the said United
States, and then and there, with force and arms, did falsely and traitorously,
and in a warlike and hostile manner, array and dispose themselves against the
said United States, and then and there, with force and arms, in pursuance of
such their traitorous intentions and purposes aforesaid, he the said John Fries
with the said persons so as aforesaid traitorously assembled, and armed and
arrayed in manner aforesaid, most wickedly, maliciously and traitorously did
ordain, prepare and levy public war against the said United States, contrary to
the duty of his said allegiance and fidelity, against the constitution, peace
and dignity of the said United States, and also against the form of the act of
the Congress of the said United States, in such case made and provided.

WILLIAM RAWLE, Attorney of the United States for the Pennsylvania District.

The prisoner having been set to the bar, pleaded NOT GUILTY.

The pettit jury impannelled, consisted of the following gentlemen:

WILLIAM JOLLY, City SAMUEL MI^CHELL, Bucks RICHARD LEEDOM. ditto ANTHONY
CU^HBERT, City ALEXANDER FULLERTON, City JOHN SINGER. City WILLIAM RAMSAY,
Bucks SAMUEL RICHARDS, City GERARDUS WYNKOOP, Bucks JOSEPH THORNTON, City
PHILIP WALTER, Northampton JOHN RHOAD, Northampton,
Some difficulties arose as to the two latter gentlemen being qualified, they
being Germans, and not sufficiently understanding the English language: however
it was agreed that any difficulties of that nature might be explained to them,
and it was urged that they would understand many of the witnesses better than
others, several of those being Germans also, and could not speak English, on
which account Mr. Erdman was sworn for interpreter.

MR. SITGREAVES opened the trial as follows:
GENTLEMEN OF THE JURY,
BY the indictment which has been just read to you, you perceive that John
Fries, the prisoner at the bar, has put himself on trial before you, on an
accusation of having committed the greatest offense which can be perpetrated in
this, or any other country, and it will devolve on you to determine, according
to the evidence which will be produced to you, on the important question of
life or death. It is the duty of these that prosecute, to open to you, as clear
as they are able, those principles of law which apply to the offender, and then
to state to you the testimony with which the accusation is supported. This duty
has devolved upon me, and I hope, while I regard my duty as accuser, I shall do
it in such a way as shall do no injustice to the prisoner. However, if I should
be incorrect, there are sufficient opportunities for me to be corrected by the
vigilance which the council engaged on behalf of the prisoner will use, and the
order which the court will observe. These are sufficient to correct any
mis-^tements, but I will use my utmost endeavors to be guilty of none.

The prisoner is indicted of the crime of treason. Treason is defined in the
constitution of the United States, Section 3. Art. 3. in the words following:

"Treason against the United States, shall consist only in levying war against
them, or in adhering to their enemies, giving them aid and comfort."

This crime appears to be limited to two descriptions: the one, levying war
against the United States, and the other adhering to its enemies. With respect
to the latter branch of the description, there will be no occasion for any
explanation, or to call your attention in the least to it, because it is not
charged upon the prisoner; he if charged with having committed treason in
levying war.

This expression, phraseology, or description as adopted by our constitution,
is burrowed from a statute of Great Britain, passed in the reign of Edward III.
which has, ever since it passed, commanded the veneration and respect of that
nation, almost equal with their great charter: it is considered as a great
security to their liberties. Indeed the uniform and unanimous consent given to
this statute, through a great lapse of time, by the most able writers on law;
its never having undergone the least alteration amidst the most severe
scrutinies, and its adoption into the constitution of the United States,
without the least amendment, are sufficient encomiums to prove its worth. I
shall state to you, as far as is necessary to the present application of that
statute, the most able and judicious expositions, but without recurring to a
variety of authorities which might be quoted.

The crime of treason, as it has been laid down by those writers, generally
allowed to be the most able on law, whose accuracy is unquestionable, is the
highest crime that can possibly be committed against the good government of a
nation, and a considerable inroad into the liberties of a subject. In
discussing this crime I shall only recur to the notes which I have taken, and
my own knowledge of the law; if that statement should he inaccurate, there are
sufficient opportunities for amendment in the course of this trial, Treason
consists in levying war against the government of the United States: it may
confidently he said not only to consist in joining or aiding the hostile
intentions of a foreign enemy; nor is it confined to rebellion in the broad
sense in which that word is generally understood; or in the utter subversion of
the government and its fundamental institutions: but it also consists in the
raising a military force from among the people for the purpose of attaining any
object with a design of opposing the lawful authority of the government by dint
of arms, in some matter of public concern in which the insurgents have no
particular interest distinct from the rest of the community. This is the best
description of the crime treason, as it relates to the matter before you, which
I am able to give. A tumultuously raising the people with force, for the
purpose of subverting, or opposing the lawful authority of the government in
which those insurgents have no particular interest distinct from the people at
large.

Agreeable to the division made in the definition of treason by Lord Hale, it
must consist both in levying war, and in levying war against the government of
the United States. Reflecting levying of war, it is to be understood, agreeable
to the most approved authorities, that there must be an actual military array,
I mention this because I think it proper to be particular in so essential and
important an enquiry, and because I think we shall prove to you that this was
actually done by the prisoner. Another thing I wish you to bear in mind is,
that war may be sufficiently levied against the United States, although no
violence be used, and although no battle be fought. It is not necessary that
actual violence should take place, to prove the actual waging of war. If the
arrangements are made, and the numbers of armed men actually appear, so as to
procure the object which they have in view by Intimidation, as well as by
actual force, that will constitute the offense.

It must be war waged against the United States. This is an important
distinction. A large assemblage of people may come together; in whatever
numbers; however they may be armed or arrayed, or whatever degree of violence
they may commit, yet that alone would not constitute treason: the treason must
be known; it must be for a public and not a private revenge; it must be
avowedly levying war against the United States; if people assemble in this
hostile manner only to gratify revenge, or any other purpose independent of war
against the United States, it will only amount to a riot; but if it is an
object in which the person has no particular interest, this constitutes the
offense of treason. There are a variety of instances which might be produced in
order to illustrate this definition of the law, but it is not necessary to turn
to them. Suffice it to say that it is the intention or end for which an
insurrection is raised, which constitutes the crime. This of course you will
have in mind when the testimony is gone into. I will just observe, as
applicable to this case, that one instance which is defined, of the crime of
treason is, to defeat the operation of the laws of the government; any
insurrection, I will be bold to say, to defeat the execution of the public
laws, amounts to treason; Having given you this explanation of treason, so far
as I suppose is connected with the present awful occasion, I shall now proceed
to state the amount of evidence we mean to produce, in order to prove that the
unhappy prisoner was guilty of that high crime.

It will appear, gentlemen, from the testimony which will be presented to you,
that during the latter months of the year 1798 discords prevailed to an
enormous extent throughout a large portion of the counties of Bucks,
Northampton, and Montgomery, and that considerable difficulties attended the
assessors for the direct tax in the execution of the duties of their
assessment. It is not in the nature of this enquiry to explain for what
purpose, or by what means the opposition was made: it is not necessary to say
whether the complaints urged were well or ill founded, because it is a settled
point that any insurrection for removing public grievances, whether the
complaints be real or pretended, amounts to treason, because it is not the mode
pointed out by law for obtaining redress. It will then be sufficient to show
you that discontents did exist, and that in various townships of those
counties; that in several townships, associations of the people were actually
formed, in order to prevent the persons charged with the execution of those
laws of the United States from performing their duty upon them, and more
particularly to prevent the assessors from measuring their houses: this
opposition was made at many public township meetings called for the purpose, in
many instances resolutions were entered into, and reduced to writing, solemnly
forewarning the officers whose duty it was to execute the laws, and these, many
times accompanied with threats if they should perform that duty. Not only so,
but discontents prevailed to such an height, that even the friends of the
government in that part were completely suppressed, by menaces against any who
should assist those officers in their duty: repeated declarations were made,
both at public, as well as at private meetings, that if any person should be
arrested by the civil authority, such arrest would be followed by the rising of
the people, in opposition to that authority, for the purpose of rescuing such
arrested prisoners: it will appear to you farther, gentlemen, in the course of
evidence, that during those discontents, indefatigable pains were taken by
those who were charged with the execution of the laws, to calm the fears, and
to remove the misapprehensions of the infatuated people; for this purpose they
road and explained the law to them, and informed them that they were misled
into the idea that the law was not in force, for that it actually was; at the
same time warning them of the consequences which would flow from opposition,
and this was accompanied with promises that even their most capricious wishes
would be gratified on their obedience. The favor was in many instances
granted, that where any opposition was made to any certain person executing the
office of assessor, in some townships proposals were made for the people to
choose for themselves, but notwithstanding this accommodating offer, the
opposition continued.

After having showed to you the general extent of this combination and
dangerous conspiracy, which existed in all the latitude I have opened to your
view, we shall next give in evidence full proof, that the consequences were,
actual opposition and resistance: in some parts violence was actually used, and
the assessors were taken and imprisoned by armed parties, and in other mobs
assembled to compel them, either to deliver up their papers, or to resign their
commissions; that in some instances they were threatened with bodily harm, so
that in those parts, the obnoxious law did remain unexecuted in consequence of
this alarm. Seeing the state of insurrection and rebellion had arisen to such a
height, it became necessary, in order to support the dignity, and indeed the
very existence of the government, that some means should be adopted to compel
the execution of those laws, and warrants were in consequence issued against
certain persons who had so opposed the laws: These processes being put into the
hands of the marshal of the district, were served upon some of them: in some
instances during the execution of that duty the marshal met with insult, and
almost with violence: having however, got nearly the whole of the warrants
served, he appointed head quarters for these prisoners to rendezvous at
Bethelem, where some of them were to enter bail for their appearance in the
city, and others were to come to the city in custody, for trial. It will appear
to you, that on the day thus appointed for the prisoners to meet, and when a
number of them had actually assembled agreeable to appointment, that a number,
-- parties in arms, both horse and foot, more than an hundred men, accoutred
with all their military apparatus, commanded in some instances by their proper
officers, marched to Bethlehem, collected before the house in which were the
marshal and prisoners, whom they demanded to be delivered up to them, and in
consequence of refusal, they proceeded to act very little short of actual
hostility, so that the marshal deemed it prudent to accede to their demands,
and the prisoners were I berated.

This, gentlemen, is the general history of the insurrection, I shall now state
to you the part which the unfortunate prisoner at the bar took in those hostile
transactions. It will appear that the prisoner is an inhabitant of the township
of lower Milford in the county of Bucks, that sometime in February last a
public meeting was held at the house of one John Kline in that township, to
consider in relation to this house tax, what was to be done: that at that
meeting certain resolutions were entered into, and a paper signed; (we have
endeavored to trace this paper, so as to produce it to the court and jury, but
have failed) this paper was signed by fifty two persons and committed to the
hands of one of their number: John Fries was present at this meeting, and
assisted in drawing up the paper, at which time his expressions against this
law were extremely violent, and he threatened to shoot one of the assessors,
Mr. Foulke, through the legs if he did proceed to assess the houses. Again, the
prisoner, at a vendue, threatened another of the assessors, Mr. S. Clarke, that
if he attempted to go on with the assessments he should be committed to an old
stable, and there fed on rotten corn: we shall further prove that upon its
being intimated by force of them to Mr. Chapman, principal assessor, that if
they might choose their own assessors things would go on quietly, he directed
that they should do so, but still they continued in opposition to the law, and
would not choose an officer at all. A general meeting was called to read and
explain the law to the people, and thus remove any wrong impressions and
mis-apprehensions: the principal assessor was at that meeting, but the
rudeness, opposition and violence, used by the people, prevented him from doing
so, which was an evident proof that they did not want to hear the law, and that
they understood enough of it to oppose it: thus the benevolent intentions of
that meeting was frustrated. We shall farther show you that the assessor of
lower Milford was intimidated so as to decline making the assessments, and that
the principal assessor together with three other assessors, were obliged to go
into that township to execute the law; that they proceeded in the execution of
their duty during a part of the day of the 5th of March last, without any
impediment; that at eleven o'clock in the morning Mr. Chapman met, at the house
of Jacob Fries in lower Milford, with the prisoner, when he, the prisoner,
declared his determination not to submit, but to oppose the law, and that by
the next morning he could raise 700 men in opposition to it: that upon Mr.
Chapman telling him, that many houses were assessed, the prisoner flew into a
violent passion, absolutely declaring that it should soon be in this country as
it was in France. We shall farther show you, that at another time during the
same day the prisoner met with two of the assessors Mr. Rodrick and Mr. Foulke,
whom he warned not to proceed in the execution of their duty, accompanied with
threats that if they did, they would be hurt, and left them in a great rage.
Farther, he proceeded to collect parties, with whom he went in search of those
men, and attacked them in executing their duty, one of them escaped, but the
other he took, but not having got Mr. Roderick, who appeared to be a particular
object of resentment, he let Mr. Foulke go, telling him he would have them
again the next day. He told Mr. Clarke that if he had met with Rodrick he would
not have let him go so easy, and declared to him solemnly and repeatedly, that
it was his determination to oppose the laws. We shall farther show you that,
after having discharged Foulke, he proceeded to Collect a large party in the
township, in order to take the assessors is the next day. Accordingly on the
day following a numerous party, to wit, about 50 or 60, the greatest part of
whom were in arms, collected together and pursued the assessors, and not
finding them in that township, pursued them into another, in order, net only to
chase them out of the township, but generally to prevent them executing their
duty. This party collected, not only many of them in arms, but in military
array, with drum and fife, and commanded by this Captain Fries and one Kuyder:
Fries himself was armed with a large horse pistol. Thus equipped, they went to
Quaker town, in order to accomplish their purpose, where they found the
assessors, two of whom they took, but Rodrick tied. Fries ordered his men to
fire at the man who fled, and the piece was snapped, but did not go off. Fries
did then compel Foulke to deliver up to them his papers, but not finding in
them what they expected, they were returned, but at the same time exacting a
promise that he, the assessor, should not proceed in the valuation of the
houses in lower Milford. Fries was in many instances extremely violent against
this law, and preremptory in his determination not to submit to it, as will
appear by the evidence.

When they left Quaker town they met with a traveling man who expressed some
good will toward the government, and for that expression, they mal-treated him
very much, and expressed their general dislike to all who supported the same
principles. During the time they were at Quaker town, intimation was received
that the marshal had taken a number of persons prisoners in consequence of
opposing the execution of this law, whereupon a determination was formed
amongst these people to go and effect their rescue, and the people of Milford
were generally invited to assist in this business. When they were going, the
parted halted at the house of John Fries, and then a paper was signed, by which
they bound themselves volunteers to go upon the execution of this design, this
paper was written by the prisoner at the bar, and signed by him and the rest:
therein they engaged to go and rescue the prisoners who had been arrested by
the marshal. On the morning of the next day 20 or more of them met at the house
of Conrad Marks, in arms, to go on with their design. John Fries was armed with
a sword, and had a feather in his hat. On the road, as they went forward they
were met by young Marks, who told them that they might as well turn about, for
that the Northampton people were strong enough to do the business without those
from Bucks county: some were so inclined to do, but at the instance of Fries
and some others, they did go forward, and actually proceeded to Bethlehem.
Before the arrival of these troops, a party, going on the same business, had
stopped at the bridge, a small distance from Bethlehem, when they had been met
by a deputation from the marshal, whom be had prevailed on to go and meet them,
in order to advise them to return home: they agreed to halt there, and send
three of their number to declare to the marshal what was their demand: it was
during this period that Fries and his party came up, but it appears that when
they came, Fries took the party actually over the bridge and that he arranged
the toll with the man, and ordered them to proceed. With respect to proof of
the proceedings at Bethlehem, it cannot be mistaken: he was there the leading
man, and he appears to enjoy the command. With the consent of his people he
demanded the prisoners of the marshal, and when that officer told him that he
could not surrender them, except they were taken from him by force, and
produced his warrant for taking them, the prisoner then harrangued his party
out of the house, and explained to them the necessity of using force; and that
you should not mistake his design, we will prove to you that he declared, "that
was the third day which he had been out on this expedition, that he had had a
skirmish the day before, and if the prisoners were not released he should have
another that day. NOW you observe," resumed he, "that force is necessary, but
you must obey my orders, we will not go without taking the prisoners; but take
my orders, you must not fire first: must be first fired upon, and when I am
gone, then you must do as well as you can, as I expect to be the first man that
falls." He farther declared to the marshal; that they " would fire till a cloud
of smoke prevented them seeing one another; and executing the office of
commander of the troops which at that time over awed the marshal and his
attendants, harrangued the troops to obey his orders, which they accordingly
did, and the marshal was really intimidated to liberate the prisoners; and then
the object was accomplished, and the party dispersed, amidst the huzzas of the
insurgents. After this affair at Bethlehem, it will be given you in evidence
that the prisoner frequently avowed his opposition to the laws, and justified
that outrage; and when a meeting was afterward held at lower Milford to choose
assessors, the prisoner refused his assent to the accommodating object of the
meeting, and appeared as violent as ever.

These are some of the points we mean to prove before you. I shall therefore at
present proceed to introduce our testimony.

William Henry, Esquire, sworn.

COUNCIL. Were you at Bethlehem on the 7th of March last?


WITNESS. I arrived there on the evening of the 6th -- we had heard that there
was a party of men would collect, for the purpose of rescuing the prisoners who
were there in custody of the marshal, in consequence of that I went to assist
the, marshal, and, if possible, prevail on the people to desist. -- The witness
said he was one of the judges of the court of common please for the county of
Northampton -- About ten o'clock on the morning of the 7th two men with arms
arrived at the tavern where we were, the name of one was Keifer, and the other
Paulus: they were called into the house, and enquired of by the marshal as to
their intention in coming armed, they appeared to be diffident about an answer;
after first saying they came upon a shooting frolic, Keifer said they were come
in order to see what was best to be done for the country: after that came in
several others three of them were David Shaef, Jacob Kline, and Philip Tesch,
armed and on horse back, two of them in uniform, with swords and pistols: the
two first men were placed with the marshal in a separate room, in order to
await the issue; at this time a considerable number of people had assembled.
Henry Shankwyler was in company with the three men: the marshal first went and
spoke to these men as to their intention, I also walked out for the same
purpose, requesting them to withdraw, and not appear in arms in order to
obstruct the process of the United States laws: Shaeff and Kline answered that
they were freemen, and might go where they pleased with their arms: I told them
that they ran great risk by appearing in arms for such a purpose as I feared
they were come.


COUNCIL. Were these three, the whole of the armed men present?


There came in a number, but I don't know how many particularly, as they mixed
among the crowd.

We requested them to deliver up their arms, but they refused. I also, at the
same time told Shankwyler that it would be best for him to surrender himself,
and not oppose the process, the others gave me answer, that they had come to
accompany their friend Shankwyler, and to see that no injury was done to him.
After this I returned into the lower back room of the house, by this time there
were a number more collected round the house, but mostly armed. I don't
recollect whether it was before these three men arrived or not, that the
marshal had sent off four men of his posse, in order to meet the men with arms
who were coming forward, and after we were up stairs there were three men
arrived as a deputation from the armed body, making enquiry as to the intention
of the marshal in taking these prisoners: with these 3 men the 4 deputed by the
marshal had returned from the armed body that was the other side of the bridge,
in order to learn the marshal's object. The marshal assured them of the
legality of the process, and reasoned with them as to the consequences of
opposition, or threats to him, or preventing him from executing his duty, but I
believe he liberated the two men that were first put in confinement, and
returned them their guns again. During the time that these two men were in
confinement we examined their guns, and found that they were both loaded. I was
pretty much in the lower part of the house backward, and there was much of the
proceedings of these people I did not see, in the front of the house, but I
endeavored to converse with as many as I knew, informing them of the badness
of their conduct, and the consequence of it, but it appeared to be to no
effect, as I knew. About one o'clock I think I first saw what was called the
main body of this armed force, marching up the street: there was a party of
horse preceded the foot came riding up two a breast, I am not certain whether
they had their swords drawn, but I believe they had, and then followed the
foot, marching up in Indian (single) file, when they came up the foot marched
twice round the tavern, and placed themselves in front of the house, where they
stood some time drawn up in single rank, I believe they were rifle-men they
continued there till the rescue was effected. During this time I frequently
heard that the prisoners were demanded by them, and they, insisted on their
release.


Cross examination. Did you hear the demand made?


No, I did not, but I heard in the house that it had been made; I also heard
that they intended to force their passage up stairs. I observed a party coming
up stairs, particularly one, whom I did not know, ^pointing a rifle up the
stairs, as though levelling it at some particular person. The people appeared
very noisy in the lower part of the house, all this time, I frequently heard
the cry of " deliver up the prisoners," and it appeared to come from the party
at the foot of the stairs. During the affair, I am not certain whether it was
previous to this or not, I looked out and saw six or eight men at the foot of
the stairs and the prisoner on the stairs conversing with the marshal: while I
was standing there, there was an old man, whom I understood afterward to be
John Kline, came running in from the front door, and called for captain Fries
in German, telling him there was his sword; (offering it) I think he called
three different times, on which I observed the prisoner wave his hand and tell
him to wait, it was not quite time yet; shortly after the prisoners were given
up. I was not by to be able to hear the conversation between the marshal and
the prisoner.


ATTORNEY. Did Fries appear to take the command of the men?


I saw Fries going backward and forward among them as though he had; and I saw
him marching into the town in front of the foot men.


COURT. Did you see him acting, or busying himself?


Yes, I saw him at different times passing to and fro.


Did any officer stay with the men that were drawn up in array before the house?


I noticed captain Staeler particularly, giving orders to his troop, and with
his sword drawn.


Did you see any communication between Fries and Staeler?


Not that I recollect.

After the prisoners were delivered up, the principal part of the men marched
off: I particularly heard captain Jarrett call to his men: I do not recollect
hearing Fries.


Did they take the prisoners with them?


No. I heard two or three men in the back room say that they must see the
prisoners, and insisted they should be let go before they would leave, and
particularly they enquired for the minister, one Jacob Ireman, he was a
prisoner, and at that time actually in custody.


COURT. What were these prisoners in custody for?


They were arrested for combinations and misdemeanors.

There was, among the company in the lower room, a man who declared himself
very violently; he said if the damned stamplers A STAMPLER was explained to be
a nickname given in that country to the friends of government, originating
from their support of the stamp act.
had only fired a shot, we would have showed what we could do. He was one of
Staeler's company. He really expressed a wish that it had been done. The words
were spoken in German.


ATTORNEY. Were many, or any of these people in a military dress as well as
arms?


There was twelve or fourteen of the horse: I believe there were none of the
foot, except that about ten or twelve had cockades of blue and white, blue and
red, etc.


COURT. Had they cartouch boxes, or any other means of carrying ammunition?


They had shot pouches, particularly the rifle company, and I believe all who
had guns. Keefer, who was first disarmed had a powder horn in his pocket: his
piece was a common fowling piece, the others were mostly rifles, as far as I
could perceive from the window.


How many armed men were there?


I did not count them, but there appeared about an hundred, or rather above
that number. The whole crowd assembled I think could not have been less than
400.


What number of persons had the marshal with him for his posse commitatus to
arrest these people?


I think fourteen or fifteen.


How many prisoners do you think there were?


I believe eighteen or nineteen.


Cross examination. Did you ever gather more than you have now dated, of the
intention of these people in assembling there?


I have frequently heard that they meant to oppose the laws.


What was the object declared by the people themselves at that time?


I understood that releasing the prisoners was the object they had in view,
both from themselves and from several persons with whom they had conversed on
the subject.


Was there a process against these persons who arrived, and were detained by
the marshal?


No.


COURT. Did you suppose, from the conversation you heard, that it was these two
prisoners who were intended to be released, or the prisoners held in custody by
the marshal against whom process was issued?


I supposed those prisoners who were taken by warrant by the marshal. I
suspected that the two persons who first came, came with improper views, and as
such ought to be confined, and wished them to be kept till we law those persons
who were coming with arms.


What did the deputation from those armed men demand?


They demanded the release of those two men, and they were released previous to
the coming up of the armed men.


Cross examination. At the time that Fries was conversing, with the marshal,
although you had not an opportunity of hearing what passed, was there any
violence in his manner, or any appearance of rage in him?


As to his own particular conduct, I cannot say, for it was but a few moments
that I had time to notice hi: I saw no particular violence in his manner.


Did you hear Fries communicate to the crowd the question he proposed to the
marshal, and the marshal answer respecting these prisoners?


No I did not; this I heard in the general conversation.


You never saw Mr. Fries but at the time he was conversing with the marshal,
and at that time not with any violent appearance.


I saw him both before and after, passing to and fro, but did not know the
man's name, but seeing a feather in his hat, I supposed him to be a man of
consequence.


At the time this sword was offered to Fries, he did not take, nor did appear
to have any arms about him?


No.


Was there any thing said, during this transaction about bailing these
prisoners?


There was a demand made by Shankwyler, in the room of the lower part of the
house, a short time previous to the actual release, but the marshal told
Shankwyler that his command was to take him before the judge, and he could not
admit him to bail.


Was there, or not, a general overture made to bail these prisoners?


Not that I recollect: there was much conversation on this subject in different
parts of the house, but not as coming from the party; but I believe it was
observed that if they could be bailed, it was probable the party might be
influenced to withdraw, but this did not come from the party themselves.


You mention that there were upwards of an hundred men in arms, and that the
aggregate present was about 400, do you consider every individual who was there
as partaking of this riot?


No. Though there were many of them that appeared there unarmed, were very
violent in their expressions, and generally they were in opposition to the
government.


During this period, were there any commissioners, or assessors there?


There was Mr. Eyerly, commissioner for that district, Mr. Balliott, and the
principal assessor, and I believe two other assessors, if not more.


Were any acts of violence offered to these officers during that time?


Not that I saw.


Did These officers remain in the house, or go down among the people?


They remained in the house I believe: they arrived there on Wednesday, the
evening preceding.


Did they hear that there was a probability of the prisoners being rescued?


Yes.


Did those people declare that they would not leave the place till they had
seen the prisoners at liberty?


Yes.


What became of the prisoners?


I believe the most part of them left the house in a short time after. I
understood they were, generally, not desirous of being rescued. They expressed
themselves so in my presence, and when they were delivered up, they entered
into some kind of obligation to deliver themselves up in Philadelphia.


COURT. Did These prisoners or the greatest part of them appear any way
desirous of being released?


No, they did not: on the reverse, they were very apprehensive of the
consequences of getting into the mob.


These prisoners were many of them from your county, and you were pretty
generally acquainted with them, did it appear that the prisoners were
acquainted with those who came to rescue them?


The greater part of them were not, especially those who came from Lehi
township. Twelve or thirteen of them I knew.


ATTORNEY. HOW far did the parson live from Bucks county?


Forty miles, I suppose.


COURT. Did those persons who came armed, profess to be particular friends to
any of them?


Not that I heard or knew of.


WILLIAM BARNETT, sworn.

Were you at Bethlehem on the 7th of March, and if you were, relate the
circumstance that transpired.


I was summoned to attend the marshal on the seventh of March at Bethlehem, as
one of his posse. I came there about 11 o'clock in the forenoon: I was there
but a very little time, when I understood there were some men coming with arms:
the marshal then appointed four of us to go out to meet them, in order to
prevail upon them not to come into the town. We went on about a mile from
Bethlehem, and crossed the Lehi, and there we met a party of horsemen first:
they were armed. I did not know any of them, but understood they were from
Northampton county, near about Millar's town. When we came up to them, we asked
them for their commanding officer. They made answer that they had no officers;
they were all commanders. We then told them what our errand was -- to try to
prevail upon them not to go on any farther, but they did not seem to mind it
much. We were with them but a very little time, before there was a company of
rifle men came up, they were armed as well as the others. We told them our
errand, but they did not seem to mind us. We then returned, and came on with
them to the bridge of the Lehi, where we halted. There we talked with them a
great while, but still they wanted to go on. We told them we came from the
marshal, and asked them what they wanted by going into Bethlehem with their
arms. They said the marshal had two of their men that had come to Bethlehem
under arms, and had put them under guard, and they wanted them, and they would
have them two men set at liberty, and one of the name of Shankwyler. As I found
that they were determined to go, I asked if they would not allow that if any
one had done wrong, they ought to suffer for it: They agreed that they ought,
but they should not be taken to Philadelphia, but have been tried in
Northampton county. When we found that they were determined to go on, we agreed
that they had better send two or three men over to the marshal, and not to go
bodily. Which they agreed to, and appointed three men to go, and they sent them
over.


ATTORNEY. Was there not some stipulation that you should return the men safe.


Yes there was; they were afraid these three men would be confined also; but we
promised them that we would see them safely returned. We then all went over
together to the tavern at Bethlehem, where the marshal was. They spoke to him,
told him what their business was, and he gave the two men up to them. When they
were given up, we went back, with them, in order to go to where we had left the
remainder of the men. Going down through Bethlehem, we met a party of horsemen,
and we stopped them: they were armed; part of them were light horsemen; and
part were other horsemen: they all had swords or some arms or other. The light
horse had their swords drawn. We told them that they had better go back, and
not go up into the town, but they seemed very anxious to go up. One of them
made answer something like this: "This is the third day that I was out, I had a
fight yesterday, and I mean to have another today if they do not let the
prisoners clear.


JURY. What prisoners did you understand him to mean, the two men?


He did not say any more than the prisoners.


ATORNEY. Who, was the man that said so?


To the best of my knowledge the prisoner was the man: I never saw the man
before, but I took notice of him then.


Had he any arms?


He had a sword. This was a distinct body from those we had left at the bridge;
these were others who had come up during the time we were gone.


COURT. John Fries had not come up when you left them, had he?


I do not know that he was there at that time; the first time I saw him, was as
I came back.


ATTORNEY. Had the two men whom the marshal gave up proceeded down the street,
toward the party, and met with them at that time?


I did not take notice where they went to after they were released; they went
on up town. -- When I saw the riflemen coming forward, I stopped till they came
up, and then spoke to them: they seemed that they would go on, but they
promised that they would do nothing.


Did you let them know that the two persons whom they had demanded were
liberated?


Yes, I did, and the three men who went with us told them also. -- The horsemen
did not wait one moment, but hurried on: they all then marched up town, and
formed right in front of the tavern: I returned with them. After they were
formed there, I was among them, and talked with them a great deal, but could
not do any thing with them:; If there was ten or twelve that agreed to be
moderate the others would all insist upon it, that they would have the
prisoners, all of them. We (...) there for nearly or quite two hours. This man,
whom they called captain Fries, came out and mentioned to his men that he would
now have the prisoners, if any of them would go into the house with him: he had
been in backward and forward several times. He said he should go foremost. He
told them that he would ask the favor of them, that they were, none of them to
fire first, if they went in. He mentioned to them likewise, that there were
some armed men on the stairs belonging to the marshal. I did not expect he
would go in: I was talking to some men there, when I looked round and saw some
of the men at the door: he said he would go foremast: he signified, talking in
German, that he should get a blow or a stroke: the nearest translation was, " I
shall get it." -- I looking round, saw the men going in at the door, and I
followed them in: they were armed men. I did not see the prisoner after he had
mentioned them words. I got in, between the men and the stairs at the foot of
the stairs: they halted there, I got in there, in order to keep them back from
going up stairs; I was there but a few minutes, when I saw the prisoners coming
down stairs.


ATTORNEY. Did you notice any particular circumstances that took place at this
time?


WITNESS. They were determined to go on; a little fellow among them, I do not
know who he was, seemed to be very angry.


Were they at that moment asking for the prisoners?


Yes, they said they would have the prisoners.


What was the conduct or expressions of the marshal at that time?


I do not know, I was not so near as to hear any thing: after the prisoners
were set at liberty, they were all gone in a few minutes; they seemed to be
much pleased that they had them.


Repeat particularly what captain Fries said, when he told the men to come
forward.


He said if he did get it, they should not be scared, they then must do as well
as they could: he said he expected to get some stroke; he told them they must
take care of themselves: I do not recollect that he said they should shoot, yet
I recollect something he said; I think it was "slay strike or do as well as you
can." The prisoner at the bar went before, and he rather wished the men to
follow him.


On being questioned again as to the words used by the prisoner: the witness
repeated it in German, which was translated in the court to mean that he
expected to get it, and if he did, they must strike, and stab, and do as well
as they could. Seblaget, steehet and macht so gut as ibr konnet.

Cross examination. I understand you to state, that when you went out at the
request of the marshal, it was to speak to these people, and that they told you
their object was to obtain the liberation of the two men belonging to their
party.


WITNESS. Yes.


Do you not recollect any thing said about giving bail for the appearance of
these prisoners?


No, I do not.


As soon as these prisoners were released did the crowd begin or disperse?


Yes, immediately.


Then they did not attempt to attack, or use with violence any person with a
view to liberate these prisoners?


No, not that I saw.


They did not seem to have any other object in view than to get the prisoners
at liberty?


No, getting the prisoners at liberty was all.


COURT. Did none of them say any thing about the tax law?


WITNESS. I did not hear them say any thing.


What became of the prisoners after they were liberated?


I believe they all went to their homes.


Did you observe no violence whatever?


No, I did not either by violence or by words hear the prisoner, nor any other
person attempt at any thing, more than what I have said.


JOHN BARNETT, sworn.

ATTORNEY. Relate to the court what occurred on the 7th of March at Bethlehem.


WITNESS. On the 7th of March in the morning early, just as I got up, the
deputy marshal handed me a summons, at which I was a little fluttered till I
read it over. The summons was, that I should be at Bethlehem at 10 o'clock, to
aid and assist the marshal in executing the laws of the United States. He also
sent me some blank summons, desiring me to summon as many more as I pleased. I
put Christian Winters, and John Mohollan's names down; we could not find any
more good persons for that business. About 10 o'clock I arrived at Bethlehem. I
was there but a very short time, when somebody came in, and said he had met 20
men at one place, 10 at another, etc. walking toward a tavern, on the road,
about 3 or 4 miles from Bethlehem; I cannot recollect its name. The marshal,
Mr. Irely, Mr. Henry, Mr. Balliott and others agreed that they thought it would
be best to send three or four men to meet them, and to stop them on the road:
it was then to be decided who should go. I mentioned that I thought John
Mohollan and William Barnett could do more with them, than any body else. They
were agreed upon as was Christian Roth (or Rote) and another, but Isaac Hatsel
went in his place. This was, conformable to agreement, two federalists and two
anti-federalists. They went and met them, I remained at the house. They were
not gone very long, indeed I think it was just as they were getting upon their
horses, there was two men, arrayed, and with arms; one had a rifle, and the
other a smooth bore piece. When they were come into the yard, the marshal went
down into the yard to them, and talked to them; what he talked to them, I did
not hear. However he took their arms away from them, and carried them up
stairs, and put them by themselves. Directly after that, there was five or six
horsemen came, I was informed that there was one man of them named Shankwyler.
The marshal and judge Henry went down to meet them, they asked them what they
come there for: they said, they only came there to be Shankwyler's bail: and
judge Henry then asked them what they did with their arms? They said they did
not mean any harm with them. They then got off their horses, and went into a
room with the judge and the marshal: what they said there, I do not know, for I
did not hear them. Presently after there came up a troop of horse, and behind
them there was two companies of riflemen. They marched up right into the yard
and formed before the door of the tavern.


How many riflemen do you suppose there was?


About 50.


Had the light horse their swords drawn?


Yes.


How many do you suppose there were in the whole?


On a rough calculation I suppose 130 or 140 armed men.


How many was there of the marshal's posse?


About 16 or 17.

After they had formed a line in the yard, about 15 or 20 minutes Captain
Jarret arrived, when they gave three huzzas. He then went into the house and
talked with the Marshal: the Marshal requested him to get the men to withdraw.
He professed he would. He had arrived from Philadelphia, whither he had been to
give bail. After this, Jarrett staid at the tavern about two hours. The men
kept regular order, and never separated. The Marshal appointed four of us, me
and three others to keep the guard of the stairs, armed with pistols, two at
the bottom, and two at the head. I served my time, and the second time I was
ordered on guard by Capt. Henry Snyder, I staid on the platform at the turn of
the stairs, when Fries, the prisoner, came up to me, and wanted to go up
stairs. I told him that he could not be permitted to go up stairs without the
Marshal's leave. I then asked him what he wanted? He answered that he wanted to
see the Marshal. I told him that I expected he could see him, and told some men
at the head of the stairs to call the Marshal out of the room. He came out, and
I then told him these two gentlemen wanted to talk to him. He said I should let
them pass. As Fries was the first man, I let him pass on between me and the
other guard. The other man wanted to go up, but I told him that one at a time
was enough, and that when the other had done, he would be permitted to talk to
him too. Fries then went up and told the Marshal what he came for: he replied
that he was come for the release of the prisoners. I stood close by them when
they were talking. The Marshal made answer that he could not give them up to
him; he then told the Marshal that he would have them. Well then, said the
Marshal, you must get them as well as you can; for he said it was out of his
power to deliver them up; he dared not to do it. Fries then told the Marshal
that he had a skirmish yesterday, and he expected to have another one to day;
he then said to the Marshal, "As for you Marshal, I will vouch that none of my
men will hurt you, but as for the other company I will not vouch for.


Do you know what he meant by the other company?


No.


Where was Mr. Balliott and Mr. Irely at this time?


They were in the room where they commonly were, up stairs.


What answer did the Marshal make to that?


I do not know.

With that both of them marched off. I remained on guard. A little while after
this, I saw the men coming in at the door, and they got into the entry, with
arms. I did not know one of those who came in except Fries: he returned with
those armed men. He had a sword in his band, but I think it was in its
scabbard. When they got into the entry, they were pressed upon by the posse,
who soon got them clean out of the door. I then got off guard. The language of
the men was, that they would have the prisoners. I could not hear many of their
expressions, because I was chiefly up stairs, but I heard them say they would
not leave the ground till they had the prisoners. The marshal at this time had
gone back into the room. Before the prisoners were released I was relieved.
When they made the second attempt, I was up stairs, looking out of the window.
I believe Christian Winters took my post. These prisoners were at this time up
stairs in a room by themselves.


How many prisoners were there?


About sixteen or eighteen.


Where was Shankwyler at this time?


He was down stairs in the back room, he was not taken up stairs at all.


Do you know any of the other prisoners?


No.


COURT. Did there appear to be any kind of acquaintance, or friendship between
Fries and any of the prisoners?


No, I believe there was not.


Did they appear to wish to be rescued?


No, the prisoners said they did not wish to be rescued by those people, they
said that they knew none of those people that were before the door. If they had
done any thing wrong, they said they were willing to go any where to take their
trials. The minister, and the Lehi people were all there.


Cross examination. Was there any violence offered?


WITNESS. I saw them point their guns toward the window often enough.


Was any violence offered to any person, besides what was offered to the
marshal?


No.


Did you hear these men say that they came there for any other purpose than to
rescue the prisoners?


No, I did not, and I believe that was all.


COUNSEL. NO violence of manner or expression was used while Fries was talking
to the marshal, was there?


WITNESS. NO, he had his sword in his hand, and in its scabbard at that time,
and the other man had his sword, and a regimental coat on.


During the time that you were there, did any person offer Fries his sword?


Not that I know, I did not hear any person.


You did not hear any one cry out, here Mr. Fries, here is your sword?


No, I do not recollect it.


CHRISTIAN WINTERS, sworn.

I was summoned on the 7th of March to go up to Bethlehem, and I went
accordingly: when I came there, which was about 11 or 12 o'clock -- about the
middle of the day, the first man that I say come there armed was one Keifer:
another, I think his name was Paul, came with him to the tavern: the marshal
went out, and brought them into the house, and took them up stairs: I was on
guard at that time, and with another, I was set to stand guard by them. As we
were in the room together, I asked them one thing or another, and amongst the
rest, what they came there for. Keifer told me that he heard they had to meet
there today, and that they had to decide about the laws; or to see how it was
made out about the laws; I then asked him what made him carry a gun with him;
why, he told me, ever since he had been a little boy, he was fond of shooting,
and therefore, whenever he went out on a frolic, he liked to take his gun
along, for he liked to hear it crack once in a while. I told him that he really
put himself in a great deal of trouble, he told me that he meant no harm by it;
that he thought he could carry his gun when he pleased. After I was relieved
from my post, I went to the back door, and saw several people who said that
they would not wish to be taken to Philadelphia, they would be tried in their
own county: they were not in arms. I then went up stairs where the prisoners
were; I went into the front room where Mr. Eyerly, Mr. Henry and more were; I
was then put to the top of the stairs, and got orders that I should not let any
body up or down without their orders. I had a pistol with me. Nothing happened
while I staid there, but after I was relieved, I saw Mr. Fries standing on the
platform of the stairs, talking to the marshal. I could not then hear all that
passed, but what I heard him say was " I have been out, either two or three
days on this business, and I had a skirmish yesterday, and I expect I will have
another today." He said that if the marshal did not give up the prisoners he
would have one today. This was something like his words, though I stood at a
little distance. I heard the marshal say he could not give them up. This was
his meaning, but there were so many words I could not make out.


COUNCIL. Had Fries a sword with him?


I did not take notice. There was nobody that I could see with the marshal but
Fries. Afterward he went down the stairs, and I then went down stairs, and
went out of the front door. After that I saw a company come in with arms; I did
not see Fries come in with them. I asked what they were after; I could not make
out who it was, but somebody said, we will obey our captain's orders. I then
went back, and went to the platform of the stairs, one of the guard asked what
was the matter? I told him there was danger coming on. He then handed me his
pistol, and another man handed me another pistol, and I staid on the platform
in the front. At this time there was judge Mohollan, and I think major Barnett,
and some others. At the same time there were several under the stairs. I told
them to stand back, they were doing wrong if they did not I must do a thing I
should be sorry for. I kept my thumb to the pistol all the time: they then
stepped back, and had some talk, but I could not make out their expressions.
They then went out of the door again, and the prisoners came down. The marshal
came on to the platform, and I left my place. The marshal sent me down to learn
the name of a person.


COURT. Had you any conversation with the people out of doors?


WITNESS. I had a good deal, and told the consequences of their conduct. They
said that they were all against the prisoners coming down to this place, they
should be tried in their own county. I did not hear any thing about the laws,
they merely complained about the prisoners being taken down to Philadelphia,
and nothing about the laws at all.


ATTORNEY. Had you not a dispute with one of them?


WITNESS. Yes, I was sent down by the marshal to enquire a man's name; he
wanted to know what I asked him for; he seemed to be scared: he said he did not
mean to do any harm to any one. I do not know his name. When I spoke to this
young man, one came up and said don't tell this damned Stampler. The meaning of
this word I think is about this stamp act; they called these people Stamplers
that told them the consequences of this conduct. It is thought a term of
reproach. The man who called me stampler struck at me, but did not hit me; they
told me his name was Henney.


Cross examination. The people daparted as soon as the prisoners were released,
did they not?


WITNESS. Yes.


Did you use no ill language to the man who struck at you?


I called him a rascal, or something that way.


CHRISTIAN ROTHS, sworn.

On the 7th of March, I was summoned to go to Bethlehem, but did not know what
it was for. About 11 o'clock I got to Bethlehem, when I came, Mr. Eyerly came
to me, and told me some men were coming there to rescue the prisoners, I
thought it not possible, but he told me it was certain. When we had been there
about three hours, there came two men on horseback, and had their arms,
whereupon Mr. Marshal, myself and Mr. Philip Sheltz went down and asked them
what they were about. They told us they were informed that there were a number
of men met there today, so they said they came there to see how they came on:
they did not say what they heard they were to meet for. We took them and put
them into the house under guard, and took their arms from them. I then thought
there was something in what Mr. Eyerly had mentioned to me. I then made an
observation to Mr. Eyerly if he did not think it proper that one or two men
should go and prevent these people coming. Mr. Eyerly told the marshal of it,
and he thought it would be proper, there should be some men go. I agreed that
if no one else would go, I would go by myself. I do not know who spoke to the
others; but I, judge Mohollan, major Barnett, and --, went out. We met them
within a mile of Bethlehem. I did not know a single man of them, but judge
Mohollan and major Barnett spoke to them first, but I did not understand what
they said. I went farther back, to the rear: I said to them what in the world
are you about men; you will bring yourselves into great trouble. One of them
mentioned, we don't know you: I mentioned if you know me or not, you will thank
me for it. I said, if you do not do as I advise you, you will be sorry for
twenty years after this; so there was one of them that levelled his gun at me:
said I, little man, consider what you are about; don't be too much in a hurry:
then some of his comrades pushed him back. Then that man hallowed out, march
on, don't mind this people: I do not know his name. They then marched on to the
bridge, and there we stopped them again. They then agreed amongst themselves
that they would send three men with us to the marshal, to see if they could get
the two prisoners we took at first, liberated, and gave their honor that none
of them should come over the bridge with arms. We then went with these three
men to the tavern, at Bethlehem. They then went to the marshal and agreed with
him, and the two prisoners were discharged, but he sat down their names. I do
not recollect their names. When these two men were discharged, we went to go
back with them again, but when we came to the lower end of Bethlehem, there was
that company and another coming on, and there was no stopping them again.


ATTORNEY. Did they know these men were discharged before they passed the
bridge?


WITNESS. I do not know.


How far is the bridge from Bethlehem?


About half a mile.


Do you know which way these two men went?


They went with us I think, but I am not sure. I endeavored to stop them to
reason with them, but they would not, and I then told them if they were
determined not to hear, they might do as they pleased.


Did you see the prisoners, in this company?


No, I did not see this man at all to my knowledge.


As I came back to Bethlehem, I went up stairs to Mr. Eyerly and the marshal.
The men paraded before the tavern, and there I think they were for two hours.


How many do you suppose there were in arms.


I suppose 120 men or upwards, were drawn up.


Did you see those two men that were first kept prisoners?


Yes, I saw them mix along with these people.


Were the light horse armed?


Yes, some of them, and with there uniforms.


Had they their swords drawn?


No, not till they came near to the tavern, then they drew their swords, a
great number of them. Before we started from the bridge, we asked them again
what they were about? they told us that they were informed that they had taken
a number of prisoners, and that they would take them to Philadelphia, and put
them in gaol there, and no bail would be taken for them: we asked them what
prisoners it was they meant? they mentioned one name only that I recollect,
which was one Shankwyler. They mentioned that they would not suffer Shankwyler
to be put to gaol in Philadelphia: they mentioned that they would give bail ten
double for him, or that they might put him in gaol in our own county, and try
him in our own county. I saw one Schwartz come up into the room where the
marshal was.


COURT. Was not you among them after they came to Bethlehem?


No, I was not. Old Schwartz said he had two sons in the company, and they were
two of the prettiest boys in the company.


Did you see any of the people in the yard levelling their guns at the window?


No.


Cross examination. Was there any other of this company besides Schwartz that
came up into the room?


No.


Did any one abuse, threaten or insult Mr. Eyerly.


Not that I know of. I heard no threats against any one.


COLONEL NICHOLS, the Marshal, sworn.

ATTORNEY. Mr. Nichols, please to relate the transactions which led to the
subject of the indictment against the prisoner, and the affair at Bethlehem.


WITNESS. Some time between the 20th and 26th of February the warrants I now
hold in my hand were given to me by the attorney of the district, with orders
for me to go to Northampton county to execute them. I sat out on the 26th and
after serving some subpoeneas on the road, in order to get some evidence about
some matters that were wanted to be in possession, I got to Nazareth en the
first of March, next morning, Mr. Eyerman and myself went into Lehi township to
serve some warrants upon some persons who had given their opposition to the
house tax law. I think we got twelve of them that day, the others were not to
be found. I think there were five of them, however they came in afterward. We
then returned to Bethlehem, and there met with Col. Balliott. We went then to
Macungy township, and there we met with no difficulty till we went to the house
of George Syder; I had a subpoene on him: he and his wife insulted us very
much; his wife began abusing us first, and he came out with a club, and would
by no means be pursuaded to receive it I suppose not understanding it: I gave
it to a Mr. Schwartz, a neighbor, who undertook to deliver it to him. We then
proceeded to Millar's town, a few miles farther: on the way we stopped at the
house of the Rev. Mr. Buskirk, where we left our horses, and walked into the
town, to the house of George Shaeffer, to serve a warrant on him; but were
informed that he was not in town. We returned to the tavern, about the center
of the town, and there we saw a considerable number of people assembled. Mr.
Eyerly and myself walked over to Shankwyler. As we walked out, many people ran
after us, and many ran past us, and getting into the house, filled the long
room. There appeared to be about fifty men. Near the house in which Shankwyler
lived, we concluded it was bad policy to ask for him, for by that means it was
not likely we should find him. And therefore as colonel Balliott knew him, I
got him to point him out to me; but upon observing me, he withdrew into the
crowd, I followed him, and laid hold on him, and told him he was my prisoner in
the name of the United States. I told him I was the marshal of the United
States for the Pennsylvania district. He retreated toward his barn. He
afterward called out that he would not hurt the marshal, but Eyerly and
Balliott were damned rascals: after this the people called out to each other
Schlaget, Schlaget: (strike, strike) This seemed to be the general voice of the
people. There was one of the Shaeffer's seemed to be a prominent character; it
was David.

I told them the consequence of their attempting to strike: I had a pair of
pistols, and finding the danger we were in, I pulled open the buttons of my
great coat, that I might, if necessary, get a ready gripe at them: whether they
saw them or not, I cannot say, but when they found that I was determined not to
suffer these people to be abused, they were then a little quiet: they, however,
pulled the cockade out of Mr. Bullion's hat, and I believe would have done more
violence to him, had they dared. I called on Shankwryler to go with me to
Bethlehem, and thence to Philadelphia, but he swore he would not: I told him
the consequence of resisting the authority of the United States, that it would
be ruin to him; he declared and swore he would resist he would not submit, be
the consequence what it might. I told him it would ruin his interest and
family; he said he would do it, if it was to the destruction of his property,
and children. However, he finally agreed to meet me at Bethlehem, but never
promised to submit, or surrender himself at prisoner. He spoke a good deal
about the stamp act, and the house tax; that seemed to be the bone of
contention, and he said he had fought against it, and would not submit to it
now; I told him he appeared to be too young to have fought on either side
during the war: he then said, his father had, he then added that there were
none in favor of those laws but tories, and officers of government. I told him
that, as to tory, that could not apply to me, that I had had a share in the
revolution, and that I was as fond of liberty as any of them. We came away, and
as we came out, Mr. Eyerly and Mr. Balliott came out of the door, they huzzaed
for liberty: I told them that I should join them in that, if they would huzza
for liberty of the right kind; but this was licentious liberty. We then went
with a constable to arrest Adam Stepham, Herman Hartman, and Daniel Everly.
When I returned, I was informed that the rescue of the prisoners at Bethlehem
was intended. This was on the sixth of March. I could scarcely conceive it
possible; I thought it was somebody for their own diversion had raised it
merely to alarm us, until we got to Bethlehem, where we got that night. There
we were informed that the report was serious, and that it would be attempted by
a body of armed men. On which I consulted with judge Henry, Mr. Balliott, Mr.
Eyerly, Mr. Horsefield, and general Brown. I had taken a bond of the Lehi
people, with sureties for their appearance. I sent Mr. Weed over the mountain
to arrest Ireman, the minister, and John Fox, which he did. Seeing this matter
very serious and important, I requested general Brown to remain at Bethlehem,
as he had very great influence in that county: he said he was so near home,
that he should go home, as he had been so long from his family. I then asked
him to return in the morning, but he seemed to think there was no necessity for
it, and did not. I then consulted what steps it would be necessary to take; I
had seen an attorney, and told him I was ordered to call a posse commitatus in
case of necessity, and also that I was ordered that they should not be an armed
force; I then spoke to judge Henry, expecting that he could call out armed men,
but he told me he could not, for he had received similar instructions. We then
concluded to call about 20 men. He called this posse from the neighborhood of
Bethlehem and Easton, about 18 of them came in. About 10 or 11 o'clock two men
riding into the yard, dismounted, and placed themselves opposite the door, by
the side of each other; one of them had a long smooth bore gun, and the other a
rifle. Some people in the house went out to speak to them, and asked them what
brought them there: they seemed to be at a loss for an answer; I think one of
them said they came out on a shooting frolic: I then asked them what they meant
to shoot: they did not know, nor could they explain the object of their coming.
I asked them what they meant to do: one of them said they meant to do what was
best for the country. I then supposed that they would all come in by straggling
parties, and therefore thought it was the best way of making the business easy,
was to lead them into the house, which I did, and put their arms into the
garrett. Shortly after, three horsemen, armed, and, I think, in uniform came
into the yard with Shankwyler: I went and spoke to them, and some went with me.
I asked Shankwyler if he was come to deliver himself up; he answered no. I
asked him what he came for, if he did not come to surrender himself, he
answered that he came to see his partner: on farther enquiry I found he meant
his accuser. By this time the people were collecting very fast, and same
persons mentioned that there was an armed force down by the bridge. On
consulting with the gentlemen who were with me, it was agreed that a few men
should be sent to speak to them, and warn them of the danger they were in if
they persisted in the measure which we supposed they intended. It was
accordingly agreed that four gentlemen should go, which they did, and in a
little time returned with three of their force, as a deputation from them to
speak to me. I asked them what was meant by this armed force, and and what they
intended by it: they answered me that they wanted to prevent my taking the
prisoners to Philadelphia. I told them that could not be, nor must be; nor must
it be attempted, they had much better go back, and tell the people to go to
their respective homes. I think they asked me, particularly for the two men who
had first been made prisoners; I forget whether I gave them up then, or some
short time after; however, they were given up, and their guns were given up to
them: they were both loaded, and one of them was putting a new flint into his
gun, in the yard, before I went out to speak to them. The same gentlemen who
went down to speak to them at the bridge, went down to them again, and, a short
time afterward, we observed that they were coming up in force, up the street,
Mr. Muhollan riding with the foremost of them, and speaking to them: the
horsemen, such as had swords, had them drawn: the infantry marched with trailed
arms. The prisoner at the bar was at the head of the infantry, with his sword
drawn: the horse marched into the yard, and formed in front of the house, the
infantry marched round the house, and the captain, with the leading file, came
in at the upper gate. I had a great deal of conversation with different persons
among them, who seemed to take a lead. They were all strangers to me, I told
them the consequences of their attempting to rescue the prisoners; I told them
they might rest assured that things of this kind would be severely punished by
the government; that it would be considered an high offense, and that every
insult offered to me, would be an insult to the United States. I had a good
deal of conversation with the prisoner at the bar, without knowing that he was
captain Fries, till he made himself known to me. I remonstrated strongly
against the measures, and told them the consequence, but they seemed regardless
of it, and seemed determined that I should give them up.


ATTORNEY. Did they speak of any prisoners in particular?


WITNESS. NO, they speak generally of the prisoners.


Did the prisoners speak of them as particular friends neighbors, or
acquaintances?


No, the measure was his object. During this conversation, he was without his
sword. The substance of the conversation was, he demanded of me the prisoners;
I refused to give them up, and told him the consequences of his demands. On his
still insisting, I told him that he and those about him would be severely
punished for this conduct, that he would surely be hanged. He said they could
not be punished: he said something to the effect that the government were not
strong enough to hang him, for that if the troops were brought out, they would
join him.


ATTORNEY. Did he give any reason for wishing to rescue those prisoners?


His reason was, that he was opposed to those laws: the Alien law, the stamp
act, and the house tax law, and said they were unconstitutional. He also spoke
of bringing people charged with crimes to Philadelphia to be tried as an
oppressive thing: they had no objection, he said, to be tried in their own
courts, and by their own people. We parted, and met in the crowd two or three
times, for the house was much crowded: he still demanded of me the prisoners, I
told him I could not give them up: I told him I was commanded to bring them to
Philadelphia: he insisted upon having them, and I that he should not. He then
went and talked to his people, and came to me again. He told me that if I did
not give them up, he would not answer for the consequences: he told me that he
would not hurt me: he was the oldest captain in the rank, but he would not
answer for them that were with me: that he took command of the whole by rank.
By this time captain Jarrett came in, and by this time there was much noise and
huzzaing. I was told that this noise was on account of the arrival of captain
Jarrett: I wished him pointed out to me in confidence, that, as he had come to
submit to the laws, he would be able to persuade others to do the same. He was
to me; he had a pair of pistols in his hand. He showed me that he had entered
into recognizance for his appearance. I then begged him to use his influence in
persuading the people to disperse, and go to their respective homes, and told
him what would be the consequence if they did not. His answer was, that he had
no influence; that he could do nothing. After this, I consulted with judge
Henry and others, what was best to be done; it seemed to be their opinion that
I had better submit, and give up the prisoners: I told them I would not do it,
I would immediately march the prisoners to Philadelphia, and if the armed mob
thought proper to take them from me, they might, it would then be their act,
and not mine: I went to them, and told them to prepare for march immediately,
for that we would set off to Philadelphia. The Lehi prisoners said they would
not do so, they would not expose themselves to so much danger, but if I would
suffer them to go to their homes, they would meet me in Philadelphia on the
Monday or Tuesday following. I met Mr. Fries about the foot of the stairs, and
he still persisted in his demand of the prisoners, that I must give them up.


Cross examination. Had he a sword with him?


WITNESS. I do not think he had a sword at that moment. I refused, and went
into the back room, and a person whom I did not know, told me, that if I did
not give them up 1 should not be hurt, but the life of Balliott, Eyerly and
Henry were in danger. This was not an armed man. I did not like to expose the
lives of those men, so I rescued them. Fries came in directly, and said I had
not given up Ireman, the minister. I told him I had; he then went out, and came
in again, and said he was without. He then mounted and went off.


ATTORNEY. Did you really apprehend any danger to the gentlemen who were with
you?


WITNESS. I did apprehend that the lives of those gentlemen would be in danger
if I refused the prisoners.


Who had you then in possession as prisoners?


We had Fox, Ireman and some others who had not surrendered themselves, besides
the Lehi people.


PHILIP SCHLAUGH,

When I was at Bethlehem, which I expect was the 7th of March, the first I saw
was that the company was ordered in rank, and when that was done, this Fries
was in the entry of the house, where he was speaking loud. I enquired who that
was, they said it was captain Fries; He said them who was the greatest tories
in the last war, them was the head leaders now; then I went out of the house,
and he went up to the marshal, and when he came out again; he went up to his
company, and told them " Well brothers, I went up to the marshal, and asked him
about the prisoners, and told him I would have the prisoners, but the marshal
told me he dare not give them up willingly; I tell you, brothers, we have to
pass four or five centries, but I beg you not to fire first on them, till they
first fire upon us: I shall be the foremast man; I shall go on before you, and
I expect I shall get the first blow." Then he turned himself round. Mr.
Mulhollan, and others begged him that he would not go on in this matter, they
would rather go and speak to the marshal that he should deliver up the
prisoners willingly, if they would absolutely have them.


Did the men rush on when he told them this?


Yes, they followed him. He then said to them, you must not fire first, but if
they do fire upon you, then I will order you to fire too, and help yourselves
as well as you can. I did not wait till the prisoners were released, for when I
heard this, I thought there was going to be warm work, so I got upon my horse,
and rode off to Easton as fast as I could.


Thursday May 2. JOSEPH HORSEFIELD, esquire, qualified:

ATTORNEY. Please to relate the particulars of the affair at Bethlehem as far
as came to your knowledge.


WITNESS. I live in Bethlehem; am a justice of the peace there, and was there
on the 7th of March. -- Shortly before the last general election, the spirit of
discontent and opposition was sensibly felt in the county of Northampton; there
were different meetings called in different parts of the county, among others,
I was informed there was one at which the militia officers were particularly to
attend, which I understood was intended to prepare a ticket for the election.
At that meeting, sundry resolutions were passed, which appeared in public
prints, among others, one was that petitions should be formed to obtain a
repeal of the alien and sedition laws, and the land tax act. I was informed
that the captains of the militia companies were to be served with a copy of
each of these petitions: I was likewise informed that this was done, and a five
penny bit each paid freely for a copy, though the Germans love their money so
well. I think the people were told that the petitions merely contained a
request for the repeal of the house and land tax law. I have seen none of them.
On the election day, the people pretty generally collected and, at least in the
district where I had a right to vote, the spirit of opposition against the
measures of government were so universal, that a friend of government, by
saying one word in favor of it, was ready to be abused and I understood it was
so in every election district in the county, and the county in general gloried
that they had gained the day. Nothing material occurred, to my knowledge, from
that time till the marshal arrived there.


ATTORNEY. Did the assessments go on regularly before that time?


WITNESS. No.


What do you know of that fact?


I never was present at any opposition myself, for I mostly stay at home.


Did not the spirit of opposition which had begun before the election, increase
before the marshal arrived?


It daily increased.

In the beginning of March, the marshal of the United States arrived at
Bethlehem, I think about the 3d. I having some personal acquaintance with that
gentleman, waited on him, when he told me he was sent to the county on business
for the United States, and desired me to inform him where several certain
persons resided, against whom he had precepts from the district judge. I
acquainted him with the courses and distances. He then went to Nazareth, and
returned again about the fifth, telling me he had summoned a number of persons
in Lehi township, and that they were to be at Bethlehem on the 7th. On the 6th
in the evening, I was informed he had returned from Millar's town, and on the
7th in the morning I went up to town, when he told me that he expected there
would be some disturbance that day, and also told me that he had issued
summons's for the posse commitatus. Between 10 and 11 o'clock the posse came, I
think they were about 14 in number. A considerable number of people from the
neighbourhoood of Bethlehem, had collected, unarmed. Mr. Dixon arrived from
Emaus about 11 o'clock, and informed the marshal that on his way he met with a
number of people collected at a tavern called Reiter's, in arms, both horsemen
and footmen, about 6 miles from Bethlehem, and that he met a number on the
road, partly armed, partly unarmed. About half past eleven, two men arrived at
Bethlehem armed, from that quarter: they were disarmed and sent up stairs into
a room; about the same time a number of persons arrived from Lehi township, who
were also sent up stairs by the marshal in a room by themselves: they were
about eleven in number. I was present when Mr. Eyerly spoke to these prisoners,
telling them that an armed force was formed with intention to rescue them; the
prisoners answered that they by no means wished it: that they would submit to
go with the marshal rather than be rescued. In about an hour, I was looking out
of the window up stairs, and saw riding into the yard a number of horsemen,
besides some footmen; 1 said to the marshal, I thought it was best for us now
to go down and see these people. I went down and asked one of them what was his
name, he answered Daniel Shaeffer. He had a sword at his side, and two pistols:
next to him, on horseback, was Henry Shankwyler, next to him was another
horseman accoutred in the same manner; his name was Philip Daesch; there were
also John Dillinger and Jacob Kline, not in uniform but with swords in the
scabbard. I asked them what they wanted: we are all civil people and have no
arms, was my observation to them. Dillinger who seemed to speak for them, said
that yesterday the marshal had taken Shankwyler and some other of their
neighbors prisoners, that they were come to see Shankwyler's partner
(accuser.) The marshal told them that the United States was the accuser of Mr.
Shankwyler. Dillinger said he thought it was not right that he should be taken
to Philadelphia. The marshal said that the judge had ordered it so. I told him
that I thought they were unacquainted with the government of the United States,
and 1 thought they were in a very critical and dangerous situation; that the
United States in less than 20 days could muster 10,000 men, which power I
thought they could not with stand, and that it was best for them to surrender
the prisoners to the marshal, and go home. They said that Shankwyler and the
others were their neighbors, and that they would wait and see what should
become of them. They did not mention the others names. I asked whether any more
armed men would be there; Jacob Kline answered, 50 more. With that we went into
the house. After dinner the people collected very fast, and Dillinger began
again to speak in behalf of Shankwyler. The marshal told him it could not be
otherwise, go he must: Shankwyler answered that he had a family to take care
of, and that he would not go. With this, the marshal and myself walked up
stairs, and there saw a great number of armed people round the house, 1 think
120 or 130, and about 250 unarmed. I suggested to the marshal that my
suspicions were very gloomy; that I doubted whether he would succeed in taking
off the prisoners, for I had quietly heard among the people that were in the
house, and out of doors, that nothing should satisfy them but the delivery of
the prisoners in front of the house was drawn up a number of men armed. I went
up stairs and there I perceived several times, guns pointed up to the window of
the second story at which I began to feel very disagreeable. Mr. Eyerly, Mr.
Balliott, Mr. Henry, and the others were occasionly at the windows, though I do
not recollect Eyerly being at the window, but the others were: I walked down
stairs, and there saw men armed close before the door, pressing in: I pressed
through them, and heard two men say if Henry, and that damned Eyerly, and that
damned pot gutted Balliott were there, they would tear them to pieces; this man
did not attempt to come into the house. I thought this was bad news, and I
walked back again, and proceeded my way up stairs, and desired Mr. Levering
(the tavern keeper to close the bar) thinking there was madness enough without
stimulating it, which was immediately done. I desired the marshal not to
protract the delivery of the prisoners to the law. Mr. Mohollan and several
others there pushed them back, but just then I heard some of the officers say,
"boys, in the ranks, in the ranks."


COURT. Were those two men whom you heard use the words just now related,
passing in at the door.


WITNESS. NO, they staid in the yard. -- I looked out of the window again up
stairs, and there I saw a second pressure, to come in at the door some of the
men who were in the ranks thumped their guns upon the ground, and jumped,
pronouncing some unintelligible shrieks, savage like shrieks. I begged the
marshal, for God's sake to deliver up those men up stairs, for the rescue was
perfect in my opinion: the closing of the men would be only butchering, and I
had no doubt the government of the United States would not let its dignity be
trampled upon in this way. The marshal still continued to hessitate. By this
time a number of persons had got into the house, adorned with large three
colored French cockades. The posse staid up stairs at this time: I then worked
my way down stairs again, in order to be ready for a jump. By this time I
understood that the prisoners were delivered. After the prisoners were gone
about ten minutes, there was not a single armed man in, or about the house:
some of the neighbors who had collected were still there, some of whom were
approving, and others disapproving of the conduct of the insurgents, but in my
opinion, the majority were approving.


Have you any knowledge of the conduct of the prisoner at the bar, at
Bethelethem?


No, I never saw him till I came down to this place, but I frequently heard the
name of captain Fries called.


Cross examination. Did you see Mr. Henry or Mr. Balliott in the room, looking
out of the window?


WITNESS. Mr. Balliott looked out of the window but stepped back again pretty
quick, afraid of the muzzles of the guns.


COURT. At the time that judge Peter's issued warrants for the apprehension of
those people, do you think any magistrate in the county could have issued them,
and made them returnable to himself?


WITNESS. I look upon it that the state justices were a nullity. Many people
came to me, asked me if the saw was dead: I told them No, they should first
hear of me being dead.


Cross examination. Was there any applications made to any of the justices of
the peace?


Not to my knowledge, but I think the justices of the peace could do nothing
with it.


JOHN MOHOLLAN, Esquire sworn.

ATTORNEY. Was you at Bethlehem on the 7th of March?


WITNESS. Yes.


Please to inform the court and jury what took place there.


WITNESS. The reason that I was there was from a summons I had received to
attend the marshal that morning. Agreeable to that summons I went there about
11 o'clock, and we went at the direction of the marshal to meet the force over
the bridge. Christian Roths, William Barnett, and J. Hartsell went with me.


He then related the occurrence of the meeting the companies, and the
delegation of three men from them, which was much similar to the testimony of
William Barnett, and Christian Roths.

COURT. At what time did you first hear that the marshal had these two men in
custody?


WITNESS. The first time I heard of it was by the men over the bridge.


What became of those two men?


I cannot tell; the marshal told me they were discharged, but I do not
recollect seeing them.


Did you see the prisoner among this party?


No, not to my knowledge, if I had I should not have known him, for I never
heard of him before. Having met with those horse men before we came back to the
bridge, we returned with them, and all made an halt in the yard. I spoke all I
could to dissuade them from the purpose about which they came, but all to no
purpose. I had no answer that I could understand, for they generally spoke in
German or broken English, which I could not understand. I always understood,
generally, that they wanted the prisoners, and that they wished to give in
security, and let them be tried in the county: that if they had done any thing
that was wrong, it was right they should suffer, but that it was not right to
take them to Philadelphia. I heard major Barnett say this who interpreted what
they said in German. After being a considerable time engaged with people as
actively as I could, but it appeared to be but to little purpose, I then went
up stairs with a view to take something; as I was returning the stairs were so
crowded I could not easily get down. Coming down I saw a person whom I
understood to be captain Fries, and the marshal standing talking to him. I
believe it was the prisoner at the bar. I heard them talk a few words: the
marshal said that they were not doing right, and they must suffer: but I cannot
recollect any thing particularly that was said, but I observed that he often
made a demand of the prisoners, but that he should not be hurt; that he would
be answerable for himself and the company, that none of his men should hurt him
that day, but that he would not be answerable for any others that did not
belong to his company. I think he repeated this twice. I was there but a few
minutes. I made some observations to the men advising them to consider what
they were about, for I considered it dangerous, and very wrong to proceed in
this way. At this time there was a noise in the entry: I was afraid something
had happened, so I went down, but I do not recollect seeing Fries, the whole
day afterward. There was a great deal said, but none of them spoke to me in
English.


JACOB EYERLY, qualified.

ATTORNEY. We wish you to relate what you took notice of at Bethlehem.


WITNESS. AS to what happened on the seventh of March, I am not able to say
much. I was out with the marshal the day before, when he served the process. As
we heard that the rescue was intended. It was agreed by the marshal to send
express to Easton, in order to obtain the posse to aid him in the execution of
his duty: they accordingly arrived between 10 and 11 o'clock, to the number of
15 or 16. Mr. Dixon of Emaus told us that he had seen about 20 armed men at
Reiter's tavern, and some at another tavern, besides some on the road, and that
he understood from them that they were coming to rescue the prisoners. It was
then agreed to take these prisoners, who had surrendered, up stairs. There were
a number of people now collected now from the neighborhood, and then it was
agreed to send the deputation to meet the armed men. About that time I went
down stairs into the back room, and there I saw those two men whose arms had
been taken from them; I did not see them come in. I then went up stairs again,
this was the last time I went down stairs, till after the prisoners were
released. I then saw those three men come with Shankwyler. I did not hear what
passed, but saw Mr. Horsefield and judge Henry go to them. Sometime afterward,
I saw an armed force coming in, a great many on horseback, and many footmen
with muskets on their shoulders: the horsemen had their swords drawn. The
greatest part of those on horseback came from Bucks county. Afterward, the
marshal came up stairs and said that they were determined to have the
prisoners, and he believed that Mr. Balliott and myself would be in danger of
our lives if we went out of the house, and then desired me to undertake to
guard the stairs, and told me to give orders that if any body would come up
with force, they should shoot them. I placed the guard on the stairs, at first
there was but two. Some of the posse were at this time below talking to the
people. After some time the guard told me that they got so violent, and
threatened to come up stairs with violence, and requested of me that I might
double the guard, which I did. As I was in the room. I looked out of the window
and saw a company of rifle men, all with three colored cockades, marching
Indian file round the house: I counted them, there were 42 in that company:
another person besides myself was counting them, but I do not recollect who it
was, though I rather think it was Mr. Balliott: they marched twice round the
house. Another time when I was walking about the room a person who was along
with me, I do not recollect who, told me that they were pointing their guns up
to the window, and that he was sure it was dangerous for me to show myself at
the window.


Objection was here made by the council for the prisoner, against any hearsay
evidence.

ATTORNEY. Had you not reason to believe that your life was in danger?


WITNESS. There is not the least doubt upon my mind, from what I heard, and
from what I say, and from the marshal's testimony, but if I had gone to any
place where they could have done it, but they would shoot me, because the
people in general appeared to be in such a rage that there was no reason in
them.


Some farther objections was made by the council as to his ideas of the state
of things, but the court declared it right to show the general impressions he
felt.

ATORNEY. Did you, or not, abstain from showing yourself at the window, or
amongst the people.


WITNESS. Yes, as much as possible. There was nothing particular that I saw,
except at one time when I was in the room, I heard a terrible huzza: this was
in the afternoon. On this I went to the window to see what produced this noise,
and I saw that captain Jarrett had arrived: the had just dismounted his horse,
and had his pistols, in his hand, and was walking up toward the stairs. I did
not remain long at the window, but just looked out, and saw him come in, and
shortly after he came up into the room where I was; he had not his pistols with
him then: I had that moment received a letter from Mr. Rawle, attorney of the
district, that Mr. Jarrett had surrendered himself and given bail, and that he
declared he was a strong friend to government. I then said to him, if you are a
friend to government, as you profess to be, you ought to go down and tell your
people to desist: to which he made no reply at all. He walked about in the room
for some time, and then wept down stairs. I did not see any thing more till the
prisoners were released. The only time I saw Mr. Fries, the prisoner, was a few
minutes before the prisoners were delivered up. I walked our of the room and
saw Mr. Fries upon the head of the stairs, speaking with the marshal: shortly
after, the prisoners were requested to go down, but the minister staying a
little while up in the room, there was a call made for him particularly, and
therefore I went and requested him to go down. Shortly after, the armed men
went off. I looked out of the window and saw Mr. Jarrett parading his light
horse in rank before the door. He then gave orders to march, and they went off.


ATTORNEY. Did you perceive any thing of the prisoner after this?


WITNESS. No, that was the only time I saw him during the day.


You were one of the commissioners appointed to carry into execution two acts
of Congress; one for assessing houses, and the other for laying a direct tax?


Yes.


Was there not, before this time, a general opposition to the execution of this
law throughout the county of Northampton?


After I had received my commission, which was sometime in August 1798, I had
received a letter from the secretary of the treasury, requesting me to take
some pains to find out suitable characters to serve at assessors. I did, in
consequence of that, write some letters to some of my friends, in the counties
of Northampton, Luzerne and Wayne, which constituted my division: in Wayne and
Luzerne, I found no difficulties whatever, but received a number of
applications sufficient, and accompanied with recommendations. In Northampton
county I was not so successful; I had but two recommendations from that county;
it was therefore necessary for me, from the best information which I could
obtain, to endeavor to find men of suitable characters in each township; and
likewise to get a number of blank commissions, in case some of those appointed
should refuse to accept of the office. I received information at Reading, at
the time the board of commissioners met, from the commissioner in Bucks, that
he had received information from a gentlemen in Philadelphia (Mr. Chapman) that
he had traveled through a great part of Northampton county, and that in every
tavern where he stopped, this tax law was the general topic of conversation,
and that great pains was taken to find out who the persons were that were
friends of the government so much as to be assessors, in order to persuade them
not to accept of the appointment. Although I could not believe it was the case
at that time, yet I found it was the case afterward.


Cross examination. Do you know this traveller?


WITNESS. No.

Agreeable to my duty, I gave notice to the assessors to meet me at a certain
place. I should have first said that I appointed the assessors agreeable to the
best information I could collect, I took one man from each township, such as
was thought qualified for the business. I sent them their commissions, and with
them notices to meet me at a time and place appointed in order to receive from
me their instructions.


He then mentioned the names of the assessors, and the townships to which they
were appointed.

I appointed a meeting of the assessors of the third district at Nazareth, on
the 3d Thursday in November, two of them did not attend, and some of the others
who did attend begged to be excused from serving. I asked their reason, and
told them I could not very well excuse them, they told me that the people in
their different townships were very much opposed to the law; that they thought
it was dangerous for them to accept of it. I found that they, as well as the
people, had a wrong idea about the law; and I was so happy that day as to
prevail upon all those that wished to be excused accepting the appointment,
upon explaining the law to them, to accept it. The next day I met the assessors
of the second district at Allentown, where all attended but one. I had the same
difficulty there as at the other place, and it was not without much difficulty
that those who did appear, that they did accept of the appointment. I then left
the blank commissions with Mr. Balliot, and requested him to appoint some
persons in the room of Mr. Home, who had refused. The Monday following met the
assessors of the other district at Chestnut Hill township. Previous to that I
had seen Mr. Kearne, who was the assessor, appointed at Easton; when I
mentioned to him that he was appointed an assessor, he told me that it would
not suit him to accept of it. I requested of him that he might name some
suitable person, and qualified for it, and I would be willing to accept him. He
mentioned Jacob Snyder, and told me he would notice Mr. Snyder to meet me with
the rest. When I came there two of the assessors did not appear, and one from
Hamilton did not appear willing to accept of it, but after a great deal of
explaining and persuading, it was prevailed upon. Just as we were going, Synder
came, he told me that be had received his notice, and that he was not willing
to accept it; that the people were very much opposed to the law, and he did not
very well understand it himself, but he thought he would endeavor to get some
information, and that when he came there, the information he received was such,
that he was determined to go after me, and accept of the appointment, if he
were to ride 50 miles in order to accept of it, for that he had been wrong
informed about the law. I then went up to Wayne county where I had no
difficulty, except that one assessor told me that he was persuaded with
difficulty to accept of the appointment. As I was going to Luzerne county, the
assessor from Hamilton township, (Nicholas Michael) came after me, and told me
that he had been obliged to fly from his house in the night to save his life,
and begged of me to accept of his resignation; I told him I could not accept of
it, but that I would see perfect justice done. At any request he went with mo
to Easton, where we went to see for Mr. Sitgreaves, attorney of the district,
but not finding him at home, we went to Judge Trail, in order to take his
deposition. He begged that I would grant the favor for him to consider of it
till the next morning; I did, and next morning he came to me and begged me "
Mr. Eyerly, for God's sake put me to jail, so that I may be secure of my life,
for if I inform against these people, I and my family shall be ruined. I told
him that I would do no such thing, for that I had too much friendship for him;
that I would give a few lines to the constable to request him to call a
township meeting, and I would meet him in the township. I requested Mr. Henry
to go there with me: I had reason to believe that this opposition arose from
misrepresentation, which I supposed was given to the people by a few gentlemen,
who had traveled through the county a few days since. When we came to Hamilton
township, there were about 60 or 70 persons assembled, three or four of them in
uniforms, their arms was behind the door at the house of Mr. Hellers. I then
told them that I was come as their friend, and without any design of taking the
least advantage of their conduct in opposing the assessors: that I had come to
read the law to them, and explain it. I did so, and pointed out the impositions
practiced on them. Mr. Henry assisted me as much as he could, but all to very
little purpose. The assessor after this again begged me, for God's sake, to
accept of his resignation. AS there was a number of them that complained
against the assessors. I proposed to them that though I had no authority to it,
yet if I thought it would be a favor to grant them that indulgence to elect
their own assessor themselves, I would grant him the appointment. They told me
they would do no such thing, for said they " if we do this, we at once
acknowledge that we will submit to the laws, and that is what we wont do. I
then enquired for a suitable man, and John Huston was mentioned, who was
likewise elected assessor under the county rates. I called him into a room, and
requested him to accept the appointment, he told me it was impossible at the
present time, but he should, whenever things appeared more favorable, so that
he could go through, be willing to do it.

I hear that the business is now done.


ATTORNEY. Please to relate who were the persons that traveled through that
county, and encouraged the opposition.


WITNESS. The last week in December, or the first of January I received a
letter from Mr. Heckavelter, the assessor of upper Milford: by which, he
informed me that he was stopped, by a regular deputation from the township
meeting, consisting of 3 men. I sent a line to Mr. Heckavelter, and wished him
to give notice to Mr. Schymer, Mr. Moretz, and some of the leading men in the
township, that I would meet them at such a time, and explain the business to
them. When I came, in consequence, within 4 miles of the place, I was requested
by a friend, not to go, for that the people, were so violent, that if I did go
I should certainly be killed: I replied to them that I would go, I was not
afraid of any of them. I took Mr. Henry along with me; when we came there, I
found about 60 or 70 persons collected at the house of John Schymer. I suppose
about 20 of them had French cockades in their hats, red, blue and white. Mr.
Schymer then took me into his own room; there were about eight or ten in the
room. Mr. Schymer asked me if I had seen the petitions, he gave one of them to
me, and requested that I would read it, which I did in the presence of another
person; there were but two in the company that understood English. While I was
reading, these two men began to shake their heads, they said it was not such a
petition as they had been told. I then asked them whether the general
opposition was not on account of the stamp tax, and the house tax; they said
yes. I then told them there was not a word in this petition against the stamp
act; they seemed to be altogether satisfied, and said that they had been made
to believe it was. I then went into the next room, where the people collected:
some of them appeared to be extremely violent and very abusive. I told them I
had not came there to be abused by any body; that I had come there as a friend,
to inform them of the law which it was important should be understood. There
was a report among them that it was no law; I read the law to them, and
explained it in the German language, and told them it was their duty to submit
to it. One of them of the name of George Shaeffer jumped up before me, and
said, Mr. Eyerly, it is no law; I told them that if they did not believe me,
they might enquire of Squire Schymer whether it was or not. Mr. Schymer told
them it was a law; upon which Shaeffer replied, " admitting it is a law, we
will not submit to it". He then farther said, here I am, take me to gaol, but
you shall see how far you will bring me. Upon which a great many of them jumped
up and said, yes by God, if they shall only attempt to take any one to jail, we
would soon have him out again. Some of them made use of very abusive language
against the assessor, calling him a tory rascal and the like; and as the
assessor had requested me to accept of his resignation because it was not in
his power to go through with it, I proposed to them, that if they had any
objections against the assessor, that they should elect one, and I would give
him his appointment; to which some of the most sensible and most moderate
replied, no, if it must be done Mr. Heckavelter shall do it, and some of the
others said, we will do no such things if we do, we at once acknowledge that we
submit to the law, and that is what we will not. I then went over to the tavern
close by, with Mr. Schymer, when Mr. Heckavelter came to me, and told me that
he was in danger; that there was three of the Shaeffers were going to give him
a licking: I requested him to stand by me, and I would see him safe. We then
went off.


Cross examination. Did they come up to beat him?


WITNESS. Yes they did, all three of them. Mr. Heckavelter told them he would
not have any thing to do with them, and they charged him something respecting a
liberty pole at Millars town.


Did they threaten to beat him on account of his going on with the laws as
assessor?


No.


ATTORNEY. But it was no private quarrel was it?


WITNESS. No, Mr. Heckavelter told me it was not.


When was the liberty pole erected?


Two weeks before that, but after the dissentions arose.


Were those poles erected any where, but where this opposition prevailed?


With a few exceptions: there was one place where the law was fully executed,
and some others that followed the example, where the law was executed:


Was the law executed at Millars town?


It was not executed there, nor at upper Milford till about two or three weeks
ago at farthest. I then agreed to go to Millars town, where one of the
Shaeffer's lived. Mentioning this to an assessor, (John Roming) he requested I
would not do it; he told me that the people were so violent that he would not
go upon his duties if any body would give him L.500 to do it, if he did, he
must run the risk of losing his life. I then desisted.


ATTORNEY. The laws were not excuted till after the army came up, and not
before were they?


The witness was going on to say what be had been told, but hearsay evidence
was inadmissible.

-- I then went to Mr. Trexlers where I saw Mr. Bobst, who gave me information
of Heidelberg, Wiessenberg, Lynn, and Low Hill: he told me that at a meeting at
one of those places the people had drawn up a paper not to submit to the laws:
he then told the people that they were certainly doing wrong, and that they
would bring themselves into trouble if they went on that way: upon which they
(the people themselves) destroyed the paper. He said the same of Heidelberg. He
likewise informed me that in the township where he lives it was impossible to
execute the laws.


At what time were the laws executed in those four townships?


Since the troops have been there. He went so far as to say that all in the
township opposed the execution of the law, except three or four.


Hearsay evidence stopped again by the council, because the constitution
provides that the accused shall be confronted with his accusers.

Mr. Rawle contended, that, as he wished to show the court and jury the general
state of that country, the hearsay evidence of Mr. Eyerly in his official
capacity as commissioner, to whom reports of the assessments were made, was
admissible.

So far as explained the general temper was allowed.

WITNESS. -- In Penn township the assessor did not meet us, he refused to
accept the appointment, well aware of the difficulties that would occur, and a
general rule was admitted to meet those difficulties. I received information
from Mr. Balliott that he had found a man in that township who was willing to
execute the office. At my request, he sent him a commission, but the man was
obliged, before he took the oaths, to return it again, declaring it was
impossible to do it. This was sometime in January. Sometime afterward he wrote
to me of another man who would accept. I requested him to sign his commission.
I received information while the marshal, Mr. Balliott and myself were about
the county, that as soon as the people, in the township knew that he had
received his commission they raised a mob.


When was Penn township assessed?


About ten days ago.


COURT. Had you not reason to believe that, owing to the opposition in that
township the law could not be executed?


WITNESS. It could not.


Was there similar opposition in any other township?


In Moore township there was some opposition, but when the assessor was opposed
he called a town meeting. That township has been assessed about two months.


Mr. Lewis insisted that if such evidence were allowed, it would be necessary
to produce the commissions of these officers, and he could see no reason why
themselves could not have been present as evidences on the prosecution, instead
of that testimony coming through Mr. Eyerly.

Mr. Rawle contended that if it was necessary to prove commissions, there would
be no end to the enquiry.

ATTORNEY. Were you present at any other meetings?


WITNESS. No. -- On the first or second of March last, when the marshal came to
Nazareth, and told me that he had process against a number of persons in
Northampton, county, he requested me to go with him: I went with him, first to
Lehi township, where the marshal served process upon those people for opposing
the assessments, without any difficulty: we then came to Bethlehem, and then to
Emaus: the first house the marshal had to serve in was a subpoena upon George
Syder, where, after being Abused by the house, we were sworn at and abused by
him: he had a large club in his hand.


COURT. Did he abuse you before you spoke to him?


WITNESS. Yes. -- He called us rascals, highway robbers and the like: the
marshal told him he only had a subpoena to appear at Philadelphia to give
testimony; to which he answered, in German, he would be damned if he would go.
The marshal finding he could do nothing with him, requested Daniel Schwartz
sen. to read and explain it to him, and we left it with him to serve. We then
went to Millars town to serve a warrant on George Schaeffer, but we were told
he was gone to Philadelphia: we went to Seward's tavern. The marshal and myself
then went to Shankwyler's where there was at least 50 assembled in the room.
Not knowing Shankwyler, Mr. Balliott pointed him out, and the marshal took him:
while the marshal was talking with Shankwyler, the crowd enclosed upon us, and
abused us very much, and in a very menacing manner, accompanied with an almost
universal cry of strike, strike, strike, so that for some time we did nor know
what would be the consequence. The marshal this time was persuading Shankwyler
to submit, telling him the consequence of opposition: he at first declared he
would not, but at length he said he would do as Jarret did. Some of the people
then said, that if Shankwyler was to be taken out of his house, they would
fight as long as they had of drop of blood in their bodies. The marshal then
turned round to the crowd, when they were so violent, and told them that Mr.
Balliott and myself were under his protection. I forgot to mention that while
the marshal was talking to Shankwyler in the bar, one of the persons present
tore the cockade from Mr. Balliott's hat, while he was turning round to speak
to the marshal: Mr. Balliott did not for the present know but it was a blow
some one had given him. They then made back a little. Having found it
impossible to do any thing farther, Shankwyler promised to meet the marshal at
Bethlehem. We then went out of the room, but before we came out of the house
there was a terrible huzza in the room. I then sent for a constable at the
request of the marshal, to go with him and show him the persons and places of
those against whom he had process. I remained while he served the process' at
Mr. Irexler's, and it was there we first received information that an attempt
would be made the next day to rescue the prisoners. We arrived at Bethlehem
that evening the 6th of March, and then the occurrences happened of which I
have given testimony as far as I know.


Some conversation here occurred respecting the testimony of Mr. Eyerly where
he said he had appointed assessors: Mr. Eyerly corrected himself, that he meant
he had recommended them to the board. But Mr. Lewis said he should expect the
records to be produced to the court, that the manner and legality of the
appointments might be seen.

SAMUEL TOON, sworn.

Testimony translated by Mr. Erdman.

ATTORNEY. Where do you live when at home?


WITNESS. At upper Milford in Northampton county.


Do you belong to any company of light horse?


Yes, to captain Jarrett's.


What is your station?


A trumpeter.


Were you requested by any body to go with a party to Bethlehem; by whom, and
at what time?


On the 7th of March, about 8 o'clock I went to the house of Daniel Schwartz.


Did you go, or were you sent to Schwartz?


I went of my own accord, because I heard that the light horse were to meet
there, when I came, there was one of the light horse there, named Samuel, the
son of Daniel Schwartz. I asked him who ordered the company together, and what
they were about to do? he said that John Fogle the lieutenant had directed them
to meet at Guise's tavern, about 3 miles from Bethlehem, on this side: he then
asked me if I would go along. I answered, no. Daniel Schwartz had another son
named Daniel, who wanted to go along, but the old man would not allow it,
because he had no regimentals or uniform.


ATTORNEY. What is meant by uniform?


WITNESS. The cap and coat. -- Old Schwartz then told his son that he should go
to a neighbor, and should borrow his coat and my cap. I would not lend my cap,
because I told him I might want it myself, if I could get an horse, as I told
him I had it in my heart to go.


Do you know what they were going for, or was it mentioned at all?


I did not know that morning what they were going for -- If that is all your
excuse for not going, old Schwartz said he would lend me his horse, and give me
a dollar in the bargain. His son, young. Daniel he would not allow to go along,
but he begging very hard, he would allow him to go as hostler, to take care of
the horses. They went, some of them as far as Guise's tavern, some of them were
in regimentals, and some not. I and Schwartz's two sons went, and when we came
to Guise's there was no officers.


How many went from Schwartz's house?


Six: Henry Staeler, myself, Adam Stahlnaker, and Schwartz's three sons. --
When we came within half a mile of Guise's, we overtook, a company of riflemen
of about 30 strong. They had no officer with them. Stahlnaker was one of the
lieutenants, but did not meddle with the company, nor was he in regimentals,
nor in arms. They waited about two hours for Fogle, the first lieutenant, but
he did not come. Captain Jarrett was down at Philadelphia. When I found there
was no one to take the command, I determined to go no farther: then there began
a quarrel among them, some of them were willing to go, and some of them were
not. Stahlnaker and myself then proposed to go to Bethlehem, and we would bring
them advice what was doing there, if they would wait an hour, and then they
would know what was best to do. I then took off my regimentals, and put others
on, belonging to my brother-in-law, the tavern-keeper. Some were willing to do
this, some were not. They then went after me, and told me that I must put on my
regimentals, and take my trumpet. I refused this, and told them, I would not go
a step farther unless there was some officer who would' take the command and
answer for it. They then agreed to it, and chose Andrew Sochiffert: He then
said he would accept of it, if they would follow him, obey his orders, or his
advice. They then went on to Bethlehem.


Did the number increase?


The rifle passed by, but the number of horsemen did not increase.


How many horsemen were there?


There were only about eight or nine at Guise's, but there were a great number
of our people on horseback, here and there one of them with a gun. When we were
about half a mile on this side the bridge, we were met by four persons from
Bethlehem.


Had you settled what you were going for?


I had no intercourse with any one of them on the subject, because I was always
a good way before the troop.


Did you not hear at the tavern?


No, I did not hear any particular reason for going to Bethlehem.


Why did you go with them?


Because I was afraid of getting into trouble, and yet I was afraid if I went
there.


Why afraid?


Because I supposed they would take the prisoners.


Why did you suppose so?


Because I heard here and there one or two say that they would not suffer the
prisoners to go to Philadelphia with the marshal.


Did you blow the trumpet as you rode a head?


Yes.


What passed when you met with these four gentlemen?


These four men persuaded us to go back again, and there was here and there one
that was willing to go back, among whom was Schiffart the captain: as they
would not follow him; he laid down his commission again. They then went all in
confusion, till we came to the bridge: all mixed one with another.


What did those people do who refused to go back?


There came one to them and told them that the two rifle men were prisoners,
which irritated them very much, and they said they would go and get them; they
would have them.


Was this before or after the gentlemen arrived from Bethlehem?


It was after they arrived, that they heard those two men were imprisoned?


What was the conversation between those deputies and the people?


I do not recollect much of their discourse, but I heard a good deal of
altercation between them: they were determined that the prisoners should not go
to Philadelphia, and that they would go to Bethlehem.


COURT. What prisoners did they say?


WITNESS. I do not know: they only said the prisoners. However these deputies
brought them so far that they agreed not to go to Bethlehem.


ATTORNEY. Upon what terms?


The gentlemen told them they would bring themselves into great trouble, for an
army would be marched against them. There was no conditions or terms made
besides this. They then proceeded and chose some people to go with them to the
marshal, to see whether he would give up these two men, and then they would
return to their homes. They then requested me to go over as one of the deputies
with two others: one of them was Yiesly, a rifle man. I agreed to go, provided
they would remain there till we returned. We then went, but without any arms,
but we were scarce over the bridge before a great part of the light horse
followed us, and arrived at the tavern before we could come there.


ATTORNEY. What light horse was that?


I did not observe them all, for they rode very fast, but it was the company I
belonged to.


Had any of the Bucks county people come up at that time?


Not any that I know of. -- When I came to the tavern I did not want to go in,
but Mr. Mohollan and the others took us into the marshal; but the greatest part
of our company had come in, and therefore I could not tell what to say for them
in their behalf. When I came to the marshal, he asked what was their design: I
answered that I did not know; but Yiesly demanded of him the two riflemen who
were made prisoners, but I cannot say for certain whether he demanded any more
prisoners of him. The marshal then read the orders which he had from judge
Peter's: We then went out of doors.


Did not the marshal deliver up these two men.


Not at that time.


Did you all go back to join your companies?


I cannot say whether the two others did or not. I remained where I was. --
About half an hour after the rifle company arrived; marched round the house,
and formed in ran^ before the house.


Cross examination. Was this before the two prisoners were given up.


I am not sure whether it was or not, because I do not know the time they were
given up, for I went up in the room with Mr. Balliott and Mr. Eyerly.


Did any horsemen come with the riflemen?


There came now and then some horseman, some armed, and some unarmed, and they
hurried into the yard. -- When I saw them standing in a rank I went down
stairs, and asked captain Staeler how he came over when he promised not to came
over. His answer was, that the Bucks county people had come, and they all come
over together. They first staid behind the house: the house was all in
confusion.


ATTORNEY. What did they ask for, or demand?


WITNESS. I heard some of them say that they wanted the prisoners out, and that
they would force themselves into the house. I came out of the house several
times to pacify them, and so did Shankwyler come out twice to speak to them.


ATTORNEY. Did you see the prisoner at the bar?


WITTNESS. Yes, I saw him once speaking with the marshal about half way up the
stair case.


Did you see him come down and speak to the people who were in the yard?


As they wanted to go in by force, he told them they should wait a little, for
that he would speak to the people inside a little more first.


Did you hear what he said to them afterward?


No, he then went away, and they forced themselves in at the door. I with some
others tried to keep them back all we could.


Did you succeed in keeping them out of the house at that time?


I succeeded in keeping them off, but one of them was very anxious to get in,
and told the people that they should pull off their gloves, in order to feel
the trigger, and cock the better.


Who was this?


It was Jacob Ingleman. -- Staeler then formed his, company in a rank. One
Henry Hoover, who was standing in the entry after they had formed. seemed to
think the time too long, and said if they would only send eight men to him, he
would soon have the prisoners. The people then got in, one after another, and
the entry became almost full. I believe at that time the prisoner at the bar
came and told them not to be afraid, but that they might now march on.


COURT. At the time Fries said that, were the men in or not?


They were in the entry, and a great many people were there: I was in the back
of the house, they then marched toward the stairs where the guards had left.
The marshal was then quite alone, and he told them he would deliver up the
prisoners. The prisoners then, came down stairs I believe, for I did not know
them: I had not the least personal acquaintance with one of them.


Was Fries any way distinguished by his dress, or sword, or cockade?


I never was acquainted with Fries before: he had on then a great coat, a
cocked hat, and a black feather: I did not see him with a sword.


Cross examination. Did you hear what passed between Fries and the marshal on
the stairs?


No, I was standing below; I only saw him there.


Did Fries speak English or Dutch?


Sometimes he spoke English sometimes German.


Friday, May 3. ANDREW SHIFFERT, sworn.

Testimony translated.

Was you one of the armed party that went to Bethlehem on the seventh of March?


Yes.


To what company did you belong?


To Jarrett's company.


Inform the court and jury how you came to go, what your motive, and what the
object of the expedition.


I was informed by John Hoover that all the light horse were to meet at Martin
Ritter's at ten in the morning: I was not at home when he came but I was
informed of it. I then went over to Ritter's the next morning, (on the seventh
of March) and when I came there, I asked what was to be done. Their answer was,
that they were going to Bethlehem to release the prisoners.


COURT. What prisoners?


WITNESS. The prisoners from the marshal.


To what township do you belong?


To Salisbury. I told them that if they were to do this, they would find what
would be the consequences. The others said that if they got the prisoners clear
that day, there would be nothing done, it would be all over: that if they came
with arms against them it would be all at an end.


If who went with arms?


If the soldiers went with arms.


Did not you enquire who had appointed them to meet?


No.


Did you not ask when you were at Ritters?


No. At Ritter's I wanted to go home, but they would not let me, telling me
that Fogle would be at Guise's tavern, whereupon I agreed to go so for with
them. Coming there, Fogle was not there, and I and Samuel Toon wanted to go
home, for there was no officers there. They then agreed to choose an officer,
when the choice fell upon me; I told them I would not go with them without they
would obey my orders, and not say any more about taking the prisoners from the
marshal. They professed to do so, whereupon we proceeded to within half a mile
of the bridge, and there we were met by four gentlemen from Bethlehem, and as
they repeated again that they would have the prisoners, I said I would have no
more to do with them. They then went into Bethlehem, but I did not go with
them, but in about two hours I went in to see what they were about: I staid
this side of the bridge 'till then. When I got to Bethlehem I was informed that
they had got the prisoners out. I remained there about half an hour and then
rode home, so that I know not what happened.


Did you hear that the marshal had taken two men prisoners, at what time and
where?


I heard that two men were disarmed: I heard it on this side the bridge.


Did you hear it while the rifle company, and the others were there together?


It was a person who came from Bethlehem that told of it, but I cannot tell who.


Was it before the deputation arrived?


I cannot tell, but I did not hear it before.


Had the Backs county people come up before you left that place where you staid
on this side of the bridge?


Yes, I saw them ride up at about two o'clock.


COURT. Was Jarrett's and Staeler's companies gone over the bridge when the
Bucks county people went over?


The light horse were, but I am not fare of Staeler's.


Did you enter into conversation with the Bucks county people?


No, not any.


The evidence here was closed so far as related to the affair at Bethlehem: Mr.
attorney then introduced the following, preceding and succeeding events to show
the state of the country, and the prisoner's intention.

JOHN DILLINGHER, sworn.

Testimony translated.

ATTORNEY. Where is your home?


WITNESS. In upper Milford, Northampton county, about six miles from Millars
town.


Do you know of any rumor or report in your neighborhood that the marshal was
coming up to arrest some persons, before he came?


It was talked of, as suspected that some persons would be arrested.


COURT. On what account?


I can give no account of that. The report was that they would be arrested to
be taken to Philadelphia.


Was it reported, or any proposition made among the people that if any body
should be brought to Philadelphia, that it should not be suffered?


It was said, that if any person was to be arrested innocently, it would be
very hard for such a man, and he ought not to be suffered to suffer. And
further it was said that somebody had sworn against Shankwyler that he had two
pistols and a sword on his table, and that he had sworn that if the assessors
should come, he would shoot them. I and my neighbors said that Shankwyler
never owned a pair of pistols, nor did they believe any were ever there except
a traveller brought them there. [He kept a tavern] I then heard that the
marshal had arrested some persons at Millars town. The following day (6th of
March) captain Staeler came to my house, and I asked him whether he had been in
Millars town. He answered yes. I asked him whether it was true that Shankwyler
had been arrested by the sheriff. (Because at that time the term marshal was
not known to them.) Staeler answered, yes, and that he was to be the following
day at Bethlehem, and asked me whether I would go to Bethlehem likewise, and
told me that more people were going up to see, I said I should also like to go
and see, provided the people would save themselves from getting into trouble. I
then dressed myself to go away: Staeler asked me if I would not take my rifle
with me.


COURT. Were you one of captain Staeler's rifle company?


WITNESS, No.


What company did you belong to?


To no one particularly; only the militia -- I then answered no, for what? He
then informed me that there were a number of people to meet at Ritter's tavern,
whence he heard they were to proceed to Bethlehem, and they would go there
pretty early, to exercise a little, and that I should go in the ranks to make a
show, because his company was not complete.


COURT. Was it muster day?


No, but they had frequent meetings in order to exercise themselves. I then
agreed that I would take my rifle so far as that. As I was dressing when he
came, he asked me what I was dressing for: I told him that I was going to my
mother in law, to fetch her some flax to spin; she lives in Bucks county, about
a mile on this side of Conrad Marks's house. Whereupon, he (Staeler) desired me
to tell young Marks that the light horse were going to Bethlehem, and that he
should go likewise if he pleased. Before I came to Marks's, I saw a light
horseman crossing the road into another road: when I came to Marks's I saw only
his wife and children and a strange man thee: I asked Marks's wife what light
horse man that was; she answered it was her son; I asked where he was going:
she said he was going over yonder where they were assessing houses, to go
against the assessors. I then left the message Staeler directed me.


Did you go farther into Bucks than where your mother-in-law lives?


No. I entered into no other house than Marks's and my mother's.


What time of the day were you at Marks's?


About one o'clock.


Did you not mention to John Schymer, Esquire that the people would not stand by
him, and that he would not be supported, when it was reported that a warrant
was ^^^ued against him, but that if he remained firm, he would?


I do not reccollect any such thing.


WILLIAM THOMAS, sworn.

ATTORNEY. DO you live in Bucks county?


WITNESS. Yes.


Did you go to Bethlehem on the seventh of March?


Yes. -- On the fifth of March we heard that the assessors were going round to
assess the houses in Bucks county: they had assessed a few of the houses about
already: my brother was at Jacob Hoover's, and I was there when he told me to
tell two of our neighbors to let the assessors go round.


Were you not on the 6th of March desired to join the party going to Bethlehem?


On the 6th in the morning I was at Jacob Hoover's and he told me to go to Adam
Broutler and Peter Coome to tell them to come to his house. On the road I met
captain Kouder: he told me I must come along back again down to the mill, for
his company was coming together there that day: when we came there, several
were met, and they were beating the drum: part of them were armed. There were
about 15 there in the whole. We then went to Jacob Fries's tavern; then the
people said they went to see the assessors, but I don't know what for.


COURT. Where there any more at Fries's than those who came from the mill?


WITNESS. Yes there were a great many more, I think about thirty. John Fries
and Kouder then sent some (two) horsemen named John Gettman and Conrad Marks,
the former had a gun, to see if they could find the assessors.


ATTORNEY. What were they to do?


WITNESS. Why, their directions was, that if they could find them they should
bring them to Quaker town, or to Jacob Fries's tavern. After the horsemen were
gone, then the order was for the company to go to Quaker town.


Were the party pretty generally armed?


A great many were not, and many who were not had clubs. I cannot tell how many
were armed, but the greatest part had either arms or clubs.


Was there a drum and fife?


There was when we were at Quaker town. -- We all stood in a rank, and fired
off, and hallowed huzza. One party went to Enoch Roberts's tavern, and the
other to David Zeller's, and soon after we were there, the assessors came
along. They were esquire Foulke, John Rodrick, and Cephas Child's. I was at
Zeller's when they came along, and they all began to run out of the tavern.
When I came out they had Foulke by his horse's bridle, and him by one leg, and
they told him to get off. It was captain Kouder that had hold of him; then John
Fries came up and told him to get off. Jacob Hoover came up, I think before
Fries, and tol Kouder to go away and not abuse the man, and he took hold of the
bridle and spoke to him. Fries told Foulke to get off, he wanted to speak to
him. Then George Mumbower came up, and stood at the back of the others, giving
one of them a knock with the butt of his gun, and told them to pull him of;
Jacob and John Hoover told them they should not abuse the man, for he would get
off without. With that the esquire rode up with them to the shed, and got off.
They then went into the tavern together. Then John Fries told him that he had
forewarned them yesterday not to assess the houses, and yet they had come to
day again; he then told him that he should show his writings, what he had done
in the township. Which he did, and John Fries read them, and gave them to him
back again. I then went into another room, and when I came out again, Child's,
the other assessor, was sitting on the table, with five or six about him. When
I came up to him, I told him that they should not abuse him, for I used to know
him: at this time they were abusing him?


ATTORNEY. How were they abusing him?


By speaking to him; I do not recollect what they said, but they told him he
should not have gone about when they had forwarned him the day before, and they
made him promise that he would not come again till farther orders -- till they
knew how the law was. They told him they thought they had as fit men in their
township as what he was, and they wished to choose a man in the same township
if they must have it done. As to Rodrick, I did not see him.


ATTORNEY. Did you hear any cry of "fire" after Rodrick?


WITNESS. No.


Did you see any gun snapped after him?


No.


Did you see any thing relating to a traveling man named captain Seaborn?


Yes, he was there, he was drunk, and some of them asked him whether he was for
liberty or government, he said government: Peter Gobble said if he said that
again he should be whipped. They were all pretty well drunk, but I was not
drunk.


Was Fries drunk?


I do not recollect ever seeing him drunk: Kouder was, and so might Fries for
what I know, but I had known him some time, and knew he was a sober man.


Did you hear any talk about tories there?


Yes, they talked of tories and stamplers: Foulke was one they called a tory,
and so were several others. -- A young fellow then went in to strike Seaborn,
but I told him he should not strike a man that was drunk: I knew him when he
lived at the river. He struck him once or twice, but I told him if he struck
him again, I would strike him. Then we went down to Jacob Fries's, and there
captain Kouder told me that I should be at Marks' the next day, to go along
with them to Millar's town. It was now dark, and I had not seen John Fries come
then. He told the same to the rest of the company. I then went home and went to
bed. After I was home about a quarter of an hour, John Gettman and John Fries's
(...) came to our house, but I was in bed. Gettman had a gun at my house, (he
was a gunsmith.)


What age was young Fries?


About fifteen or sixteen -- I went next morning to Marks' tavern in
consequence of a massage they had left for me that night before with my mother.
By ten o'clock we were all there.


Was John Fries there?


Yes.


He named 13 more who were there.


Young Marks went off soon after sun rise to Millar's town to tell them we were
coming. John Fries's son went with us, but his father's horse got lame, and he
was obliged to go back with it.


Were all these people armed?


Yes, all but Marks and old Kline. -- The prisoner had his sword with him.


COURT. Had any one the command of the men?


WITNESS. Yes. John Fries had the command but he did not command till he got to
Bethlehem, he gave no orders on the road.


ATTORNEY. What was the substance of the conversation before you went from the
tavern?


Why, that they were going to Millar's town: I did not know that they were
going to Bethlehem.


Did you hear any conversation about the intention of the march?


Yes. That we were going to Millar's town, for should there be prisoners there,
Marks said that he wanted us to show ourselves.


What were you to show yourselves for?


I do not know what for.


Were you to assist to bring the prisoners down to Philadelphia?


I do not know.


What was the intention of the Northampton people?


Why, they had a mind to take the prisoners again: I understood that the night
before at Fries's and along the road before we got there. About three or four
miles from old Marks', we met young Marks; he said it was not worth while to go
to Millar's town, that the prisoners were up at Bethlehem, and that they had
all gone there.


Who had gone there?


The Northampton people -- the light horse. Some was then for going back again:
some, as they had come so far, was for going up to Bethlehem, to see what was
going on there, so we went on.


Who told you to go on?


Old Marks and John Fries said that as they were come so far on the road, they
would go up and see what was doing there. Then we went on about a mile, and
stopped at Ritters where they fed their horses: there was a liberty pole there.
Then we went on to Bethlehem. When we came to the bridge, there the people had
stopped, there was some riflemen and some light horse. Some asked the reason
why they stopped there: they said they could not get over, the bridge was shut:
then John Fries rode un, and asked whether they required toll or not; they
said, yes. Then he told them to count his men, and told us to follow him.


Did he speak generally?


Yes. -- The words he used was, now boys, follow me. I do not know whether he
counted all or only his own men.


Did you hear any thing at that time of those men whom you found there having
sent three men to Bethlehem?


I heard of their having taken two or three men under guard.


Who paid the toll?


I do not know, we did not, we were all mixed together.


Did you not hear of three men being sent forward?


No, I did not. -- I heard of their having taken some prisoners.


Had you heard before you come to the bridge of these two prisoners?


No.


Did the whole party follow Fries over the bridge, or only the Bucks county
people?


I believe only the Bucks county people, without it was some few.


What became of Staeler's Riflemen?


Why they came pretty soon after over the bridge.


You were all on horseback?


Yes.


Did not the others come over the bridge at the same time it was opened for you?


I did not look back; all that I can say, wh^: we got up to the tavern, they
were pretty close after us.


What distance is it from Marks' to Bethlehem?


About twenty miles.


When we got over the bridge, there were two men met us, and said we should not
hurt them; Fries told them that he should hurt nobody without they hurt him
first. Then Judge Mohollan came and spoke with him afterward, but I do not
know what either he, or Fries said. When we got up to the tavern at Bethlehem,
the whole of Staeler's rifle-company were there. They marched round the house
twice; we did not stand in ranks, we were separate. They wanted one to go up
and talk with the marshal, and they from Bucks and Northampton said John Fries
was more fit to go up than ever a man that was there. Then John Fries and one
Hoover went up stairs. After a while Hoover came down, Fries staid up when he
came down, he kept dashing and swearing, and said force should do: give him
nine or ten of the best riflemen in the company, and he would storm the house;
a great many of them told him he should not do it, he said he would, Jacob
Hoover, George Mitchel and Mr. Mohollan endeavored to keep him off.


Did this Hoover belong to Staeler's company?


I think he did. -- Then Fries, when he came down stairs, he fetched some
writing down with him, that he got from the marshal, which he read to the
company. He said the marshal dared not give up the prisoners, and therefore
that they would take them by force of arms. At this time the Bucks county
people were separate from the others.


COURT. Who did Fries speak to?


WITNESS. He spoke to the whole of them. -- Then he asked, what shall we do now
-- take them by force of arms or how? Several of them said, since they come so
far now they would have them. Frederick Henry said since they were come so far,
it was a damned shame not to have them. Then Fries went up stairs again, and
said he would go and talk to them once more. When he came down again, he said
that the marshal dared not give them up, without they took them by force of
arms. They then told him that he should go and do something pretty soon, for it
was getting late. Some of them said it was better to let Fries have the whole
command of all the men. Then it was concluded to go into the house, and he
spoke five or six times.


Was it agreed that Fries should have the whole under his command? I do not
know. I only heard what that one man said, and he thought him the fittest
person.


Did Fries hear this? where was he?


He was in the yard before the door, and near enough to hear it.


You did not hear him object to taking the command?


I do not know whether he heard what that man said. -- Then Fries, when it was
concluded to go into the house said, For God's sake don't fire boys, till I am
fired upon first: he said this three or four times over. Then we moved on to go
in, he was before us.


COURT. HOW many followed him?


I do not know, but a good many at last. I could not see who they were, the
house was so full. Then Fries went up and talked to the marshal about half way
up stairs. Henry told me that Fries was telling the marshal that if he did not
give up the prisoners, they would fire on them, so that they should not see
each other for smoke. After that, the door was opened, and I saw some of them
come down. -- Some came down while Fries was talking to the marshal.


Then they were not all down?


There was some not down; they called for them, and they came down. -- Fries
said he was glad Hoover did not go in along with him, because he was too much
of a fool; he thought this would not have done so well as it did: he did not
want him there.


Did you retire from Bethlehem altogether when you had got the prisoners?


Did Jarret's troop go with you?


I saw some light horse before us.


Did you see Fries go to the minister after he was released?


Yes, he went to him in another room: he pulled off his hat to the minister,
and told him he must thank him that he had got out, he said he was out, but he
could thank him for all.


The marshal was again called to reconcile some seeming difference in the
relation of the last conversation Fries held with the marshal, and of the
prisoners coming down at twice.


The marshal said that the last conversation he held with the prisoners was at
the foot of the stairs. -- Mr. Fries declared that he would force his way up
stairs, if I would not give them up; I told him that this would be punished
with the utmost severity, but that if he was determined to rescue the
prisoners, he should not go up stairs, but that I would go up, and order them
down. Finding myself not in a situation to resist his force, I went up and
ordered them down.


Cross examination. Had any prisoners left the room before you went up stairs?


No.


ATTORNEY. Had you any Conversation with him afterward?


Yes, he returned and said that we had not given up Ireman, that I must deliver
him up with the rest: I told him they were all gone: he then went out and
returning again said he was there; and went off. At that time all the prisoners
went out.


Cross examination. Have you any recollection of what Thomas swears that Henry
told him, respecting firing so that you should not see each other for smoke?


No. I cannot be particular in that; I cannot recollect it so as to give
evidence upon it. There were many very serious threats, else I should not have
given up the prisoners.


Cross examination. At any time when you were in conversation with Fries, did
any of the prisoners come down stairs?


No, not the Lehi prisoners: there might be others that would not submit, but
none from the room in actual custody, not to my knowledge: if they did, it must
have been while I was speaking to them in the crowd, it was possible for them
to do it at that time.


Were they not guarded?


They were in the room, and that guard remained there till I went up; it was
placed there to prevent any person going up or down.


Cross examination. After this conversation with Fries, you went up stairs to
order the prisoners down. Were they all there in the room at that time?


I believe so, but I did not count them.


Well, upon your order did they come down; and did you come down with them.


Yes, I came down with them.


ATTORNEY. When the prisoners came down stairs and you with them, do you
recollect having a short conversation with Fries at the side of the stairs?


Yes, but there was but a very short one.


Cross examination. Did you lead, or follow the prisoners in coming down stairs?


I am not certain, but I believe I followed them.


GEORGE MITCHEL sworn.

ATTORNEY. Where do you live?


I keep tavern in lower Milford township, Bucks county.


Inform the court whether there was any opposition to the house tax law in your
township.


There was great disturbance and discontents respecting this house law; it
happened that there was a meeting advertised for the 8th of February, at the
house of John Kline, to consult about the house tax law.


Were any names signed to the advertisement.


None that I recollect. -- A number of the inhabitants met, it was pretty late
in the day: they all seemed discontented, but they were in doubt whether it had
passed into a law or not. There was something in the news paper of an
amendment, which made them doubt whether it was in force. They formed an
instrument of writing, but I cannot recollect the particulars of it. It was
drawn up by John Fries; I assisted him. We passed home after that. I had no
particular conversation with any body after the paper was signed: it was signed
by about 50 or 52 of the inhabitants.


Do you recollect whether captain Kuyder was directed to give any notice by
that meeting?


I do recollect something; I think it was that captain Kuyder should give
notice to the assessors not to come forward till they had informed themselves
farther, whether it was a law or not.


Cross examination. Who put up the notice of this meeting?


WITNESS. I am not sure: perhaps it was myself. John Hoover, and several, had
talked about it, and we thought we would call a meeting. Was Fries present when
you agreed to call this meeting? No. -- This was on Friday: on the Monday
following James Chapman came to my house, and told me I should tell Jacob
Hoover that he should give notice over the creek (I live nearly at the end of
the township) that if they would choose an assessor of their own, they should
be welcome; and any man that was capable of the business would be admited into
the office. There was one Valentine Hoover came to my house that same day, he
lives over the other side, and I told him what Mr. Chapman had told me,
likewise, I informed Jacob Hoover that day myself. Who opposed it I don't know,
but it was reported that it was not adopted. Squire Foulke sent me word to
advertise a meeting. Israel Roberts and Samuel Clark called on me and told me.
They informed me that Mr. Foulke was of opinion that the people were ignorant
of the law, and he would read it for them, and explain it to them: this was the
purpose of the meeting. So we advertised the meeting to be held at my house.


What time was this?


Sometime in February toward the latter end. It was on a Saturday, and there
were a great many of the inhabitants at the meeting, squire Foulke and Mr.
Chapman attended it. The people behaved very disorderly; but I cannot recollect
any of the conversation that passed. Jacob Kline came in and asked me what the
meeting was intended for. I told him that I understood by squire Foulke, that
the Germans were very ignorant of the law, and that he called them together, to
read, and explain it to them; I desired him to try to pacify the people, and I
believe he did his endeavor, but it proved in vain: at least they did not read
the law. I did not understand. that any body offered to read it, he thought it
was in vain, there was such a clamor.


Did they say any thing to you?


After Mr. Chapman was gone, Marks asked me how I came to meddle with the
advertisement.


Was John Fries at the meeting?


No. -- I don't recollect any thing afterward till the assessors came, which
was the 5th of March. They took the rates of my house and my neighbors.


Who were the assessors?


Mr. Child's, Mr. Foulke, and Mr. Rodrick. -- I went from home the rest of the
day, and the next morning when I returned (sixth of March) I heard there had
been an uproar about driving away the assessors. It was talked of that they
were going to Millars town the next day. Hearing of such an uproar, I thought I
had business at Millars town. so I concluded to go and hear what was going on:
they talked they were going to meet the Northampions who were going for the
relief of the Prisoners.


Did you know the names of any of the prisoners?


No. -- So we came at Marks's; (7th of March) when we came there, there was a
talk at Marks's house about going to the tavern above Emaus: Marks said his son
would bring word. We went on then till we me^ young Marks, and he beckoned that
we should halt, or go back, so we did; he said he had been up at Ritter's
tavern, and they bad started before he came there.


Who went with you?


He mentioned eighteen names.


Who were the commanders?


I do not know of any in particular who took the command. -- Some wished to go
to see Bethlehem, some to see the bridge, so they concluded to go on.


COURT. Did you hear John Fries say any think about going on?


I cannot say who were for going on, and who were not. We were overtaken by
several people going to Bethlehem on the road.


COURT. Were they armed or not?


None that I can recollect. -- When we got to the bridge at Bethlehem, there
were a great many armed men, and light horse, and two rode over the bridge
toward us, from the other side. I did not hear the conversation that passed at
the bridge; but after a while we went over to Bethlehem.


After you got to Bethlehem, what did you observe, respecting Fries?


There was a great many of the company that was formed before the house, who
seem to speak out that they would have the prisoners. Fries went in, I saw him
start to go in, but I did not hear who ordered him, or who desired him. A short
time after, in the course of five or ten minutes, Henry Hoover came out to us,
and said he was sergeant of their company, and he was chosen to demand the
prisoners. He said he went up stairs, and somebody gave him a push, and had
like to have tumbled him down stairs, and he came out in a great passion. He
went on in a great rage, and I catched hold of him: he said if they would only
give him ten men, he would storm the house. A short time after that, I observed
Fries come out, and he said "silence" to the people there. He seemed to be as
much among Staeler's company as among ours. He then afterward said,
"Gentlemen, an officer of the United States says he cannot deliver up the
prisoners, unless they are rescued by force of arms: so, he said, if you are
willing, we will, I will go foremast, but if we do, I beg of you, none of you
fire till they fire on us first, till I give the word, and if I drop, then you
must take your own command." He repeated these words, at least, once more. I
heard nothing afterward of the proceedings in, no^ out of the house, that I
recollect.


Was there some time after this, a meeting held at Marks's?


Yes.


After the proclamation?


A meeting was held on the 18th of March.


What was the object of the meeting?


To choose a committee of the three counties of Northampton, Bucks and
Montgomery.


Why these three counties?


Because there were none else in the proclamation.


What was the meeting held for?


To consult what was best to be done, and it was determined to leave it to the
committee.


Was John Fries there?


Yes.


Did you put any question to him relative to the affair at Bethlehem?


No. After the meeting I had some conversation with him: while the committee
was sitting I said to him: John Fries, you never intended to resist the law,
did you? He made me answer, yes, I did.


What laws were you talking about?


We did not in particular mention any laws.


Was there a meeting after this at your house, and what time was that?


It was on Easter Monday, March 25.


What was the object of that meeting?


That was to appoint an assessor. The one that was appointed was to do the
business, if he pleased, if not, the person they chose was to do it, or both
together.


Was John Fries at that meeting?


At the beginning of it he was, but I do not recollect that he was a^ the time
they gave in their votes.


Did he unite in the choice of the assessor?


Several did not wait because there was no opposition, and they thought there
was no occasion.


Did he, or did he not express himself as much against the law as ever?


He said it would not suit him to vote now, as he had been against the law
throughout.


Did not many of those who had been opposed to the law before, vote for the
assessor now?


Yes.


Cross examination. At the meeting at Marks's, was it not generally agreed that
there should be a submission to the laws?


Yes. -- After the business was over, they made mention of it, but I do not
know that they made any report of it.


Did not Fries, with all the rest, agree to the submission?


I cannot say.


COURT. Was there any agreement to do it?


Why, I believe the people never knew to the contrary but there would be a
return made.


Cross examination. Was it not recommended to submit?


Yes.


And was it not agreeable to the meeting?


Yes, I believe it was; I heard no opposition to it?


ATTORNEY. Was not the return made in writing?


Yes.


Did not 'squire Richards propose that there should be a submission signed
there?


No, I do not recollect any such thing.


Cross examination. Was it a general design of the meeting to conform and
submit to the laws?


On the 15th of March we received the proclamation, and that evening I took it
down to Frederick Henny's; William Thomas went with me: I read the proclamation
to Frederick Henny, and he was agreed to submit; he made no opposition.


Cross examination. When Fries said it would not suit him to vote for the
assessor, did he say he continued in opposition to the law at that time?


I don't know that he did, but he seemed rather opposed, at that time, to the
laws or the appointment of an assessor.


Cross examination. Was this proclamation communicated to the meeting on the
18th of March?


Yes it was; after I had read it to Henny, I told him to take it to others. I
thought it was proper to get a petition sent to the President.


JAMES CHAPMAN.

ATTORNEY. You are a principal assessor under the act for laying a direct tax
are you not?


Yes, for twelve townships, (which he named).


How did the assessments go forward under your care?


I believe in all but lower Milford the assessments were carried into effect
without opposition, or in a majority of the townships, except some little
threatenings. The assessor of lower Milford was taken sick soon after he got
his instructions, and so did not proceed. His name was Samuel Clark: I called
upon him afterward, to know whether he was able to proceed or not: he thought
he should be able in a few days: I had occasion to go to Newtown, and was
several days from home, but found there was nothing done respecting it; I found
the people had had a meeting, and there appeared to be great opposition to the
rates being taken. The day after I returned from Newtown, Clark called upon me,
and told me he thought it was not safe to go about, from the disposition of the
people at that time. I told him that I would meet him the next day at George
Mitchel's tavern in Milford, and meet the people to know what their complaints
were. I met Clark at a house just by, and he told me he would be in at Mitchell
in a few minutes. I examined Mitchel, to know what was their complaints:
Mitchel signified that the people were dissatisfied that the assessor was
appointed without their having a choice: for they wished to choose for
themselves. I told Mitchel if they would choose, a man of character, I would
use my influence with the commissioner to have him appointed, and I desired him
to give notice of it to Jacob Hoover. I wrote to the commissioner stating the
situation we were in, and told him what I had done, but he seemed not to be
willing to indulge them with it.


COURT. Who was the commissioner?


WITNESS. Seth Chapman was commissioner for that district. -- I told him it
would ease the minds of the people if it were done. At length he consented, but
seemingly with reluctance. However they never chose one.


Was it made known to the people?


I do not recollect that it was. -- I met him at a meeting of the assessors
which was held at the house of John Rodruck. On my return home I was told, I
think by 'squire Foulke, that the township was advertised to meet at Mitchel's.
He said if I would attend there he would meet me. I got there between one and
two clock, Just as I got to the house, before I went in, I saw ten or twelve
people coming from toward Hoover's mill, about half of them were armed, and
the others with sticks. I went into the house, and twenty or thirty were there.
I sat talking with some of my acquaintance that were well disposed to the law.
Conrad Marks talked a great deal in German, how oppressive it was, and much in
opposition to it, seeming to be much enraged. His son, and those who came with
him seemed to be very noisy and rude; they talked all in German, which as I did
not know sufficiently, I paid but little attention to them. They were making a
great noise; huzzaing for liberty, and democracy, damning the tories, and the
like. I let them go on, as I saw no disposition in the people to do any thing
toward forwarding the business. Between four and five I got up to go out; as I
passed through the crowd toward the bar, they pushed one another against me.


Was there any offer made to explain the law to them?


No, none while I staid; they did not seem disposed to hear it.


Cross examination. You did not say a word to them about it?


No, I did not. They did not mention my name the whole time of my being there,
but they abused Eyerly and Balliott, and said how they had cheated the public,
and what villains they were. I understood it was respecting collecting the
revenue, but I did not understand near all they said. I recollect Conrad Marks
said that Congress had no right to make such a law, and that he never would
submit to have his house taxed.


Cross examination. Fries was not there, was he?


No. -- They seemed to think that the collectors were all such fellows; the
insinuation was that they cheated the public, and made them pay, but never paid
into the treasury. -- After getting through the crowd to the bar, I suppose I
was fifteen minutes in conversation with Mitchel: he said perhaps they were
wrong, but the people were very much exasperated. Nothing very material
happened, and I asked Mr. Foulke if it was not time to be going. So I got into
the Sleigh and went off; soon after they set up a dreadful huzza and shout. I
stopped at Jacob Fries's tavern, and waited for Mr. Foulke, who soon came:
Clark, the assessor was likewise there. After talking a little more on the
subject, Clark still persisted in not having any thing to do with it, for he
thought it was not safe for him. We thought it was best to give the other
assessors notice, as their assessments were nearly finished, to meet us at a
certain day to take the rates in that township. I then wrote to the other
assessors, requesting them to meet at Quaker town, on the 4th of March,
Rodrick, Child's and Foulke met me there: we waited till evening, but no others
came; ^o we agreed to meet at my house next morning at 9 o'clock. We met, and I
went with them to Milford, to Samuel Clark's, but he was not at home. It was
thought best for me to go to see for Clark, as he was engaged in a moving. I
went to Jacob Fries's tavern to wait for him; they went to Mitchel's to take
the rates, Clark soon came: he told me he could not undertake to take the
rates, for that he might as well pay his fine if it cost him all he had, for
they were so opposed to it at any rate, that he could not think himself safe,
for at least he should receive some private injury. Finding he would not do it
I said no more. John Fries was coming up just then: he told me he was very glad
to see me: he told me that he understood I had been insulted in their township
at one of their meetings: he was very sorry for it: he mentioned 'Squire Foulke
as well a^ myself: had he been there, he said, it should not have been done: I
turned it off by this: that there was not a person among them that spoke a word
to me. I told him I thought they were very wrong in opposing the law as they
did: he signified that he thought they were not, and that the rates should not
be taken by the assessors. I told him that the rates certainly would be taken,
and that the assessors were then in the township taking the rates. I repeated
it to him, and he answered "my God!" if I was only to send that man (pointing
to one standing by) to my house to let them know they were taking the rates,
there would be 500 or 700 men under arms here tomorrow morning by sun rise. He
told me he would not submit to the law. I told him I thought the people had
more sense than to rise in arms to oppose the law in that manner: if they did,
government must certainly take notice of it, and send an armed force to enforce
the laws. His answer was that "if they do, we will soon try who is strongest."
I told him they certainly would find themselves mistaken respecting their
force, he signified he thought not: he mentioned to me the troop of horse in
Montgomery county, and the people at upper and lower Milford, and something
about infantry, who were ready to join. He said he was very sorry for the
occasion, for if they were to rise, God knew where it would end: the
consequences would be dreadful; I told him they would be obliged to comply: he
then said huzza, it shall be as it is in France, or will be as it is in France,
or something to that effect. He then left me and went off.


Cross examination. Did Fries appear to be intoxicated?


No, not that I know. I scarce ever saw him intoxicated. -- A short time after
he was gone, on the same day, the assessors came to Jacob Fries's tavern. We
then ordered our dinners there, and I believe it was Child's undertook to take
the rates of Jacob Fries's house. We had not gone out of the room after dinner,
till John Fries came in, he addressed himself to 'Squire Foulke, telling him he
was very sorry to see him there; he was a man that he had a great regard for,
but that be was opposed to the law himself. "I now wa^^ you, said he" not to go
to another house to take the rates, if you do, you will be hurt." He did not
Wait for any reply, but turned himself about, and went off out of the room; I
do not recollect any thing farther was said to him. He seemed much irritated.
The assessors concluded to proceed upon their business.

Rodruck and Foulke agreed to go together, and Child's went by himself: this was
an agreement between themselves.


Cross examination. Had Mr. Clark's appointment been vacated?


There had been no meeting of the assessors since Mr. Clark had refused,
complaining that he found it inconvenient to proceed with the assessment.


Was this new arrangement communicated to the board of assessors at all.


No.


The council for the prisoners doubted the legality of the appointment of Mr.
Foulke, since the law had provided that an assessor must be appointed by the
board of commissioners, and not otherwise.


Mr. Chapman said it was established at the meeting at Rodricks, which was
called in order to see what business had been done, and then an arrangement was
made that in case of the inability or unwillingness of Clark to do the business
in lower Milford, it should be done by the whole, and therefore it was done,
without the place of Clarke being vacated.


Cross examination. Were there any minutes of the assessors kept?


There was no more than a memorandum.


ATTORNEY. When you had this conversation with John Fries, was it in any
respect founded on the alteration of the assessors, or was it a general
declamation against the law?


He did not mention any thing of that at all.


Saturday May 4th.
Mr. Dallas gave notice that he should expect the gentlemen engaged in the
prosecution to produce the records of the assessors.

JOHN RODHICK sworn.

ATTORNEY. Were you one of the assessors under the direct tax law, appointed
for lower Milford?


Yes.


Have you your warrant?


-- Produced it. Dated November 5, 1798.

I suppose you took the oaths the law directed?


Yes.


Did you act as assessor in any other part of your district previous to go.


Yes. -- There were twelve townships in our district, and there were six
assessors to serve them. -- He named them. -- We were all six sworn at a
meeting held at my house, by the commissioner, Seth Chapman: 'squire Foulke got
his warrant afterward; he was appointed, I think, in addition to Samuel Clark.
-- We met the commissioner on the 16th of February, when it appeared all the
other townships were nearly done, except lower Milford; at that meeting all
attended but Clark. -- The principal assessor^ James Chapman was likewise
there. We were informed that lower Milford was not done, for Clark was afraid
to go about. The commissioner told the principal assessor that he must inform
the other assessors, that if any thing could be done in it, we must try to do
it. We all agreed that we would.


Was Mr. Foulk appointed before this meeting?


Yes, and he was present at it. -- Not long after this, we got orders from the
principal assessor to meet him at Quaker town on the 4th of March, and to go
the next day to get the rates at Milford. There were only three of us attended.
We agreed to meet at the principal assessor's house the next morning, which we
did, and thence we went to Clark's to have him to go with us: he was not at
home, however we proceeded on, taking the rates, Mr. Child's, Mr. Foulke and
myself. We had taken between 50 and 60 assessments when we came to the house of
Jacob Fries.


Were the people at home when you took the rates?


All were at home, I think, except one, and there we left a notice. When we
came to Jacob Fries's we met the principal assessor. After dinner, while we
were sitting at the fire, John Fries came into the room: we had a room by
ourselves. He said he heard we were come to take the rates of the township; we
told him yes. He said he would warn us not to proceed, else we should be hurt.
He said he was sorry for 'squire Foulke, and I believe Mr. Chapman he
mentioned, for he always respected them very much. He said he was opposed to
the law, and he would not submit to it. He then left the room. He seemed to be
a little in a passion. We got on our horses, and proceeded at taking the rates:
I and Foulke went together, and Child's by himself to some who we thought were
quiet people. We proceeded on till about sunset, when we were going to the
house of one Singmaster, and as we turned down a lane, out from the road, we
heard somebody hallow to us: we stopped, and few it was John Fries and five men
more. We stopped, and they came walking toward us. John Fries was in the
front. Fries said that he had warned us not to proceed, and we would not hear,
and now they were come to take us prisoners. I believe I asked by what
authority: with that he made a grapple at the bridle of my horse; I wheeled ray
creature round, and he just catched hold of my great coat, but he could not
hold. I rode off then: after I had got about two rod, I turned my creature
round again; and he was a little way from the rest. I told him I was surprised
at his conduct, that he had behaved so. He began to damn and curse, and walked
back toward the other men: he mentioned that if he had a horse, he would soon
catch me.


ATTORNEY. Was he near his own house then?


WITNESS. He was about two or three miles from it.

I rode up nearer to those other men: they had stopped esquire Foulke: as Fries
returned back to his men, he said, men, let Foulke go as we cannot get Rodrick;
to morrow morning we will have him, I will have 700 men together to morrow, and
I will come to your house, and will let you know that we are opposed to the
law. We then went and took the assessment of Singmaster's house. We had agreed
before we left Jacob Fries's, that we would meet the principal assessor the
next morning, to see what course we should take.


Cross examination. Was Singmaster at home?


Yes. -- So we met: we said then that it was not worth while to attempt any
thing more, we could not proceed on. James Chapman then wrote a letter to the
commissioner to state matters. We then agreed to quit taking the rate at lower
Milford at that time, as we thought we should not be able to do any thing. When
we were going home through Quaker town (on the 6th of March) Cephas Child's rode
before us. I and 'squire Foulke rode together. When we came to Quaker town,
Child's turned into 'squire Griffith's: we found a great many people armed with
guns, and with uniforms, so I said to Foulke, here is Fries, and his company. I
said, we wont stop if we can help it: I rode through them, but when I had got
half through them, they hallowed to me to stop; a great many hallowed, and came
running on both sides the road, some with their clubs and muskets to strike me.


COURT. Did they strike you?


WITNESS. No, they did not, I rode quickly through them.


COURT. Did they strike at you?


I saw them running to come to strike. -- I had passed Roberts's tavern, and
when I come to Zeller's tavern, there was John Fries at the porch; he hallowed
to me to stop, for I was going to pass by, and not to stop and give myself up:
there was another man with me. They followed me to stop me: I stopped and
wheeled my creature round, and asked Fries what he wanted. They damned me, and
told me I should deliver myself up; I told him as long as he used such
language, I would not. There was order then given to fire at me.


COURT. Who gave the order?


That I cannot tell, but there was two men standing close together at Zeller's
door, they pointed their guns: as I saw that, I rode off.


Cross examination. Then, as you were so near, you can tell whether it was
Fries or not who ordered them to fire.


I did not hear him.


How far were you from the porch?


Five or six rod.


Were Fries and you face to face?


The other company were still coming up at this time: they hallowed them to
stop me. The last I heard was, they hallowed out to get horses to pursue me,
but they did not pursue me.


Cross examination. Had Fries, or the other people the gun at this time that
the order was given to fire?


I cannot say that Fries had any thing in his hand at that time, but the others
had clubs.


COURT. How far was Fries from you at that time?


I do not know: perhaps five or six rods. There was an old man standing with
him.


ATTORNEY. Have you seen that old man since?


Why, I thought I saw him, or some one like him the other day in the city. I
believe I have seen him in the court since the court began.


Before you met with Fries, did you meet with any opposition that day in taking
the rates for lower Milford?


Why they talked of giving us some, but still they gave it in: Nobody prevented
us.


Cross examination. Who made out the lists for the rates taken by you?


'Squire Foulke: -- there were a great many Germans, so I enquired, and Foulke
put it down.


When did you first know that the rates were not taken in lower Milford?


On the 16th of February.


Did you know of their being an intention of appointing Mr. Foulke before he
was appointed?


I do not know.


Was Foulke appointed on account of Clark's absence, or merely to go into that
township?


I understood he was appointed to assist Mr. Clarke: he was appointed by the
commissioner.


CEPHAS CHILD, qualified.

Were you one one of the assessors under the act for the valuation of houses?


Yes.


In what county?


In Bucks.


-- He here showed his warrant, and proved his qualification, dated November 5,
1798.

At the meeting at Roderick's when we were qualified, we had our instructions
given us by the commissioner: he informed us that there were six assessors to
twelve townships, which we were all equally concerned in assessing, and it
would be proper for us to point out which townships we would severally take. I
think this meeting was about the latter end of December. I made some
objections, because I could not talk the German language: they said that could
make no difference, because we were at liberty to call the others to assist us.
To that I assented, and we all agreed as to our districts: Milford and Richland
were assigned to Clark. I took Hill-town and New-Britain. I agreed reciprocally
with Clark to assist him, and he me, as he could talk German, and in Hill-town
there were many Germans. This was agreed in the presence of the whole, and
likewise Rodrick I made the same agreement with. I believe that this kind of
arrangement was generally made by the whole, to assist each other. Accordingly
Clark and myself fixed upon a day when I should come and assist him for two
days, and another time was appointed for him to assist me. I had made some
beginning in my own district before that day came. Before we separated, the
assessor pitched upon an early day to make our return of what we had done, in
order to examine whether we had proceeded right or not. I went up to Clark's
agreeable to appointment, and found he was not able to go on: I therefore
attended to my own district.


ATTORNEY. Why was he not able to go on?


He was sick and unable. -- We met to make our returns at Rodrick's Everhard
Foulke, I think, met with us, I know nothing of his appointment. This was on
the 5th day of the Bucks court (6th of February.) Not having gone through our
business, we were to meet on the 16th again. Foulke, I understood at the former
meeting, had been appointed. When we met, enquiry being made what we had done:
Foulke told James Chapman that he dared not go into the township, for he
understood that some threats were thrown out against him, and he rather wished
that the people would appoint some other person, themselves, to do it. The
commissioner did not seem to agree with it, but at last consented that if such
could be done, he should not materially object: finally, he consented so far as
to intimate to James Chapman, that if they should make such an offer, and
appoint one, he would recommend him, if not, he said we must go and assist in
that township. There were some proposals made who of us should go, excuses were
made, and then the commissioner informed us that we were all enjoined as much
to assess that township as our own. Upon which he told the principal assessor
that if it did not go on, he was to write to us, and we were to attend to the
call. I received a letter about the first of March, or the last of February
from the principal assessor, that he had been to Milford, and it did not seem
likely the assessments could go on, and I was ordered to meet the rest in
Quaker town on the 4th of March. Accordingly, Foulke the principal assessor and
myself met there. We had word from two others that they were not able to come.
We concluded to call upon Clark to go with us, and divide the township so as to
complete it in a short time. The next morning we met to begin the business, we
went to Clark's but he was not at home. It was agreed then that we should go on
with the rates, and James Chapman was to go to Jacob Fries's to wait for Clark.
The first house we went into was Daniel Wiedner's, I went in first, and told
him I was come to take down the rates, under the revenue act of the United
States: he appeared to be very angry; I reasoned with him, telling him, if he
wished to read the law he might: I told him the consequences of opposition, but
he might have ten days to consider of it, and give in his account if he chose
to take that time. He seeing me thus said, "take it now since it must be done,"
he gave me his account accordingly, and appeared contented. He said farther,
"we have concluded not to take it, as we expect the act will be repealed." He
meant they had concluded not to take till they knew what Congress would do with
the law. I made reply to him that I believed that was already done, for I had
seen a report of a committee of Congress, that it was inexpedient to repeal it,
and it was not done.


COURT. Did he offer to read the law?


No. He made some remarks, but I told him it was very wrong. I cannot tell what
he said in particular. One thing I think was, that the assessors were to have
very extravagent wages. "It does not matter," he said, "you may as well give in
my return." I did not get on my horse till I got up to Mitchell's where the
other two assessors were. Widener went out a little before me, and he was there
when I came, walking about, seemingly very angry; I again reasoned with him.
Another objection he made was, that the houses of high value was to pay
nothing, while smaller ones, and of small value was to pay high. I forgot to
say that after the rates of Wiedner's land was taken he returned and said he
had forgot, there was another piece of land: he then sat down with an heavy
sigh and said. "They will play the devil with me; what shall we do." I asked
him what he meant, he made no answer. I told him I hoped every one would be as
well convinced as he was. I took several houses in my way, and went to Jacob
Fries's. As I was going in at the door, I met John Fries, who shook hand with
me, told me he was glad to see we, and asked me to take a drink. He came in
again after we had done dinner and said "I forbid you going to any other houses
in the township: he then mentioned that Foulke and Chapman, or Rodrick were men
he much esteemed. He said if we did go to any other houses, we should be, or
would be, hurt. We then proceeded to assess. Where English people lived there
appeared no objection, except at one place. The people there said, that if they
did give in the account, there were some ordinary people in the neighborhood,
and they would be set on by them to do them an injury. That afternoon I went to
David Roberts's: his wife seemed very anxious, and wished her husband had been
there, for she said I should not go home alive. I went afterward when he was
at home, and he said he had no objection, only for his neighbors. After some
conversation he said the people there had agreed not to let the rates be taken
yet: he said they had already chosen an assessor in their own township: I told
him I wandered they did not let him go on: he signified that he was a person of
an obnoxious character, and therefore they did not wish to accept of him. In
our return home, I called at 'Squire Griffith's: as I got often my horse, his
wife told me that they were come there to take us, and that there were 40 or 50
men there, and she did not know what they were about. A little girl just after
came in and said that they had hold of 'Squire Foulke's horse by the bridle,
going to take him: I went to the window, and saw them all round him. I did
purpose to go out, but at their persuasion I staid. The little girl came in
again, and said they had taken Mr. Foulke into Enoch Roberts's tavern. After a
short time Fries came over into the house where I was sitting: he took me by
the band, and I rose up; he said, Mr. Child's, you must go with me to my men, as
we walked along he said "I told you yesterday that you should not go to another
house, and if you did you would be hurt, and we are now come to take you
prisoner, if we find that you will go on with the assessments." My answer was,
we are obliged to fulfill our office, and we cannot do otherwise, unless we are
prevented. I was endeavoring to inform him of the manner in which I had
obtained the warrant, in hopes that I should prevail upon him to go on with the
business, as Roberts had proposed, but he would not hear me. When we went into
the house. he addressed himself to his men and me: "here are my men" -- "here
is one of them."


COURT. By this it appeared that he had the direction. Did he seem angry?


He appeared to be angry, but he did not appear to show any revenge to me, or
to talk angry. -- I do not recollect that I knew any one in the house, except
the tavern keeper. Some of them soon began to use rough language. A person then
came behind me, and caught me by the collar over the shoulder, and said, "damn
you Rodrick, we have got you now, "damn you, you shall go to the liberty pole
and dance round it;" the house was then crowded as full as it could crowd, and
they pushed me up so close, that I could not turn round sometimes for a
considerable time: the person who caught me, seemed to wish to keep behind me,
but he still kept hold of me: during this time I had several thumps, which
seemed, more with the knee than the fist. After some time he got to see my
face: he damned me that I was not Rodrick, but that I was the other damned son
of a bitch that he saw sitting at Rock hill, he had mistaken me. A short time
after this, a person came up to me and said "keep a good heart, and you will
not be hurt." I turned, or endeavored to turn to them and said, "I am not
Rodrick, nor did I ever assess in Rock hill:" he said "you are a damned liar."
With that there were still more of them came up, and pressed about me more, and
more took hold of me. There was a good deal of talk, some in German, and some
in English. I then told them that my name was Cephas Child's; that I was not a
man known in the county, but I had no doubt many of them, though they did not
know my face, knew my name: by that there was some who knew me there as Coroner
of the county; that man then said "if he is Child's, he is no better than the
other." He asked me where I assessed: I told him: a number of them asked how
they liked it where I had been. I told them some of them had appeared
dissatisfied in the first instance, but as I believed, every man almost in the
townships where I assessed were satisfied, they again said I was a damned liar,
for the people had told them that they would join them in the suppression of
it, and my own neighbors would fight against me. I told them I thought I knew
better than they; that if I was well informed they would not do so. then they
began again at me. Then they asked me if I had taken the oath of allegiance to
the United States of America: I told them I had: they asked me when: I told
them I could not recollect the time, but I knew it was as soon as the law
required it of me: they asked me if I was a friend to the government of the
United States; I told them I was: they then began to damn the government, and
the governor, and shoved me about, many of them taking their Maker's name in
vain: there then was a person who spoke very good English: they damned the
house tax and the stamp act, and called me a stampler repeatedly: they damned
the alien law and sedition law, and finally all the laws: the government and
all the laws the present Congress had made. They damned the Constitution also.


What Constitution?


They did not mention what Constitution, whether of this state or of the United
States. They damned the Congress, and damned the president and all the friends
to government, because they were all tories, for that none were friends to the
present government except tories. They asked me if I had been out in the last
war: first I told them the law did not require me to go, and then I said I was
under the tuition of my parents: they said they had fought for liberty, and
would fight for it again. They said they would not have the government, nor the
President, and they would not live under such a damned government: "we will
have Washington;" others said "No, we will have Jefferson, he is a better man
than Adams: huzza for Jefferson."


Who said so?


All of them. -- They then insisted on my taking an oath of allegiance to them,
alleging that if I did so, I should not be hurt. They insisted on it several
times, till at length I had no way to wave it, and then I asked them what their
government was. One answered Washington: I said I had taken an oath of
allegiance to Washington's government already. They then said Jefferson; we
will have none of the damned ^^amplers, nor the house tax. So they went on.
They said they embodied themselves to oppose the government; they meant to do
it, and that was their design in coming there.


Who said so, and what were the precise words?


I do not know who said it, but the words were these "We are determined to
oppose the laws, and we have met to do it; the government is laying one thing
after another, and if we do not oppose it, they will bring us into bondage and
slavery, or make slaves of us: we will have liberty." And then they mentioned
the number of men that had joined them, or sent them word that they would join
them. They mentioned, some an hundred, some more, some less, that they had
there would do it, besides, they had all Northampton county to a man would join
them, except some tories as they called them. Between Quaker town and Delaware
river, I recollect they said they could raise 10,000 men if they should be
wanted to oppose the sedition and alien laws. I cannot be certain, but I think
he said (as he spoke in German) and fifty other damned laws. However I am not
certain as to the number. They likewise said that General Washington had sent
them account that he had 20, 000 men all ready to assist them in this
undertaking to oppose the laws. I begged them not to believe it, for it could
not be, and somebody was endeavoring greatly to impose upon them: I thought I
knew the situation of things better, and as for General Washington, I was sure
he never would undertake such conduct as that.


JURY. Did they speak in the German language at that time, or English?


A great many of them spoke in German, but one or two of them spoke very good
English, but they were altogether Germans. This passed while I was in custody.


Cross examination. What do you mean?


WITNESS. Why Fries took me in there and left me in custody and went away.


COURT. Did he order them to keep you in custody?


Not that I know of. -- They said Genesis Washington had certainly wrote to them
so and so. One of them said he would be damned if it was not so, for he had
seen the letter from Washington; or something to that effect. During this time
they were constantly pushing me; one would come to my back and get his knee up:
they would endeavor to push me on the stove, one or two had hold of my hips
and endeavored to throw me down, others seemed ready to lick me, and
particularly after this conversation about Washington. About that time Captain
Fries came toward me and seemed very much surprised: He said, Mr. Child, I
understand some of my men have abused and insulted you. He really did appear to
be very serious; he said he would not allow me to be abused; he appeared to be
really distressed for the usage I had received, and if I would tell him who it
was, he said he would make him behave himself. He then told me to come into the
room. He said he respected me, and did not wish me to be abused. I told him I
thought it hard that he should leave me amongst a parcel of intoxicated people.
I do not particularly recollect what I said, but he told me he hoped I would
not impute that conduct to him: I told him I was not much injured, and
therefore hoped he would not think about it. He said his men were civil men,
and seemed to wonder such a thing had happened. I think he then gave me
something to drink. He took me into a room, the farthest side of which seemed
to be empty. When I got in there, he demanded my papers while I had been an
assessor. While he was with me no person insulted me, indeed some of them, when
he came forward into the room where I was pushed off, out of the way. I then
told him all that I had done, and reasoned with him, but notwithstanding that,
he insisted on my papers; I then told him I had no papers about me relative to
the assessment.


Cross examination. Who were in the room at the time the request was made for
the papers?


I do not recollect any body particularly, but there were a great many crowded
into the room after me. -- He insisted that I had the papers, I told him I had
not got the papers, he said I had, and he would have them. I told him I had no
papers about me, but what related to my onice of Coroner. I was going to
deliver up to him my county tax papers, but he said I had other papers, I said
I had not. He then looked on those I had given him, and saw Hilltown at the
top, then he said Hoho! my boys, we have got what we wanted, and then turned
about and went away. He left the pocket book, taking the papers with him. There
was a considerable huzza made, and they most of them followed him out of the
room. They were gone but a few minutes till they rushed in again as hard as
they could rush, without Fries, and some got hold of me. They brought Daniel
Weidner along with them: some had pistols, guns, clubs, Sec. and some swords.
They seemed very angry, and were pushing upon me while some endeavored to put
them off. Wiedner came up to me, and insisted on the return of the rate I took
of him yesterday, he said he would have it. I desired him just to acknowledge
to the truth, Did not he give it me freely yesterday: this while a person had
hold of me, some of them stepped up and said it was fair. I then asked him, did
I not say I would not take the measure of your house by force, but you gave me
the rates with a free will? Yes, he said, but I was not forced, and therefore I
want it again. Some of them then went out, and directly others came in and
shook me very hard: one came in and threatened me, and said I should be shot;
some brought in their guns and showed them to me, and told me if I should be
seen in Milford township on the business, I should be shot.


Weider went off. This person with the sword threatened a good deal.


ATTORNEY. Who was he?


He was called Marks, the elder. I believe him to be the same man I have seen
here. -- While I was in this conversation, William Thomas came forward and said
he knew me, and that they should not abuse me. That gave me an opportunity of
talking farther, and then I reasoned with them of the bad tendency of such
conduct, and told them that I really thought if I had the law with me, I should
persuade them to allow of it. One of them who had abused me before, came to me
and acknowledged he had abused me, and was sorry for it, and wished me to
forgive him. I think his name was Smith, but I am not sure. After passing some
time in conversation, Fries came back again with the transcript, and delivered
it me, and told me as near as I can recollect in these words; I must go home,
and must never come back again to assess, or I should be shot, and insisted on
my promising I would not do it. My reply was, that from the pains I had taken,
I had left the township with a view of not returning to it, unless compelled by
authority, and from their present treatment, if they ever catched me going back
without that authority, I would give them leave to shoot me. He then told me,
Foulke and you may inform the government what has been done as soon as you
please, we can raise 1000 men in one day, and we will not submit to it.


Did they say they were opposed to all the laws?


They said there were a number of laws they were opposed to, and one of those
laws was now putting in execution, and they appeared to think if that was
stopped, the others would be. This was how I understood it. The words were that
they were determined to oppose the laws, and not let them be put into
execution; there were so many laws coming on it was time to stop them, and if
they were known to oppose them, they expected the others would not be brought
forwards.


Cross examination. Was Fries present when these words were used?


No.


Monday, May 6.
JUDGE PETER'S (one of the Bench) sworn.

ATTORNEY. Will your honor please to give the Jury an account of the
circumstances of your issuing warrants in Northampton county, and of
circumstances within your knowledge previous to the examination of John Fries
on the 6th of April.


WITNESS. The first time I heard officially of this uneasiness in the counties
of Bucks, Northampton and Montgomery, was sometime in February, I cannot
precisely recollect what time. I had heard of it before as a piece of news, but
this was the first time I heard it officially: it was by depositions being sent
to me by the attorney of the district (Mr. Sitgreaves) relative to a number of
persons. After that I examined some witnesses relative to it, and upon the
whole I concluded to issue my warrants against the parties charged. Being much
engaged in the district court, the attorney of the district drew up the form of
the warrants for my signature and approbation. We had concluded, by way of case
to the people, that these warrants should be drawn up in a form of order for
the defendant to appear before some justice of the peace, or judge of the
county in order to give bail for their appearance at the circuit court of the
United States. Neither of us then knew of those insurgents, as it turned out
afterward to have got to such a head. But I doubted myself of the propriety of
the form and substance of the warrants, because I thought that the justice, or
judge before whom bail was taken, ought to be acquainted with the whole case,
and ought to have the proof of the fact before him, on which the proof of the
warrant was found. I had some doubt too, whether it was legally right for
persons taken by my warrants to go before an inferior magistrate. For though a
justice of the peace of any state has a right by the laws of the United States
to take cognizance in the first instance of crimes against the United States,
and bind over the offenders to the proper court, yet I did not think that, as
such justice had not had the original cognizance of the matter, there would be
a propriety in my ordering him to take secondary notice of it. While I was
hesitating on this point, I received information of the length to which, at
that time, this opposition to the law had arrived. I doubted very much, and
this thought was afterward clearly confirmed to me, whether the magistrates of
those counties, and particularly Northampton, would choose to take cognizance
of such offenses, or would chose to do any business concerning them. There were
two of the magistrates, one of them a justice of the peace, the other a state
judge, who had done themselves much honor in persevering so far as they did in
endeavoring to bring those criminals to justice. But finally it turned out
that they were obliged to abandon even every endeavor toward executing this
business. So that the law, and the public authority, so far failed as it
respected that county, that the judicial authority of the United States became
entirely prostrate. I found that tome of the very persons who were charged
before me were magistrates, and I wish I could (...) that they were the only
magistrates who were engaged in this business. (...) were the reasons that
induced me to alter the form of my warrants. I found that too many magistrates
were concerned in flattering the prejudices of the people, and engaging in
seditions practices, and encouraging the people in their mistakes for me to
trust them, and I finally found that there were but two magistrates that could
be depended upon, and they told me that they were insulted in the performance
of their duty for the United States: of this I had good evidence. And farther:
it arrived to such a pitch that I could not get one of these gentlemen even to
issue a subpoena to examine witnesses, and save them the great trouble and
expense of coming before me. This was the opinion of those two gentlemen; one
of them wrote me, and the other informed me, that they were afraid to perform
such an act. They could not only not get persons to serve the process, but they
could not get the witnesses to appear before them. This I do not bring as a
charge against any particular person, but as a reason why the warrants were
thus issued. Another reason was that those people had taken up the fallacious
notion that they would not appear before me, and therefore I thought it best,
though this should not have been my leading motive, to convince them that every
person in this district ought to obey a warrant issued by me, and appear at
such time and place as I directed; the whole district being to be considered
the same as a county in respect to a state.


The witness then produced the warrants, dated February 20, 1799. One of which
was read.

The marshal wrote to me official statements at sundry times of the
difficulties he met with, and at one time informed me that the prisoners had
been rescued, by force of arms, from his possession. The account he gave me it
is unnecessary to state, being much similar to what has been given in evidence:
He took some engagement from those prisoners, particularly those of Lehi
township, that they would appear before me, which, the prisoners themselves
told me, was cheerfully given. I understood from them, and other channels, that
they several times attempted to come down before me and deliver themselves up,
but they were prevented by persons who interrupted them, and would not let them
come.


ATTORNEY. Was John Fries brought before you after you got up there?


Yes: I had previously issued my warrant against him.


Was this the examination he signed in your presence?


[Showing the witness Fries's confession] which was as follows:

The examination of John Fries -- 6th April 1799.
The examinant confesses that he was on the party which rescued the prisoners
from the marshal at Bethlehem: that he was also one of a party that took from
the assessors at Quaker town, their papers, and forewarned them against the
execution of their duty in making the assessments. The papers were delivered
with the consent of the assessors, but without force; perhaps under the awe and
terror of the numbers who demanded them, and were by this examined and
delivered to the assessors. He confesses that at the house of Jacob Fries, a
paper was written on the evening preceding the rescue of the prisoners at
Bethlehem, containing an association agreement of the subscribers to march for
the purpose of making that rescue, but he is not certain whether he wrote that
paper: He knows he did not sign it, but it was subscribed by many persons, and
delivered to the examinant: -- He does not know where that paper is -- The
examinant confesses also, that some weeks ago, he wrote (before the assessors
came into that township) an agreement which he, with others signed, purporting
that, if an assessment must be made, they would not agree to have it done by a
person who did not reside in the township, but that they would choose their own
assessor within their township -- A meeting has been held in the township since
the affair at Bethlehem, for the purpose of making such a choice: the examinant
went to the place of election, but left it before the election opened. -- The
examinant further acknowledges that his motive in going to Bethlehem to rescue
the prisoners was not from personal attachment, of regard to any of the persons
who had been arrested, but proceeded from a general aversion to the law, and an
(...) to (...) and prevent its execution. He thought that the acts for the
(...) and collection of a direct tax did not impose the quota (...) citizens,
and therefore was wrong. He cannot say who originally pro^^cted the rescue of
the prisoners, or assembled the people for the purpose -- (...) township seemed
to be all of one mind; a man unknown to the (...) came to Quaker town and said
the people should meet at Conrad (...)'s to go to Millar's town. The examinant
says that on the march of (...) people to Bethlehem, he was asked to take the
lead, and did ride on (...) the people until they arrived at Bethlehem -- The
examinant had no (...) took no command, except that he desired the people not
to fire (...) should give them orders, for he was afraid, as they were so much
(...), that there would be blood shed. -- He begged them for God's sake (...)
to fire, unless they had orders from him, or unless he should be shot do (...)
and then they might take their own command. -- That he returned (...) papers of
the assessors which had been delivered into his hands, back to (...) asessors
privately, at which the people were much enraged, and suspected him (Fries) of
having turned from them, and threatened to shoot (...) between the house of
Jacob Fries and Quaker town.

JOHN FRIES.
Taken 6th April, 1799, before RICHARD PETER'S.

WITNESS. It is my constant practice to tell (...) prisoner that he is not
bound to be evidence against himself: I did not make any promise or threats to
extort it from him, but he chose to make a voluntary confession, which if they
do not choose to do, I commit t^^m without it. I am particularly delicate on
this subject of confession, and I do not like to encourage it.


JUDGE IREDELL. The gentlemen of the jury will observe that the law requires a
judge to examine a prisoner, and it is left quite at the option of the man to
confess or not.

The council for the prisoner hoped, as it was a case of treason, upon which
the law and constitution was extremely cautious how evidence was admitted, the
jury would consider that proof of the overt act must be given by two witnesses
independent of any confession the prisoner might make.


WITNESS. The prisoner appeared to me to be not at all disinclined: his manner
was that of a man not having done any thing wrong, but perfectly collected, and
possessed of his faculties. It was read to him afterward, to which he
accorded, and, thinking a part not fully enough explained, added the latter
part. -- I have now brought it to my recollection that there were three
magistrates in that county, instead of two, to whom we were peculiarly indebted
for assistance.


Cross examination. Were any others applied to besides those three?


Some were, but we found much disinclination to do the business, and herefore
thought it quite unnecessary to apply farther.


JUDGE HENRY, again called.

He was asked his situation, and the particulars of the opposition being such
as either to disable, or affright the magistrate from their duty.

He deposed that he was an associate judge of the common pleas for the state.
He issued a number of subpoeneas about the 15th of January to make some
enquiries respecting the opposition to the tax law; these were issued at the
instance of Mr. Eyerly, one of the commission (...) and others could not
proceed in the execution of their duty and particularly in Lehi township. The
witnesses generally appeared much afraid at opening themselves: and he could
say that among the people, there were many much opposed to the law. I agreed to
meet a number of persons at Trexler's, commonly known as Trexler's town: there
captain Jarrett appeared with a part of his company of light horse. Shortly
after the arrival of Mr. Eyerly, Mr. Balliott and myself, the people seemed to
be walking about, and looking in at the ^indow, and seemed to make game at us,
and mouths: I observed Hen^^ Shiffert in particular; -- they were mostly in
uniform.

ATTORNEY. Was it muster day?


No: I understood it was the several conversation there that Jarrett meant to
display his consequence, (...) to intimidate.


Cross examination. Who did (...) hear this from, was it from the light horse?


No: I believe, it was from Mr. Trexler.


ATTORNEY. Did the witnesses be afraid?


Yes, one man in particular appeared to be in great terror: when he was called
up to give his testimony, he cried like a child, and begged for God's sake that
we would not ask him, for that the people would ruin him when he returned home.
Indeed all the witnesses were much agitated.


Did you or did you not discover a general opposition to the execution of this
law?


Yes, I did.


COURT. Was you not apprehensive of danger?


Yes I was (...) the threats which were given.


Do you imagine there were any magistrates in the county that went so far as
you?


Yes, several of them.


Cross examination. How many witnesses did you take the examination of, at
Trexler's?


I think eight or nine.


Did they do any thing to injure you except make mouths at you?


No, I sent for the captain, and requested him to keep his men in order, for
all I wanted was to examine witnesses. There was no farther than, insult
offered to us. -- The captain assured me, he would do all that lay in his power.


Cross examination. How far is Trexler's from lower Milford in Bucks?


Ten or twelve miles. -- From Lehi to lower Milford? Thirty. -- From Hamilton
to lower Milford? Thirty one. -- From Bethlehem to lower Milford Sixteen. Upper
Milford in Northampton, and lower Milford in Bucks join each other.


JACOB STERNHER, sworn.

Testimony translated.

ATTORNEY. Where do you live?


In Macungy.


Do you recollect any talk in your township of the assessors coming there to
measure houses?


Yes, it was said that they were to measure them.


How long ago?


They talked in the winter about it.


What was the talk in your neighborhood respecting the conduct of Millar's
town, when the assessors came there to measure the houses?


I was told that one man (inadmissible)


What was the general talk?


I never went into company, and therefore I cannot say what it was.


When were the houses measured in Macungy?


About three weeks ago they begun to measure.


Do you know if any houses were measured before the army went up into that
country?


Not that I know of in that township.


Was you at Trexler's before judge Henry?


Yes.


Did you hear any threats against judge Henry, Mr. Eyerly and Mr. Balliott by
the people there?


No, I did not.


Were there any there, who said they would come to harm, if they continued
measuring the houses?


No, I did not hear any.


Did you hear any of the people say, while those gentlemen were there, that the
assessors should not come to measure their houses?


Yes, I heard some people say that they were not willing to have their houses
measured yet, and they wished it to be told to those gentlemen.


Was you not desired by the people in Millar's town to inform the assessors
that they should not come into that township to make the assessment, or he
would be hurt, or meet with an accident?


Yes, a man told me to tell the assessor so.


Did the person say any thing about pistols and a sword?


Yes, he desired me to tell the assessor that there was a man there who had
pistols and a sword.


Who did he say the man was?


He did not mention who.


Mr. CHAPMAN and Mr. CHILD'S were called again at the suggestion of Mr. Dallas
to be asked how the measurement of a house was taken?

It was always in every instance given by the owner, we never measured any
houses. Size, length and breadth was told us, or the proprietor had ten days to
send it in: we left a note for those people that were not at home.


Did the people who were at home in Milford mention the dimensions of their
houses?


Yes.


Mr. Chapman proved the letter which was mentioned in his evidence to have been
written by him to the commissioner.

Mr. Sitgreaves produced and read the warrants under which those persons at
Bethlehem were held: also the commission from the President of the United
States, appointing one of the commissioners under that act.

Mr. EYERLY again called.

Cross examination. How far did Fox live from lower Milford?


In lower Sochon township; about ten miles.


How were the principal and assistant assessors appointed?


At the time I received the notice from the first commissioner that was
appointed in the commission, the commissioners were to meet at Reading on the
22d of October. After a board were met, every commissioner was desired to make
a plan of his division, and to divide it into such a suitable number of
assessment districts, as to have the law executed in a reasonable time: at the
same time each commissioner was requested to make out lists of persons
qualified for the office of assessors in each division. As soon as this was
done, as the law gives a power to the Secretary of the Treasury to reduce the
number of assessors if too large, the clerk made cut a list, and sent it to the
Secretary of the Treasury; a list was also entered in the Commissioners book.
Some few alterations were made in some districts afterward, but at the time
the board was sitting. After this was done, the form of the warrant was agreed
upon by the Commissioners, and ordered to be printed. They were then filled up,
and every warrant signed by all the Commissioners. A rule was then adopted to
call all the assessors together in each district, and the Commissioners was to
meet and qualify them and give them instructions.


Mr. DALLAS. I presume a record was kept, where is it.


I do not know; it was left in possession of the clerk, he lives at Reading.


After the proclamation was issued by the President, was there not a meeting of
the Commissioners with the assessors in some townships?


I do not know.


Has there, to your knowledge, been any resistance to the operation of the law
since the issuing of the proclamation?


I do not know of any -- I was in Philadelphia.


ATTORNEY. Was the country in a pacific state, except where the army matched.


No. -- After the President had issued his proclamation I wrote up to the
principal assessor in Northampton county, and to Mr. Balliot, to request them
to go on, and have their returns made in a certain time, and to give notice to
all the other assessors so to do. I received answer an from Mr. Balliott that
he had received information that it was impossible to do the business in the
execution of the law.


ATTORNEY. Did you endeavor to get the business executed?


Yes.


Did you succeed?


No.


Did you attribute it to the neglect of the assessors?


No.


To JUDGE PETER'S.

ATTORNEY. Did you not discover manifest signs of terror coming from the
districts where the army had not marched?


WITNESS. Yes, in many instances, some very strong, it was even attempted to
raise troops to oppose the army if they went up. There were one or two
instances of testimony given to me that troops were endeavored to be raised,
and nothing, I believe, but the rapidity of the progress of the troops
prevented its execution. I did believe that unless the army had gone through
the whole country, there would have been the most atrocious instances of
violence.


Did not some of the witnesses give their testimony under great reluctance,
owing to fear?


Yes, I had, in some instances, to state the protection of the United States,
and their determination to lay hold of persons who should threaten, in order to
stimulate them: some said, after they had given their testimony, that they were
afraid to go home. I can really say, that, in general, they were the most
unwilling witnesses I had ever examined. I got evidence that some of them were
forming associations for actually opposing the troops. One man was even afraid
because I was in his house, asking for some refreshment, as, he said, he should
be suspected for harboring me; however, after I had expressed my own security,
he seemed satisfied.


Mr. Dallas gave notice that, though they wished to give as little trouble on
the part of the defendant as possible, yet he should produce two or three
witnesses in order to show that this indisposition, which was manifested to
permit the assessment, was owing to the uncertainty those people were in, of
the real existence of the law, and that the prisoner himself had declared that
it was no law, and that they had no idea of opposing Congress by force of arms,
but that they wished for time, in order to ascertain its real existence, and if
the law was actually in force, that they wished, agreeable to their former
custom, to appoint assessors from their own respective townships: also we mean
to show that Fries was perfectly acquiescent after the proclamation, and that
Mitchel was entirely mistaken as to the expressions said to be used by Fries at
the meeting at Conrad Marks's. However, as we wish to have time previously to
examine the witnesses we mean to bring, we shall not be able to produce them at
this stage of the trial.

Mr. RAWLE, then opened the constitutional definition of treason, as consisting
of only two parts: "levying war against the United States, and aiding the
enemies of the United States." As it is only the first of these species of
treason the prisoner is charged with, it is only necessary to ascertain what is
meant by levying war against the United States. Mr. Sitgreaves has stated that,
levying war against the United States consisted, not only in a broad sense of
rebellion openly manifested, with an avowed intention of subverting the
government and constitution of the country, but also with force of arms, or by
numbers sufficient for that purpose, to cause an impression of terror: these,
either one, or all together, used to prevent the execution of the laws, or of
any particular law of the United States from motives, not of a special but of a
general nature -- is treason. This position I believe is perfectly correct, and
has already received the sanction of a court of the United States, respecting
the insurrection in the western parts of Pennsylvania. See a Dallas 348.
Mitchel's case -- This doctrine is laid down in terms short and concise and is
such as is founded on the particular authority of all the writers on English
law.

Page 355. Bradford -- attorney. The design of the meeting was avowedly to
oppose the execution of the excise law; to overawe the government; to involve
others in the guilt of the insurrection; to prevent the punishment of the
delinquents, etc.

Patterson (Justice) -- The first question to be considered is, what was the
general object of the insurrection? If its object was to suppress the excise
offices, and to prevent the execution of an act of Congress, by force and
intimidation, the offense, in legal estimation, is high treason; it is an
usurpation of the authority of the government; it is high treason by levying
war. Taking the testimony in a rational and connected point of view, this was
the object. It was of a general nature, and of a national concern.

Let us attend, for a moment, to the evidence. With what view was the attack
made on General Neville's house? Was it to gratify a spirit of revenge against
him as a private citizen, as an individual? No: -- as a private citizen he had
been highly esteemed and beloved; it was only by becoming a public officer,
that he became obnoxious, and it was on account of his holding the excise
office alone, that his house had been assailed, and his person endangered. --
They were arrayed in a military manner; they affected the military forms of
negotiation by a flag; they pretended no personal hostility on General Neville;
but they insisted on the surrender of his commission. Can there be a doubt,
then, that the object of the insurrection was of a general and public nature.

Page 340. Patterson (Justice) in the charge against Rigol.

With respect to the intention, there is not, unhappily, the slightest
possibility of doubt: To suppress the office of excise, in the fourth Survey of
this state; and particularly, in the present instance, to compel the
resignation of Wells the excise officer, so as to render null and void, in
effect, an act of Congress, constituted the apparent, the avowed object of the
insurrection. Combining these facts and this design, the crime is high treason.

This you will perceive, gentlemen of the Jury, is not preventing the execution
of all the laws, or all the authority of the government, but of " an act of
Congress." It is an usurpation of the authority of the government, and thus it
is levying war, and is high treason. Taking it in this point of view, this was
the very object of the insurgents at Northampton, and was of a public, of a
general, and not of a private or special nature. In the case I referred to, the
prisoner acted different from the prisoner at the Bar; he acted in a
subordinate station; he does not appear to be a first character in that
treasonable enterprise.

Gentlemen, the law thus laid down by the court upon that occasion was derived
from the English authorities to which I shall now refer you. 4. Blackstone, p.
81. defines that branch of treason of which we are now treating -- "Levying war
against the King (substitute here the U. States for King) is, pulling down all
enclosures, meeting houses, prisons or brothels" -- Although bawdy houses are
illegal, yet by any individuals not authorized, taking the authority which
alone is vested in the government, it is an usurpation of the authority, and
the act being of a general, and not of a special nature, is treason. Lord Chief
Justice Hale, whose name will ever be endeared by the piety, the humanity, and
the found legal learning which characterised him, has a chapter upon this
subject of levying war against the King. 1. Hales pleas page 105. He says to
march with colors flying, drums beating, etc. if on a matter of a public or
general nature, is high treason, but if on a private quarrel or for a private
purpose, it is not treason. Treason in levying war, by this definition,
consists of two sorts. First, marching expressly, or directly against the
King's forces: secondly, interpretatively, or obstructively; doing a thing of a
general nature. Page 133. If to pull down a particular enclosure, it is only a
riot, but if to pull down all enclosures, it is levying war against the King,
because it is generally against the King's laws.

Foster, p. 211. Insurrections in order to throw down all enclosures, to alter
the established law or change religion, to inhance the price of all labor or
to open all prisons -- all ris^ngs in order to effect these innovations of a
public and general concern by an armed force, are, in construction of law, high
treason, within the clause of levying war. Insurrections, likewise, for the
reformation of real or imaginary evils of a public nature, and in which the
insurgents have no special interest, -- risings to effect these ends by force
and numbers, are, by construction of law, within the clause of levying war.

1. Hawkins, Chap. xvii. Sect. xxiii. p. 37. is much to the same effect.
Douglass, 570. in the case of Lord G. Gordon. The case there on the part of the
prosecution was an attempt to force the repeal of an act of Parliament, and
this was called high treason, although the defendant was not convicted. Keyling
p. 70. on the case of Messenger, Appletree and others, and 75, ibid.

It will probably be said by the defendant's Council that this should be simply
considered as a rescuing prisoners from the custody of the Marshal, and that is
not treason, and that a number of crimes of a less degree must be committed in
order to make it treason, as Arson, Burglary, and Murder. But I would observe,
that when these crimes are committed, one or more of them, they are not
component parts of treason, but they lose their qualities and their name in the
absorbing crime -- treason. So when general Nevil's house was burnt, it was
said only to amount to Arson: to that it was answered by Judge Patterson, were
it not for the treasonable purpose with which this was done, it would be so,
but the guilt rose to treason in the intention. Admitting it is a crime, and
worthy of a punishment, the question is, whether, or not, it must be considered
as one of the means made use of to obtain the end in view. 1. Hale 133. If a
man break open prison, except where a person is convicted for treason, it was
ruled to be only a great riot: if several were rescued thereby, it was a riot
and (...), except those persons rescued were convicted for treason, and where
it was without any particular view to the persons themselves, and where the
prisoners were unknown, then the rescue becomes a part of the treasonable act,
and that, with other facts constitutes ^e person guilty of treason. In 4
Blackstone you will find an answer to what Mr. Dallas said this morning ought
to be in favor of the prisoner: to wit, an ignorance of the existence of the
law.

Suppose every man who would profess himself ignorant of the existence of a law
was exculpated from the observance of it, or from the consequences of breaking
it, to what would that doctrine lead! It would be for the interest of every man
who wished to oppose a law, to keep himself under the shelter of this want of
knowledge, in order that he might sin with impunity -- without knowing it. This
is a mistaken fact, and an error in point of law. I make these observations,
not because I suppose that the defense will be seriously set up, or that, did
it exist, you would be in the least guided by it, but under the impression that
when you come to examine all the facts, you will discover that it was not so.

Unless these points which I have laid down are controverted, I shall not
trouble you with more points of law, and shall leave the observations I am
farther to make, to a later period of the case.


MR. DALLAS.
May it please your Honors: GENTLEMEN OF THE JURY,
IT has become so uncommon in the state of Pennsylvania to be employed in a
cause, upon the issue of which the life of a fellow creature depends that, I am
confident, the court and jury, as well as the council on both sides, are
prepared to give a solemn, candid and patient attention to the present
investigation. It is, gentlemen, a question of Life or Death; and if what we
have heard is true, that the prisoner is a husband, and a father, it is a
question whose importance extends beyond his own life, to the existence and
well-being of a miserable family. If I should manifest therefore, an
extraordinary solicitude to secure the attention of the jury, as long as the
occasion shall require, these considerations would, I think, furnish a
sufficient excuse: yet, permit me to add to my justification another remark. It
is not only the life of John Fries, and the well-being of his family, that are
at stake on this trial, but, we all know, that the impressions made on your
minds, and communicated to the public by your verdict, may reach the lives and
families of many more unhappy men now under indictments for a similar crime. I
must confess, that I feel agitated by the prospect: for, if it appears so
awful, so interesting, as it evidently does, to the court and audience, how
must it affect us who are the council for the prisoner, charged with the
developement of every principle and of every fact, that can tend to an
acquital? As it relates to the Council for the prosecution, the difficulties
are comparatively small. They have had an opportunity amply to explore all the
facts; to calculate the effects to be produced, and to point their testimony
precisely to the object of the charge. We, who are council for the prisoner,
are ignorant of the man and of his connections. Till you were impannelled, we
knew nothing of the evidence to support the prosecution; and could; therefore,
be little prepared to encounter and repel it, Besides, in all our enquiries for
the means of defense, as well as in our examination of the witnesses, we have
been embarrassed by the foreign language in which the parties have spoken. That
some of you, however, as well as the opposite council understand the German,
has been a source of consolation to us; for, it is your province to decide on
the facts.

But these are not the only obstacles which we have to encounter. I am sure I
shall not be misunderstood when I say, that the prosecution appears to be
strongly marked with the authority and influence of government.

It is, I grant, incumbent upon the government to exercise its powers ^or the
punishment of crimes; but it is essential to a fair discussion of every
accusation, that the acts of the government should not be estimated as proofs
of the prisoner's guilt. Thus, though you find by the proclamation of the
President (which, doubtless, he thought, with a wife and upright intention, was
required by the extraordinary circumstances of the times) that the disturbances
in Northampton were deemed overt acts of treason by his advisers; and though
this denunciation was followed by the march of a considerable army for the
express purpose of subduing and apprehending the traitors; you will recollect,
that you are to decide whether treason has been committed, from the evidence of
the witnesses, and not from the opinions of the government. Again: great
inconveniences have been experienced by many meritorious citizens, who
relinquished the pursuits of business, and the pleasures of domestic life, to
assist in the suppression of the insurgents; but you will not allow the
irritation and resentment proceeding from this source, to transfer from your
judgments to your passions, the determination of the cause. Far be it from me
to contend that outrages have not been committed, which are disreputable to the
state or society at large, and to the character of Pennsylvania in particular;
or to endeavor to shelter from the punishment of the law, the instigators and
perpetrators of such offenses. Every citizen is interested, and is bound to
assist in detecting, prosecuting, and punishing the offenders; but every
citizen, let it be remembered, is still more interested, that even the greatest
criminals should only be punished in the manner and to the degree which the law
prescribes. However we may differ on speculative points of politics abroad,
however we may be disposed to approve, or to disapprove, the measures of
administration, and however we may controvert or assist, the constitutionality,
or the expediency, of particular laws, all party spirit, all personal
animosity, must be abandoned when we are called upon to act as ministers of
justice; or we shall, in the indulgence of a moment's vengeance, overthrow
those barriers which are our own security, and the pledge of safety to
posterity.

Whatever you may have thought, whatever you may have said, whatever you may
have heard, in other scenes, must now be obliterated from your minds. The
character of private citizens, with all the privileges of private opinion and
feeling, is here exchanged for the character of public functionaries, with all
the restraints of law and justice. Your opinions as private men, will only be
regarded according to their intrinsic merit; but your verdict as a jury will be
forever obligatory, bearing all the authority of a precedent.

Though, then, a proclamation has issued, an army has marched, and popular
resentment has been excited, we claim an unbiassed attention; and
circumscribing your view of the subject to the evidence, we confidently expect
a fortunate result. What has happened in England upon a similar occasion, we
think will happen here. The British Privy Council announced a traitorous
conspiracy to the British Parliament. The British Parliament declared that the
party recognized and confirmed the charge of high treason and thus the whole
weight of public authority in that country, legislative and executive,
instituted a prosecution, which was, afterward, conducted with the greatest
zeal and talents -- with such zeal and talents as the present prosecution has
displayed. What was the event? A jury (that inestimable palladium) without
fear, and without favor, examined and pronounced that no treason had been
committed. I allude to the recent cases of Horn Took and Hardy.

I shall, I presume, be excused, if I intimate to you some other disadvantages
under which the prisoner's case labors; for, it is not merely necessary to
produce evidence, to explain, extenuate, or refute the charge; we must guard
your minds against any previous bias, any latent pre-determination to convict.
The accused gentleman, and his companions, you will recollect, are not upon
their trial among persons, with whom they have been accustomed to live. This is
a disadvantage, which every candid man will acknowledge. They are to be tried,
likewise, by a jury, selected and returned by the marshal, the very officer who
has been personally insulted, and whose appointment depends on the will and
pleasure of the executive magistrate -- that magistrate by whom the offenders
have already been described as traitors. I mean not to cast the least
reflection upon the laws of Congress, nor upon the officers of the government;
but to make a general remark on the defective state of our judicial
institutions. The conduct of the marshal has, indeed, been highly exemplary
throughout the transaction; and when with such powers he returned such a jury
as I have the honor to address, he manifests an impartiality and independence
of character, that entitles him to the respect and plaudits of his country. Nor
is it here that the prisoner's disadvantages terminate: but I hope, I believe,
that never 'till this day was the Press employed in a base and sanguinary
attempt to intimidate the jury and council from a faithful execution of their
duty in a capital case! Since, however, the jury have been summoned; nay, since
the court have been sitting upon this very trial, there have been the grossest,
the most insidious practices in a public newspaper, to warp your sentiments,
and to deprive the unfortunate prisoner of the benefit of the best talents,
which the bar of Pennsylvania can afford. On the other hand, a gentleman, whose
abilities we all respect, and whose long residence in the offending counties
must greatly facilitate the progress of the prosecution, is associated, without
censure, and certainly without being answerable, in the duties of the attorney
of the district. While our ignorance of characters, and circumstances perplexes
the defense; his accurate information and experience enable him to probe every
witness to the quick, and forcibly to combine and interweave all the incidents
of the transaction. But his motives are pure ^ for, if he does arraign; if he
does convict; if he does punish; it is because his patriotism and public spirit
enable him to soar far beyond the (...) affections of a neighborhood.

Gentlemen, in this situation we appear before you as advocates for the
prisoner. I declare that as far as my mind is capable of being impressed by a
sense of duty, I feel a terror lest any thing should be left undone, or unsaid,
which is essential to the cause: and, therefore, complicated as the discussion
must necessarily be, accept, I pray you, my sentiments under the following
heads.

First, I will endeavor to establish such points of law, as seem to me to be
applicable to the facts which have been given in evidence.

Secondly, I will consider the general state of the discontents, and how far
the rescue at Bethlehem was connected with the previous disturbances.

Thirdly, I will take a review of the conduct of the prisoner in particular.

I. With respect to the crime of treason, I hold the constitutional act in my
hand by which it is defined. The gentleman who opened this prosecution, has
very justly said, that the words of the definition were borrowed from a statute
very much admired in the English code; but I do not think that he has very
justly added, that, because the United States have borrowed the language of the
statute, they have, also, adopted all the inferences and expositions of the
British courts. It appears, indeed, that Lord Hale (I. Vol. p. 132) thought,
that even the English courts had carried their decisions on the statute too
far, and emphatically warns the judges from proceeding further in the dangerous
doctrine of "constructive treasons." Speaking of past cases, he says those
resolutions being made and settled, we must acquiesce in them, but, in my
opinion, if new cases happen for the future, that have not an express
resolution in point, nor are expressly within the words of 23 Ed. 3. though
they may seem to have a parity of reason, it is the safest way, and most
agreeable to the wisdom of the great act of 23 Ed. 3. first to consult the
parliament and have their declaration, and to be very wary in multiplying
constructive and interpretative treason, for we know not where it will end. It
should be premised, that in that celebrated statute of 25 Ed. 3. on which is
founded our definition of treason, there was a provision made, that if the
overt act charged, or the crime supposed to be committed, did not come,
specifically, within the words of the statute, the judges should not pronounce
it high treason, but must refer it to the parliament. Hale, the great and good,
applauds the provision; and when he says, that the courts have gone far enough,
does not the strength of his expression imply, that they had gone too far? --
"Be very wary in multiplying constructive treasons, for we know not where it
will end." Now, it is said, that because we have brought the words "levying
war" from the English statute, we, therefore, adopt all the interpretations of
the English courts; but I deny the proposition, because I think it is dangerous
as well to the policy of our constitution as to rights of individuals. In the
same statute of the 25 Ed. 3. there is another crime, called compassing the
king's death; and levying war has been construed to be an overt act of that
species of treason. Hence the gentleman will find that there is some confusion
in the English books on the doctrine of levying war, considering it sometimes
as a substantive and independent of treason, and at other times considering it
merely as evidence of a traitorous design against the life of the monarch. It
is impossible to conceive, indeed, any thing more absurd than constructive
treason, as it has been applied to compassing the death of the king. Any man
who should use a single expression, a loose word, among friends, or enemies,
that could be tortured, by the most circuitous process, into any thing like a
wish for the king's death, was termed a traitor. In Blackstone's Commentaries,
it is mentioned, that an innkeeper, ludicrously declared that his son was heir
to the crown; meaning that he was heir to the tavern, which had the sign of a
crown; yet, the expression was construed into treason, and the man suffered as
a traitor. In another instance, the king killed a deer belonging to one of his
poor subjects, who upon the first impulse of his resentment, wished the deer,
horns and all, in the king's belly; and the man was also hanged as a traitor.
So far will construction go, and, in such a manner may a man's life be
endangered! If constructive treasons are admitted in this country, no man will
be safe: It may destroy my life; it may destroy yours.

In England this species of treason is considered in two lights; levying war
against the person of the monarch, and levying war against his authority. I
wish you to know precisely upon what footing this distinction prevails in
England, because I shall ask you presently, what species of treason ought to be
considered as adopted by the principles, as well as the terms of our
constitution. Levying war against the person of the monarch consists in any
attempt to dethrone him; either with a view to change the government, or merely
to supplant the person who administers it. The act is unequivocal, and meets
the common sense of every man. But levying war against his authority, is so
indefinite, that any thing and every thing may be made treason; the
intemperance of a mob, as well as the hostility of an army. Independent of all
technical reasoning, then, let me ask you, upon the suggestions of common
sense, whether you perceive more in the recent occurrences than a great riot; a
lawless disturbance of the public peace, a daring rescue? Was there in the mind
of any man, till the denunciation contained in the proclamation of the
President, and the march of the army, an idea that treason had been committed?
Till then, the guilt in obstructing the execution of the laws was not
denominated treason, nor was the punishment expected, death!

In order, however, to examine this point of law more minutely, and to apply it
to the facts, let me observe that from the English books (whose authority,
however, is not implicitly admitted) two general propositions are to be
collected:

First, The intention must be to levy war.

Secon^^^ War must be actually levied against the government.

When I say, emphatically, that the intention must be to levy war, I mean that
the intention, free of all constructive matter, must be to commit that
description of crime, which the gentleman concerned for the prosecution calls
"levying war." Without that precise intention, however criminal the intention
may be in other respects, the offender cannot be guilty of treason. A man, or a
mob, may intend to commit a crime; a man may be armed, or a mob may be arrayed,
for the purpose; and the utmost force may be used to accomplish it; but it is
no treason, unless the intention was treasonably to levy war: though it may be
arson; or it may be riot, etc. If the avowed object is to subvert the
government; to drive Congress from its legislative function; to seize the
President, etc. and instead of the established order of things to introduce
anarchy, or monarchy, the act would be plainly and unequivocally within the
meaning of levying war.

It is true, that the English books go further; and consider an attempt by
force to obstruct the execution of all laws, or to compel the repeal of a
particular law, as a constructive treason within the description of levying
war. But the obstruction of all laws is, in fact, an attempt to subvert the
government, and to compel the repeal of a law, is a very different thing from a
temporary interference with its execution. Conceding therefore, as far as the
English authorities go, and as far surely, as the interests of our government
can require, there is no precedent of a constructive treason to warrant a
conviction in the present case; the opposition was not directed against all
laws; nor was there any force employed to compel a repeal of the obnoxious Act.
In Foster 211, as read by Mr. Rawle, you will find the reference is
particularly made to the case of forcing the repeal of a law, or laws, etc. and
not a word about opposition to the execution of a particular law. What, then
were the origin and character of the late rising of the people? Was it not an
opposition given to certain officers merely from a doubt of the existence of
the law; or till the people had ascertained whether other counties conformed to
the assessments, or till the inhabitants of townships were indulged in
appointing their own assessors? Let me ask you, whether these characteristics
are within the scope of the law of levying war? Remember what Hale says, "Do
not let a parity of reasoning allure you; be very wary that you do not add to
the catalogue of constructive treasons. Judge Blackstone too, has been quoted
by Mr. Rawle (Vol. 4. p. 81) where he speaks of treason as an "attempt to
reform religion, or the laws;" but I entreat your attention to the distinction
which the passage itself is calculated to establish. Every one knows that the
term reform the laws, means repeal the laws. The current of Legislative power
is uniform. Those who made, can alone annull a law, and if a reformation is
produced, it must be by applying to the legislature. If the application is made
with force, or menaces, the English writers declare, and we may safely allow
that it would be an act of levying war. But where is the analogy between that
case, and the case of resisting a subordinate officer, while executing his part
of a particular law?

Now gentlemen, I challenge the prosecuting council to say, in what part of the
evidence it has appeared, that these insurgents went further than to declare
that the law did not please them; that though they did not mean to compel
Congress to repeal it, they had some doubts, and wished to ascertain whether it
existed or not; to know whether the country in general had submitted to it; to
know whether General Washington was not dissatisfied with it, and to see
whether they could not get the assessor appointed by themselves. Under these
impressions many irregularities occurred, but I ask the adverse council to
point out if they have discovered through the whole course of the business, any
insurrection existing, any traitorous design, till the meeting at Bethlehem; or
whether till that moment the people of Northampton could be said to have been
guilty of any crime?

We are told that the case of the western insurgents in 1794, is in point; and
that the decisions upon the trials that then took place, are precedents on the
present occasion; but, with great deference, I declare that it seems impossible
to bring cases more dissimilar into view, where violence has been committed in
both. At this stage of the argument however, I shall only remark, that whatever
may have been the language of the judge, who then presided, I am sure the
attorney of the district will be good enough to recollect, and candid enough to
state, that the opposition, though in its origin, excited against the excise
law, was conducted with the avowed purpose of suppressing all the excite
offices, and compelling Congress to repeal the act, See 2 Dallas Rep. 346.

Let us for a moment, gentlemen, trace the motives of the people, by looking at
their conduct not at large, but in the lawless scene at Bethlehem. What did
they do? why they rescued the marshal's prisoners; but the moment they had
effected the rescue, did they not disperse? Their whole object then was
consummated; for, I must presume that they contemplated nothing farther, as I
see them attempt nothing more; and yet the time was very favorable to
accomplish a more extensive design, if it had ever been meditated. Men
intending to compel, by every hostile means, the repeal of a law, when they had
in their hands the obnoxious agents of that law (Mr. Balliott, Mr. Eyerly, the
marshal and others) would hardly have let the moment pass without some effort
to triumph in their advantage. It was, indeed rumoured to be their intention to
dispatch Mr. Eyerly; but where does it appear? Was he not completely in their
power? Was he not constantly in their view, though he incorrectly says that he
was constantly out of their view? No: I repeat that the rioters having
accomplished the rescue, dispersed; and will you, under such circumstances, in
a case of life and death, determine that they came to commit treason? rejecting
the plain fact, and adopting a constructive inference? But if they proceeded no
farther than I have stated, let us again look to the law of England, to define
their crime, as distinguished from treason? and you will not cease to bear in
mind that you must establish the distinction. Hales pleas vol. 1 p. 133 -- 4.
Bacon's abridgment vol. 6. p. 513 -- 4 -- 5.

Foster Sect. 2. 210 "risings to maintain a private claim of right, or to
destroy particular enclosures, or to break prisons, in order to release
particular persons have not been holden to amount to levying war within the
statute.

Upon this principle a rising of the weavers in London, to destroy all
engine-looms, machines, etc. did not amount to levying of war -- for the judges
considered it merely as a matter of private quarrel between men of the same
trade, about a particular engine, which those concerned in the riot thought
detrimental to them."

Now, if we should be fortunate enough in the course of this business to show
that, however criminal these people may be, yet, that taking it altogether,
their intention was only to acquire information, to see what really was the
state of the country, and to procure township officers of their own
appointment: if so, though they achieved the rescue, we have done with the
indictment for treason; the verdict must conform to the evidence, and the
judgment to the verdict. That the offense is an aggravated misdemeanour, I will
not deny; but it ought to be distinguished from Treason; and, I think, I shall
soon evince that it never was within the view of our legislature to consider it
as the treason contemplated by the constitution. Give me leave, then, to ask
(and I beg, gentlemen, as this is a matter of construction, that you, who are
to fix the intention, will give candid attention) whether the facts prove more
than the breaking open a particular prison, in order to rescue particular
prisoners? Was not the matter of a partial, local nature, to make a particular,
and not a general rescue, for which a particular prison (if it may be so
described) was violated? And as to the previous opposition what was it more
than a partial obstruction of particular officers, to prevent in a particular
township, the execution of a particular law. At Kline's the people said to the
ex-assessors, "we will not let you come into our township 'till we know whether
it is a law or not; and if we must be assessed, it shall be by assessors of our
own township." A gentleman in behalf of the prosecution has told us, that we
are to receive as authority all the adjudications given to the them "levying
war" in England: But if I can produce an authority higher than the English
parliaments, or the English courts to prove that the present case ought not to
be included in the description of treason, I presume he will not reject it
because it is American: I mean the authority of our own legislature. Before,
however, I turn to the act of Congress, I will attract your attention,
gentlemen, by one proposition. If the legislature has explicitly classed an
offense under a particular head in the penal code, it is inconsistent and
absurd to search for it, and punish it under another head. For instance, if the
legislature has declared that rescuing prisoners, not under sentence of death,
should be punishable only with fine and imprisonment, it would be inconsistent,
by arguing, in a circle, that a rescue with force and numbers, is a combination
for the purpose of preventing the execution of a law, and that such a
combination is treason, by levying war. 1 Hales pleas 151. Keyling 75. Foster
p. 200. Sect. 7.

If the offense to which I refer had been treason, it would not have consisted
with the wisdom of the legislature to make it a misdemeanour: and on this
ground it is, that I now ask you to reflect, which species of levying war, the
direct or the constructive, was within the view of the framers of our
constitution? Did they not intend to exclude every description of constructive
treason? But to proceed; if I can demonstrate, that every thing which has
occurred of a criminal nature, from the commencement of the business, to its
consummation, and regarding every previous discontent as tending to the
particular rescue at Bethlehem (which is the utmost the opposite council will
pretend) has been considered by the legislature of the United States, (whose
acts I repeat, are entitled to more respect than all the British authorities,
parliamentary or judicial) as high misdemeanors, and not as treason; then I am
entitled to insist, that the constitutional provision does not embrace the
case; or if it does embrace the case that Congress, possessing the power to
declare the punishment of treason, has limited the punishment of one species of
the offense at least, to fine and imprisonment. Listen to the act, "If any
person or persons shall knowingly and wilfully obstruct, resist or oppose any
officer of the United States in serving, or attempting to serve or execute any
mesne, process, or warrant, or any rule or order of any of the courts of the
United States, or any other legal or judicial writ (...) process whatsoever, or
shall assault, beat or wound any officer, or other person duly authorized in
serving or executing any writ, rule, order, process or warrant aforesaid, every
person so knowingly and wilfully offending in the premises, shall, on
conviction thereof, be imprisoned not exceeding twelve months, and fined not
exceeding three hundred dollars," Shall it be contended then, that obstructing
the marshal, who was employed in serving process, constitutes the crime of
treason! If it did so, there was no kind of necessity for this law.

Is there an ingredient in the whole of the conduct, while obstructing the
marshal in the service of his process, that is not embraced in this legislative
description? But let us take another step: the process is executed, the
prisoners are apprehended, and actually in the custody of the marshal; and if
it is treason, under the Constitution, to take them out of his custody, would
Congress be justifiable in treating the offense simply as a misdemeanour? And
yet such absurdity is imputed to the national legislature, since in the 23d
section of the same law, it is enacted, that "if any person, or persons shall
by force set at liberty, or rescue any person, who shall be found guilty of
treason, murder, or any other capital crime, or rescue any person convicted of
any of the said crimes, going to execution, or during execution, every person
so offending, and being convicted thereof, shall suffer death: and if any
person shall, by force, set at liberty, or rescue any person who before
conviction shall stand committed for any of the capital offenses aforesaid; or
if any person or persons shall by force set at liberty, or rescue any person
committed for, or convicted of any other offense against the United States,
every person so offending shall, on conviction, be fined, not exceeding 500
dollars, and imprisoned not exceeding one year," Thus, if a malefactor was
actually under the gallows when rescued, the rescue would have been but a
capital offense; and the same consequence is now attempted, where the persons
rescued had been admitted to their parole, and were in custody of the officer,
merely upon mesne process. It was a matter of honor that made them resign
themselves to his custody, and it was, in effect, a matter of form that he kept
them in custody: for, we find, that as he took their parole to meet him at
Bethlehem, so at the moment of the rescue, he took their parole to meet him in
Philadelphia, which they have all punctually done.

Here then you find, gentlemen, that we have two of the prominent features of
this case reduced to the form of positive law: to wit, the obstruction of the
marshal in the service of his process, and the rescue of prisoners from his
custody. But there is another circumstance to which I would wish, likewise, to
lead your attention. You find there was an indisposition to allow a particular
class of officers to make the assessments; and the people urged, that if it was
to be done, it should be done by their own assessors. In this important point,
therefore, the particular officers, and not the law, form the object of
resentment and opposition. On this distinction, I have the respected authority
of Mr. Bradford, the late attorney general of the United States, for asserting
that the offense was riot, not treason. In his argument in the United States v.
Mitchel (2 Dallas Rep. 354.) he states that an opposition was lately made to
the appointment of a particular judge, in Mifflin county, and he was forcibly
driven from the bench. But the offense was prosecuted merely as a riot, upon
this principle of descrimination, that the design was not to prevent the
governor from appointing any judge, but only to displace an unpopular
individual. So even if the unpopular assessors, instead of being forewarned not
to enter the township, had been forcibly expelled from it, the offense would
not have been treason, but not.

I am arrived, however, to the last and conclusive evidence of the sense of
Congress upon this subject: from which it will be proved that the same
cautious, and in respect to punishment, the same benevolent, legislature, had
considered all that the ingenuity of any gentleman can suggest as criminal in
the lawless career of the rioters, and defining the offense to be a
misdemeanor, excludes the idea of its being a treason. Let us turn to the act
commonly called the sedition act. Congress have there declared, that fine and
imprisonment should be the only punishments for the offense which appears on
the evidence to have been committed by the prisoner. I ask you, gentlemen, to
reflect one moment upon the testimony that you have heard upon this trial,
while I analyze the first section of the law. Has John Fries been guilty of a
combination and conspiracy to obstruct the execution of the laws? In this act,
his punishment is prescribed. Imprisonment and fine. Did he intimidate a public
officer? Here is the punishment. Is there in the whole transaction any
councilling, or advising, or any efforts toward producing an insurrection, it
is punishable by this law. The law contains these descriptions of offense:
First, combination with intent to oppose any measures of government, or to
impede the operation of the laws of the United States. This offense,
notwithstanding its generality, is only punishable with fine and imprisonment.
Secondly, an intimidation of persons, who are applied to for the purpose of
executing a law, so as to prevent their accepting the office, or having
accepted it, to deter them from discharging the duties annexed to it. This is
the offense that will be urged upon you: all the disturbances of Northampton
county; all the tittle tattle and alarms of commissioners and assessors, will
be arrayed against the unfortunate prisoner to affect his life: and the
aggregate will be swelled into the size, and depicted in all the malignity of
treason, though the law says it is nothing more than a misdemeanour. "Yes," you
will hear it exclaimed, "Fries is the leader; he is the very life of the mob:
it was he who advised, he who addressed, he who alarmed, he who intimidated, he
who rescued!" Did he so? Then this law will punish him for a high misdemeanour;
but I can discover no law to punish him for treason. I am sensible that if I
err in my opinion, those who prosecute will be able to discriminate, between
the case proved by the evidence, and the case defined in the sedition law. I
have not the ingenuity to perceive it; and I hope you will only give that
weight to the respective arguments which they respectively merit. Nay, I am
persuaded, that the humanity of the prosecuting council, will induce them to
abstain from any harsh exposition of the principle, as well as from any
strained application of the evidence, involved in the controversy. The law
provides for combinations formed for all these purposes, whether they have been
carried into effect or not, the simple punishments of fine and imprisonment.
Simple do I call it! respecting this man, do we not know how exemplary it may
be rendered. Suppose the judge was to impose a fine of 5000 dollars, can 5000
dollars come from the purse of John Fries? And if it cannot come from his
purse, then the power of remission is in the chief magistrate alone; and unless
he thinks that the public will sustain no injury from the convict's liberation,
his sentence of five years may be protracted to an imprisonment for life, and
the total deprivation of the means by which his family can be rescued from
wretchedness and ruin. It is not therefore, a simple punishment. But, permit me
to repeat, that every description that can be given of the disturbances in the
northern counties, is to be found in the law I have referred to; and if the
legislature, which must be supposed to be as wife, as guarded, and as
well-informed, as courts, or juries, in regulating the interests of the
community, has thought proper thus to describe the crime, and prescribe the
punishment, shall we presume to be more wise, and assume a power to be more
penal? If the legislature was contented to class these actions with
misdemeanors, shall the designation be expunged by this court, or arbitrarily
transferred to the catalogue of constructive treasons? Shall a jury sitting
here; -- shall a judge sitting there; -- declare that though the offense is
unequivocally pointed out by law, yet in their ideas of distributive justice,
the penalty ought to be enhanced, and the man ought to be hanged! In every
authoritative book, in regard to criminal cases, the most liberal
interpretations are given to laws which mitigate punishments. Then let us
suppose that the legislature when the sedition law was passed, contemplated the
crime of treason without a view to the distinction of direct and constructive
treason. The crime is defined by the constitution, but the punishment is not;
and, therefore, an early act of Congress, agreeably to the power vested in that
body, affixed the punishment of death: but, it will not be denied, that
Congress might at that time have inflicted only the punishment of fine and
imprisonment, as is the case in the penal code of Pennsylvania. If, therefore,
Congress has the power to modify the punishment and if we discover in the
Sedition act a full description of treason, whether direct or constructive,
ought we not to consider it, upon the liberal principle of expounding penal
statutes, as an intended mitigation of the punishment, and a virtual repeal of
the pre-existing sanctions? If there is any inconsistency in the two laws, so
that they cannot stand together, the former must be presumed to be annulled by
the latter, and the greater punishment is superseded by the less, because
enacted subsequent to it. The word intimidate, used in the Sedition act, is of
extensive meaning; it is not a mere feeling which would arise from saying you
will suffer among your fellow citizens; it is a feeling which operates upon the
mind from an apprehension of personal danger, and may be the effect of every
species of force or menace. 1 Hale's pleas 3 and 6 Bacon 513. These authorities
show what arraying in arms is, with a view to commit a crime; but prove that if
the intention is not treasonable, it is not treason, however violent the act
might be, and whatever may be the military array of the actors; and the
intimidation to which the law applies, embraces every description of force that
can possibly be contemplated, in order to accomplish the meditated purpose; --
the obstruction of process, -- the rescue of prisoners, the surrender of
office; -- or the resistance of a law. Foster 219 Sect. 10. "Attacking the
king's forces in opposition to his authority upon a march, or at quarters, is
levying war against the king. But if upon a sudden quarrel, from some affront
given or taken, the neighborhood rise and drive the forces out of their
quarters, that would be a great misdemeanour, and if death should ensue, it may
be felony in the assailants, but it will not be treason, because there was no
intention against the King's person or government."

1 Hale's pleas 146. "If any of the King's troops be killed, it is felony." An
open resistance to the justices of Oyer and Terminer in the county of Surry was
felony. Here a sudden attack upon the King's troops on their march, though this
must be considered as a direct attack upon the government, yet, if any quarrel
arise between them and the people, it is no treason. So, in the present
instance, all the object of these people was to obtain a little time to procure
information. To that we attribute their conduct toward Rodrick Child's and other
officers: it arose from the impulse of the moment, and though directed against
public officers, ought not to be denominated levying war against the
government. The whole purpose and extent of every violent word or gesture,
terminated in the intimidation of those officers. Do we hear a variety of men
whispering to Eyerly he was in danger of his life? Look at the fact: he goes
the rounds with the marshal, to serve the process against the very men, who are
alleged to have pronounced the threat, yet no danger attends him: he appears
repeatedly at the windows at Bethlehem amidst the tumult, yet no outrage is
offered: the active leaders of the mob level guns at him, yet not a trigger is
drawn! It was in short, a mere system of intimidation, without a design to use
force, much less to commit treason. Nay, I will pledge myself in saying that
there was great art used on the part of the prisoner to accommodate the matter
with the officers in every stage of the transaction, and to prevent personal
injury or any kind of violence. The case of the judges of Oyer and Terminer,
referred to in Hale, is surely as strong as the present. Those judges were as
much authorized then, as the assessors are now; and the non-reception, or
acknowledgment of both, as public functionaries was the offense.

The acts committed during this scene of tumult, ought to be punished, and I
hope will be punished; but as acts of riot and sedition, not as acts of treason.

I am sensible that it is possible to draw distinctions, to refine upon the
meaning, and pervert the language of the act: but on principles of humanity, I
am confident the gentlemen opposed to us will abstain from a mere exercise of
ingenuity and eloquence, while we, who contend in favor of life, have a claim
to every indulgence; a right to the benefit of every shade of discrimination.

It has been laid down by the opposite council, that there must be generality
of object, in order to constitute the crime of treason. If an insurrection
takes place, by which it is designed to oppose all the laws, it needs no
reasoning to convince any man that a subversion of the government is intended,
and that this is treason: But this I contend, is the only species of treason
which ought to be recognized under a republican form of government, and to
which alone the language of our constitution can be fairly applied. I am
justified in the position, because the legislature has asserted it. If the
constitutional language may be satisfied in that manner, the diversity
introduced by the legislature ought at least to be judicially respected; so
that when the legislature having provided the punishment of death for levying
war, provides a different punishment for offenses, which according to the
English books would be construed into that very species of treason, we are
bound to say that the English constructions are fallacious and that taking
advantage of Lord Hale's advice, the framers of our constitution have not only
rejected the past decision (by which they were never bound as the English
judges are) but have guarded against the accumulation of interpretative
treason. When, therefore, I say that to oppose all laws, and to resist all the
authority of the government, is a palpable levying of war, which requires no
technical aid to define or explain, I go as far as the terms of the
constitution necessarily demand; and I think we are not authorized to go
farther. I think I am right, also, when I say, that the legislature has
distinguished the offense committed by the prisoner, from treason, and provided
a different punishment for it.

Recurring to the western trials, let me repeat that the direct, the avowed
object of the insurrection of 1794, was to suppress all excise offices, and to
compel a repeal of the excise law; but can it be pretended that on that
occasion, or on any occasion, a verbal menace to an officer, the rescue of a
prisoner, or a temporary resistance to the execution of a law, arising from a
doubt of its existence, was declared to be treason? Where shall we stop
gentlemen, if such constructive treasons are allowed? It is impossible for
human genius, or human study to provide a barrier against the consequences. The
framers of our constitution, the legislature of the union, one would imagine
had taken every practicable precaution against the admission of constructive
treasons; but if we are to adopt the expositions, and the principles of
exposition, of the English courts, the wisdom of our own country has been
exercised in vain. If a forcible opposition to the partial execution of a
single law, by a particular set of officers, is treason as the gentlemen
allege, with a parity of reason, it may be pronounced, that a noncompliance
with any lawful requisition of an authorized officer, constitutes the same
crime. Open that door, and the mischief will be carried much farther, will
become more dangerous to civil liberty, and personal safety, than any thing
which, the metaphysical disquisitions on the crime of compassing the King's
death, have generated in England. If any act that will interfere with carrying
the laws and measures of government into effect, is treason, what a privileged
order our public officers instantaneously become, what an enviable security
they attain! Upon the whole discussion of this point of law, then, I conclude,
that on the legitimate definition of levying war as applied to our form of
government; and on the authority of the American legislature, no treason has
been committed. There was no force employed against the government; no general
object to overthrow the constitution and laws; no direct attempt, by arms or
intimidation, to compel Congress to repeal the obnoxious act: but the whole was
a great and unjustifiable riot -- seditious in its origin; daring in its
progress; and iniquitous in its effects.

I proceed to the consideration of another point of law, and enquire that
supposing this case to be treason, how is it to be proved? The first clear rule
is, that the overt act must be proved in the county in which it is said to have
been committed, as on the present indictment in the county of Northampton. 4
Hawkins chapter 46. sect. 184, 5, 6. p. 454. It was mentioned by Mr. Sitgreaves,
that the specific overt act, with which Fries is charged, was rescuing the
prisoners at Bethlehem; but this does not appear on the face of the indictment.
If, however, that act was treason, then not only the act, but the traitorous
intention, must be proved in the proper county, as the intention and the act,
are both essential to the crime. Now, for a moment, overlook the general
narrative of discontents and disturbances, dismiss from your minds all the
previous, and all the subsequent transactions, and confining your ideas
precisely to the affair at Bethlehem, pronounce whether there appeared at that
time and place any thing more than a design to rescue the prisoners? It is, I
assert, my right to call for full proof of guilt, where the indictment states
that the guilt was incurred. At Bethlehem, then, from the commencement to the
close of the tumult, who can trace an act of levying war against the United
States? The truth is, that before John Fries came on the borders of Northampton
county, the military array, of which you will hear a great deal by and by, had
taken place; and the people had got to the bridge of Bethlehem. But there is no
evidence that any of the active men in opposing the assessors, were present at
the bridge, at the time the rescue was contemplated; and from the first
convening at Schwartz's 'till the moment of their taking the prisoners, what
were the views of the party, as declared to Messrs. Henry, Balliott, and
Eyerly? Why, that they came there simply to rescue the prisoners. The sincerity
of the declaration is corroborated by the powerful consideration, that if there
was a design to annihilate the laws, or to persecute and injure the officers,
the opportunity as I before observed, could never be more favorable to ensure
success. Such facts speak stronger than the strongest language: And is it not
conclusive, that a rescue only was in view, when we hear, that in less than ten
minutes after the surrender of the prisoners, the whole multitude dispersed,
leaving the commissioners, assessors, justices and marshal uninjured and
unannoyed upon the spot? There is one incident, however, which, perhaps you may
notice: one of the two persons who were detained at Bethlehem in the morning,
on being asked how he came there, said that he understood there was to be a
meeting about those laws, and that he came to see what would be done about
them; but with this single exception, it is observable that not a word was said
at Bethlehem respecting the existence, execution, obstruction or repeal of any
unpopular act; not a word escaped but in relation to the rescue of the
prisoners. In that rescue, the prosecuting council say they discover the
generality of object, which even the English doctrine calls for in the
definition of treason by a constructive levying war; and insist that the
particularity of object, which would extenuate and reduce the crime, is not to
be found. Is it so contended, because the demand of surrender, was not founded
on a tie of consanguinity? because an uncle, a brother, a father, a son, were
not imprisoned? This, surely, is not a legal idea of particularity. But all the
law regards is to be found in the present case. The party assembled with a view
to release a particular set of prisoners, and not prisoners generally.
Shankweiler was one who was there; three or four came with him to see that he
should not be used ill, and to offer bail for him. What was their language at
the bridge? "They have taken our neighbors; but if they have done wrong, they
ought to be tried in their own county." That they should be transported to
Philadelphia was the great objection -- was the motive to the rescue: that they
have been transported to Philadelphia, is a great inconvenience, is the
principal difficulty in the defense.

Thus, then, in point of proof the prosecution is defective: it is not merely
an act of violence, but a traitorous intention that must be shown at the place
where the violence was committed. No such intention has appeared in evidence;
while on the contrary we have pointed you to the parts of the evidence which
prove that the people did every thing that they intended to do, and the moment
they obtained their object, dispersed. With this view of the subject, why does
the government prosecute for a capital offense? If this prisoner is acquitted
on the present indictment, there is no probability of his escaping with
impunity: though his life may be spared; there is no doubt but the attorney of
the district, will present a bill against him under the act to which I have so
repeatedly referred.

On the principle of the law that I have stated, 'till the overt act is
completely proved in Northampton, the intention as well as the deed, I take it
you cannot go to another county for evidence, by proving there an independent
and substantive act of treason. It is immaterial to Fries, as it respects this
charge, what he did in the county of Bucks. He met at Kline's: and though I
will deny the impropriety of his conduct at that meeting, no lawyer will assert
that it amounted to treason. He did not meet at Mitchel's; but wherever he did
attend, we cannot perceive any thing in his conduct, but a vague dislike of the
land tax, and a steady regard for the safety of the assessors. It is immaterial
what he did, and what he said, in the county of Bucks: the offense must be
proved in all its parts in the county of Northampton.

And here, gentlemen, I am naturally led to guard you against another
instrument in the system of state prosecutions, called accumulative treason, as
dangerous and as unjust an instrument as constructive treason, of which I have
already spoken. Accumulative treason, is, the artful combination of a number of
circumstances, which in their original, unconnected situation were unimportant,
but being thus combined become gigantic, and frightful to the eye. Mere
indiscretions committed at different times, in different places, and under
various impulses, collected into a mass, and exhibited at a moment, may be made
to assume the complexion of the most odious crimes. None of the acts committed
out of Northampton ought to be brought into the account against the prisoner,
till, at least, the act of treason has been proved, legally proved, to have
been committed there. For those extraneous acts, if they do not amount to
substantive acts of treason, indictable where they were committed, he may be
rendered responsible under the sedition law, or under the general law against
rioters. If his actions in another county ought not to be taken into view, the
reason is stronger for excluding his words. Words spoken may be an high
misdemeanour, but can never amount to treason. 4 Black Com. 259. and yet it is
attempted to prove the present charge by the aid of loose, equivocal, and
ambiguous conversations. With respect to such evidence, arising under
circumstances that are not clearly stated, communicated without regard to the
order and connection of facts, and depending on the memory of persons agitated
by terror, or by resentment, can it be necessary to caution an upright and
enlightened jury? Take them, if you will, the language of the law declares that
they cannot constitute treason; but the language of humanity instructs you
totally to disregard them.

Let me advert to another circumstance with respect to the evidence. It is not
necessary laboriously to distinguish what is hearsay evidence and what is not:
and I admit that the testimony, which applies to a description of the general
state of the country, is not to be disregarded, because it is of the nature of
hearsay. Upon the detail, however, of specific facts, the rule is strict and
beneficial. Whatever was heard from a second person, when that person might
himself have been brought as a witness; or whatever has passed in relation to
the prisoner, at a time when he was absent; the law will not allow to be the
foundation of a verdict upon the present trial. Included in this description is
every piece of information, all the tittle tattle, that passed between the
subordinate and principal assessors or commissioners. Again: the assessors told
the commissioners that the law could not be executed; but this is matter of
opinion, which must be founded on facts; and you must take the facts, not the
opinion, as your guide. Nor can a correspondence official or unofficial,
between public officers, be estimated as evidence on the trial of a third
person. If it can be estimated as evidence, then it will be always in the power
of the officers of government, to fabricate and produce evidence that will
inevitably convict an obnoxious individual. God forbid that ever this should be
the case here; but the temptations to an abuse of power are not wanting.
Without meaning a reflection upon Mr. Eyerly, it cannot be overlooked, that he,
who was the commissioner for executing the unpopular law, had been recently an
unsuccessful candidate for Congress; and if a base motive could actuate him, do
we not perceive his opportunity, to avenge the defeat upon the active opponents
of his election? Official reports are necessary to maintain the connection
between officers of different grades; -- the facts stated in them are binding
upon the reporters, and the reports are themselves sufficient evidence to be
acted upon by the officers to whom they are made: but was it ever tolerated,
was it ever conceived, that an official statement of facts should be conclusive
in any case, even in a case of property, affecting the rights of a private
citizen, in a court of justice. The facts depend upon books and vouchers,
constituting an official record, and the books and vouchers, or authenticated
copies, or exemplifications, can alone be admitted as legal evidence upon a
trial at law.

There remains another point of law, to be introduced to the notice of the
court and jury. I take it for granted, that no man can be said to oppose a law,
unless the law exists; no man can oppose a measure of government, unless his
acquiescence is lawfully required. The judges will not view my position in the
mistaken light which Mr. Attorney did, that the commission of every officer
from the assessor to the President must be produced, before any act in
execution of the land tax law could be performed: No, Sir; I contend not for so
extravagant a, doctrine: but I assert, that every man who resists a public
officer de facto, and in consequence of the resistance is indicted, has a
legal, settled right to demand upon his trial, proof of the authority of the
officer. In the first instance, the party who resists, does it at his peril; --
but if the person claiming to act as an officer, had no warrant, or commission,
the resistance was justifiable, and the defendant must be acquitted. Let us
apply this principle. The law being enacted by congress, it is an
incontestable, though sometimes harsh rule, that ignorance, shall be no excuse
for disobeying it: but suppose that a man, calling himself an assessor should
come into my house, and insist on going from room to room to take the rates,
without showing me his warrant; and that in consequence of his refusal I should
turn him out, and he should prosecute me; -- what is the result? If he was de
jure an officer, I am liable to the penalty of the act; but if he was not, then
I am not only innocent, but entitled to an action of trespass against him for
his intrusion.

We have, with this view of the case, repeatedly called for proof of the
appointments of the assessors, in conformity to the act of Congress. Such
appointments could only be legally made by a majority of the board of
commissioners for the division, at a regular meeting. Now, as the evidence
proves, that one of the assessors was not so appointed; and that bundles of
blank warrants were left in the hands of each commissioner, to be filled up
with any names he pleased; which task in one instance a commissioner assigned
to an assessor; sufficient is shown to justify our exacting on a ^pital trial,
the best evidence of regular appointments, that the case will admit: the best,
the only evidence, is the record of the commissioners, which the law directs to
be kept by the clerk of the board. There can indeed, be no room to justify the
transfer of the discretion and authority vested in the commissioners by
Congress: it is not like the common case of blank certificates, to
authenticate, ministerially, the signature of a magistrate, notary, etc. which,
I as a public officer have often filled up on behalf of the Governor: but it is
the case of a discretion, arising from the judgment, information, and integrity
of the party, who is confidentially appointed to exercise it; -- such a
discretion as is vested in the Governor to appoint Judges, of which he could
not have transferred to me, in the shape of blank commissions, without, I
believe, exposing both of us to the jeopardy of impeachment.

2. Having thus delivered my sentiments upon the points of law, that arise on
the evidence, I shall now enter upon the consideration of the second
proposition, -- the general state of the discontents in the northern counties;
and how far the rescue at Bethlehem was connected with the previous
disturbances.

And here I find, gentlemen, that the source, from which proceeds much if not
all, of our political good, discharges, likewise, much, if not all of our
political evil: I mean the business of elections. You will recollect the
testimony of Mr. Horsefield.

That gentleman, when he wished to give you a description of the origin of all
the mischief that we deprecate, pointed his finger emphatically, at the
election of 1798. Now, I pray that I may not be misunderstood in the progress I
shall make through the scene which is thus disclosed; let it not be supposed,
that I am depraved enough to justify the misconduct that has been exhibited;
because I am firm enough to contend, that it did not proceed from motives
directed to Treason, nor lead to consequences that amount to Treason. At the
eve of our election, it is natural for the citizens of a free country, to
canvass what has been done by the public agents; to applaud the good, and
reprobate the bad: and in doing this they exercise a right; nay, they perform a
duty. No intelligible and candid man will say that the constitution of a
representative republic can be preserved in a vigorous and healthy state,
unless the people, from whom it denies its vital principle, are vigilant and
virtuous in the exercise of the elective franchise. For this purpose they
retain the right of opinion; and though they may use it upon mistaken, or
erroneous grounds, if they use it fairly and peaceably, there is no power to
control or obstruct them.

I ask, then, what were the ostensible causes of discontent? They will be
delineated by the opposite council as specter of the most visionary, yet most
horrible aspect; but notwithstanding any sincere abhorrence of the manner in
which the discontent has been manifested, I cannot admit that the causes did
not afford a legal ground for exercising the right of opinion. For instance,
the alien and Sedition laws. They are a novelty in this country, and their
novelty might alone attract the popular attention and displeasure. But were the
inhabitants of the northern counties of Pennsylvania the only dissatisfied
citizens? Peruse the debates, examine the files of Congress, and you will find
the most pointed declarations of the public opinion, the most unequivocal marks
of dissatisfaction, throughout the United States. Exercising the right of
opinion, the people disapproved the laws, and the law makers. Exercising the
right of Election they endeavored to promote the success of those candidates,
who would regularly procure a repeal of the laws. Again: the stamp act was
strongly objected to, and produced the nick name of "Stamplers," which was
applied generally to the friends of government. Now, in my opinion, there
cannot be a more convenient mode of taxation than an imposition on stamps; but
that was not the opinion of the people of Northampton and Bucks. They had
imbibed a prejudice against a stamp act in the year 1775, and not considering
properly the ground of American opposition to the tyranny of taxation without
representation, they confounded the name with the principle of the law. I
repeat that I do not agree with them, but I contend that they had a right to
speak freely on the subject.

Again. The house tax was objected to; not from the real, but from the
imaginary burdens which it imposed; for if it had been intended to devise a tax
for the relief of the poor, at the cost of the rich, for the benefit of the
country at the expense of the city, there could not, I think, be a more
ingenious plan than the present law exhibits. The opposition must evidently,
therefore, have arisen from misconception, or misinformation. But if their
opinion of the law was sincere, however erroneous, it is entitled to
indulgence. The fallibility of the human understanding, and the frailty of our
passions, must be respected in every wise and benevolent system of politics, or
law. A man who honestly acts under a false impression of facts, may be pitied
as a weak man, but he ought not to be punished as a wicked one. Then, the
rioters were under an evident delusion, as to the principle of the land tax,
the purity of the government, and the compensation of public officers. They had
not the ordinary access to information, since our laws are published in
English, and most of them only understood German: and this being a question of
property, they acted upon the first blind impulse of their avarice, proving the
truth of Mr. Horsefield's observation, "that the Germans are fond of their
money, and do not like to part with it." But still there is a criterion which
in applying a rule of law ought always to be regarded: -- I mean the moral
character, and mental seize, of the men who are arraigned. If a
discontent exists, we cannot fairly expect the same mode of expressing it, from
illiterate, uncultivated men, the scattered inhabitants of a remote district,
that we may reasonably exact from men of education and manners, formed by the
luxury and refinements of a metropolis: These will take care, if they do
express their discontents, to avoid personal indignity, and legal
embarrassments; while those, without skill to ascertain the limits of the law,
as without delicacy to respect the inviolability of the person, rarely act
without being riotous, or complain without being abusive. Plain men, then, have
but plain ways to manifest what they feel; and they ought not to be tried and
condemned by a more perfect, and generally, a more artificial standard. A
disturbance similar to the one under consideration is not uncommon in England;
but the government, instead of entering prosecutions against the discontented,
for treason, has sometimes thought it proper to acquiesce in the wishes of the
people. We all remember the popular influence in depriving Lord North of the
reins of government. The attempt of a minister (Mr. Pit) to involve that
nation in a war with Russia, was a very unpopular measure; murmurs and
complaints reverberated through the kingdom, and, finally, he was obliged to
abandon his project The shop tax was sanctioned by all the branches of the
Parliament; but it generated clamours so loud and so acrimonious, riots so
numerous and so outrageous, resistance to lawful authority so daring and so
injurious, that the government itself might justly be said to be assailed; and
the act of parliament to be repealed by force and intimidation; yet, not a
single indictment for high treason was projected. Hence it is that I think
risings of the people, like the present should be viewed with the determination
to punish, (...) account of delinquency, but, also, with the disposition to
mitigate on account of prejudice, or ignorance. In a country where party spirit
beats high, there should be peculiar caution on the subject: For, even in the
present case, has not the joy testified by the triumphant majority at the late
election, been classed with the symptoms of popular discontent and hostility to
the government? Nor will it be denied that there actually did arise in the
minds of the people a serious doubt, whether the law was in existence or not;
and although, I repeat, that ignorance is not a legal excuse, yet you must take
into view the state of information, before you can ascertain the degree of
guilt. Under this ignorance, in this state of doubt, can the refusal to permit
the assessors to enter a particular township, be construed into a fixed and
deliberate intention of levying war against the government? Though the law had
been enacted, we find that the subject of the law had been brought anew before
Congress, and petitions were sent in abundance praying for a repeal. These
discontented people might have supposed that a repeal was effected, or
intended; though we, who were at the seat of government, knew the object of the
revision was merely to amend, and not to rescind the law. At the meeting at
Kline's (acting, probably, under the mistake that I have suggested) there was
an express declaration, that the people did not think the law was in force at
that time: And here let me remark, that the prisoner, who is called the great
parent of the discontents, was not present at Kline's, which appears to have
been the first step in the opposition to the land tax. Such was the state of
information at that period. Mr. Horsefield has said that there were general
discontents prevailing throughout the country: but his allegation is too vague,
too comprehensive, to be understood or acted upon. The citizens of a free
government have a right, if they apprehend that a violation of their
constitution is intended, or if they think that any encroachment is made on the
bulwarks of liberty, or property, to express their opinion; but is it
practicable so to express that opinion as not to encounter from their political
opponents the charge of discontent and sedition? How, in the present instance,
was the popular discontent expressed? At first petitions to the government were
proposed, framed and subscribed. This was the result of Kline's meeting; and in
this, I presume, no hostility, no levying war, can be discovered. At every
subsequent meeting, whether convened by the assessors, or by the people
themselves, the reliance on legislative redress was never abandoned; though, it
is true there was great intemperance of manner and of language. The assessors
were sometimes interrupted in their journies, and sometimes jostled in the
crowd; and the unmeaning epithets of Stamplers and Tories, were rudely applied
to the friends of government. But however censurable, where is the treason in
such proceedings? A rioter and a traitor are not synonimous characters; and let
us say what we please about nicknames and slander, the society that patiently
submits to the scurrility of the Philadelphia newspapers, will never be
disgusted or enraged at the indecorum or vulgarity of the northern insurgents.
But the insurgents went further; they intimidated the assessors: and is that
treason? No; it is the very gist of the offense for which the sedition act
explicitly provides. Is it not the very phrase of that aft, that if any persons
shall combine to intimidate an officer from the performance of his duty, he
shall be deemed guilty of a high misdemeanour, and be punished with fine and
imprisonment? Now let us go step by step through the evidence, and I defy the
most inquisitional ingenuity to discover any thing beyond the design, and the
effect, of a system of intimidation. Is there any actual force resorted to? No!
I find the bridle of one assessor seized, and his leg laid hold of; but the man
is not pulled of his horse, nor is he the least injured in his person. I find
that a witness thinks that he heard the word " fire" given, and that he saw two
men from a neighboring porch, present their rifles at another assessor: well,
did the riflemen fire? No. They had guns; their guns were probably, loaded; and
if any thing more than intimidation was meditated, how shall we account for
their not firing? But we hear a great deal of the personal jeopardy of the
commissioners and assessors; and yet who of them sustained an injury? Mr.
Chapman, Mr. Foulke, and Mr. Child's are, generally speaking, treated as men of
merit and consideration; and, in particular wherever the prisoner met them,
they were respected and protected; as at Jacob Fries's and Robert's taverns. To
repel the plea for favor founded on such correct department toward the
officers, we shall be told, that the prisoner was an artful man, that he was
the leader; and it will be strongly urged against him, that he called on the
officers to surrender the public papers. Of his conduct as a leader, I shall
speak hereafter; and of his demand of the papers, it is surely sufficient to
observe, that in opposition to the sense of the rioters, and at the risque of
his life, he returned the papers, privately, in the same state in which he had
received them.

Having spoken of the Assessors, I would wish, likewise, to review the evidence
with respect to Mr. Eyrely, the commissioner, and Col. Nichols, the marshal.

[Here Mr. Dallas entered into an investigation of the evidence, to show, that
although the people acted violently at the several meetings which Mr. Eyerly
had called to explain the law to them: that although Mr. Eyerly accompanied the
marshal in his whole progress for serving process, and that although he was
conspicuously present at Bethlehem, no personal violence was ever offered to
him, or to the marshal; and all the ill-treatment they encountered, amounted to
no more than an attempt to intimidate them, but which they both declared was
without effect. Mr. Dallas then continued as follows.]

And are we to be to told, Sir, that these acts without force, without any
apparent object but to intimidate the assessors of a particular district; that
district acts of inconsiderate riot and folly shall, when connected and
combined, constitute a deliberate treason, by levying war against the United
States If no treason was actually perpetrated, if none was intended, when the
transactions occurred I insist, that nothing previous to them, nothing ex post
facto, can make the prisoner a traitor; the intention at the time must have
been treasonable; or the act can never be punished as treason.

Let us now, however, proceed to enquire into the circumstances of the rescue
at Bethlehem, and its connection with the previous disturbances. I think the
evidence is strong in support of the assertion, that the sole, independent,
consummate object of the assembling of the people at that place, was to rescue
these prisoners. Is there any satisfactory proof of a combination between the
people of Northampton and of Bucks? I know that an expression is said to have
escaped the Prisoner, that, in this general discontent with respect to the land
tax, certain persons of a part of Northampton would join the inhabitants of
Lower Milford: but let the foundation of his opinions be tested by the facts,
and it evidently arose, not from negotiation, conspiracy and compact, (as the
prosecution supposes) but from a general knowledge, which he possessed in
common with thousands, that the land tax was unpopular throughout the adjacent
country. It is enough, however, for the defense, that no combination, or
correspondence, is proved; since the rule declares, that in legal
contemplation, what does not appear, and what does not exist, are the same. You
do not find the people of Bucks attending any meetings but in their own county;
nor entering into the county of Northampton at all previously to their
appearance at Bethlehem.

Gentlemen, it might surely be expected, that a concerted insurrection for
treasonable purposes, prevailing throughout the three counties of Bucks
Northampton and Montgomery, and cemented by common interests and passions,
would have been inspired and conducted by one common council: but is there the
slighted proof of such a cooperation? I am aware of the communication made by
Captain Staeler to the son of Conrad Marks; but the communication itself was
merely accidental; and amounts to nothing more than the request of one
individual of Northampton to an individual of Bucks. I am aware, likewise, that
a message was received at Quaker town (as one of the witnesses says) mentioning
the arrest of the Northampton prisoners, and inviting the people of Bucks to
assist in rescuing them. Who brought this message, and to whom it was
delivered, I don't recollect; but it seems, that a compliance was resolved on;
and a paper expressing the resolution, was prepared and signed by Fries, with a
number of other persons. But was the object of the invitation, or of the
resolution to comply with it, treason, or rescue; -- to commit a riot, or to
levy war against the United States? I repeat, that the sole, independent, and
exclusive purpose was to rescue a particular set of Prisoners.

Now, if in the previous part of this transaction, nothing has struck your
minds as traitorous in the acts, or the intention of the people, I beg you to
follow me, gentlemen, with strict attention to a consideration of the object
that was actually effected, and the means of effecting it. The object was to
obtain a rescue; a rescue was effected, but it was effected with circumstances
of military array: will this alter the original character of the riot? No, sir:
-- If the people did not repair to Bethlehem with a traitorous intention, their
arms and military equipments will not convert them into traitors. As on the one
hand, I grant, that the circumstance of military array is not necessary to an
act of treason, if the, intention is traitorous, so I insist, on the other
hand, that the circumstance of military array will not constitute treason,
without such intention.

[Here Mr. Dallas entered into an investigation of the evidence in relation to
the assembling of the people, their march to Bethlehem, an their conduct there.
In the course of the detail he endeavored to establish, that the sole object
of the rioters was to rescue the prisoner; that no injury was offered, or
intended against the marshal, the commissioners, the assessors, or the posse
comitatis; and that although the prisoner was forced into a conspicuous station
among the rioters, his conduct had been marked with civility toward the public
officers, and a solicitude to avoid the effusion of blood. On the last of these
points, Mr. Dallas concluded as follows:

And here permit me to remark, that if the conduct of John Fries was such as to
justify his being selected as a subject for capital punishment, I cannot see
the policy or justice of the selection; nor forbear from deprecating the
consequences of the precedent. A good man may sometimes affect to join a mob,
with a view to acquire and to exercise an influence in suppressing it: or an
intelligent and temperate man may, for a while, be associated for an illicit
purpose, with a furious and ignorant rabble, who ill naturally look up to him
as a leader: but in either case, the power and the disposition to avert, or to
limit outrage, will be dangerous to the prominent individual who displays them;
and his only safety is in mingling with the crowd, whatever may be the
direction or the devastation of the storm!

Gentlemen of the jury, I have now gone through two of the general
propositions, into which I divided the consideration of the defense; and, in
the course of my observations, I have anticipated much that related to the
third proporsition -- the particular conduct of the prisoner. I should here,
therefore, break off, as I feel that my strength, and I fear that your patience
are exhausted: but that the proclamation of the President demands a moment's
further attention. By the laws of the United States it is provided, that, under
certain circumstances, the President may call out the militia to suppress an
insurrection, having previously published a proclamation, requiring the
insurgents to disperse. This proclamation is obviously in the nature of an
admonition; and if the admonition produces the effect, I ask, whether in the
present, as in every other case, it ought not to produce impunity? Then I
argue, on general principles, that if the rioters did peaceably retire to their
homes upon this authoritative warning, they ought to be sheltered from
punishment for any offense previously committed. Nor is the argument without a
sanction from the positive authorities of the law. 1 Hale 138: And the court
will recollect, that the principle is incorporated into the statute, which is
usually called in England, the riot act. There must surely, be some object in
requiring the President to issue his proclamation; and the one which I suggest
is equally benevolent and politic. On the present occasion it produced an
immediate and decisive obedience to the laws. Besides when we recollect, that
the President has the power to pardon offenses, to discontinue prosecutions,
and to grant a general amnesty, as in the case of the western insurrection; why
may we not consider the proclamation as emanating from that attribute of mercy,
since no specific formula is prescribed, by which its exercise shall be
expressed, or announced? Judge Iredell interrupted Mr. Dallas, observing that
he thought it irregular to make any use of the proclamation as a pardon,
without pleading it. Mr. Dallas said, that he only meant to infer from the
facts of the warning and the dispersion, that the insurgents never meditated
treason.


Mr. Dallas then proceeded to point out the differences in the nature, progress
and turpitude of the Northampton insurrection, and of the western insurrection:
2 Dallas'a reports 349, and analyzing again the case of lord George Gordon, he
contended that upon that authority alone, the prisoner ought to be acquitted.
In the case of lord Gordon, the direct, the avowed object, was to obtain the
repeal of a law; and as petitions and remonstrances were unavailing, a body of
40,000 men were convened and marshalled to surround, intimidate, and coerce the
Parliament. Riot, arson, murder, and every species of the most daring outrage
and devastation, ensued; and yet, the only prosecution for high treason was
instituted against the leader of the association; and that prosecution
terminated in an acquittal. View, then, the riots of lord George Gordon in
their origin; estimate their guilt by the avowed object; aggravate the scene
with the cotemporaneous insults and violence offered to the persons of peers
and commoners; and close the retrospect with the horrors which the British
metropolis endured for more than eight days; and then say, (exclaimed Mr.
Dallas) what was the guilt of John Fries compared with the guilt of lord George
Gordon; -- what is there in the English doctrine of treason that has justified
an acquittal of the latter; -- what is there in the American doctrine of
treason, that will justify a conviction of the former?

Gentlemen: I can proceed no longer. The life of the prisoner is left, with
great confidence, in your hands. There are attempts to make him responsible
under the notion of a general conspiracy, for all the actions and all the words
of meetings, which he never attended, and of persons whom he never saw. But
this is too, too harsh, in a case of blood; It is inconsistent with the
humanity, the tenderness of life, which are characteristics of the American
people, and especially of the people of Pennsylvania. Nor is it called for by
the policy, or practice, of those who administer our government. I believe that
to the chief magistrate, to every public officer, to every candid citizen, it
will be matter of a gratification, if after so fair, so full a scrutiny, you
should be of opinion, that treason has not been committed. Such an event will
by no means ensure impunity to the delinquent; for, though he has not committed
treason, though the punishment of death is not to be inflicted; the violation
of the laws may be amply avenged upon an indictment of a different nature. The
only question, however, now to be decided is, whether the offense proved, is
like the offense charged, treason against the United States. The affirmation
must be incontestably established, as to the fact and the intention, by the
testimony of two witnesses to the same overt act: but remember, I pray you,
what the venerable lord Mansfield stated to the jury on lord Gordon's trial, --
remember, that it is enough for us, in defense of the prisoner, to raise a
doubt; for, if you doubt (it is the principle of law, as well as of humanity)
you must acquit.

The council for the prisoner then called the following witnesses.

JOHN JAMIESON.

COUNCIL. We wish you to inform the court and jury, what you know, of the
conduct of John Fries.


WITNESS. Sometime after last February court, John Fries came to my house; I
had heard, on my way coming to Newtown, that there was to be a meeting at
Kline's. I asked him whether there was many people there, and what they had
done. He told me there was, and they had agreed not to allow the assessments to
be made in the township as yet; he said the reason was, because they did not
know whether there was a law passed on it or not; I told him I really believed
there was, for though I had not seen it myself, I had heard of it. He likewise
told me that Mitchel had undertaken to draw up an instrument of writing, but he
could not go through with it, and that he called upon him to assist him to do
it, which he did. -- On the 6th of March, I had occasion to go to the township
meeting on account of a pauper which was likely to become chargeable, calling
at Jacob Fries's, I had been there but a short time, before a parcel of men
came there, some with arms, and some without. They called for liquor, freely.
They then proceeded to make enquiry whether any body knew whether the assessors
were going about the township or not: I do not know whether they got any
information or no, but they agreed to go up to Quaker town; after they were
gone a little while, Jacob Fries and I concluded that we would ride up after
them: we went to the house of Enoch Roberts. We went into a room, but nothing
occurred there, and I then asked Jacob Fries if he would ride down to Daniel
Penrose's: after we had been there some short time, one of the family told us
that our horses were getting loose, so we went out, and there we saw Mr.
Rodrick, who halted; he appeared to be much frightened; so I asked him what was
the matter, he told me they had catched Foulke and Child's, and that he was
afraid they would kill them, and insisted on my going back to try to prevent
them being hurt: I told him I would not, except he would too; he said he would
if I would engage they should not hurt him; I told him I would not do that, for
I did not know what they had against him. However, at his desire I went to
town, and when I got there, I think I was told they had Foulke in the stable;
so I rode up, and called him by name, and I think he answered me. At my desire,
he came into the house: while we were walking along, I told him it was a pity
he should assess the township till they were more reconciled: I told him I
thought the best way to quiet the people, was to show them the small
assessments he had made, and promise not to go about again till they were
satisfied. He said he was willing to do that. We then walked into the room, and
soon after we were there, Conrad Marks walked toward us with a kind of sword
in his hand, though I believe sheathed, and said to Foulke " What, I hear you
are going about this business again; did not I tell you not to do this
business, but I cannot tell you in English like as I could in Dutch; but it is
for the sake of those few dollars that you go about this business." Foulke
answered him that he did not do it for the sake of the money. Marks answered, "
did I not tell you that it you could not do without, come to my house and I
would keep you four or five days; but if you had to do this for half a crown a
day, the devil would not send you about the township. I then told Marks what I
had advised Foulke: he said if he would do that, he would use him like a
gentleman. Then the affair of Captain Seaborne See Thomas's testimony.
took place, which seemed to draw the attention from Mr. Foulke. I saw John
Fries looking over some papers, but I did not know what they were, I went away.
--

A day or two after the affair at Bethlehem, John Fries came to me and told me
the circumstances, much the same as was related by the marshal to the best of
my knowledge: he then said he did not know what to do with these Germans, for
that they had got it grafted in them that general Washington was opposed to
this law, and that, so poor a man as he was, he would not grudge half the
expense of a man to go and get his opinion on purpose to satisfy the Germans.
The next knowledge I got about it, was from two gentlemen who came from
Philadelphia in order to carry the proclamation about, and they gave me some
proclamations, desiring me to do all I could to get submission to the laws. I
spoke to many of them, and there was a meeting called at Marks's on the Monday
following. There were 150 people or more there from the three counties. It was
agreed by several people that it would be best to have men chosen to form a
committee, from the three counties, to consult what to do for the best. This
was agreed to, and four men were chosen from each county. I was one of four
chosen from Bucks, with George Kline, David Roberts, and Conrad Marks. Dr.
Baker, 'squire Davis, and I think 'squire Jarrett were some. We unanimously
agreed to recommend to the people, as near as I can recollect, to desist from
opposing any public officer in the execution of his office, and enjoined upon
the citizens to use their influence, to prevent any opposition, and to give due
submission to the laws of the United States, dated 18th of March.


Was there any opposition at all when this was reported?


I did not hear any body but did consent to what was done by the committee. The
people of lower Milford thought it would be necessary to have the assessments
taken. David Roberts said that he believed Mr. Chapman would agree for them to
appoint an assessor in their own township. It was then agreed that we should
ride to him to know; which we did next day: he said he had once made the offer,
but it was now out of his power. He then said Mr. Clark had been first
appointed, and that he had not yet given up his commission, and he did not know
how another could be appointed now; that if Mr. Clark would go about it, it
would answer the end. On returning home, I called at Frederick Henny's, and
desired him to draw out some German advertisements, and send them over toward
Marks's, to desire the people to meet, and consent to let Clark go about. I
believe he did it. At the time of appointment, the people met at Mitchel's,
perhaps there were about 40 there. John Fries, and Frederic Henny were there.
The people in general agreed to let Clark go about, I believe Fries and Henny
did not vote. I went to Fries and asked the reason: he said he had no objection
to the people voting for him, and he wished it was done; but as he was first
opposed to Clark going about the township, he thought it would not be right in
him to vote. I believe Henny said about the same. -- I saw Fries again a few
days before he was taken: he told me he had heard a report which troubled him
more than any thing in his life: I asked him what it was: he said that a report
was in circulation that he was collecting up men to assist the French: he said,
"da^^ the French, if they were now to come to invade this country, so old a man
as I am, I would venture my life against them; but I want nothing ^o do with
them.


COUNCIL. Did Fries make any opposition at Marks's?


WITNESS. No, I heard of no opposition.


Has his house been assessed?


I do not know.


Cross examination. Was there any proposition made there about signing a
submission paper?


I do not recollect any. -- I recollect Fries said that if he was called upon,
or summoned, he would come forward and deliver himself up. -- This he said at
Marks's.


JACOB HUBER.

COUNCIL. Was you at the meeting at Conrad Marks's?


WITNESS. Yes.


What happened there?


It was after the proclamation, and we were choosing the men to meet in the
committee, Fries and I got a talking together. He says, now Jacob, you see the
error we got into by going to Bethlehem. I answered to him, that the assessors
would have to go about and assess the houses; he said they should not assess
his before he gave them a dinner, then they might take the assessment of his
house; and if I am not at home, said he, my son will give them a dinner.


After this meeting, what was the general situation of the township?


Quiet. John Fries was peaceable and quiet as any man could be; I never
afterward heard of the least opposition.


Cross examination. Did you see George Mitchel at Marks's?


Yes.


Was you much with him?


No, no conversation with him; he was clerk of the meeting.


ISRAEL ROBERTS.

COUNCIL. Please to relate to the court and jury what you know of this affair.


WITNESS. After the proclamation arrived in our neighborhood, there was a
statement in the next weeks' newspaper, stating the conduct of John Fries,
which I procured, and took to John Fries. After looking over the paper, he
seemed pretty submissive, but said nothing: he appeared, I thought much
distressed in his mind. I told him that I wanted to have some conversation with
him, relative to it. I then asked him whether he had rightly considered this
matter? whether he had not run himself into danger inconsiderately, and told
him the consequences as I thought might attend it. He said he never had
considered it so much as he had within a few days before. He said he had not
slept half an hour for three or four nights, and that he would give all he was
worth in the world if the matter was all settled, and he clear of it: he
likewise faid, if the government would send for him, he would go with him, even
if a little child was sent.


What was the general state of the township of Milford after the proclamation
was read?


I do not know, I believe there was some little opposition to the law.


Was any opposition made by the prisoner?


I do not know that there was. -- I recollect that John Fries farther expressed
himself to me at that time, that he was charged with taking part with the
French, which he took very hard, and signified his determination to defend the
country against any invasion, if any army should invade our land, he would, at
any time lay all this aside, and turn out against them, and particularly
France. Judge Peter's said he must do these people the justice to say that from
all he heard, and all he saw, they were generally disposed against the French;
he found none at all in favor of them.


There was a meeting at Mitchel's after that, to choose an assessor; Fries was
there; he was asked to vote, but he said he would have nothing to do with it.


COUNCIL. Did you hear him express any doubts of the existence of the law?


WITNESS. Yes, more than once, I heard him say that he did not believe it was
and established law, and therefore he was determined to oppose it.


COUNCIL. What time did he say so?


WITNESS. I think it was the 5th of March.


Cross examination. Where was he then?


Not far from Jacob Fries's tavern, on the road. He said he would oppose it,
till he had known other counties had agreed to it, then, said he, we must
submit; but he would choose lower Milford should be the last.


Cross examination. At the last meeting at Mitchel's, did there or did there
not appear a disposition to wait till they should have assistance from any
other place.


Yes, it was said that a letter had arrived to George Mitchel from Virginia,
stating that there were a number of men, I think 10,000 on their way to join
them: that letter was traced from one to another, through six or eight persons,
till at last it came from one who was not there!


Were not some of the company at that time in arms and uniform?


Yes.


COURT. Do you recollect what was said when the letter was mentioned.


I do no recollect, but they appeared to be more opposed to the law than they
were before.


ATTORNEY. Was there any declaration, from any person there, that they had
their own laws, and would submit to no other?


Not that I recollect. -- At the meeting at George Mitchel's at which Mr.
Foulke and Mr. Chapman was present, which was held for the purpose of
explaining the law, there were a number (about 12) came up in uniform, and
armed with a flag and liberty on it. They came into the house, and appeared to
be very much opposed to the law, and in a very bad humor. I proposed to read
the law to them; they asked me how I came to advertise the meeting: I told him
I did it with the consent of a few others: he asked me what business I had to
do it: I told him we did it to explain the law. He looked me in the face and
said, " We don't want any of your damned laws, we have laws of our own," and
shook the muzzle of his musket in my face, saying, " This is our law, and we
will let you know it." -- There were four or five who wished to hear it, but
others forbid it, and said it should not be read, and it was not done.


Cross examination. Did you see Fries on the evening of the 5th of March?


Yes I did. -- He asked me if they had assessed my house? I told him they had:
he then asked me if I had told any body of it; I said I had not: he then added
that he had forbade them to come into the township, as he did not believe it
was an established law, and others should be gone through with first. I think
he then added that they could not get hold of Rodrick: they had got Foulke, but
let him go, and added if they had got Rodrick they would have put him under
guard for that night.


Did he appear in a good temper?


No, he did not, and he seemed very much opposed to the law.


ATTORNEY. Was Fries' objection to the tax law, or to what particular law?


He did not express his opposition to any one that I heard, but to the law for
assessing houses, that night: in a conversation I had with him before, he
appeared to be opposed to the alien and sedition law also.


ATTORNEY. Did he seem to talk about its being unconstitutional?


I do not recollect -- I know that he expressed himself a number of times, that
he did not believe it was an established law.


ATTORNEY. Did he mean by that, that the law had ever passed, or that it might
be amended?


I took it that he did not believe the law had ever passed; he seemed to doubt
of its being established.


EVERHARD EQULKE.

COUNCIL. What was the conduct of John Fries at Quaker town on the 6th of March.


WITNESS. AS I was coming from the house of James Chapman with the other
assessors (John Rodrick and Cephas Child's) when I came nearly opposite Enoch
Roberts's, I saw the prisoner at the Bar, and a number of others with their
arms, (though I don't know that he had any, but the others had.) Some of them
held them nearly as high as my horse's side, on a level, with their arms
hanging down. I spoke to them as I passed and rode on till I got nearly to the
other tavern, David Zellers's. When I got there, a number run out and cried
"stop." Some of them addressing me by name, desired me to stop; which I did in
a pleasant manner. Before any of them got to me, I think John Fries came over
from Roberts's; when he was about a rod from me, he called me by my name, and
told me he had told me yesterday that he would take me to day, and he was now
come to do it, or it should now be done, I don't know which he said. Captain
Kuyder then ran up, and seized my horse by the bridle, and a number of others
came round me; the prisoner did not come himself. Some of the people there
(Jacob and John Huber) came and took Kuyder off, and be then seized me by the
foot, and endeavored to dismount me, but he failed. He then again took hold of
the bridle, but Habers released me again. Fries came up and said, "Foulke, you
shall be taken, if you will get off, there shall no man hurt you." He took hold
of the bridle, and ordered Kuyder to hold it; I rode up to the stable, got off,
and went into the house. When in the room, which was very thick of people, the
prisoner came and demanded my assessment papers. I told him that I did not like
to give them up; he told me not to hesitate, but to do it. In that situation I
gave them to him, and told him I was in hopes he would not take them away
without giving them to me again when he had looked at them. -- I then went into
another room with some of them, who exclaimed much against the law. Huber said
they were not willing to submit to it yet. Fries then gave me the assessment
papers again unhurt, and told me that he had used me better than I deserved,
and that if I had a mind I might return him to court, which I had before
threatened. He then went with me to the bar, and took me to my horse through
the mob, and held the bridle while I got on, and I rode off.


Then you received no injury?


No.


Cross examination. Did, or did not the prisoner at the bar in the course of
conversation at Quaker town express any consciousness that he had been engaged
in a dangerous enterprise?


Yet, he said he knew, or thought he had transgressed the law in such a manner
as to endanger his life, and that I might return him if I would.


ATTORNEY Did he speak of any force that was expected to assist him?


He did not that, he did the day before, when he attacked Roderick and me in
the road. He said there would be 700 men there to morrow morning, pointing to
Jacob Fries's house.


COUNCIL. Are not you an assessor for lower Milford?


I was appointed assessor for the whole district.


What time were you appointed?


I do not know.


Have you your warrant?


Not with me.


Was your appointment so ear^ (...) November?


I believe not.


Was it early in February?


I believe it was. -- It was on the last day of the court. (January 28.)


Was it the same kind of warrant as other assessors had?


Yes.


Who delivered the warrant to you?


James Chapman brought it to me at my house.


When you were at Quaker town there was a cry for the papers from you, were
these papers respecting the rating of houses under the land tax?


Yes.


When were you first applied to, to become an assessor for that district?


Perhaps about two weeks before.


Who by?


By James Chapman, and several other neighbors.


Do you know whether there was a meeting of the board of commissioners for the
purpose of appointing you?


I cannot say.


MR. EWING, After the evidence on the part of the prisoner was closed, rose and
addressed the jury as follows:
May it please your honors: AND YOU, GENTLEMEN OF THE JURY.
YOU are now gentlemen in the discharge of the most important duty, which
possibly has, or ever can fall to your lot as members of society. -- This is a
cause of the greatest magnitude, of the first impression. -- Its importance is
derived not only from a consideration that the life of the prisoner is now at
stake, but also from the precedent that your verdict will establish in similar
cases in future. From this view of it, it claims the highest and most serious
attention that can be bestowed upon it.

When I address you on this occasion, I feel diffident, lest my ideas should
not be clothed with that perspicuity, or clearness, that I could wish; or my
sentiments delivered with that ease or Elegance that might ensure success. I
shall rely upon your goodness to forgive any innacuracy of style or sentiment
that your penetration may discover in my address to you.

When I address you on this occasion it is with an anxiety of mind, which I
never before experienced, when I reflect upon the possible issue of this cause
with respect to the unfortunate prisoner at the bar.

The situation of the public mind, now roused to resentment; the place where
this subject is made matter of enquiry; together with the prejudices that may
exist against the defendant, all conspire to form strong obstacles to the
defense which I shall attempt on this occasion. But when I consider your
characters gentlemen, I am fully persuaded, that you will suffer no
circumstances of this kind to bias your impartial judgments, to destroy that
inflexible integrity which chracterizes you; or prevent this defendant from
receiving from your hands (which is all he asks) a fair, a candid and impartial
trial; that you will hear his cause under every presumption of his innocence,
until the contrary is proved by the most uncontrovertible evidence -- That it
is essential to the very existence of every government; that it is essential to
the preservation of life, liberty and property, that offenses should be
punished, and that the crime of treason, the highest that a member of society
can commit, is what I will admit, but I contend that it is equally essential to
the existence of a government, and to our security as members of it, that every
man indicted, should have a fair trial; to have the offense defined with
certainty, and proved in such a manner, as to leave no possibility of doubt on
the minds of the jury.

That this man has been guilty of a flagrant violation of the law, an offense
for which he deserves to suffer, and which the good of society requires should
be punished, is what I readily admit; but I do contend, and I assert with
confidence, because I think the law will bear me out, that no act the prisoner
has committed can be construed treason, by the most rigid, or strained
construction of law.

Gentlemen permit me to observe, that in proportion to the nature and magnitude
of an offense, so ought the evidence to be. -- As the accusation against this
man is of the deepest dye, as it is the highest possible offense against the
laws and government that he could commit; so should the proof of it come from
the purest sources, and be of that nature as to establish the crime beyond the
possibility of a doubt.

He is indicted for the crime of treason: -- happy for us that we are not now
left to the construction of judges; -- to the opinions of men of any kind, or
we might be led astray in a variety of instances, and at times introduce
accumulative treason. The people of this country, knowing the magnitude of this
object, and the propriety of good security against such constructions ingrafted
into the constitution, the definition of the crime, and transmitted to us
unimpaired. Congress recognized the constitutional definition, by ingrafting
also the very words of the constitution into the act for the punishment of
crimes: they have there prescribed the punishment; they have said that the
perpetrators of this crime shall suffer death. We are now to consider how far
the defendant is guilty of treason, as laid in the indictment. I had meant to
have gone more largely and fully into this subject from the authorities of law
writers of eminence; but my learned colleague has so ably, in so masterly a
manner handled this cause, that less remains for me to do. I shall endeavor to
show you what is to be understood by levying war against the government of the
United States, and think I can rest on that ground with safety, to prove to
your satisfaction, that the prisoner has not been guilty of the crime of
treason.

The defense rests upon three grounds.

First. That he has not been guilty of the crime charged in the indictment.

Secondly. If he has been guilty of any crime at all, the act of Congress has
sufficiently defined it, and prescribed the punishment not to be capital.

Thirdly. I contend that the proclamation of the President should operate as a
pardon to take off the guilt of actions done previously thereunto, if not
continued in.

Judge Iredell here interrupted Mr. Ewing, respecting the pardon; and said that
a plea must be put in, if that was insisted on, but the prisoner must plead
guilty to plead pardon. The proclamation was read by Mr. Ewing, in which he
observed, there was no pardon promised.

Mr. Dallas said he had begun speaking on this point before, but was
interrupted from explaining his idea: he thought there was much difference
between an assemblage before and after an admonition to disperse: it doubtless
would have been treason had they continued in arms, but their future actions
put a construction upon their past actions, and proved that they were guilty of
riot, and not treason.

Mr. Ewing continued. -- This opposition arose from ignorance; they did not
know, that the law was in force; and the first time they knew that, was by the
proclamation, when they actually did disperse, and submit to the law.

The prisoner at the bar is not guilty of the treason laid in the indictment,
for First, there must be a traitorous intention, and Secondly, that intention
must be carried into effect. In order to prove that, we must trace his conduct
through Bucks county, and then proceed to Bethlehem, where the act of treason
is said to have been committed. In order to discover what is meant by levying
war, we are obliged to resort to the authority, or decision of English courts
on the statute of Edward the III. but though every thing that has been done
there, is not to be considered as a proper precedent for us here, yet there are
some rules and constructions in England that will apply to particular cases
here. -- Wherever a set of men take up arms to oppose themselves, to the
government generally: to subvert the laws, or to reform them; in that case they
are said to levy war against the government. The great criterion to distinguish
what amounts to this crime is the quo animo, or the intention with which the
act was done. The object must be of a general nature, and not an assembly to do
a particular act, this would not be treason. I shall now show by the conduct of
the prisoner that his views were not of a general nature, and that it was by no
means marked with that degree of malignity which the council for the
prosecution have represented. You will consider that the residence of the
prisoner was remote from the seat of government; and from that source of
correct information, which as a member of society he ought to have received,
whereby to regulate his conduct. The people with whom he conversed were
unacquainted with your language, warmly, and perhaps superstitiously attached
to old established laws and customs of the place where they resided. Having
been accustomed to be taxed and assessed by men of their own choice; men whose
conduct they had a right to scrutinize, and whom they had used to bring to
account: You need not be surprised that these people would at least hesitate at
admitting innovations into their customs: the ideas which struck them naturally
were, "From what source can this law arise, that should send a stranger into
our townships to make assessments; a right which exclusively, as we think,
belongs to us?" They did not feel such prejudice against this law, considered
as to its effects but from the manner of its breaking upon their view: The
introduction of this new principle alarmed them, but they assembled not to
oppose the law, but to gain time for information of the real existence of it.
Under this delusion they labored, because they had not the advantage we have,
of enjoying information, and the illiterate state they were in operated as a
great source of their opposition. This ignorance and delusion was peculiarly
manifested throughout all their conduct. Their first meeting was held to
consider whether it was a law or not; not being satisfied about it, and
disappointed in their information, they met again, in order to tell the
assessors not to come about their township to make the assessments, until their
doubts were removed: the assessors went on however, and all this while the
people were enveloped in darkness. They warn the assessors; they tell them "we
don't want to repeal this law by violence" -- No, if they had, arresting the
assessors would not have done it, they must have gone to an higher source; and
if they had gone there with a determination to repeal or oppose it, the act
might have received the stamp of treason. I deny that they arrested any of the
officers of the government in the execution of their duty: we have repeatedly
asked upon what authority these men acted; we have asked, and have not obtained
satisfaction, and we therefore presume the authority does not exist; and where
there is no law, there is no transgression. But suppose they had produced their
authority, to what would their opposition have amounted? To a riot, and no
farther. What course did Fries take in this scene? Humanity and tenderness,
wherever his interposition was necessary, and be was present, characterized
him. So far from subverting the government: so far from preventing the
execution of its laws; so far from injuring, or punishing these assessors while
entirely in his power: he prevented the very people who were with him from
doing those acts, and he himself was industrious to release them, and lead them
into a place of safety. If conduct like this is to be construed into the crime
of treason; what act, I ask, will not by and by: if this is treason, it is
unhappy for us, for thousands in the United States have been guilty of the same
thing. Because a law exists, must we acquiesce implicitly -- have we not a
right as freemen, to think -- have we not a right to object to it? It is
impossible that we should be all of one mind, with respect to the beneficial
consequences of a law -- some difference of opinion will necessarily exist. The
opposition was manifested in different places, but it was all to the same law;
but the opposition did, in no instance amount to a traitorous intention, nor
was it ever manifested in their conduct from the beginning to the end. I ask
you, if Fries ever took any active part in it, so as to distinguish him as
their leader? It has been declared that he opposed the law, and likewise that
he took men to Bethlehem to rescue the prisoners, but we do not find there was
any command given. There was a difference of opinion on their way, whether they
should go to Bethlehem or not: If he had commanded these men, and had intended
to levy war against the government, some of them would not have returned; but
he would have led them on to the object without consultation. Trace him toward
Bethlehem: there were several who could not pass the bridge, because toll was
demanded: when he came up he said "count my men." No doubt he meant only the
men of his own company, because we do not hear that he paid for more than his
own. It does not appear that he had any communication whatever, informing him
that such a party were to meet there that day, much less can it be imagined
there were any treasonable communication. He went up with his men, but we find
while another company formed before the house, his men stood aloof; they did
not form there in the ranks, nor did they come there for that purpose. The
consideration that some of their country people were taken prisoners, and they
thought it was unconstitutional and oppressive for them to be taken to
Philadelphia to be imprisoned and tried, induced them to insist upon the
rescue. What did they say? -- "We will bail them: if they are guilty, they
ought to suffer." Bail is refused: the marshal could not have granted that
request, but they did not know that. When they found this their proposal was
rejected, they determine they will have the men. Then John Fries appeared -- a
man who had used the assessors respectfully: a man whose character was that of
humanity -- he was chosen to go in to the marshal to demand the prisoners. One
said he should be commander of them; but it does not appear that he did take
the command at all; but we hear of two others who commanded on that day. Fries
went in and conversed on the release of the prisoners with the marshal, who
with great firmness said, that they must be taken from him. He went out again,
and the men being pretty warm, he checked them: went a second and third time:
all his aim was to prevent the shedding of blood; he pledged himself to the
marshal that no harm should come to him from him or his company.

If the object of these people had been of a general nature, men so obnoxious
in the county as Balliott, Henry and Eyerly would not have escaped their
vengeance, or resentment, when they were so much within their power: had their
conduct been stamped with treason, they would not have been satisfied with
rescuing the prisoners: the officers would have suffered, but not one we find
was hurt. One strong trait, worthy your observation is, that their view in
going to Bethlehem was not to prevent the operation of the law, but simply to
rescue the prisoners; and in this, their conduct cannot amount to more than a
riot and rescue: an offense defined as well as its punishment, in an act of
Congress. As the overt act must be laid in the county where the offense was
committed, and if it is true that treason was not committed at Bethlehem, where
shall we look for it? the gentlemen will not attempt to prove, I presume, that
the beginning of the treasonable act was in Bucks county, and its completion at
Bethlehem. But Bucks has nothing to do with the present indictment at all, and
ought not be brought into view.

Mr. Ewing then referred to Foster 210, and 1 Hale 143 and Lord George Gordon's
case, each of which, he said, far exceeded the case of the prisoner at the bar.
But, he observed, as the time and patience of the jury, to which he felt
himself so much indebted, and which had been so severely tried already in this
lengthy trial; and as the defense had been so ably handled by Mr. Dallas, and
what remained would be, he had no doubt, well conducted by the justly
acknowledged great talents of another learned advocate, he should forbear
enlarging. The verdict you give, gentlemen, said he, will not only be of vast
moment to the prisoner, but will also establish a precedent for future similar
cases, and it will be to your immortal honor if you preserve and decide with
impartiality and firmness; while on the contrary, it will be a source of shame
and disgrace if you do otherwise, through the influence of prejudice or the
operation of external circumstances. I can safely trust the life of my client
in your hands, under a consciousness that those feelings of humanity, and a
just estimation of the evidence, will outweigh all other considerations, and
thus will your righteous verdict gain you the gratitude of you country, the
approbation of your own consciences, and the warmest thanks of the defendant.

MR. SITGREAVES.
With submission to your Honors. GENTLEMEN OF THE JURY.
I ACKNOWLEDGE the propriety of an observation which dropped from one of the
council for the prisoner in the course of his address to you: that is, that
those who are concerned for the prosecution in criminal cases should not
endeavor, by their eloquence or ingenuity to divert the attention of the jury
from the truth, or to stretch that truth so as to give them more unfavourable
impressions on the facts than they will bear. This I must acknowledge would
have been unnecessary advice to me, because the views I shall be able to take
of this subject will be but feeble and imperfect. In the course of my limited
and short experience, I have been but little conversant with criminal courts,
and have paid but little attention to the criminal code, and never have been
engaged in a case so important as the present, my public duties having, for
some years past drawn me from the bar. It may not be wondered, then, if I have
not been able to bring into this court talents equal to meet those called to
the assistance of the prisoner. I must therefore say I shall not be able to do
justice to the case. I confess I feel a desire that those persons who have been
guilty of this second outrage and disgrace brought on the state of
Pennsylvania, may feel the punishment the law inflicts. I hope you and every
one who hears me will join in this sentiment, for on it hangs much of our peace
and security. I have no objection to going still farther -- my lot is cast in
that part of Pennsylvania where this unfortunate circumstance occurred: I feel
particularly for the good order, peace, and prosperity of that part of the
state, but I have unhappily seen it in such a situation that all the harmony of
society was destroyed, and if I were not to feel a strong desire that peace,
harmony, and good order should be restored, I should be destitute of humanity;
for we all know that crimes can only be prevented by inflicting suitable
punishments on the delinquents. I wish, gentlemen, that the law should be
executed against those who were criminal, but when I say so, let me not say
that I wish the prisoner at the bar to be executed: No, my earnest wish is,
that the general good of society may be procured: this man must be tried by the
evidence that (...) brought against him, and upon that alone he must stand for
his guilt or innocence.

Having said thus much, I begin now to premise one or two things which I think
should be altogether set aside, but which has been much insisted upon. You have
been told that the prisoner appears here on the charge of treason, under all
the disadvantages of denunciation by the President of the United States in his
proclamation. Any of the assertions of that proclamation are not to have weight
on your minds, nor will it operate against the prisoner: he is to be tried by
the evidence only, and you (...) not to regard any thing you have heard out of
doors before this trial commenced: nothing should operate to doom the prisoner
to an harder ^te than the law, supported by fair testimony provides. It is also
as true that nothing contained in that proclamation should operate to the
benefit of the prisoner: if it should not convict him, no more should it acquit
him. The analogy which has been drawn does not exist between this proclamation
and the riot act of England, as you have been told, but even (...) did, the
inference would not be just. You were told that all who dis^se on the reading
of that act, are pardoned for crimes previously com^ted: it is not so. But more
of that presently. The proclamation of the President was issued for one
purpose, and the riot act, in England, is ^ad for another. The President has no
authority to call forth a military power but under certain circumstances:
wherever a combination should (...) which are too strong for the civil power to
quell, then the military (...) be called in to aid the civil, but with a
humanity intending to present the effusion of human blood, and to call out
military force as seldom as possible, the law has provided that a proclamation
shall be previously ^ed, that the offenders may disperse peaceably to their
homes: but there is not a a syllable about pardon in it. The President has the
power to part, it is true, but he has not done it by that proclamation.

The riot act, which passed in the reign of George I. was enacted in order to
prevent tumultuous assemblies: if people refused to depart wi^^in one hour
after it was read, they were guilty of felony, for which they were to suffer
death, although the offense before was only a misdemeanour, yet the refusal to
depart makes it felony, but it cannot be pretended that any such departure
excused them from the riot, but on the contrary, prosecution and conviction
frequently takes place for that crime, although they should disperse^ and
therefore it does not affect the merits of the case. The proclamation is as a
blank paper before us, and therefore we must examine this case upon its own
independent merits.

Gentlemen, in summing up this case on the part of the United States, the
method most natural to adopt is,

First. To consider the law as relating to this subject.

Secondly. What was the amount of the offenses perpetrated at Bethlehem, and.

Thirdly. Enquire whether the facts produced in evidence are such a^ (...)
convict the prisoner, and make him guilty of the charge in the indictment, as
applying to his particular case.

First, with respect to the law on treason. I should have expected it was well
understood that there would have been no difference amongst us, (...) ever we
might differ on its application to the prisoner, yet unfortunate there is, and
we must endeavor to meet those objections. The st^ment which was made to you
at the opening by myself, and a statement by the attorney of the district, I
believe to be correct: I am confir^ in that opinion, and have no doubt it will
be given to you by the co^ in the charge as correct. We are not at this day to
distract ourselves with theory: The law of Edward 3 of England, called by some
"(...) sacred statute," and by others the parliament who enacted it, is call^
"The Blessed parliament," that law and our constitution have adopted (...) same
words. The judges in England, as eminent for their patrioti^m (...) eminent for
their tenderness, and as eminent for their ability as any (...) were in this
country, have solemnly settled this particular in a va^^^ of instances and
unfortunately, young as this country is, there has been the necessity for a
court of the United States for this district to settle^ principle likewise. The
adjudications under this statute were made by (...) all well known for their
love of liberty. We have no need to conjure (...) a different exposition, or
different form of construction, than what (...) already been admitted in both
countries: indeed it is what cannot (...) shaken at this day. It is, that all
insurrections by a multitude of people with intention to usurp by violence or
intimidation the lawful authority, of the government in matters of a general
and public concern, in which the insurgents have no interests distinct from the
rest of the community (...) TREASON. From the best consideration I have been
able to give the subject, I have formed this definition, which I believe
comprises (...) whole that can be said about it, and I believe no more: I think
this assertion will appear to be justified by the best authorities. If this
description is just, the offense is clearly settled and amounts to "levying war
against the United States." In the most essential parts, I think the rule has
been settled by the council for the prisoner.

The Intention, which constitutes the gist of the offense, is proved to have
been to some general object; if the intention was to gratify (...) private
concern or interest, even if there be all the apparatus of war, as guns, fifes,
drums, etc. whatever violence should be committed under it, it cannot amount to
treason, because the intention is not to a public matter, whatever other crime
it may amount to, and whatever enormities may be committed. This may be the
case, in order to gratify some particular passion, or some particular interest.
It is the intention, which distinguishes treason from other crimes: Riot, is
generally much like it, but not being of a public nature, is only a
misdemeanour: Treason on the contrary, is the greatest crime known to the laws
of any country. Lord Mansfield at the trial of lord George Gordon, expresses
the same opinion. If this is a true position, it is certainly an irresistible
inference, that insurrection for the purpose of suppressing and preventing the
execution of a public law, is to prevent or obtain a public object, and of
course must be high treason within the rule of our constitution. Yes, this has
been repeatedly denied, by the gentleman, to be high treason; nay, he even went
on so far as to say that in England, no such thing had taken place; he says it
must be a combination to oppose alt the laws; or at least, to force the repeal
of a law. Gentlemen, I think I have stated enough, to convince you that this is
erroneous: If treason is the unlawful pursuit of an object of a public nature,
then the suppressing of a public law is treason. But I would not have you rest
on my definition if I cannot bring you full proof in favor of it. See 1
Hawkins Chap. 17, Sect. 25. 1 Hale, 133. And this position is confirmed still
further, by a precedent of our own. 2 Dallas, 346, etc. I consider this settles
the question beyond all doubt, and it ought to rest so forever, the decision
was so serious and solemn in both countries. I shall assume this as an
acknowledged point throughout the whole of my enquiry. I should have added the
opinion of Mr. Erskine in lord George Gordon's trial. Speaking on the treason
statute, he says, None of them have said more than this, that war may be
levied, not only by destroying the constitution, or the government itself, but
by assuming the appearance of war, to endeavor to suppress a law which it has
enacted.

It is certain that British cases go much farther, and if it was necessary and
the case required it, it could be justified by decisions in England upon points
infinitely less strong, than those I have quoted: points which were settled at
a very early period, which neither the parliaments nor the courts have ever
interposed to change. Cases of public grievances, whether real or pretended,
whether they grow out of law, or out of practice, as pulling down all
enclosures, etc. which are the invasions of private right, from its
universality -- is high treason. Again, usurping the powers of the government
by pulling down all bawdy houses, is High treason. The case referred to by Mr.
Bradford in Mifflin county was, that a particular judge was driven from the
bench: they did not oppose the sitting of the court, but they had a resentment
against the individual, and therefore the prosecution was for riot. This will
assist us in our farther enquiries upon the present occasion. This crime is
said not to be treason but a rescue and bare obstruction of process, and within
the sedition law, or within a clause of the penal code, and therefore not
treason. But whatever nature an offense may be, of itself, if it is accompanied
with this particular act of treason, the act becomes treason: I willingly admit
that a rescue of prisoners may be without treason: a person may be willing to
risk the law rather than his friend should suffer, and may therefore rescue
him; this would be but misdemanour: If ten men in arms go to an officer and
rescue his prisoner, if it be done in a private manner, it is no more than a
misdemeanour; but if these same ten men in arms go from motives of a public
nature, then it becomes treason. The intention therefore, makes the crime to
differ.

It is said farther that the legislature of the United States have passed a
solemn opinion upon it, and that they have called it no more than a combination
of certain facts; a rescue, etc. against which it has provided, and therefore
it cannot now be called treason. -- I think this received a good answer by
judge Wilson, 2 Dallas 351, and the objection was solemnly overruled by the
court. The sedition act was not made at that time to be sure, but if it had,
there can be no doubt but it would receive the same answer, and meet the same
fate by this judge if read in objection. But the first section of the sedition
act describes a different sort of combination, and is not levying of war. There
must be of necessity a conspiracy in levying war, but there may not be in an
unlawful combination.

JUDGE PETER'S. -- Whatever the crime would have been without a treasonable
intention, with a treasonable intention would constitute the overt act.

MR. SITGREAVES. -- The cases in the books are strongly demonstrative of this
particular. 212 Foster. Benstead's case. "Certain unpopular measures having
passed in the council, the odium was thrown on the archbishop of Canterbury. A
paper was pasted up in London, exhorting the apprentices to rise and sack the
archbishop's house at Lambeth, and accordingly some thousands went with a
declaration that they would tear the archbishop in pieces."

It was not attacking the individual, but the officer that became high treason.
The same with respect to the attack on general Neville's house during the
western insurrection; the attack on him was, because he was an officer, and
therefore being upon the office and not the man, it was upon the government,
and high treason.

Such is the general opinion of treason; the great enquiry will now be what was
the intention with which the offense at Bethlehem was perpetrated? It is
allowed to be a rescue; it is conceded also that there was an obstruction of
process: If it was so it was part of the general system which being of this
public nature, obtains the magnitude and operation of treason. Before I go into
the examination of this, I will make an observation on what has been said: that
the overt act must be proved in the county where it is laid. I heard this
position, but I did not discover my application of it, and therefore I am at a
loss to know how to treat it. There exists in England, and in the state of
Pennsylvania, a form in the direction to the grand jury, which deserves notice;
they are sworn to enquire for the body of the county. This causes considerable
difficulty particularly where something done out of the county is required as
an ingredient in the charge, and if the beginning of a crime was in one county,
and its completion in another, the difficulty would be greater; but even those
difficulties are remedied. The idea of his honor judge Peter's the other day,
appears to be sound. That a district is the same as it respects the United
States, as a county is to a state, and therefore, the grand jury are drawn, not
from the body of the county, but from the body of the district, and the whole
extent of the district is equally connected with the venue if it be laid there.
As to the evidence, therefore, I consider the crime may be laid in one county,
and proved in another. 2 Hawkins, chap. 46, Sect. 182. I consider whatever rule
applies in England or in our state governments relative to counties, is the
same respecting districts under the general government of the United States;
likewise, if the overt act be proved in the county where it is laid, you may go
out of the county for evidence to show the intention with which it was
committed. This, I think, cannot be denied. In Foster 9, we see that an overt
act not laid, may be brought as evidence to support one that is laid, in order
to show the intention.

With respect to hearsay evidence, the rule of law is, that the circumstance of
the oral testimony is regarded, as it may tend to establish other evidence,
though of itself it be no proof. There are a variety of instances in which it
is necessary to be admitted, though there is a rule against it in others. In
all cases where proof is to be made by evidence of general reputation it is
useful: so upon this occasion, it is competent to us to prove the general state
of the country; if proper to show the general state of a country where
insurrection prevails, it is as proper in order to show the general
combination, the design and intention, because it may be the only effectual way
of coming at that knowledge. For instance: this information which was received
by the commissioner in the discharge of his official duty is proper evidence to
show why the law was not carried into effect, and consequently the criminal
spirit of the country. Popham's reports 152.

Mr. Sitgreaves then went into the case of lord George Gordon, which had not
been represented to the jury by Mr. Dallas to his satisfaction. He related the
circumstances of that riot at length. He said the acquittal of that gentleman
was not a certain proof of his innocence: doubts might have arisen on the minds
of the jury as to the sufficiency, or character of the evidence, or there may
have been a contradiction of testimony, by which all the credit of it would be
taken away. Besides, it did not appear to him that the act of High treason was
committed; the multitude who accompanied Lord George to the Parliament house
did not go to compel a repeal of the law, or to overawe the Parliament, but
from a report that the numerous signatures were not rightly obtained, they went
to stamp truth on the instrument, and convince Parliament of the respectability
of the signers. Besides the main point of evidence of what a person heard Lord
Gordon say in the Lobby, was received doubtfully by the jury. Many things went
to make the testimony not so unambiguous as it ought to be on a trial for life
or death, and on that account perhaps the learned judge charged them, if a
doubt hung upon their minds, to acquit the prisoner. Upon the whole no
inference can be drawn from that case.

Gentlemen, another extraordinary position was taken by both the council in
defense of the prisoner. It was said that it could be no offense to rescue
prisoners who were taken up for acts committed against men who acted without
authority, nor to oppose men who had not authority to assess under this law. It
was attempted to be shown you that some of the assessors had not received their
warrants agreeable to the act of Congress, and thence all the outrages were
tolerated! I do not suppose that the gentlemen engaged for the prisoner means
to go beyond the case in which they are engaged, but I must say that their zeal
on this occasion has introduced a dangerous principle -- if the apostle of any
insurrection had come reeking from the gore of Europe, and had preached up to
you this doctrine, he could not have done it more completely than those
gentlemen; agreeable to this the whole country may raise themselves into array
against to the who de facto exercise the authority of the government and the
laws, ye^ if called to account the court must be informed, if the ingenuity of
the council can find a fault in the appointment of the persons engaged in the
execution of the laws, that they have not transgressed the laws and upon that
account! Is not this at oncesapping the foundation of society, and by a kind of
encouragement of insurrection, striking hard at the root of all government?
This is an opposition in my opinion upon a dangerous and destructive ground. I
am not disposed at this time to enter into any argument whether it is necessary
to prove the appointment of the officers, but admitting it is true, that upon
the indictment of persons for obstruction of process or obstruction of a public
officer in his duty, is no offense without he prove his due appointment, yet it
does not follow that facts given in evidence to prove an outrage, should
require all that strictness of examination. You will observe that the prisoner
does not stand charged with any thing but the rescue at Bethlehem, he is not
now charged with the offenses he committed in Bucks, or any where else, much
less with any thing where he was not present. These previous transactions are
given you to show the intention with which the last outrage was committed: it
is only to show the tendency of the design. These gentlemen exercised the
offices, and it does not appear that there was the least doubt expressed in
those counties of their authority, neither by the prisoner nor any person
whatever who associated with him, at any time or on any occasion: their
opposition was not founded on any such pretext, but it grew merely out of the
law, and therefore it must appear that the outrage was an unequivocal fact,
conducted with the intention, so far as we can collect, to defeat the law. On
these grounds there is no necessity for proof of due appointment. But what are
the objections, or what proof do they require. There is no pretensions to a
doubt respecting the legal appointment of any officer, but the two assessors at
Penn in Northampton, and Milford in Bucks: Mr. Eyrely himself tells you that
all the rest were appointed by the board of Commissioners, and that at Penn,
the assessor refused, and Mr. Balliot had the blank to fill up. Respecting the
other Mr. Foulke supplied the place of Clark who held his appointment, and Mr.
Foulke was appointed to assist him. How then, gentlemen, from those two cases,
could a general inference be warranted that the appointments were irregular,
and upon that ground these outrages be justified?

We have heard much about the danger of following English precedents, and about
the words high Treason. There is a species of treason in England which cannot
exist here; that is, conspiring against the life of the king, and speaking of
mere words which have frequently been construed into that crime. It has been a
question of great doubt whether words can be called treason, but in that
country or this, it is necessary to prove the intention with which a crime was
committed, and therefore mere words, though it is true cannot convict, yet if a
man has done a lawless act, we may exemplify the design by words, even of the
prisoner himself. With respect to an action done publicly and notoriously, that
is a matter capable of positive and absolute evidence, plain to the senses;
those who see it can tell of it, but there can be no way of diving into the
heart: if the party himself, from that recess, should develope his designs,
these declarations made, either by himself or others who heard him, can prove
the intention of his actions, and for that purpose is good evidence.

Gentlemen I have now said all which I think necessary with respect to the law
on treason. I am confident I have not done justice to it; but what I have
omitted will be amply supplied by the attorney of the district, and their
honors upon the bench.

I shall now proceed to investigate the facts as they have appeared in
evidence, and apply the law to those facts, in order to show you what share of
guilt the prisoner transacted. In doing which I shall only select the most
prominent features of the testimony which may go to prove my position.

First with respect to levying war. I think it will require but few words to
show that there has been an insurrection in the three counties; that at
Bethlehem there was a multitude of people in arms, amounting to the full sense
of the words of "levying was with arms:" the insurgents had all the apparatus
and accoutrements of a regular military force, and they went there in military
array. This is proved by fifteen witnesses (not by two merely). It is farther
certain that this multitude of people perpetrated atrocious and lawless
offenses, and in contempt of all legal authority, after solemn, reiterated and
repeated warning; that the marshal, conformable to that humanity which
characterized him, sent a deputation to them, requiring them to go home, and to
abandon their purpose; that he selected persons who were most likely, from
their political opinions to procure the object, but nothing would do for them
short of what they set out upon, and the mission failed.

We will next consider for what purpose this outrage was committed: It was said
to be simply for the purpose of releasing the prisoners: this was the abstract
and naked design. If such is the fact, the prisoner must be acquitted, but if
he had an object beyond that: if it should appear that this was one link in the
chain of opposition to the laws, then it amounts higher; it amounts to treason.
It is my purpose to show you that their designs were higher than a mere rescue,
and that it did not flow from any particular regard to the prisoners in
custody, but it was a public opposition, and one means used with a view to
prevent the execution of a law of the United States. Gentlemen, the mere
recital of one or two facts will be sufficient to bring this home to the mind
of any man who is not determined to shut his eyes against plain testimony.

It is in full and complete proof before you, that in the counties of
Northampton and Bucks, the opposition was almost general, and that in the
township of Milford; all along the river Lehi, and both sides of the mountain;
there was an union in opposition to the law, uniformly conducted with system,
menace, and threats; that the persons who thought proper to assist in the
execution of that law, were previously intimidated not to accept of it, and
after they had accepted, they were prevented from executing it, and in many
places, until the march of the army, the law did actually remain unexecuted. I
shall not state to you the particulars of this evidence, but remark that the
system was general, and that it was accompanied with threats and menace, and
that the friends of the law, and those who were peaceably inclined, were
prevented, under the influence of this terror, from speaking their minds on the
occasion; and even the magistrates of the country were so impressed, or so
intimidated, as not to perform the duties of their office: That the law was
completely prostrate, and persons who would have given testimony against them
for these proceedings were afraid to do it. In the course of this proceeding,
it was repeatedly declared, that if any person should be arrested for
opposition to the law, that they should be supported. This system of menace was
general; it was not an opposition grounded particularly upon the obnoxious
characters of persons who were employed in the execution of the law, but upon
the law itself: There was an offer of a particular commissioner to use his
influence, that they might choose their own officer, but that would not satisfy
their object -- no, they said if they accepted that offer it would be approving
the law, and that they would not do. Mr. Eyerly the commissioner, had been for
many years the representative of this district in the Legislature: Mr. Balliott
had been in the Legislature, in the Council, and in the state convention, which
proves they were men of confidence in their district, and that the particular
dislike now exemplified was not to them as men, but as officers under the law.
One of the council for the prisoner went minutely into all their views, and the
veins through which they acted, and endeavored to palliate, or excuse the
conduct of these insurgents; while, at the same time he appears to know what
were the views of government in prosecuting the delinquents; but there is no
necessity to answer that, because the prisoner is not on his trial for
obstruction of process. I most solemnly disavow that political party spirit
enters at all into this prosecution, and beg the jury will dismiss all party
spirit and prejudice from their minds: However we may differ on points of law,
we must agree with them that the people had a right to examine and explain the
law, and express their dislike to this or any other law. Their opposition to
this law might have been right, or wrong; it does not alter the case and God
forbid that any motive of the kind should influence us to revenge; These are
natural rights under a free government, which every citizen has a right to
exercise. We are not now enquiring into the nature, or grades of any, or all
those particular offenses; whether this particular outrage is a riot, or that a
misdemeanour, or whether it amounts to treason, we are simply showing to you,
from the evidence collected, the weight and force of those facts; to wit, that
there was opposition to this law, and that universally, and that these people
did their utmost, to endeavor to stop the execution of the law; and that these
acts were in strict union with the last act at Bethlehem, of the intention of
which, the previous acts collectively are plain proof, for certain it is, that
an act illegal in its nature, may receive color and complexion from one that
is strictly legal. Suppose a man had reduced his thoughts on this subject to
writing, without any intention of communicating it to any person; suppose in
that writing his intentions are fully declared with which such writing was
drawn; then this act, though innocent in itself, would be competent evidence to
show the intention with which a subsequent outrage was perpetrated, and it
would be in full proof to show that a violent opposition to the laws in that
country particularly to the and for the valuation of houses, and that it was
not from a personal or private motive, but generally an aversion to the law
itself, so that a long time after the period fixed for its execution, the law
actually remained unfulfilled. In several parts the people returned to a sense
of their duty and submitted to the laws, and happy would it have been for the
government as well as themselves if they had all done it; for then this
investigation would have been prevented: but in some parts, the marshal, and
those who were with him, who were not volunteers as has been insinuated, out
acted in conformity to their duty as public officers. -- These were insulted,
arrested and obstructed as officers; The marshal was abused by numbers of
people at Millar's town, and he was not able, though he touched Shankweiler, to
execute process on him. Gentlemen, all I ask of you, is to connect the
circumstances in your minds; the general course of events which gave rise to
what afterward was consummated at Bethlehem. The prisoners who were rescued
were desirous of accompanying the marshal to Philadelphia; they would rather
not be liberated; -- they were taken from various parts of the country, unknown
to each other, and more so to the persons who rescued them: there was no
private attachment, regard, or resentment; What therefore could be the motive
of the insurgents? Could it be interest? No, it would be bad policy to spend
dollars to oppose a tax law rather than cents to support it. Was it a private
distinct interest they had, which did not concern the community? If not,
agreeable to Judge Foster, it was treason. I have said that these prisoners
were not known to the insurgents; I would make the exception of Shankweiler;
but you will observe that he never did surrender himself to the custody of the
marshal, and though some said they were come to see him as a neighbor, others
to see his partner, (accuser) etc. yet he was not de facto in custody: It could
not be to rescue him that this large armed body met, because he could have been
safe by keeping at home. But one solemn fact respecting the others demands a
solemn inference: The Lehi prisoners had cordially submitted to the law, and
thus desired to recommend themselves to the mercy of the government by
penitence, and actually at last gave the marshal their individual assurances to
meet him at Philadelphia: I ask then by way of inference what becomes of all
the private object, or the neighborhood esteem necessary to vindicate these
insurgents? It was not for the prisoners' sakes, but through opposition to the
law that they did this act, for it is plain that the persons in custody of the
marshal were afraid as much to trust themselves in the hands of the mob, as Mr.
Eyerly or Mr. Balliott were. They doubtless had a treasonable, a rebellious
determination to oppose the government; the previous declaration of the party
was, that "if any persons were there in confinement who were opposed to the law
they should be rescued," was a plain indication of their opposition to the law,
and that this rescue was a part of the general opposition. Mr. Sitgreaves then
went into a review of the evidence respecting the meetings at Upper Milford,
and at Schymer's, where, he said, opposition to the law marked the conduct of
the people, but at Lower Milford, the prisoner at the bar by his own
confession, eminently displayed his intention; three witnesses corroborated the
fact; "This was the third day he had been out on this business; he had a
skirmish yesterday, and would have another to day (7th of March) if the
prisoners had not been given up." This clearly proves that the business at
Milford was closely connected with that at Bethlehem; thus being all parts of
one whole, the former acts are full and complete evidence of the latter. In
Lower Milford they resolve that the law should not be executed yet, because
they did not know it was a law: In reply to this we may say, it is
inconceivable to suppose that any people should be so stupid as to doubt the
existence of a law, when the assessors were actually going about the country in
conformity to it; this is incredible notwithstanding the charity we are forced
to have for these people's ignorance. They farther resolved, that their
township should be the last to submit The council reminded Mr. Sitgreaves that
this was sworn to by but one witness.
to it, if it was a law. Is not this as much as to say, If others assist us in
rebellion we will go on, but if all submit, then we will also. No thanks to
them. The assessors found it so, for they were chased, insulted, and finally
obliged, to abandon the township, and yet, in that township the utmost possible
means were used to convince them of their errors. At Mitchel's it was proposed
to read the law, but in vain; they "did not want any damned laws." An offer was
made to them to choose their own assessor, which was likewise treated with
disdain: They set the most solemn warning of consequences at defiance, and
defied even the government itself; sometimes vainly fluttering themselves, that
they had all the people coming to their assistance, they set at naught the
judicial authority, because; they supposed they had arms and numbers sufficient
to support their opposition. At Quakers town they resolved to go to the rescue,
and there we find them all declaring opposition to the law, and defiance to the
government: They were engaged in these acts when they received? information
from Northampton county that the prisoners were in custody, and then they
signed a resolve to go to rescue them.

Gentlemen, when these facts are taken into view, so immediately preceding, and
so directly pointing to what took place at Bethlehem, can you hesitate, as
honest men desiring to do justice, and speak impartially between the prisoner
at the bar and his country, that he went there, not merely to rescue prisoners,
but to execute a part of the general opposition to that law of the United
States? If he has done so, he is guilty of Treason. Let us now attend to the
evidence which grows out of the avowal of the parties themselves at Bethlehem
at the time of the outrage. These are previous indications, which certainly
point as truly to the intention, as the needle points to the pole.

Two persons appeared in arms just at the arrival of the posse: the Marshal
thought proper to take and disarm them: upon being questioned, they answered
they came there in order to see what was best to be done for the country. They
did not come to assist Shankweiler; they did not profess to have any friendship
for the prisoners, but to see whether the interest of the country was to be
promoted by treason and rebellion. Can there be a stronger proof than this that
the object was of a public, and not of a private nature. Keifer said he heard
"it was to be made out about them laws." This is positive proof that it was to
be settled that day, whether the laws or the people were to be triumphant; if
they could overawe the marshal, probably they thought they were to be
triumphant. It is true this was not the declaration of the prisoner at the bar,
but of another person: upon this you will observe, that where a great number
embark with one general object and design, the acts and declarations of each
are chargeable to all, and are proof against each and all. 6 Term. case of the
king against Stone. Though a man does not act or say one word, yet abetting the
object, it leaves him equally responsible for the whole with those who actually
speak or do. That this design was of a public nature I farther prove, because
it was not this, that, or the other prisoner they demanded but "the prisoners,"
without knowing who were in the custody of the marshal: they would not go from
the ground until they had the whole of them. After the marshal had liberated
them, supposing one was left, the demand was made for him, and the marshal was
forced to give them proof that he was gone. Indeed the conference of Mr. Fries
with the marshal is sufficient to show the object, and surely the application
of his own conduct to his own case will not be disputed. Jamieson tells you
that Fries' own story was correspondent with that delivered by the marshal:
referring to the marshal's testimony it appears that Fries, in conversation
with him, when he delivered up the prisoners, expressly avowed that it was not
out of any friendship or attachment, but that his motive, was opposition to the
laws; that the laws were unconstitutional, and that he would not submit to
them, and for this reason he had come to take the prisoners, and he would
persevere until he had them. The marshal told him "you will be hanged." He
treated that with contempt, and told him it was not in the power of the
Government, for if they were to send a military force, they would join in
opposition to the law with them, Now this is a declaration of Mr. Fries, their
leader; their spokesman; their representative, and shall we not give credit to
it? From this declaration, and the concurrent testimony, I think there cannot
be discovered a crevis at which a doubt is to enter. Mr. Fries, when he came
into the entry, talking loud, and with an importance becoming his dignity, gave
his general opinion upon politics, saying that those who were now at the head
of affairs, were all tories during the war, and in this way found fault with
the laws. I do not find fault with the word "tories." I believe it bears
analogy with the ridiculous word "Stamplers," and only can tend to show the
general disapprobation expressed against the government, but when a variety of
things concur, of whatever little importance they may be in themselves, they
are increased by their accumulative weight, and thus become worthy of notice.

Gentlemen, it is farther given in evidence that, during the time they were at
Bethlehem, there were repeated threats of violence thrown out against Mr.
Eyerly, Mr. Balliott and Mr. Henry, on which account the the marshal desired
them not to show themselves to the people: these gentlemen who had been the
confidential and favorite friends and servants of the people are now in a
dangerous situation, the objects of resentment, which resentment, we have good
reason to conclude was occasioned by their offices under the government.

Mr. Sitgreaves then answered some of the remarks of Mr. Dallas on the conduct
of Mr. Eyerly, and explained away the inconsistancy of his testimony. He said
it was clear that John Fries, the prisoner was an active and influential
character through this dark scene, in which he was recognized by all who were
there, even by persons who had not known him before: he was not merely an aider
and abettor of Treason, though that would have made him guilty of it, but a
leading man; a conductor of the violence committed.

You will remember that when the marshal sent forward a deputation to those at
the bridge, they were prevailed upon to halt, and attend to their propositions:
when they agreed and promised upon their honors not to pass the bridge until
the return of their own deputation from the marshal; though the horse did go
over, yet the foot remained until the prisoner at the bar came up with his men.
He instantly appeared the prominent, the active leader of the expedition; he
settled the toll with the keeper, and they all went over. When Samuel Toon
upbraided Captain Staeler at Bethlehem with breaking his word and passing the
bridge, his answer was we came over with Captain Fries and the Bucks county
people. When the main body was coming up, he marched at the head of the
footmen: when Mr. Mulhollen met them, the answer was received from Fries. It
was he who was appointed by them to go to the marshal. Here let me make a
remark upon what has been dwelt upon as a circumstance much in his favor; that
is, that Fries always did his utmost toward the prevention of violence. Let not
the merit of any man's actions be withheld: I agree in that with the council
that he has avoided the effusion of human blood, and appeared to endeavor to
prevent every severity, so far as was compatible with the accomplishment of his
purpose: Nay, I will say that Mr. Fries has shown an Urbanity and Humanity
toward the assessors in Bucks county which has done him credit and honor. But
let us not forget that every fact which displays his humanity, at the same time
establishes his influences, and more -- his authority over those who were with
him. When he came into the room where they were abusing Mr. Child's, he says
"point out the man who committed this outrage and he shall be punished" when he
was gone, they began upon Mr. Child's again. At Bethlehem, when he told the
people not to go on yet, we find them obey him, and if he had carried it
farther, they still would have obeyed him. Thus you see, gentlemen instead of
this rendering him assistance, it confirms his control over them and makes him
principal in the transaction. Again, amidst all his Urbanity did he not execute
the whole of his purpose? Did he not say "Foulke, you shall be taken"
notwithstanding the respect he had before professed? Did he not, when he said
to Mr. Child's he was very sorry, for what had happened, demand and obtain his
papers? Did he not say to the marshal, my men shall not hurt you, but I will
have the prisoners? As much as to say all this shall be done as easy as
possible, but it shall be done. While we admit his humanity on the one hand, we
still find it coupled with his purpose, his determination to obtain his object.
Twelve witnesses prove that the prisoner was active at Bethlehem so far then it
is in full proof by six times the number the Constitution calls for. He was not
only at Bethlehem a commander, but he was there a volunteers he came there from
a great distance; he was industrious, and made a great Sacrifice of his own
private interest to go there; he came out of his own county to accomplish the
general purpose for which they had assembled: he went there with all the
insignia of military rank. I have observed that he was emphatically the great
spokesman between the Marshal and the people, and therefore he alone was
admitted up stairs; he came out to explain to his men the success of his
embassy: that the marshal had said he could not comply: that he had arrested
these people at the command of the judge, and at last, when the marshal told
him he could not deliver them without force, he calls upon them to the onset;
he tells them he would be their leader; begs of them not to fire first; tells
them they must go through an armed party on the stairs, and if he should drop,
they must fire again, and do as well as they could for themselves. In
consequence of his invitation, they went into the house: and at that critical
moment the marshal delivered up the prisoner to them, to prevent violence.

I need only refer you to the testimony brought by the prisoner to prove that
he was constantly active in the grand business of opposition through the whole
course. He wrote the paper at Kline's and at Fries' to invite them to go to
Bethlehem; he warned the assessors not to go on with their business, not even
to another house. He declared he had a great regard for them, but it was
against the law he showed this hatred; to which he said he never would submit.
He defied the government, telling how many men he had ready. In conversation
with Chapman, he told him the number he could raise; Chapman told him it was
impossible; that they could not cope with the number government would send
"we'll try then who is strongest" he replied: He went away in a great passion
when told that the assessments going on, then, said he, it shall soon be as it
is in France."He seems to have anticipated all the horrors of a civil war; for
when told of the consequences, he said, if they once began, he knew not where
it would end. He appeared to argue the point with as much zeal as though he
thought he could prevail upon the government to desist from enforcing the tax.
"You shall not go to another house," he said: but finding they did go he
attacked them at Singmaster's, with a determination to take Rodrick prisoner,
but not taking him, he let Foulke go whom he had taken, and promised to take
them the next day, he took two of them the next day, but let them go on a
promise to desist from assessing; at the same time declaring his determination
not to submit to this law, but that it should be repealed. The party then
resolved to go to Bethlehem, but they did not separate, till he had procured
from them their signatures to an engagement to go and accomplish their purpose.
When on the march to Bethlehem, and met by young Marks, he was one who
prevented their returning, and they actually did proceed, and got to Bethlehem,
where this scene concluded.

Here then gentlemen the evidence closes. We find this man is not of a yielding
texture; he still continued in his opposition even at the time there was a
recommendation to submit to the laws: at a meeting Marks's it was determined to
recommend submission to the officers, and all the laws of the United States,
and to desist from opposition to the laws. This is proof that there had been
opposition to the Laws in the three counties. When these things were done
Mitchell asked Fries if he ever did intend to oppose the laws. "Yes I did," was
his answer.

In the testimony of Mr. Roberts we have proved the general state of
opposition, as well as the guilt of the prisoner: this witness was called by
the prisoner's council. To be sure he proved the prisoner's penitence and
submission. If he had not been guilty he could not have been penitent. He said
he had not slept for several nights: an acknowledgment so much the more
pertinent to prove that he had been doing what he knew was wrong.

Gentlemen of the Jury. -- I have endeavored to show you this subject in all
the points of view I am able, so as to give you a right understanding of the
facts; and permit me to declare to you that I have not wilfully perverted
either the law or the facts to the best of my knowledge; yet it is possible I
may have done it, if so you will be undeceived in those particulars by the
court. -- Gentlemen, you have a solemn duty to perform: we have all had a
disagreeable and tedious undertaking I pray you to do it in such a way as may
do justice to the prisoner and the bar, and at the same time consider how much
the happiness, the peace, and tranquillity of your country, depends upon a fair,
impartial and conscientious verdict, which there is no doubt but you will
deliver.

MR. LEWIS.
With submission to your Honors. GENTLEMEN OF THE JURY,
IT is now become my duty to address you on behalf of the prisoner at the bar,
who is arraigned before you on the important issue of Life or Death: I do it
with the more confidence, because I have not been able to learn from the
council for the prosecution, a single instance of English law that comes up to
the present case, in good times or in bad times, so as to denominate it
Treason, except in a determination during the bloody reign of Henry VIII, and
that is mentioned among the evils of the time: I have not been able to find it
under any existing circumstances whatever, and yet any person who is the least
acquainted with English history or law, must know that the excise law and the
shop tax, as well as some others, have led to riot and insurrections, and a
variety of trials have been held upon them. It may be right to make the
experiment upon the present case; but, unless this prosecution is warranted,
established in good times, and upon solid grounds, I am sorry to say, but truth
compels me to declare, that it is a burning torch in the hand of a madman; it
is a flaming sword in the hand of a tyrant, and has done immense injury in
England. I know there is no intention in the attorney in this case, to do any
thing that is wrong; yet I wish more reflection had been used, before the
prosecution had gone on. Thus it was in England respecting Hardy, Took,
The^wel, and others; those who most understood the whole of the charges were
not satisfied to call their crime a misdemeanour, though there was no direct
point in ancient or modern law, warranting any other indictment, yet the
experiment was tried, but an English jury appreciated it in its proper light,
and they resolved to do nothing which their ancestors had not done, not even in
the application of constructive treason; and therefore after a mature
discussion they returned a verdict of Not Guilty. When, on the present
occasion, the causes and proceedings are duly considered, I am satisfied you
will feel it a duty you owe to the prisoner now before you, and to your
country, to pronounce a like verdict. It is not because a circumstance any way
similar to this has once taken place, and been argued upon the same grounds,
that therefore it is right it should take place upon the present occasion;
adopting a principle of this kind has often made courts in arbitrary times,
take gigantic strides, over the statute of Edward III, so that a man could not
know how to look, act, speak, or even think, without difficulty and danger. I
have said that I am not able except during the mandatory reign of Henry VIII,
to find the trace of a single instance where rescue, under any circumstances
whatever, 'as been found to amount to treason, and if succeeding ages did not
consider themselves bound by that practice, I trust you will not sit here to
establish a law, but to give it such a construction as justice demands of you.
I have undertaken this cause the more readily, because I do not undertake to
justify, to palliate, nor to excuse; but I censure the transactions which have
given rise to this trial as much as the council for the prosecution does: I am
sensible as they are, that those people violated the law without cause; and I
came not here to set up a mock excuse for them: No, it is my opinion that they
merit exemplary punishment, but that punishment must be conformable to law, or,
when once the law is overturned, the consequences will be incalculable;
offenses higher than the present may be committed with impunity by some, while
those of less grade will be severely punished in others. It is not for me to
say that the prisoner is entirely innocent: To me, to the court, and to you it
is totally immaterial whether he has acted wisely or foolishly; guilty or
innocently, if not guilty of the offense upon which he now stands upon his
deliverance. I may be asked here how I came to defend a man, who I admitted had
violated the law, and in some degree sat the government at defiance. My reasons
are these: It is the privilege of every man to have a fair trial, and not to
be condemned without being heard, especially in affairs of an highly criminal
nature; few men are capable of defending themselves before a court, and in a
capital case, from the perturbation of their minds, still less so than in any
other: And woe betide that country, where a man so charged should not be
entitled to every assistance that he can procure. By the statute of William
III, which is the first that ever allowed council at all, the court were
obliged to assign council, who were obliged to render all the assistance in
their power; the same is allowed by our act of Congress, (p. 112. Sect. 29.)
for without that, he may be considered as condemned unheard, and the public
mind would be left unsatisfied as to the innocence or guilt of the accused.
Those who have entertained the surprise I have hinted at, at my being thus
engaged, have doubtless acted from the bed of motives, but, not satisfied with
this, and wishing to spill the blood of a man before he is proved guilty, some
calumniating scoundrel has, in a public print, had the hardihood, during the
present trial, to impute to the unhappy prisoner's council, the base influence
of gold, when all concerned know very well that the prisoner has not a farthing
to give, and not a farthing, nor even a promise of any, was ever given to those
who have undertaken his defense. I will say no more respecting this vile
attempt, but that the law says no publication shall take place which may tend
to influence a court or jury, while a trial is pending, and therefore it is an
high contempt thrown upon the court, and upon you, and the probability is that
either the author or the publisher will be brought to answer for his conduct.

There is one thing, gentlemen, I would wish to caution you against: there are
many citizens who suppose that the troops will never turn out again unless a
conviction takes place on the present occasion, and that an insurrection will
soon appear again: but this is paying a poor compliment to our volunteer
troops, to suppose they would not be satisfied without shedding blood:
Gentlemen, let no arguments or considerations have weight with you but what are
supported by law, and then decide, regardless of the consequences. Another
matter I would caution you against, is one with which I found very considerable
difficulty to cope, but at length I diverted myself of it, and I pray you to do
the same: I mean all kind of prejudice as to the party tried and trying. Our
Constitution, and our laws, are wisely calculated to preserve the happiness and
interest of ourselves and posterity: our Government is composed of tried
patriotic characters, and our political bark, with such men at the helm, need
not tear a storm; but notwithstanding this, it is villified and abused: These
are grounds for prejudice to work upon, and it is difficult, I can say by
experience, to avoid its influence; but when we come to the sacred temple of
Justice, even if to decide between A and B, on a matter of trifling property,
we are sworn to an impartial and unprejudiced decision; and how much more is it
demanded of us in a case of life and death? It is necessary to enter that
temple diverted of opinion or bias, otherwise there is not a fair scope for our
reasonable faculties to act, nor can our consciences be acquitted of guilt. I
will take the liberty of reminding you that your oath is "that you will well
and truly try, according to evidence;" this obliges you to expel every thing
from your minds which you might have heard out of doors respecting the whole
business of the insurrection, excepting such only as is proved by the evidence.
Your present situation, gentlemen, imposes upon you a duty which is highly
important; important as it concerns your country, the prisoner, and likewise
yourselves: it concerns him, because his life or death is, in some measure
placed in your hands; it is upon your verdict it depends whether he shall
continue with industry to spend the remainder of his life with his family and
friends, or whether he must leave them all, and be suspended between heaven and
earth to a gazing multitude. Your decision is of importance to your country,
because we are now treading upon the dangerous, and, I had almost said,
unbeaten ground of constructive treason, and because it may and will operate as
a precedent to future proceedings. Nor is it less important to yourselves
because, if owing to honest intention, and mistaken views you should go farther
than a reflecting moment would dictate, in some circumstance of a public nature
which might possibly occur, the work would be irretrievably done, the
reflection would come too late, and pardon would be out of the question.

I will now proceed to consider the particular offense imputed in the
indictment to John Fries* the prisoner at the bar, by which he must be
convicted, if at all. [Mr. Lewis, here read the indictment.] To this indictment
he has pleaded not guilty, and you are sworn to decide upon the issue. The
question is not whether he has, or has not been guilty of a riot, or rescue: he
may have been guilty of an high misdemeanor, of this or the other description,
but the question is, has he ordered, prepared, and levied war against the
United States? That is the language of our constitution, and the act of
congress formed thereupon. In order to insure the conviction of this man at all
events, it has been stated to you, and that with no small degree of confidence,
that, as the framers of our constitution have adopted the words of the English
statute, the courts are bound to admit the expositions which have taken place
upon it, from time to time in the English courts: though we have laws of our
own, yet in order to know the true meaning of our constitution we are to go
back into the remotest and most dark ages of English history, to understand its
meaning! The English statute, or the opinions of the courts of justice are
equally become part of the code in that country it is true, and it was as
possible for the framers of our constitution to have extended the one as the
other to this country, had they chosen so to do, but their not doing it, is a
presumptive proof that it was not acceptable. To me it appears strange that
while the English statute is not in force here, the English construction of
that statute should! that is a position I never mean to subscribe, but
controvert it from the beginning to the end, of this case. As we have enacted
laws of our own, and have not extended the laws of England to this country, we
must put our own construction upon them, and not the determination of an
English court. Neither the English laws, nor the opinions of English judges are
to be regarded any farther than is consistent with our good, to appreciate
which the situation of the times when those opinions were given, and whether
the judges were dependant or independent are important considerations. I do not
mean to find fault with English decisions in general: I believe that with
regard to property, since the judges have been rendered independent of the
crown, it is as wisely administered as the laws of any part of the globe are:
but they were not always in a situation to give impartial opinions, when they
held their station at the will of an arbitrary monarch, who could hasten or
delay causes at his pleasure, to which the judges were the most obsequious
tools. Such has been the decisions of some periods respecting treason. But it
is not true that the very words of the English statute are adopted in our
constitution; they very materially differ: the statute of Edward III, does not
provide that confession must be made in open court if received at all: it does
not specify that two witnesses shall be necessary to establish the fact, but it
was left to the court upon principles of common law^ nor does it say a single
word about an overt act. Since, then, the two statutes are so dissimilar in
important points, it would be very wrong to admit of the same construction in
both. So careful was our government of the lives of our citizens, viewing the
injuries other countries had sustained by indefinite laws, they provided that
the crime should be put in the indictment, and supported by the testimony of
two witnesses. In England there might be one witness to one overt act, and
another to another.

But I stall now proceed to show what does, or what does not amount to levying
war: in doing this, we are not to go back to corrupt times, under corrupt
judges, nor do I think the observations of those judges are in the least
obligatory upon our courts, but how far they will be respected, in another
question; we may rest assured they will be regarded no farther than reason will
suggest. This I consider of importance, not only at present, but to posterity.
Most of our laws, it must be remembered, are from England, and were brought
with our ancestors as their birthright: this was the case wherever British
subjects emigrated, but as soon as we became independent states, we enacted
laws of our own, although in a great degree copied from British states, but
they became new under our constitution.

I think gentlemen, I shall be able to show you, upon the opinions of men sound
in law knowledge in England, that the definition of treason in our constitution
will not bear the construction that has been put upon theirs at an early
period. We have an express and distinct meaning of this crime in our own acts
of Congress. An act passed 1790 (Vol. 1, page 100). Sect 1 shows what treason
is, and particularises wherein it shall consist. Sect. 5 defines the punishment
which should be inflicted on a rescue of persons committed to custody, or in
the hands of the officer. But there was another act passed defining the precise
circumstances attending this case, this was passed after the declaration of the
judges on the case of the western insurrection, and from its being enacted
subsequent to all others upon this species of crime, appears to me to be
binding upon our courts: I mean the Sedition act. It appears to reach the
present case in the fullest extent; the language of that act is, whoever shall
combine or conspire, etc. shall be guilty of a high misdemeanor: this act does
not specify the number: a township, a county, or twelve counties equally is
within the law. Combining to prevent the execution of the law: this reaches the
action, whatever may be the number or force used: it is a misdemeanor and shall
be punished with fine and imprisonment, not death. Whether the object shall or
shall not be effected, the law says the punishment shall be the same. Here then
is a solemn declaration made by the legislature itself, the same body that
enacted the punishment of death to what they termed treason by a prior law, and
surely that authority had the greatest right to put a construction on, or make
an alteration in their on law. If there is a legal definition of the crime
committed by the prisoner at the bar, this act contains it: every case is here
provided for by the punishment of fine and imprisonment, and had a prosecution
taken place under this act, a conviction would have been certain, and the
punishment would have been ^gorous, and exemplary.

Under this head of English construction, I would ask how it can apply to us,
when we consider that before the act of William III, no person charged with
high treason was allowed council to plead for him, unless he stated some
objection in point of law which made an argument necessary, and even then he
could not do it without first admitting the truth of the fact charged against
him, and yet all the decisions of English courts alluded to were formed before
that period! Further. Not only was the accused not allowed council, but if he
had hundreds of the most respectable witnesses to prove the falsity of the
allegations, he never had a right to b^ing them forward until the reign of
William III. These decisions, gentlemen, of the English courts, which are
called up as precedents for us to regard, were formed under these arbitrary
circumstances: No council allowed even though the prisoner was deaf and dumb,
nor witnesses, if he could even prove he was hundreds of miles distant at the
time. Further, to show what dependence can be placed on the sayings of these
men, you will observe that until the time of William III. all the judges held
their commissions during royal pleasure only, and even until the first of
George III, the judges were never completely independent, and of course were
obliged to study the royal pleasure; their opinions being extorted before the
trial commenced. The consequence of all this is plain, that no impartial
opinion could be given. It was common before trial first to closet these
dependant judges and bring them to submission, if their opinions ran counter.
Bacon, the greatest, wisest, but meanest of mankind, thus stooped to become the
tool of his master. Those who could not thus be brought over were despised, and
more obsequious persons placed in their room, and it was not 'till they could
have a decision thus formed that persons were brought on their trial for high
treason. And yet we are referred to these persons to tell us what is the
meaning of our own statute on treason! Thus it was that many of the best
citizens of England fell a sacrifice, and for no other purpose, many of them,
than because they possessed exalted virtue. During the existence of this state
of things, the judges would set silent on their bench during a trial for life,
and hear the crown officers, instead of acts and expressions of humanity to the
unhappy prisoner, abuse him with the most opprobrious and insulting language.
Influenced by this meanness, Sir Edward Coke, while attorney general, descended
to abuse the great and good Sir Walter Raleigh, with the vile epithets of
Traitor, Viper and Spider of hell, etc. turning away from him with the greatest
scorn: and this was the manner in which trials were commonly managed. See
Foster, 234.

It was well known that the statute of Edward III, made no provision whatever
respecting the charging of an overt act in the indictment, nor does it say any
thing about proof, but a statute enacted in the reign of Edward VI, made two
witnesses necessary in cases of high treason, but Foster says no great regard
was paid to this better statute 'till near a century after, and the reason
assigned was that it was not for the safety of the crown, or to the common well
known rules of legal evidence. It was common to admit one witness of his own
knowledge, and another by hearsay, if it was even from the mouth of that one,
and at the third or fourth hand, and frequently the depositions were taken out
of court to be read, rather than bring them into open court. This must appear
an uncommon representation of the administration of justice, but it is a fair
picture of the times under which the decisions took place which are brought
against us. At the period in which the seven bishops were tried, lord Cambden
declares that justice Powel was the only honest man that sat on the bench.
Blessed justice! I know that since the judges have become independent men in
England, there has been as much independance in their conduct as in any
country; but then, as Hale tells us, these decisions had already taken place,
and therefore they must Seabode by; but he takes care to caution future judges
how they introduced new cases by putting new constructions. The question now
is, whether this court and jury are prepared to be bound by judges thus
principled and thus circumstanced, to form a decision upon our own law. I
contend that these decisions are by no means binding upon us, we have the
sedition law, which comprehends the whole case. In 1 Hale 132, and 1 Blackstone
69, it appears to be lamented that the independent judges of later days have no
power to alter the rules of law established in the dark ages of English
jurisprudence, otherwise, we have reason to believe, they would not be in
existence at this day. Lord Kenyon, when council for lord George Gordon,
declared, that he did not think the parliament of Edward III, ever had any
design that constructive treason should exist at all, or any wish to leave room
for it to be introduced. We are certainly, therefore, unentrammelled by every
foreign rule, otherwise the question would be, what rules we should adopt, and
what not. It is a rule in law that statutes affecting life, should never extend
beyond the letter of the law, so as to leave the possibility of a doubt. If
that is a rule respecting penal statutes in general, abundant more so is it
necessary respecting the high crime of treason. Above all things, if bad times
should even happen in this country, and bad times may come here as well as they
have in all other countries, it will be of vast importance that the law should
be known precisely: it will be of consequence to a citizen to know on what law
he is to be tried, if he becomes the devoted object of any one's resentment, or
commits a crime: it is of consequence that the flood gates of usurpation and
tyranny should never be left open, and the liberties of our citizens be thrown
away ad libitum on the uncertain ground of construction. 1 Blackstone 88.
Foster 58. we read that it ought to be "clearer than life itself."

We now come to examine the true, full, just, and reasonable meaning of our own
treason statute; for I do not admit that constructive treason ought to exist at
all. A line is drawn, and if we ever cross it, where are we to stop? Treason
against the United States, we find, consists in "levying war against them,
etc." The question is, what is levying war? Levying war may fairly extend to
the three following things:

First. Where a body of men take up arms, and array themselves in a marshal
manner against the government, with a view to put an end to its existence. This
is its plain natural meaning, but cannot be said to have been transacted by the
prisoner at the bar, and therefore requires no farther definition.

Secondly. It is expressly levying war, if a part of the union, throw off all
allegiance and authority of the United States, totally disregarding its laws
and institutions, and act as a divided people as though they did not belong to
them.

Thirdly. Where laws have been enacted by the union, pursuant to the
Constitution of the United States, and a number of people, being dissatisfied,
should, of their own authority, by numbers, or force of arms, take possession
of the legislative or executive authority, and by this force of arms or numbers
should undertake to compel either of the departments of government to act as
they dictate, thus robbing the government of its legitimate power, by assuming
it themselves.

No doubt the good of posterity was intended in the constitutional definition
of treason, and we are to touch it with a trembling hand indeed, lest it
moulder, and grow into, God knows what. Now, as this is an act which was
deliberately formed, if we go upon the dangerous ground of construction, that
cannot be done so deliberate: No, I say it was to be handed down pure to
posterity, and we ought not even to depart from a letter of it. If liberty of
construction is to take place in any degree, by so much it tends to render the
constitution vague and uncertain, and we know not where it will end. If the
constitution only intended the three definitions of levying war which I have
laid down, it is clear that a man cannot overstep those constitutional limits
without intending to do it. Go beyond this, and you leave jurors and judges to
make the constitution any thing and nothing: a mere nose of wax, to be molded
into any form at their will, and they may be excused, because left to exercise
their own judgment upon it, but lord Hale has charged you not to do this, even
though encouraged by a parity of reasoning: agreeable to his apprehensions, it
is deducible that if ever we have a bad president, presidential encroachment
may wrest the constitution to every thing that may serve any particular
purpose. But God forbid either should ever happen.

Stating these as expressly levying of war, (and I know of no other) I call
upon the prosecutors to produce a single instance, except in the inconsistent
reign of Henry VIII, wherein the rescue of one or more prisoners, by one or
more people, has ever been said to amount to treason. I may go farther, and ask
those gentlemen whether a refusal to obey the law, and resist the officers who
came to execute it has ever been called treason but by themselves? We find that
universality, a design to pull down all prisons, etc. is requisite to make the
offense treason: it is only a general opposition to the government. But why are
we to look for universality if we are to take a case like this, and call it
treason? If an officer of the government, (agreeable to this doctrine) goes to
execute process, and that process is resisted by one individual, does he not
deny the authority of the government? Yes, as much so as though 50 or 100 were
engaged in it: the whole intent the mal amens being exercised to resist it, it
becomes treason. The offense now charged constitutes nothing more nor less than
opposition to legal authority. The pulling down of a single meeting house, a
single brothel, or a single prison, was not allowed to be a denial of the
authority of the government in ancient usage, but when it was done with a
general intent, it became treason. Now we contend that except the universality
and generality of design in the act charged can be pointed out, it does not
amount to treason. When I said I know of no case whatever when resisting the
execution of law amounted to treason, I should have mentioned the exception of
resisting the militia law: this must be considered in a light of resisting the
army, because it is part of the general army that this law provides, and
opposing the army in any way would be treason, but resisting or opposing any
other laws is only a misdemeanor, except an attempt be made to subvert all
laws. Gentlemen, I repeat the exhortation; beware of constructive treason; it
is a dangerous thing to admit into our tribunals; it is like the scythe of
death, levelling alike the great and small, the guilty and innocent: whoever
reads its history will see war, famine and pestilence; a dangerous disease
without a medicine to cure it: beware how you establish a system in which your
progeny, as well as yourselves, are materially interested. If it were possible
for posterity to glance an eye on the proceedings of this day, no doubt but
they would wonder, and await the important event with anxiety: It is putting
your liberties into the hands of tyrants, if tyrants should ever torment this
country, to prevent which you are now called upon to establish a rule for
preventing injustice, should injustice ever appear. Montesquie says 4
Blackstone 75

The reason of this is plain; it is the point made use of by a government when
it becomes corrupt, and should be disposed, by taking advantage of its power,
to injure the people. Where constructive treason is not allowed, there can be
no ground for apprehension from that dangerous weapon. But we are told that by
adopting the words of the statute of Edward III, (which is not the case) we
have admitted all the authorities of the courts of Great Britain. This I deny,
we read the consequences of such a proceeding throughout the English books: See
Keeling 7. Hale 134. 4 Blackstone 75, 79, 80. When once this dangerous
principle was introduced, the courts soon ran to enormous extremes: and should
you pronounce the prisoner guilty to morrow, it would be the established law of
the United States, so far as a jury could do it. But there is one thing worthy
of your notice: the parliament of Edward III, from the experience they had,
defined treason in as clear terms as they could, they did not know but new
cases might arise, in which case they provided what no honest judge could
object to; they provided that if new cases should arise, the judges should not
call it treason until the the parliament had determined it to be so; so
extremely were they afraid of constructive treason that they would not trust a
judge, even if there was a similarity to former cases, nothing was to be left
to construction, or be called treason by the courts but direct levying of war.
But the parliaments were so much under the crown that it could have been more
safely trusted to the courts. However we are not bound either by the statutes
of Edward III, or William III, because, as I stated before, they are not in
force here, much less the decision of the judges or the parliaments under them:
We must put a construction upon our own statute, alone confining it to the
express word of levying war. This is an important question, and you are
required to deliberate fairly and fully, uninfluenced in any manner whatever,
but by your consciences.

Judge Hale 1 p 131 makes distinction between express and constructive treason:
you will there see that the time when constructive treason began and
flourished, was in those dark, gloomy, troublesome and bloody days, when
England was drenched with the blood of her best citizens; when the soil was
enriched with their gore, and yet to authorities passed at such times are we
referred by the council for the prosecution, and upon those authorities are we
to place our Constitutional definition of treason. Enhancing servants wages was
one of the cases those gentlemen relied on, and we admit that it was
denominated treason to rise for that purpose. Supposing that construction was
not pronounced by the king or by his judges, but by the most upright decision,
how might it operate on this case? Why, we admit that wherever a body of men in
arms go and surround the legislative or executive authority, to compel the
repeal of a law, it would be levying war: the wages of servants in those days
was fixed by act of Parliament, and it could not be enhanced legally, but by an
act to do it, and therefore any armed mob, going for the purpose of obtaining
this object, is a treasonable assembly, because the object is to compel
parliament to alter the law. Another definition referred to, is the pulling
down enclosures, prisons, etc. generally. In referrence to that I would ask if
the one now before the court is not a new case? If it is not I am at a loss to
find a new case. It has even been held that any number of men assembled to
rescue any number of persons, provided they did not go with a view of
prostrating all prisoners, and releasing prisoners generally, is only a great
riot. It is a new case in England, and it is so here, and therefore ought to be
cautiously handled. 6 Hume 402. in the case of Lord Stafford.

I shall now proceed more particularly to state my reasons for alleging that
the crimes with which the prisoner is charged are fully comprehended, and
punishment provided for them in the Sedition law. This I shall consider first,
as it relates to the rescue independantly. Secondly I shall make some
observations on the law, independent of the rescue, and thirdly, both together.

It is admitted, that the mere rescue of the persons from the custody of the
marshal at Bethlehem, would not amount to treason, and it would not be
necessary for me to say a word about that were, it not for the following
reasons. Speaking of pulling down meeting houses, brothels, prisons, etc. the
crime is defined: 4 Blackstone 129, "offenses against public justice, is
obstructing the execution of lawful process." This, there can be no doubt, is
an offense at common law, and persons found guilty of a rescue of a person
convicted of a crime, is adjudged guilty of the same crime, and would be
punishable accordingly, had it not been for our act of Congress, (the Sedition
act) but that act reduces a rescue, generally, to misdemeanor. Bat agreeable to
law, persons rescuing others not committed for treason, does not amount to
treason. A case in 4 Blackstone 86. the party himself was guilty of felony at
common law by making escape, but I believe it to be an entire new doctrine to
make the offense of the accessories or assistants higher than those who are
rescued: Rescue of persons for felony has been always felony, treason, treason,
etc. I think therefore it is clear to prove that every exertion has been used
to attempt to make treason of this crime, by the gentlemen, but it is as clear
that they have searched and tried in vain.

But it is farther said, that this business assumed a generality, and that the
object was to defeat a law of the United States, for which purpose a number
combined and conspired together, and more effectually to accomplish this they
rescued the prisoners, and therefore committed treason. Were I to admit this I
might call upon the gentleman to support his conclusions by authority, to show
that preventing the execution of process, or releasing prisoners before they
were carried to jail, is treason. I repeat that the only case mentioned is in
the disgraceful days of Henry VIII. which I think is inadmissible. But I deny
the fact: I deny that there was any combination or conspiracy between the
people of lower Milford in Northampton county and those of Bucks county at all
upon the business. First, the people of both counties were alike averse to this
law, and for similar reasons. I believe there are many unprincipled men who
wish to injure their country, and go about preaching up sedition to the people,
which communicated in different directions, catch fire in the same manner, and
perhaps at nearly one period; hence it is that their prejudices and opposition
may appear from the same cause, without parties holding the least
correspondence. I ask you whether there is a tittle of evidence to prove that
ever the prisoner went into Northampton county till this circumstance occurred?
was there any communication by writing, or any other way? no, not at all. Upon
what foundation can a conjecture arise then, that there was a combination? You
are not to try by conjecture, or wild supposition: No, you are sworn to "well
and truly try according to evidence." Does it appear, I ask you to recollect,
gentlemen of the jury, that he was instigated to this conduct by any
intercourse in any way held with Northampton county? No, it does not; but there
is a strong presumption that the discontents took root and grew to that state
without any combination at all. But whether or not treason was committed in
Milford township, is not for you at present to say; the overt act is laid at
Bethlehem, and there it must be proved, that he levied war upon the United
States with a number, or by force sufficient for the purpose, and (...) with
them he combined and conspired, etc. If he did this at all, (...) did it on the
7th of March, for it does not appear that he ever (...) there before in his
life; now if there was a conspiracy, it must appear that he acted previously
and in concert with others, and the act would have been alike chargeable to
all; but this does not appear. It is true Fries was heard (...) say we will
oppose you, and all the people of Northampton will join us, but this could
easily arise from his having heard that the people of Northampton were
dissatified with the law, but it does not fellow that, because there were
discontents in Northampton county, he should be responsible for their actions,
particularly since it all, at least, depends upon conjecture. Keeling 19 has a
case to answer this, where rebellion existed in two parts at one time, but it
was determined that this might happen without correspondence, since no such
evidence appeared, and therefore no notice was taken of it. Then, gentlemen, if
I were for a moment to admit that John Fries had committed treason in Bucks
county, which I deny, it would be immaterial upon the present occasion, because
upon every indictment for treason, the overt act must be proved in the county.
But it is said that doctrine does not apply, each state being to the whole
United States, as a county to the state, because the grand jury have the
district at large to inquire for; and therefore it is immaterial whether laid
in one county or the other. If this be sound law, dreadful indeed must be the
situation of the people of the United States, if the government should ever
fall into different hands from these in which it is now happily placed, because
an attorney may, at any time, keep a person, arraigned for a capital offense,
in ignorance, till he comes to the place of trial, and of course not be
prepared to repel it at a very distant place from where the act is laid. But
this, I will be bold to say, cannot be law. My reasons for thinking so are,
First, the law of Congress called the judiciary act, sect. 29, vol. 1. page 67,
says, that in cases punishable with death, the trial shall be had in the county
where the offense was committed:" here I would remark that the law takes
notice, not of a State or a district, but of a county, and therefore the
analogy drawn by Mr. Sitgreaves, that a district to the United States, is the
same as a county to a state, is not in point. The trial is to be had in the
county unless the judges shall determine that it cannot be had there without
great inconvenience, (See Foster 194) but let the offense be where it may,
twelve jurors must be summoned from the county, see 237 of the same book: if we
examine these authorities they will appear different from what they were
represented. 2 Hawkins C 46, sect. 34, is an authority to prove that upon a
plea of not guilty to a specific charge as to place, etc. in an indictment, if
the least variance appears from that place, it is sufficient to acquit the
party, and is fatal to the prosecution. It is not necessary for me again to say
that you are totally to exclude from your views whatever the prisoner did in
Bucks county, since the charge is laid in Northampton, and since an acquittal
from that charge will not prevent a prosecution in Bucks county. If it appears
that no treason was committed by him on the 7th of March at Bethlehem, you must
pronounce him not guilty.

Mr. Lewis then reviewed the testimony of Dellinger on the circumstances which
led to the expedition to Bethlehem, which he contended had nothing to do with
it, save the quo animo. It appeared that they heard Shankwieler was to be
there, but it is not pretended that going there upon that account would be
treason, and particularly as Shankwieler was not in custody, and it does not
appear that the prisoner knew of any others being there at that time. Then the
object particularly was to see Shankwieler. When they came to the bridge, it
appeared to them that two men were detained at Bethelehem, and it seems they
went forward to rescue them. In this they were justifiable; for if the law was
violated, it was by Major Nicholls, in making an arrest which the law did not
authorize him him to do. They were illegally detained, and it was lawful for
any body to go and rescue them. 2 Lord Raymond, 1301. I am not disposed to
blame the marshal; but I cannot justify him in point of law: his situation, no
doubt, rendered it a prudent measure; but it was detaining men by false
imprisonment, and was enough to alarm all the people of the state. I mention
the circumstance only to prove that there can be no rescue, unless the persons
liberated are legally confined. Instead of Fries being guilty for that action,
a very worthy man (the marshal) was guilty of assault and battery in the act of
detention. If this is fact, how does the affair stand afterward respecting
universality and design? I have justified Fries and the others in leaving the
bridge to go up to Bethlehem, and the laws of their country will justify them,
because it does not appear that they knew these people were discharged. When
they got to Bethlehem, it appeared there were a number of persons under arrest;
for, it does not at all appear in evidence that they ever heard before that
Fox, Ireman, or the Lehi prisoners, were there: The gentlemen on the other side
only presume it; but you, gentlemen, must not go upon presumption. You must
well and truly try, and true deliverance make, according to evidence. It does
not appear they knew of it; they came from a great distance, and from quite
another part of the country than where the Bucks county people came from; Fox
and Ireman had been just brought in, and none of them knew they were there:
however, when they were got there, upon a lawful occasion, hearing of a number
of persons being confined there, and that they were to be taken to Philadelphia
for what they considered to be no crime, they generally waxed warm, but Fries
was cool, he endeavored to pacify them: he had brought his sword with him, but
when he was appointed an ambassador of peace to treat with the marshal, he left
it behind him.

The whose of the transaction must be viewed as a sudden affray, like numerous
cases mentioned in Hale, Foster, etc. where great and sudden riots arose. Where
is the proof, I ask, of combination, of association or of correspondence? None
at all: they came there to a man without the least treasonable views, for it
was merely by chance they came there at all. There was much rage among the
people upon the first impressions, the knowledge of the prisoners in custody
made, and had it not been for the cool conduct of the prisoner at the bar,
blood and massacre would have been the immediate consequences, for no doubt
liquor was operating pretty much in their brains. An altercation took place:
they insisted on the prisoners, and in the prosecution of his delegation, from
the preremptory demands of the people, he made use of language which I admit
was unjustifiable, and violating the law, for which he ought to be punished,
but not with death. 1 Hale 153. But further: the persons were not in prison,
they were only in custody of the marshal: these are materially distinct; the
releasing of persons taken to prison, is only a misdemeanor while releasing
them after they are in prison, which is in some measure the sanctuary of the
law, is felony: 4 Blackstone 130. The breaking open of prisons generally is
treason, but in no case is the releasing prisoners before they are taken there.
Keeling 75.63. Lord Gordon's trial, Demarree's case 4 slate trials 844 and 900.
It would not have been treason, therefore, if a number of persons had actually
conspired to rescue these prisoners from the marshal, nor even if they had been
confined in a gaol, instead of a room, because it was not a general design to
break open all prisons, but one only: but on the contrary they were not in
prison they were only in custody of the officer who served the process; how
then, in the name of reason and common sense will it be made to amount to
treason when it would not, if they had been in gaol. But says the gentlemen, we
will not call it rescuing of prisoners, but a general obstruction of the
execution of the law, and the means here used was to support that general
object. The rescue is of itself a specific offense, and of itself admitted by
Mr. Sitgreaves to be only a misdemeanor. If it is so, how is it possible to
convert a misdemeanor into a treason, and thus to take away the life of a man
when imprisonment only is his desert! But what ground is there alleged for
this position? It is said that the arming and arraying a number of men was with
this intent. I deny the fact, and it has by no means been proved. The cases
referred to in England are treason to a demonstration. Enhansing servant wages
could not be done by force but by surrounding the parliament house, and this
was justly denominated waging war against the king. Any rising to alter
religion must be effected the same way: Religion is established by law in
England, and tha^ law must be altered by the parliament, therefore it could not
be forcibly altered but by levying war. 4 Blackstone 81. Reforming the laws
must be done the same, if at all. 1 Hawk. C 17. sent 25. see Erskine in
Gordon's trial 32. Not only open rebellion, but resisting the laws as enacted
is treason. The laws are a proof of the authority of the commonwealth, and
resisting those laws is making the parties independent of the commonwealth, and
therefore a defiance of the authority of the state. Lord Mansfield in the
charge on the same trial says, among other enumerations, that combinations,
etc. to arrest the execution of militia laws is treason. This strongly merits
observation. Why does the learned and experienced Lord Mansfield particularly
specify militia laws and no other? Why does he not say to arrest the execution
of any law? Why the militia law? For the best of all reasons, the same reason
as the taking or attacking a fort or a cattle belonging to the king, because
that is the place where he keeps his military forces, and because the military
is the strength of the kingdom, and this is resisting the military authority.
Therefore it must be allowed that a resistance of militia laws are upon a very
different footing than any others, and in time of danger resisting this law
would prevent the militia being drawn into the field when there is occasion for
them.

Now, gentlemen, these things all considered plainly show that what is now
attempted is a novel experiment, like modern philosophy, an entire new thing,
saving the solitary instance in the reign of Henry VIII, and it is clear that
the resistance of no law is treason, but the militia law. I agree also with the
doctrine Lord Mansfield lays down that any attempt to oppose the laws by
intimidation and violence is levying war, and treason.

It is unnecessary for me to turn to the books to prove that confession of the
party, or words spoken by him, taken perhaps in the time of fear, are not to be
regarded by you. This was so plainly improper, that the law of William III,
making two witnesses necessary, or confession in open court, was enacted: I
need only turn to our own laws (judiciary act.) There must be one of two kinds
of proof: the party in open court must confess, for confession out of court
cannot avail even if made before 10,000 witnesses: or else two witnesses must
prove the same overt act, and he must be convicted upon that indictment, if
any. If you are to go to all parts of the country for heated words, heard by
any body, in any circumstances, I must consider it as a very scandalous abuse
of the statute of Edward III. I think it impossible to hesitate at what was the
meaning of Congress when they made this act, and therefore shall barely recur
to the evidence.

Here is a proof, that the prisoner came up to Bethlehem, where he acted in a
certain manner; but the gentlemen concerned for the prosecution, think that
does not sufficiently indicate his design, and therefore they travel to Jacob
Fries's, to Kline's, and a number of other places: now suppose you convict him,
I entreat you to inquire from what evidence you do convict him? Is it from the
overt act committed at Bethlehem, or from that and other circumstances
together? If this is the broad ground upon which you go, do you convict him
upon the evidence of two witnesses, to the same overt act, transacted at the
same place? No, you do it upon the evidence of two, and a number of other
evidence besides, on a variety of circumstances. Let me suppose for a moment,
that two witnesses had come forward, and given an account of his conduct at
Bethlehem, but that evidence was not sufficient to answer the indictment: you
hear of such and such conduct at Quaker town, at Kline's, etc. etc. I ask,
would he have been convicted upon the evidence of those two independent of any
other? No, he would not. This is by no means agreeable to the statutes of
William III, or Edward VI, and in my view totally inadmissible. What is the
consequence of such a verdict? Why, a man charged with murder, assault or what
not, may know who the witnesses against him are, while one charged with
treason, the highest possible crime, may not know, if you can travel from town
to town, and from county to county for the evidence; if you can bring
correspondence, etc. from every part, of which the prisoner knew nothing until
brought before the court. No man would be safe in the admission of such things,
but you must form your opinion alone from the evidence of two witnesses
relating to the act committed at Bethlehem agreeable to the indictment. The
statutes, and our act of Congress mean and intend to prevent this kind of
rambling over the whole state for evidence, or indeed upon the doctrine of the
gentleman, notwithstanding the act says otherwise, they can with equal
propriety go throughout the United States to collect evidence to support the
prosecution, which was never seen nor heard of before.

I now contend, gentlemen, that the case of the prisoner at the bar does not
come within the statute of treason; and I also contend that it does come within
one of two other acts, for the judiciary act 22 and 23 sections, page 109, vol.
1. speaking of resistance of process and rescue, completely extends to the
prisoner. No, say the gentlemen, it is not a mere rescue, but a rescue for
certain intentions and designs. Have the Congress distinguished any particular
design, or have they not in this law? No they have not: then permit me to say
where Congress have not distinguished it, nor the books, it is not for judges
nor juries to distinguish: it belonged to Congress to make or except such cases
as they thought proper, they have not thought proper; and you have no right
whatever to do it.

But lest my objection should appear of weight to except it from the judiciary
act, there is a very good law, but which has been shamefully villified and
abused, called the sedition bill, providing fine and imprisonment for any high
misdemeanor, under which, us I observed before, the very actions of the
prisoner are defined. This act has passed since the trials of the western
insurgents in 1794, so that the opinions of the judges respecting treason at
that time, is most clearly and fairly superceded by this act, which has pointed
out, whatever has heretofore caused doubts about the meaning of treason in the
statute, and thus put an end to any judicial construction. That act provides,
that if any persons should combine or conspire together, to impede the
operation of any law of the United States, or to intimidate any persons holding
places or offices under the United States -- This last, is one of the many
little things collected together, in order, that when brought into a mass, they
may amount to treason -- It goes on, that if they should advise, attempt, or
procure any insurrection, riot, or unlawful assembly or combination, he or they
shall be deemed guilty of an high misdemeanor. The very crimes which are here
enumerated are charged upon John Fries, the prisoner at the bar: whether it is
carried into effect or not. Now, if any act or description can be more just
than this, I should wonder; it answers precisely every part of the crime
charged, and every concomitant circumstance. Now the question is, whether or
not, as the constitution did not define the punishment of treason, and as a
misdemeanor is described here, to be what some have thought used to be levying
war, and as the punishment is less, than what the other law respecting treason
enacts; whether this should not operate as a repeal of the former law, so far
as related to these points. As to the cases of Vigal and Mitchel, western
insurgents, I should doubt whether it would affect them at all, even if the law
had then existed, because the circumstances very much differed from the
insurrection in Northampton county. Wells and Nevil were inspectors, and their
offices were strictly belonging to the United States, and were deposits of the
United States, and equally under the protection of the law, with castles or
citadels: in addition to this, the officers of government were driven from
their own homes, and upon pain of death, they dared not approach their homes.
Their offices were burnt by the insurgents, and there was no law that touched
their case but the constitutional act defining treason; on which account, they
were tried and convicted under it. I would introduce these ideas, to show you,
that the decisions then formed by the court, are inapplicable at this time,
since the Sedition act is since passed, and agreeable to these circumstances,
which materially differ from those of 1794.

It is now time to close. Gentlemen, the task which you have to perform is very
serious, and very important; but I will not insult your understandings, by
saying more than my indispensible duty claims from me, in behalf of the
prisoner. You will, I have no doubt, consider the case calmly, wisely, and
deliberately. You know the law, under the direction of the court: and I have no
doubt, you will decide according to the impulse of your consciences. I will
only add, that the prisoner received, and has held his life from the authority
of Him, who is all-wise great and good, and by Him only, can it be destroyed,
except he has violated those equitable laws made by his country for the
preservation of peace and order in society: he is therefore entitled to an
equitable verdict: if he has done the acts named in the indictment, I have no
doubt, you will pronounce him guilty: if he has forfeited his life, go he must,
and if he is to go, it is not in the power of men to prevent it. I shall
therefore rest assured, that you will give a conscientious verdict, upon which
you are bound to answer.

MR. RAWLE.
AFTER his exordium, in which he expressed the importance of his situation as
public accuser -- he hoped that while his duty peremptorily imposed upon him,
the necessity of doing justice to the United States, he should not be divested
of candor toward the unfortunate prisoner at the bar, to whom he hoped full
justice would be done. He proposed in the first place to collect the detail of
transactions, the clear and unequivocal train they had been testified by the
several witnesses, not only called to support the prosecution, but unhappily
for the prisoner, corroborated by the witnesses called by himself. In the
second place he should apply these facts to the laws and Constitution of the
United States: from both of which he thought it would evidently appear to the
jury that the prisoner was guilty of treason in levying war against the United
States.

The prisoner stood indicated for opposing in a warlike manner, two laws of the
United States, the one entitled "an act providing for the valuation of lands
and dwelling houses," etc. passed July 9, 1798, and the other entitled an act
for levying a direct tax within the United States, passed July 14, 1798.
agreeable to these acts certain commissions and assessors were to be appointed
to carry the provisions thereof into execution. It appeared in evidence that
Mr. Eyerly, one of the witnesses produced, had received a commission
conformable thereto in a part of Pennsylvania, which he received in August,
1798, together with a request from the secretary of the treasury, that he would
find suitable characters to serve as assessors to act in the division assigned
to him. In the execution of this request Mr. Eyerly found very great
difficulties, although there was a perfect acquiescence in all other parts of
the union. Many whom he nominated declined on account of the unpopularity of
those laws, although Mr. Eyerly very industriously, and in a praise worthy
manner endeavored to remove those objections.

In order to show the general difficulties there was in the execution of these
officers' duty. Mr. Attorney recited the testimony of Mr. Eyerly (page 47) and
its confirmation by Mr. Chapman, Mr. Henry and others. He also went into an
examination of the testimony demonstrative of the difficulties the assessors
found in the execution of their duty and the insult they frequently meet with,
when engaged in their pacific efforts to explain the law to the misled rabble^
But sorry was he to say, that these commendable efforts were outweighed by the
influence of certain leaders, among whom he found several captains of militia,
and Fries with the rest: he throughout the whole scene appeared the most
prominent, and instead of attending to the good advices given him by his best
friends, flew in a rage and renewed his opposition. A part of the effects of
their hostility was accomplished in preventing Mr. Clark from fulfilling the
office which he had undertaken, and the general reluctance there was in others,
and indeed finally the abandonment of the assessments; for it appeared that,
not only those who were unwilling to give their rates, refused, but those who
were willing, were intimidated from doing it. To such a pitch was intimidation
and dissaffection arrived, that he was sorry to say, the very Magistrates of
the peace had so far neglected their duty as to join the opposition, and nearly
all of them, from one or other of these motives, refused to issue process for
the apprehension of delinquents, or examine persons who opposed the laws: and
those who did attend to their duty, found the greatest difficulties to procure
the attendance of evidences, who were prevented by the impulse of fear from
coming forward. Many attempts were made to pacify these deluded people, who
were under the most baneful advice, and the attempts accordingly miscarried,
even though propositions were made in some townships to indulge them with the
choice of their own assessors.

Their town meetings were sometimes attended by military bodies, in all the
parade of war, with arms, music, and colors flying, who constantly employed
the most violent and indecent menace toward the officers of the United States,
which made even their personal safety doubtful. In this state of things, the
marshal of the district was dispatched to serve process on a number of the
violaters of the public peace, and having served several warrants in Lehi
township, he went to Lower Milford, and thence to Millar's town, where the
gentlemen who were with him, assisting in the duty, met with repeated insults
and even personal abuse. The assessors were still unable to proceed in
measuring the houses, and finally obliged to abandon the business altogether;
some of them having been compelled to resign on account of the opposition they
met with, and the threats which were thrown out, so that they were in actual
danger of their lives if they had proceeded. While these officers were going
the tour of their duty, in defiance of opposition, the principal leader, and
indeed principal mover of the insurrection, John Fries, makes a distinguished
figure upon the stage: he was not yet apprised that they had proceeded to
assess the houses in his township, as soon as he learnt that they had, deaf to
the arguments and reasoning of Mr. James Chapman, he flies into a rage, and
exclaims, pointing to a man near him, If I were to send that man to my house to
inform them that the assessments were going forward, I should have 700 men here
by day light tomorrow, and not only that, but we have men in Montgomery, and
all Northampton county to join us. This, gentlemen, certainly evinces a general
opposition to the law, as clearly as words can do it. When told that the
assessments were going on, it operated on him like an electric shock, and he
sullenly retired having first adverted, with threats, to the melancholy scenes
which has transpired in France. He afterward meets the assessors at Jacob
Fries's, to some of whom he expresses much respect, but certainly not very much
like a friend or a neighbor, if we consider the anger which he displayed. No;
it was not friendly admonition, it was the mark of enmity in disguise, and the
special declaration of war: this will be evinced in observing the affair near
the house of Singmaster: (p. 71.) Fries, with some attendants, met three of the
assessors, one of whom (Mr. Rodrick) they endeavored to seize. Fries was at the
head of the band, but missing his mark, and taking Foulke he let him go, with a
threat that they should all be taken the next day: on the next day, when the
assessors were to meet at Mr. Chapman's, Fries, and his party, met at Jacob
Fries's, whence they march in military pomp to Quaker town to execute their
threat. They ride up to the tavern, and there, after discharging their ^ieces,
give an huzza to the much profaned name of Liberty. When the assessors came
into the town, swolled with large drafts of guilt and whiskey, the latter of
which it appears that Fries kept clear of, but of the former he had a large
portion. Seeing Mr. Rodrick ride through the town, they ordered him to stop,
which he refusing, the cry of fire was given. Mr. Rodrick did not know who it
was gave the word, but they levelled at him. However, gentlemen, on the other
side say, they did not fire. This is the kind of defense which is held up to
you: if they had fired, perhaps it would have been said, they did not hit; if
they had hit, that they did not kill, and if they had killed, then it would
have been only homicide! Mr. Foulke next came, he was stopped by a number, and
among them Fries appears. So far as relates to the prisoner at the bar, it
appears to have been his studied object to abstain from actual violence and
outrage at all times; but his plans are regularly accomplished, notwithstanding
his seeming moderation; and from his attention toward Mr. Foulke, and some
others, it was clearly proved that the officer, and not the man, was obnoxious.
Fries had told Mr. Foulke the preceding evening that he would come to his
house, and bring seven hundred men with him, rather than that the law should be
executed.

The opposition to the assessors, the general transactions of the 6th of March,
and the resolution they entered into to go and liberate the prisoners the next
day, Mr. Rawle said he considered as the beginning of the treason. On this day,
(March 6th) the prisoner at the bar, the cool, deliberate leader and adviser of
this assembly, whose minds and measures were those of their leader, in which he
exhibited his power, particularly on the arrival of Mr Foulke, commanding him
to get off his horse, and come into the house, when he demanded his papers;
but, on that gentleman making some demur, he broke out, ordering him not to
hesitate, on which they are delivered up, and then it, was he made use of the
declaration, that they would not submit to the law, till the other states had
submitted. The law shall be repealed; we will not submit, he said: this we have
from a respectable witness. When the papers were returned, it was with a strict
injunction not to proceed in the assessments, accompanied with a bravado: "You
may return me if you think proper." Having done this, there was another
assessor who was to be also brought, and maltreated (Mr. Child's.) Fries goes to
a neighboring house, and accosts him in a friendly manner, telling him he must
go and see his men. When arrived, he leaves him amongst his men. It is
unnecessary here to recapitulate the orgies of that transaction, in which the
venerable name of Washington was used by their profane lips: they even extend
their madness so far as to call upon Mr. Child's to swear allegiance to them.
Suffice it to say, that the whole period of his stay was filled with hustling
and abuse; but being a robust man he was not hurt. When Fries returned they
were quiet, and he expressed concern at the treatment, and inquired for the man
who did it, but soon he makes a demand of the papers, which being given, he
went out exulting at the acquisition; mean while Mr. Child's was again ill used,
and which again ceased on the return of Fries, who being disappointed in their
contents returns the papers. Mr. Child's, in this situation, does what any man
would do, promises not to go into the township again to assess, and the
assessments were perfectly stopped in Lower Millford. If this had been a mere
local matter; if no promise of assistance had been received, if no
preconcerted, but unexecuted plan had not been designed, their labors might
have rested here, having accomplished their professed purpose of effectually
preventing the assessments going forward amongst them; but their views were
more hostile to the government, under which they were protected, and which was
that moment extending its wings to shield them from assault, in common with
their fellow-citizens. Their triumph was incomplete; "nothing was done, while
aught remained to do" was their language; for, upon returning to the house of
Jacob Fries, a message was sent by Dillinger, at a late hour, to give more
general notice that next morning they were to go to Bethlehem in order to
rescue the prisoners. Shankweiler and others were named as the prisoners whom
they were to rescue. This, gentlemen, is an important proof of the system with
which this rescue was conducted, in which it is clear the people of Northampton
and Bucks were connected: those people of Bucks were informed that certain
persons of Northampton had been arrested by a Judges' warrant, and were to be
taken down to Philadelphia; but, they reasoned to themselves, If this is
permitted, our plan will fall through; our intimidation of the assessors will
be at an end; they will proceed in their business, and we shall not be able to
carry our plan of defeating the law; we ourselves shall be taken next. No;
Shankweiler, and all the others, must be liberated. The message is
communicated; and with a view of holding to this steady purpose, all who were
present, the prisoner at the bar drew up a writing, binding those who
subscribed it to meet at Millar's town the next morning: What are the
particulars of that instrument we are ignorant, it not having been produced to
us; but, I am sorry to say, upon his own declaration, that he never signed it:
in this he appears to desert his comrades, and leave them in a predicament into
which he had led them; for, having gone so far, they would not think of
abandoning their plants. The next morning they met by appointment; their
proceeding would then have been stopped by intelligence given them by young
Marks, but on consultation, the prisoner at the bar says, "No, we will proceed
as we come so far." They proceeded until they came to the bridge.

During this period the Marshal, who had been dispatched up to serve warrants
from the judge of the district, arrived, and after a variety of instances of
opposition, as related by himself (p. 37) by Mr. Henry (p. 24) and by Mr.
Eyerly (p. 45.) He was going forward in the execution of his duty as well as he
was able, but being informed of the design which was formed to rescue the
prisoners who had promised to meet him at Bethlehem, by virtue of the powers
deputed to a Sheriff, he procures a Posse Commitatus to assist him, on which
account, owing to the generally dissatisfied state of the neighborhood, he was
forced to send so far as Easton for some of those aids. The next day the
Marshal was ready to receive his prisoners: two men armed then made their
appearance.

Mr. Rawle here retorted pretty strongly on Mr. Lewis's reference to 2 Lord
Raymond 1301. adverting to the false imprisonment (as that gentleman called it)
of Keifer and Paulus at Bethlehem, previous to the commencement of the general
outrage, in which he recited the evidence respecting the arrival of those two
men, and justified the Marshal for his prudent precaution to prevent the
shedding of blood, because, from his information, he appeared to be in a
delicate and dangerous situation. I would rather, Mr. Rawle exclaimed, spend my
life in voluntary exile on the bleak shores of Botany Bay, than live at large
in a country where a Marshal in the execution of such an invaluable duty,
should be held up as an object of guilt: this is at once destroying all that we
hold dear -- our judicial system, on which depends our security. The act was
laudable, because it was an act of personal safety and general prudence.

Mr. Rawle then proceeded to examine the evidence until the arrival of Fries at
Bethlehem, contending that neither the arrest of those two men, nor that of
Shankweiler particularly, who had never surrendered himself prisoner at all,
was the cause of the assembling Fries and the party at Miller's town, their
march from Milford, or their arrival at the bridge near Bethlehem: it was not
till after their arrival at the bridge that the party were informed of the
detention of these two men, when they sent to demand them. They were liberated,
but in order to beg this armed force to come no farther, the Marshal dispatches
four of his posse to reason with them. But the object was not yet attained, for
while these two men were delivering up, the Marshal perceives the prisoner at
the head of his party, with a sword drawn, marching up with all the
appurtenances of war, although the others had engaged to await an answer at the
bridge. They appeared to be instigated to pass the bridge by the arrival and
example of Fries, and from that moment affairs assumed the awful spectacle
which the Marshal had been Previously led to apprehend, and this John Fries who
had obtained the rank of a Captain in the Militia, which he ought to have used
solely to defend his country, prostitutes his command to the base and dangerous
purpose of rebellion against the government. All the evidence agree that the
only leader; the only distinguished character; the only ambassador, negociator,
and adviser that appeared throughout the whole transaction was the prisoner at
the bar: It is he that goes first to demand the prisoners: a recital of his
conduct may be seen in Thomas's and Mitchel's testimony, corroborated by
others. He declares, Gentlemen, if you are willing we will take them, I will go
foremost; none of you fire till they fire on us first; till I give the word; if
I drop, then take your own command. To give him all the credit due to his
humanity it is observable that he wished to obtain his object by intimidation,
but if it was not attainable by threats, force must be resorted to. No doubt
there must have been a moment when he attended to personal safety; as
commander, and foremost man in a narrow passage, he must have fallen first, he
had a very fair chance of receiving a blow or a bullet, and therefore that
precaution for his men not to fire became indispensible. The object of these
insurgents was not to commit murder, the prisoner is not charged with it, but
to prevent the execution of the law, and this was to be obtained better without
a loss of life than with it, but the expressions of Wm. Barnet, reciting those
of the prisoner, were "Stick, Stab, and do as good as you can, as I expect
first to get it."

Gentlemen, Treason may sometimes, and indeed often does call into its aid the
commission of acts horrid and atrocious, but such atrocities are not
necessarily component parts of Treason. Actual homicide, destruction, or
seizure of property may, and often does occur: if the Marshal on that unhappy
occasion had stood out five minutes longer, I leave it to yourselves, or to any
dispassionate person to judge whether lives -- more than the life of the
prisoner would not have been lost, and still the crime would have been but
Treason; But that it did not arrive to such an horrid scene we are indebted to
the judicious conduct of the Marshal, who acted above all praise: influenced by
the advice of two of the neighboring magistrates, whose powers were insulted
and suspended, and who must, with himself, have fallen a sacrifice in the
execution of their duty, he determines to make the surrender: the rescue, said
Mr. Horsfield, I considered was perfect, otherwise the destruction of human
lives was certain: you are a stiff Officer. (to the Marshal) When I see those
guns levelled at the window: when I hear those savage shricks, I now think you
will be justifiable in giving up the prisoners. The Marshal, after much
hesitation, acted very laudably in giving them up without farther opposition. I
grant that Mr. Eyerly and Mr. Balliot retired unhurt, but observe, gentlemen,
they were not the object; the liberation of the prisoners, and thus preventing
the Marshal executing process, was their only aim, and when they obtained that,
they desisted from farther violence.

I might with propriety apply to this Treason words which were used for a
different purpose by Pope,

"All are but parts of one stupendous whole:"

A general plan of opposition to the law was contemplated, and the release of
the prisoners was but one of the parts, if not of one stupendous whole, it was
of one great system. Having obtained their object, they retired from their
successful expedition, the trumpeter sounding the triumphal blast before the
conquerors, in defiance of the legal authority of the United States, and thus
departed, we hear no more of them.

These are facts; -- not founded on the testimony of a single witness, which is
sufficient to convict a man in common cases; nor are they confined to the
testimony of two witnesses, which is all the constitution requires; but they
are corroborated by numerous witnesses, produced in order to remove every doubt
from your minds as to the material facts of the crime. There is no case in our
books more clear than the present, the evidence is so uniform, that even the
ingenuity and talents of the prisoner's counsel have not been able to contest
one fact that has been related; indeed the whole is so fair, that the most
incredulous must be satisfied of the accuracy of the charge, independent of the
confession of the prisoner, which confirms the whole: it proves to a
demonstration that his main object was nothing less than to prevent the
execution of the laws which all men are bound to obey.

Gentlemen, the counsel for the prisoner have endeavored to diminish the force
of that voluntary confession by telling you that no man can be convicted upon
his own confession out of Court, nor without the testimony of two witnesses:
the same arguments have been used to nullify the expressions which we have
produced proof that the prisoner frequently made use of, from which we
evidently discover his intention. I allow that no man should be convicted for
treason unless upon the testimony of two witnesses, or confession in open
Court; but when all the facts necessary to substantiate the crime proved by two
witnesses, the declarations of the prisoner, as well as his confession may be
produced as good evidence as to his intention, and this is not necessary to be
proved by two witnesses; this tends to show the designs of his heart, which can
only be known to his Creator and himself. These declarations should be known to
the Court, in order to discover the intention with which the crime was
perpetrated. In the case of Lord Gordon, the words said to have been used by
him in the lobby of the house was not rejected by the jury because it required
two witnesses, but on account of the improbability of a declaration having been
publicly used which no more than one individual could be produced to prove. We
have proved by two witnesses that the overt act was committed by the prisoner,
and have produced much corroborative testimony, in which we have not been
confined to two, having heard it from twelve respectable witnesses. If we have
succeeded to prove the intention, it is sufficient for the law, and if you
believe the testimony, it indubitably substantiates the fact. Mr. Rawle, in the
examination of the testimony, went more at length than we have thought it
necessary to follow him, because no reference can be made to it.


I shall now proceed to consider what is the law arising upon these facts, in
going into the examination of which, I shall put out of the question two
objections, one of them only has been produced, the other having barely been
alluded to, rather than held up.

A proclamation was issued by the President, on which Fries did then go to his
home, whereupon it has been argued that no instance can be produced to prove a
prosecution being commenced for acts committed prior to the reading of the riot
act in England, if the mob thereupon dispersed, because they had complied with
the proclamation. It is right in part: if the people do not disperse, the
remaining mob are guilty of felony: but I ask the gentlemen has the defense
been at all set up on the ground of compliance with the proclamation? In the
riot at Drury Lane theater by the footmen; and that which was held up in which
the earl of Essex and others were engaged, many of the rioters did disperse in
consequence of the riot act being read, and yet were afterward punished for the
enormities they committed while they were there. Alike trivial is the objection
respecting the undue appointment of assessors. It is sufficient that such a
person acts as commissioner or assessor, if he usurps that power the law has
provided a remedy by other means than the dangerous one of an insurrection to
know merely whether* A. B. or C. are regularly appointed to office. There are
legal modes of application to ascertain the fact; there is the whole board of
commissioners, or even an higher power may be applied to, to ascertain the
authority, and no virtuous honest citizen would think of opposition on that
account. We do not think it necessary to trouble the court, since it was fully
in the power of the prisoner's council to have brought the commissioners under
this act before them, but not having availed themselves of it, nor pressed it
home to your notice, gentlemen, why was such a scarecrow insinuated, but to
mislead you? there can be no doubt of the legality of those commissioners, if
there was, it would not alleviate the crime of rebellion. But that was never
used, neither by the prisoner himself, nor any of the insurgents, as a ground
for the rebellion; it was not even a coloring for it, nor does it appear that
the insurgents ever doubted in the smallest degree, the legality of the
appointments, their declarations were repeatedly "no assessors shall act in the
township, nor shall any assessments be made." No doubt was ever made of the
powers used by the officers, and therefore the opposition to the law is alone
to be considered.

Having disposed of those two points, I wish now to impress upon your minds a
most solemn conviction, to wit, That the law under which the prisoner at the
bar stands indicted, without being in the least doubtful, ambiguous, obscure,
or perplexing, is well defined in, and composes a part of the Constitution of
the United States, art. 3. sect. 3. It is certainly momentous that you should
be fully satisfied of the true meaning of that part under which the present
crime is placed, to wit, "levying war against the United States." I would
premise that the indictment is worded precisely in the usual form, and that the
only question now is, what is that levying war with which the prisoner is
charged?

To ascertain what is levying war, it is necessary for us only to consider what
is the nature of civil and political society in the United States. The
government is the organ which the people collectively have thought it their
duty and interest to establish for their mutual safety -- their will, publicly
expressed in the laws, is the legitimate will of the majority of the people:
all our laws are the acts of this majority, and it is a radical principle,
which will not be controverted, that the will of the majority is always binding
upon the minority, and should be acquiesced in quietly by them, whether the
administration of that government be in the hands of one person, or of many;
those, therefore, who do not choose to continue in that society, ought to
withdraw quietly from it, rather than disturb the quiet of the whole.
Allegiance is a quiet submission and acquiescence to the supreme power -- In
monarchical governments it is placed in the king; but the citizens of America
know of no allegiance but to the laws, for they alone are the binding principle
by which society at large is kept in domestic peace and security. If,
therefore, deviating from this allegiance to the laws, measures are taken to
disturb the public peace by a resistance of the laws, accompanied by force of
arms, or by the intimidation of numbers sufficient for the purpose, and it be
applicable only to a grievance of a public or general, and not of a particular
or private interest, such resistance then becomes the crime of treason, and
particularly so if the views are to bring about the suspension or repeal of any
of the ^^ws; for there is no particular kind of law liable to exception; it is
treason, because it is an attempt to overturn the fundamental principles of
society, by endeavoring to impose into the system the will of a minority, which
has no right to be there; it is creating a new agency, a new species of
legislature, and eventually dissolving the powers legally ordained. This
definition may apply as well to any one law as to all the laws, for each is
equally stamped with public approbation, and to none particularly is sanctity
attached, all proceeding from one power, those who undertake to resist any one,
may with equal propriety resist the whole, and treason appears to me to be the
inevitable inference, otherwise it would be impossible to ascertain the limits
at which this dangerous licentious conduct must stop, we should be at once
thrown back into a state of natural society; which God prevent. I ask the
gentlemen who argued for this distinction, to point out to me which law may be
resisted with impunity! If one may be, the evil principle will go on to another
and another, and where will it stop!

I have no occasion again to recur to the authorities we have produced which
the gentlemen pass over as the acts of bad times, corrupt judges, a profligate
court, etc. The counsel with all their learning and industry seem to be
satisfied with this general discharge of our authorities, but whatever might
have been the baseness of the attorney generals of those times, the meanness of
the judges, the profligacy of the court, or the merits of the prisoner, we
stand upon broad established, and general ground, which is not pretended to be
obligatory upon us merely because it has heretofore been decided, nor is it
obligatory in England upon that account, although you have been so told, but we
go upon it, because it is right. That Sir Walter Raleigh was grossly abused by
Sir Edward Coke as notorious; it was the bad practices of those times, but this
reference more regards the proceedings on trials, than the decisions: the
decisions uniformly were, that usurpation of public authority in a certain
manner, amounted to Treason. What! shall a man be permitted to attack the
government by piecemeal? to take out a plank here and a plank there, till our
political ship sinks, and such conduct not be called a treasonable division of
the government! With respect to the authorities wherein it was stated to be
necessary that the design should be to pull down meeting houses, brothels etc.
generally in order to constitute high treason, it must be observable that it
was the assumption of the legal powers which constituted the crime; to pull
down meeting houses as such, was interfering with the toleration granted by
government, and therefore treasonable. With respect to Bawdy houses,
government, and not individuals, have a right to correct them, and if
individuals pretended to correct the evil, they were attainted of high treason.

We are told that no case is to be found in which a mere rescue is called
treason. Hale 133, in my opinion is an authority in point. Bethlehem was the
prison of the United States under the marshal, there the marshal held several
persons in custody, and levying war, or attempting by force or intimidation to
deliver those prisoners out of his custody is certainly treason. Here we stand
upon ^^ttled ground we say, and I appeal, gentlemen, to your recollection,
(...) there was no particular view to relieve any particular person, but that
the words were "Shankweiler and others" the claim was general, and the object
was general -- the repeal of the law was that object, and these were the means
used to obtain it. This is declared to be treason ^^en by that great and
virtuous man who is held up to your notice as guarding us to beware of
introducing more constructive treasons: Sir Matthew Hale, whose very name
carried authority at the period of 1668, and with him, all the judges upon
mature deliberation, have declared this to be sound law. As Burglary, Arson and
Murder may be made the means of treason, so may rescue; Treason must have some
means: sometimes the most atrocious, sometimes the means may be newly invented,
but because newly invented it cannot lessen the crime with respect to the
murder of Sir Theodosious Boughton, by capt. Donnelan in England, because it
was merely by a draught of laur^l water (which in that country is poison) -- a
new invention for murder, the counsel might have argued against the conviction
because no former case had occurred, as well as that the innocence of this
rescue should be held up, because new. But there was no such thing. A strong
and important part of the combination was actually carried into effect, and it
was not absolutely necessary to prove the rescue in order to prove the treason:
it has been evidently shown to you in the transactions at Quaker town, so that
the rescue was only a part, and the termination of the general plan so far as
it proceeded.

I have no need to take up more authorities to prove that this is treason: it
was so before the birth of our constitution: this principle was coeval with the
reign of Edward III, in 1340. I take it to be a true and incontrovertible
principle, that when we sind an act, on which previous decisions have been
made, those decisions have been acted upon, and we should think proper to pass
that act by engrafting it into, and making it a part of our constitution, those
decisions are of course adopted as our direction, whereby we are to understand
the applications of that act. I would barely observe that while those gentle
men are telling us that we are not to have recourse to those volumes of laws,
(which we ought all to be acquainted with, as volumes of science, explanatory
of the code by which we are bound) they themselves resort to the same species
of authority, to endeavor to prove that treason under the act of Edward III, is
not treason in America. We have heard much about constructive and
interpretative treason, and constructive levying of war. Agreeable to the form
of government in England, the king is recognized as king in two capacities, one
in his natural, as king, and one in his political, as sovereign: now, when that
part of treason called compassing the king's death is mentioned, it refers to
his natural capacity, but when of levying war against the king, it refers to
his political capacity, and it was therefore necess^^y to show the distinction
between different species of treason: this latt^^ is termed constructive
treason; but from the variety of its modes of introduction, cannot be so well
defined; but its existence is necessary in order to support society and
preserve it (...) this is what is termed levying of war; it may consist in
opposition (...) the king's forces, or by threats or force attempting to compel
the (...) to remove his ministers, or alter established laws. If you expu^^e
what is direct levying of war, there can no such thing as treason he found;
either the law is wrong, or the arguments used on the other side. Gentlemen,
the law is established, but the argument's vanish like vapor before the
morning sun; what, then, in England is called constructive levying of war, in
this country must be called direct levying of war. The framers of our
constitution were as learned, and as wise as any gentlemen now at the bar; they
certainly saw that this was the only kind of direct of levying of war that
could exist in this country, and therefore if they had not intended that what
was called constructive in England should constitute what they called "levying
of war against the United States," they would not have introduced the crime at
all: this is an absurdity they never would have been guilty of.

The learned gentleman admits that resistance against one particular law may be
termed constructive treason, and may be the crime of treason here: he says that
resistance to the militia law would be a restraint upon the principle
dependence of the government, and therefore treason; gentlemen try our
arguments by this test, and see whether resistance on the present occasion is
not equally so. I ask you what is to become of the militia, the standing army,
the eventual army, or the civil power itself, if you are unable to raise
revenue? Who will fight, who will transact your civil concerns if they are not
paid? If by opposing revenue laws the government itself as well as the army is
fundamentally undermined, is it not at least as much treason as though the
militia law alone were more openly (but not more effectually) attacked? Nothing
is so much entitled to respect and submission as laws which are the direct
means of keeping society together. At the present time, when the feudal system
is no more, but from necessity subsistence must be obtained from employment and
labor, the defense and preservation of the country must come from the revenue,
and to destroy that is to give a mortal wound to the government itself.

Mr. Rawle then went into a review of some of the circumstances, alluded to by
the opposite counsel, which characterize the insurrection, and the trials
thereupon in 1795, which he insisted, though those gentlemen would not allow
it, were very similar in circumstances to the unhappy affair now before the
court, in which he drew the following parity between the cases:

In 1794, the disturbance was to prevent the execution of one law -- the excise
law:

In 1799, the house and land tax laws.

In 1794, four counties were engaged in opposition.

In 1799, but 3: Northampton, Bucks, and Montgomery.

In 1794, the excise officers were attacked and prevented executing their duty.

In 1799, the assessors were the same.

In 1794, the insurgents collected into an army, in battle array, displaying
their ensigns of triumph, with numbers sufficient to procure their object; say,
6000 men in Braddock's field.

The object of 1799, was to do it in a similar manner, and they actually did,
by their military appearance and boasts of much larger increase, impress a
general opinion of their power, sufficient to acaccomplish their purpose.

In 1794, the insurgents made public declarations that the excise law should
never be executed.

In 1799, were not declarations of the same nature made by these insurgents;
for that other counties, and even other states would support them, and it
should never be done?

The object of 1794, was to obtain a repeal of a law -- the excise law.

In 1799, it was the same, so far as related to them -- the house and direct
tax.

In 1794, the excise officers were compelled to promise, that they would not
execute the law in that part of the country.

In 1799, the same promise is exacted, and obtained respecting Lower Milford
and other parts. There was some difference, it is true, as the gentleman
stated, some of the officers at that time being banished from their houses, on
pain of death. It was farther argued, that there was this striking distinction;
that General Nevil's house might be considered as a castle of the United
States, because it was an office of excise; but the analogy still holds good;
it was General Nevil's dwelling house, however, that was attacked; the attack
was made only because he was an officer employed in the superintendance of a
tax they disliked: Mr. Levering's tavern at Bethlehem was made the prison of
the United States, and there was an executive officer of the United States, it
was as much so as any other prison in the Union: this was the castle, the
fortress of the United States, to protect which the marshal had assembled his
posse commitatus, provided with weapons of defense. I consider this, therefore,
a more violent breach of the law than the attack upon General Nevil's house; so
far as it went -- admitting that no guns were fired, nor lives lost, nor was
any house burnt, otherwise so far as it went the case was rather stronger than
the former. Happy is it for the prisoners that the scene of riot was not
farther from the seat of government: if it had been more remote from the power
of government, we cannot calculate upon the consequences, or increase of revolt
and excess which would have been evinced. I will not pretend to anticipate
them, for I wish not to inflame my own mind by the sad calculation, nor the
minds of the jury; I only wish the facts to appear in their native colors.

Why then can we entertain a doubt, viewing all these circumstances, that the
prisoner is guilty of treason? There can be none. We are told that the
legislature have parted a law, entitled the Sedition Act, which shows the
offense of the prisoner; and that the opinion of the legislature was to bring
under this law the constitutional definition of treason, making it a
misdemeanor! To me, of all the weak arguments which have been brought in behalf
of the prisoner, this is the weakest. This law, which has been cried up from
one end of the continent to the other by some persons as unconstitutional, is
now to be brought into court to explain away what the constitution positively
defines to be treason. If this ever had been the intention of the legislature,
there certainly would have been something like treason, something like levying
of war introduced into that bill, but we find no such thing; the words do not
at all occur in it, and that it is not intended, I think is clear. Sedition and
treason are two distinct crimes, and two distinct punishments are enacted to
meet them. The description of crime in the sedition act, is those who combine
with intent to impede the operation of the law, and those who intend to raise
an insurrection -- these are to be considered as guilty of an high misdemeanor.
Now, those who conspire to commit treason are not considered guilty of treason;
the treason must have been carried into effect. It cannot be treason for a man
to counsel, advise, or attempt to procure insurrection with intent to impede
the operation of any law of the United States; but this is declared to be a
misdemeanor, whether executed or not. Besides, the word "treasonable," is not
inse^^ed in the sedition law: thus, if a man be indicted for taking the
property of another, unless the word feloniously is introduced, he is not
liable to the charge. So in this case, the act must be traitorously done, or it
is not treason. To show the absurdity of this doctrine, we need only for a
minute suppose, that in the commission of any of the crimes specified in the
sedition act, lives should be lost, houses burnt, etc. The laws of the United
States have previously declared, that such offenders should be punished with
death, and surely it ought to be carried into execution -- not be mitigated by
a future law to the mere penalty of 5000 dollars, and five years imprisonment.
If this was the intention of the legislature, might it not, at least, be
expected that they would have declared so in the act; but they have manifested
no such intention, in that, nor in the present instance, with respect to which,
had they done it, they would have overleaped their constitutional powers; for
the constitution is an ark, into which the legislature itself dare not place
its feet; if they were to do it, the judiciary have the power, and it is their
duty to bring them back again, and say, "You have gone too far:" They can as
much restrain an unconstitutional act, as Congress can make a constitutional
act. This constitution gave Congress the power to declare the punishment that
should be inflicted on what it had defined to be treason. Congress had nothing
to do with the crime, and if they have declared it, as the gentleman supposes,
they have done it without authority, and it can be (...) no avail whatever. But
no, they have rather, in the act alluded to, declared what should not be
considered treason, or removed doubts upon that head. This being the case, the
same opinion which operated on the judges in 1795, is still in force; because
no legislative act has intervened to change it. Certain it is, that Congress
did not intend to enact an unconstitutional punishment for treason; but if they
had intended it, they have not a right to do it, nor have they done it.

Now, gentlemen, whether these things are as we have represented, or not, are
for you to judge, and decide upon your information, if you are satisfied that
the prisoner at the bar was engaged in the affair at Bethlehem, and that affair
was connected with other previous arrangements, you must convict him, otherwise
you must not. We consider, and think the evidence must prove to you, that all
are parts of the same whole, were began long before the 7th of March; and that
they partly existed in Northampton and partly in Bucks counties. It must be
upon a full conviction in your minds that the treason was committed by him in
Northampton county, that you can convict the prisoner: and if you have not that
full conviction, I firmly hope you will acquit him; if you have, you are bound
to pronounce him guilty.

CHARGE OF JUDGE IREDELL.
GENTLEMEN OF THE JURY,
I AM persuaded that every person, who has attended to the present very awful
and important case upon which you are now called to decide, must be impressed
with a just respect for the patience and attention you have shown, through the
long period which unfortunately has been taken up; but this, though much
personal inconvenience must have been experienced, not only by you, but by all
concerned, is unavoidable; none of us can repent that, in a case of such moment
as the present, the time which is absolutely necessary for a complete
investigation, has been employed.

Gentlemen, it is with great satisfaction to me, on the present occasion, that
my ideas on the points of law directing our conclusions, upon which it is the
duty of the court to give opinion, absolutely coincides with that of the
respectable judge, with whom I have the honor to sit. Before I state to you any
observation, with regard to the facts which have appeared from the evidence, I
shall previously deliver my opinion upon some points of law, so far as they are
unconnected with the evidences; those which are, I shall speak to in their
proper place.

This, gentlemen of the jury, is an indictment against the prisoner at the bar,
for levying war against the United States; the first inquiry therefore is, what
is meant by these words of our constitution. Treason against the United States,
shall consist only in levying war against them, etc. These words are repeated
verbatim, I believe, in an act of Congress, called the Judiciary Act, defining
the punishment of the crime of treason, pursuant to constitutional authority.
This crime being defined in the constitution of our country, becomes the
supreme law, and can only be altered by the means therein pointed out, and not
by any act of the legislature; and, therefore, the repetition of the words of
the constitution in the judiciary act is quite unnecessary, as the only power
left to Congress over this crime was, to describe the punishment: the same act,
in another part, makes provision for the method of trial. Agreeable to their
power, Congress have described the punishment, and thereby declared the crime
to be capital. It is clear therefore, that, as the constitution has defined the
crime, the Congress, drawing its sole authority from that constitution, cannot
change it in any manner, particularly as it is so declared; yet the counsel for
the prisoner say, that the legislature have given it a legislative
interpretation, and that their interpretation is binding on this court. They
say that Congress did not mean to include the offense charged upon the prisoner
at the bar, under the definition of levying war; because the sedition aft
describes a similar offense, and because a rescue is provided for in another
act, the punishment extending no farther than fine and imprisonment. Several
answers may be given to remove these objections:

First, If Congress had intended to interpret these words of the constitution,
by any subsequent act, they had no kind of authority so to do. The whole
judicial power of the government is vested in the judges of the United States,
in the manner the constitution describes; to them alone it belongs to explain
the law and constitution; and Congress have no more right nor authority over
the judicial expositions of those acts, than this court has to make a law to
bind them. If this was not an article of the constitution, but a mere act of
Congress, they could not interpret the meaning of that act while it was in
force, but they may alter, amend, or introduce explanatory sections to it. In
this we differ from the practice of England, from whence we received our
jurisprudential system in general; for they having no constitution to bind
them, the parliament have an unlimited power to pas^ any act of whatever nature
they please; and they, consequently, cannot infringe upon the constitution. The
very treason statute of Edward, III. itself, contains a provision giving
parliament an authority to enact laws thereupon, in these words: Because other
like cases of treason may happen in time to come, which cannot be thought or
declared at present: it is thought, that if any such does happen, the judges
should not try them without first going to the king and parliament, where it
ought to be judged treason, or otherwise felony. On this point Sir Matthew Hale
was very careful, lest constructive treason should be introduced.

This, gentlemen, you will observe, only relates to any case not specified in
that act. But, on the occasion now before you, it is not attempted, by any
construction or interpretation, that any thing should be denominated treason,
that is not precisely and plainly within the constitution. No treason can be
committed except war has actually been levied against the United States.

But farther, nothing is more clear to me than that Congress did not intend in
any manner whatever, to innovate on the constitutional definition of treason,
because they have repeated the words, I think, verbatim in their own act, with
regard to the rescue and obstruction of process which is mentioned in the act
alluded to: it will not be pretended, by any man, that every rescue, or every
obstruction of an officer in serving process, or even both together, amounts to
high treason, or else to no crime at all: No; the crimes are differently
specified, and rescue or obstruction of process may be committed without that
high charge. This, I think, was sufficiently explained by the counsel for the
United States. Suppose 1000 men rise in arms, avowedly to destroy the
government, and in the execution of their design commit murder, burn houses,
purloin property, etc. does it make the design less evident, because they
committed other atrocious crimes in order to obtain their main views? No; it
was to destroy the government, and that crime would be charged upon them, being
the higher crime, which the concomitant ones only tended to aggravate, as they
were committed, not for the purpose of committing murder, but to intimidate the
government, and accelerate their object. With regard to what is stated in the
sedition act -- combinations and conspiracies to raise an insurrection, --
these, gentlemen, may be committed without the parties being guilty of treason:
men may combine and conspire for a private purpose; possibly to injure an
individual, merely to gratify some private motive: if so, they come within that
act, and that only. It is only when they carry their projects farther; when
they aim at the destruction of the government, that the nature of the offense
attains the aspect of, and essentially becomes treason; and therefore it is
necessary to prove the intention, otherwise there can be no treason. There can
be no levying war without a number of persons unite, and that number cannot
levy war without some previous intention; and therefore under this law, there
being no previous intention defined, but merely an unlawful combination, the
act termed treason in the constitution, it is plain it is not intended, nor is
it of the nature of treason.

With regard to the authority from which the opinion of this court is founded,
and of which you have heard much already, I shall trouble you with a very few
observations. When this constitution was made, it was in the power of those who
formed it either to define treason or not, or, if they thought proper to do so,
to do it in what manner they chose, in which they might have followed the
example of the country whence their ancestors came, to which they were
accustomed, and in which they were most experienced in their own several
states, where the crime of levying war was denominated treason. I believe this
has been generally followed through the states; in some I know it has. This
term of levying war is an English expression, borrowed from the statute of
Edward III; but notwithstanding this, the principal provisions respecting
treason are taken from an act of the British parliament in the reign of William
III, which is principally calculated to guard the independence of the court
against the power of the crown, and the prisoner against his prosecutors. Now,
I must confess, as these able and learned framers of our constitution borrowed
the act, in terms, from the British statute alone, an authority with which they
were familiar, that they certainly at least meant that the English authorities
and definition of those terms should be much respected. Those gentlemen knew as
well as any counsel at the bar, the danger of constructive treasons: they knew
how to guard themselves against the bad times of English history, and were
equally acquainted with the better, and more modern decisions. Would it not
have been natural for men so able, so wise, so cautious of their liberties, had
they entertained a doubt of their insufficiency, to have introduced some new
guards, some new interpretations, and not to have left us in later times in the
dark, exposed to so much danger as the gentlemen of the bar apprehend?
Gentlemen who know any thing of that country, know that arbitrary times have
existed, and also that a number of decisions have taken place since that
period. I do not believe that any judge since the revolution in Enland have
ever considered that he was bound to follow every arbitrary example of the
English courts, or the crown laws which had taken place in dark ages. Can any
man suppose that, if a man was to be prosecuted for either of the crimes
referred to by one gentleman (Mr. Lewis) so absurd a prosecution would be for a
moment indulged by the judges of this age. No, they would highly resent such an
insult offered to an enlightened court. Such instances have ever been
reprobated as much by the courts, as by the gentleman who quoted them.

With respect to this doctrine of precedent, I will take the liberty of
submitting to you a case of a civil nature; suppose it a case of great moment;
suppose in this court, or any other from which an appeal could not be had, a
solemn decision had been had respecting a title to a piece of land; upon this
adjudication a gentleman wishes to purchase this land, taking this title to a
lawyer he is confirmed in the opinion that the title is good, and that he is
safe because of the decision of the court. On the faith of this decision alone
the man lays his money out, and therefore it must be important how precedents
are formed. If precedent is so important in a civil case, how much more so must
it be in one like the present. If a case is new altogether, and no precedent
can be found, it ought to be much in favor of the prisoner, but if a solemn
declaration has once been made that such and such facts constituted a certain
crime, that declaration ought to be abode by, and for this plain reason: every
man ought lo have an opportunity to know the laws of his country (if he will
take pains to inform himself) lest he should involve himself in guilt
ignorantly. The propriety and necessity of this must be manifest, and if so, it
is as necessary that the proceedings of our courts should be uniform, otherwise
their can be no dependence upon their judgment. If, therefore, a point has been
settled in a certain way, it is enough to direct any court to settle a future
case of a similar kind in the same way, because nothing can be more unfortunate
than when courts of justice deviate in decisions on the same evidence.

This leads me, gentlemen, to point out to you a consideration of great
magnitude: this is not the first time, as I have been informed, that these
questions have been discussed in the court. During the trials of the persons
concerned in the western insurrection, they were discussed, and I have no doubt
with great ability on both sides. Judges Patterson and Peter's were then on the
bench, and after all the display of splendid talents used in argument on both
sides, and all the authorities produced that men were capable of, from the best
judgment that could be formed, the court, without hesitation, declared itself
in favor of the prosecution. As I do not differ from that decision, my opinion
is, that the same declaration ought to be made on the points of law at this
time. Vide Dallas's reports 355.

It is, however, objected, that after this solemn decision had taken place, the
Legislature, by the sedition act, settled the matter differently, and that we
are bound by that act. This has been answered, so as to remove it beyond all
doubt, and concessions were made at the bar sufficient to remove the
seriousness of this objection out of the way. It was acknowledged that if it
had been an opposition to the militia act, then the crime would have been
treason; or if it had been done to compel the repeal of an act, it would have
been treason. For my part, I cannot perceive what kind of sanctity there is in
the militia act more than any other, that should make any opposition to that
act particularly serious: all the acts of congress flow from the same
authority, and all tend to the same end, to wit, the happiness and security of
the community: individuals may differ in their views of the magnitude of them;
some may think the militia law, some the revenue law, some another, but the
Legislature have thought all these laws equally necessary, and they having
thought so, it is our duty to obey them all alike. But, if the opposition to
the militia law, by force of arms, is to have this extraordinary sanctity,
because it strikes immediately at the existence of the government, then I
should be glad to know what can be said about a revenue law? Government cannot
exist a day without revenue to support it! Farther: opposition by force to one
law, is of the same nature as opposition to all the laws; the offense is
levying war against the government; opposing, by force of arms, an act of
congress, with a view of defeating its efficacy, and thus defying the,
authority of the government, is equally the same in principle, if done in one
instance, as it could be in many. In monarchical governments it will sometimes
happen that a rebellion breaks out in an endeavor to destroy one monarch, and
set another on the throne: in such a case the treason plainly and unequivocally
displays itself, and there can be no doubt about it; but this cannot occur in a
republican form of government: men are seldom found who will be guilty of such
open treason, as to come forward, in the face of day, and declare their design
to destroy the constitution or all the laws. No, if men of sense go to promote
insurrection, whether they mean to destroy the government or not, they must be
wicked; they go about their design by more insidious means, art will be used,
and pains taken to promote a dislike to a certain law, this evil prejudice is
encouraged until it becomes general among the people, and they become as ripe
for insurrection as in the present case. Nor would the evil cease with the
destruction of one law: they may declare they mean to stop at that one act, but
having destroyed it, and finding their power above that of the government, is
it not to be apprehended that they would destroy another, and another, and so
on to any number they disapprove of: if they would not be particular in one
case, they would not in another. During the western insurrection the ex^ise law
was unpopular: in this case it is the house tax act, and if this is permitted,
it will be impossible to know where we can rest secure, nor how soon the
government itself will fall a prey. This reason may account for the
introduction into the English statute book, and our constitution, with the
determination of the courts in both countries, of the principle that an attempt
by force and violence to impede the operation of a single act shall be treason,
and under the description of levying war, as much as what shall at first appear
more dangerous, since the effect may be the same.

There is another preliminary point, meriting a few observations, that is with
respect to the proclamation of the President. It was contended that, because
that proclamation required the people to disperse, and commit no more crimes,
it amounted to a pardon of all they did before. It is sufficient to observe
here, that had this objection been seriously made, a plea of pardon upon the
ground of that proclamation must have been preferred, or it could not have been
admitted. But the plea was not made, nor if it had, would it have been
effectual, because, if this did amount to a pardon, it did so only on certain
conditions; the attorney of the United States and the party are both allowed to
show whether or not the prisoner has complied with the conditions of the
pardon. It is possible also that the pardon has not been offered in such a
manner as the constitution permits, in which case the attorney must be
permitted to put in a demurrer. Of the force of these objections the court are
to decide, and of course the plea must be referred to them.

Again, this pardon might have been pleaded in due season. Of this the counsel
for the prisoner were informed, and had time to consider, but they did not
choose to avail themselves of it. But if it had been proposed, nothing is more
clear to me than its insufficiency; for in my view, the proclamation contained
no pardon at all. The circumstances which gave rise to, and the nature of the
proclamation, ran thus: Certain information was received by the government of a
disturbance having broken out in that part of the country, which, baffled the
power of civil authority, but as it is necessary to prevent any insurrection
with as little trouble as possible, after inferior means have failed, the law
provides that the President shall make proclamation, inviting and commanding
such disturbers of the public peace to disperse in quietness to their homes by
a certain time: this must be done before the military can be ordered out
against them. This is in order to prevent more people joining the standard of
rebellion afterward, and to admonish others not to commit farther crimes, but
there is not a word in the proclamation implying an offer of pardon for any
thing committed before.

The riot act of England was cited in support of this doctrine, but there is no
similarity in the two cases: that act says, a magistrate shall go to the mob,
and endeavor to prevail upon them to disperse, if he cannot do it, he reads the
act, and if they still continue combined, they are guilty of felony, but then
this felony is a crime created merely by that act, but even that act does not
intimate that they should be pardoned for crimes committed before the
magistrate came, even if they do disperse. Instances to the contrary might be
cited.

Having now, gentlemen of the jury, stated my opinion in the best manner in my
power on the law, independent of the facts, or the particular application of
that law to the prisoner at the bar, I shall, agreeable to my duty, state to
you in the best manner I am capable of, the nature of the issue which you are
now called upon to determine. It is an issue of an aspect the most awful and
important that any juror can ever be called upon to determine. It is your duty
to divest yourselves of all manner of prejudice and partiality one way or the
other. Dismiss from your minds as much as you can all which you might have
heard or thought on this case before you came into this court, and confine your
opinions merely to the evidence which has been produced. No extraneous
circumstances whatever ought to have the least weight with you in giving your
verdict: you ought not, and I hope you will not take into your consideration at
all whether the safety of the United States requires that the prisoner should
suffer, on the one hand, or whether on the other, it may be more agreeable to
your feelings that he should be acquitted. It is solely your duty to say
whether he is guilty of the crime charged to him or not. No man can conceive
that the interest of any government can possibly make it requisite to sacrifice
any innocent man, and I can rest perfectly satisfied, which I have no doubt you
also are, that this government will not, and God forbid any considerations
whatever should ever influence such an action.

I do not think it necessary to go into a minute detail of all the evidence
which have been produced, it would be only mispending time. The general scenes
which passed at Bethlehem must be fully in your mind; these scenes are
supported upon the evidence of twelve witnesses, but I think it my particular
duty to bring to your recollection those parts of that transaction in which the
prisoner at the bar was concerned, leaving the rest as much as possible out of
view. On this occasion I must request the gentlemen of the bar, if in my
instance I should err in stating the evidence, that they will correct me; but I
shall endeavor to be accurate.

The judge here stated the prominent features of the evidence given by Messrs.
Henry, John Burnett, William Barnet, Winters, Col. Nichols, Schlaugh,
Horsefield, Eyerly, Toon and Mitchel, so far at related to the conduct of the
prisoner at Bethlehem, which, he said, he thought proper to state first,
because the offense charged in the indictment was said to be committed at
Bethlehem. Gentlemen, he continued, if you are not well satisfied, that the
overt act of treason was committed at Bethlehem, and that that overt act is
supported by the evidence of two witnesses at least, you will not find the
prisoner guilty.

Now, gentlemen, is the proper time for me to state one or two points
concerning the law of evidence, of which you have heard much from the bar. As I
observed, there must be two at least to prove that the act of treason was
committed at Bethlehem. It is the opinion of the counsel for the prisoner that
you must be convinced, not only of the fact by two witnesses, -- not only that
he was concerned in a certain act, but that you must have the evidence of two
witnesses, at least, by evidence drawn from the same place, that it was done
with a treasonable intention, before you can pay any attention to any other
evidence whatever. The fact is, that when the overt act is proved by two
witnesses, it is proper to go into evidence to show the course of the
prisoner's conduct at other places, and the purpose for which he went to that
place where the treason is laid, and if he went with a treasonable design, then
the act of treason is conclusive. In this I am supported by a very respectable
authority on crown law: Foster in the case of Deacon, from which it appears
that it is enough, to prove that a rebellious assembly of armed men were there,
and that the prisoner joined them. In order to prove to you fully the design
with which the prisoner went to Bethlehem and joined in this great outrage, I
shall select some of the evidence respecting those previous transactions; it is
not necessary to state the whole.

The judge here read the evidence of James Chapman, John Rodrick, Cephas
Child's, and William Thomas respecting the conduct of Jacob Fries, on the 5th of
March, and respecting the meeting with Foulke and Rodrick near Singmaster's;
and also the transactions of the 6th, at Quaker town which evidence he said so
confirmed each other, that no doubt could be entertained.

We now come to the confession of the prisoner, voluntarily made on his
examination before judge Peter's. Here is a point of law relied on by the
prisoner's counsel -- that no man should be convicted of treason but on the
evidence of two witnesses, or upon confession in open court. This is the
provision in England as well as here, and the meaning is, that no confession of
the prisoner, independent of two witnesses, or without the facts have been
established by two witnesses, should be sufficient to convict him: but if two
witnesses have proved a fact, the confession of the party may be received by
way of confirmation of what has before been sworn to. In former days in England
it was allowed that confession out of court and the proof of the witnesses
should be sufficient to warrant a conviction; but happily our constitution
would not admit it, if an hundred would swear to it, that danger is wisely
avoided. Instances enough are in the recollection of the court, of a civil and
criminal nature where confessions have been received, but the jury are to judge
from other evidence how far that is to be regarded.

Evidence may sometimes be given which may be doubtful, and wants
corroboration; you will judge whether that is or is not the case at present.
But if the confession of the prisoner should go to confirm the evidence, if
sworn to by two witnesses at least, it may be received, but unless it does go
to corroborate other testimony, I do not think it admissible. You will consider
whether any part of this confession has not before been proved by two
witnesses: if it has, it goes to corroborate what they say, if it has not, you
are to disregard it. I think there ought to be great caution in receiving, as
evidence, a confession which any man makes himself, because it possibly might
be obtained from him by artifice or intimidation, with respect to this
confession, you have the testimony of my honorable colleague, judge Peter's,
that he gave the prisoner deliberate warning, that he was not bound to convict
himself, and that no intimidation was used. Whatever objections, then, there
may be as to confession in general, it does not apply in this case, because it
was voluntarily given.

The prisoner on his part introduced some witnesses, thinking they would be
favorable to him: one of them appeared to be so in his testimony, which I shall
endeavor to relate, the other three did not answer his expectation [The judge
related the evidence of John Jamieson.]

With regard to the point of law stated respecting the sufficiency of the
warrants, the evidence to this fact shows the general disposition of that part
of the country to resist the execution of the law, and prevent it by force or
intimidation; our means of showing that, is their conduct toward the
assessors. Those who were appointed to that office, so far as they had it in
their power, showed a deposition to act as such. It is contended that their
warrant ought to have been produced. With respect to the blank commission which
there was a suspicion was unlawfully filled up, there ought to have been the
books produced, but it was not material. This indictment it will be observed,
is not for any resistance to the assessors, or obstruction of them in the
discharge of their duty. I suppose it is not necessary to show that these
officers were de facto engaged in the execution of the law; that they were
considered as assessors, and no suspicion ever was entertained but that they
were properly authorized to be assessors. This doubt if there was any, could be
removed by reference to a very respectable authority. It was sufficient if the
warrants, given under the seal of the commissioner, were produced to the court.

The honorable judge entered pretty largely into the examination of the
objection respecting Mr. Foulke's appointment in the place of Mr. Clarke, which
he contended was not material, since the warrant was filled and he acted under
it.

With respect to another point of objection stated at the bar, that the marshal
in detaining the two men at Bethlehem was liable to an action, he said that
under the circumstances of that period he could not, because, under certain
circumstances, he was warranted to call out the posse commitatus i. e. the
power of the county, to assist him, if he was likely to be overpowered: it
could not be presumed that the circumstance did not empower and warrant him to
call them out, and therefore we may conclude that danger was really to be
apprehended, and those apprehensions must be heightened by the arrival of those
two men in arms. In the opinion of judge Henry, who was present, the danger was
such as to justify the act of detention of those two men. Was it with a view of
depriving these men of their liberty? No, but supposing them to become with
intent to assist in the rescue which they acknowledged they had heard was
contemplated.

Gentlemen, in looking to the law on this point, I do not think it is
encroaching at all upon the liberty of any man to take him in custody: an
officer in such an action must be at his peril, and could only be justified on
the exigency of the circumstance: if he did it unnecessarily, a jury would
teach him to take care how he sported with the liberties of his fellow
citizens; but supposing, from good evidence that he was in danger of assault,
if he waited the United force of the assailants, shall it be contended as
unreasonable, that the marshal should take measures of self-defence while it
was in his power, and detain what he might reasonably suppose a part of them?
He surely acted the part of a prudent man, and was justifiable in the act.

Before I dismiss this general subject, I think it an indispensible duty which
I owe, to declare that, excepting the single instance, wherein I do perceive
some impropriety of conduct, in the filling up the blank, commission, what has
been disclosed in the course of this examination of the conduct of the
commissioners or assessors, has reflected on those officers the greatest honor:
at the same time they acted with industry, fidelity, and firmness, in the
discharge of that duty they did all in their power to make it easy to the
people, accommodating themselves to endeavor to give full satisfaction,
undeceiving the deluded, and removing the errors which the people had fallen
into. If the people still continued in ignorance and opposition, those
gentlemen acquitted themselves of blame, and their conduct merited high praise.

As to the plea of ignorance, the law says ignorance shall excuse no man, other
wise, how could it be possible to prove whether a person knew the law or not:
if ignorance could excuse a man of crimes, no crime would be brought to
justice, or there must be, what is not to be expected, some self evident proof
of the guilt. A complete knowledge of the laws cannot be expected to find every
corner of our country; but thus much we may say, to remove those kinds of
excuse; if a man does not know when a law is passed, he knows how to obtain
that information, and the law itself; for if he cannot come to Philadelphia, or
some other town where they may be purchased himself, he has opportunity of
sending from time to time. But in the present case any doubt could have been
removed by application to the assessors, who were ever ready and willing to
show the law, and therefore no plea of ignorance can possibly be set up.

Having spoken in commendation of the conduct of the commissioners and
assessors, perhaps it is also my duty to say that the conduct of the marshal
has been equally exemplary: he did every thing in his power, by fair and
honorable means, to avoid going to extremity, and as long as he had a hope of
retaining his prisoners, he displayed a degree of courage which few men would
do; he even offered to expose his life to this armed mob, by proceeding with
the prisoners to Philadelphia, which he would have done but for the advice of
three or four gentlemen with him, who thought it madness to proceed. He
accordingly desisted, and in the event delivered up the prisoners.

This trial has lasted so many days, that we must be all very much fatigued;
and I declare, gentlemen, I have scarce had power to examine the various points
with minute attention, much less to prepare so proper a statement of them as I
intended to have done; the fatigue I have felt many nights at going out of this
court has prevented me doing it: under these circumstances I have no doubt of
your excuse, which I shall the more readily meet, since your fatigue must also
be very great.

Gentlemen of the Jury. The occasion is undoubtedly the most awful and
important that ever could arise in any country whatever: the great question for
you to decide is, whether the prisoner has been guilty of levying war against
the United States at Bethlehem, in the county of Northampton, as charged in the
indictment, or not -- in order to discover the nature of his conduct, you must
examine into the motive with which he went to Bethlehem: it is necessary for
you to examine the whole of his previous actions relating thereto: if it should
appear to you that the prisoner formed a scheme, either on the way or at
Bethlehem, by any kind of force to obtain this object, then, in my opinion, you
ought to declare him guilty of the charge laid in the indictment. On the
contrary, if you think he had no public and evil motive in view, he is not
guilty of the crime.

Before I dismiss you, gentlemen, I would remind you of one consideration which
must impress your minds: a great and important end of bringing persons guilty
of public crimes to justice is to preserve inviolate the laws of our country:
men who commit crimes ought to be punished, otherwise no safety nor security
can be had. On the other hand, it is of consequence, that no man's life shall
be taken away unjustly; if a man is not guilty of a crime, he ought not to be
punished for it; and it cannot be for the interest of the country to put a man
to death for what he has not committed: therefore you are not to regard the
consequences, but determine merely by the facts in a manner for which you will
be answerable at a future day, as well as myself, for all the conduct of our
lives, as well as for the verdict you now give.

Mr. LEWIS stated a question to the court, whether the overt act laid in the
indictment in a certain county, must not be proved to the satisfaction of the
jury, both as to fact and intention in the same county, or whether the overt
act did not include both fact and intention. To which judge Iredell replied,
that he considered Foster's crown law as settling that point -- when two
witnesses are produced, which proves the overt act laid in the indictment,
there might be then evidence drawn from other countries respecting the
intention: this is the opinion of judge Foster, and it is my opinion. But there
is another thing: it goes to a point which is inadmissible; it is not for the
court to say whether there was a treasonable intention or act as charged in the
indictment; that is for the jury to determine; we have only to state the laws,
we therefore should have no right to give our opinion upon it. Again, if no
evidence could regularly be admitted out of the county until both the fact and
intention were established where the crime is laid, the consequence would be,
that there ought to be some way of taking the opinion of the jury, whether they
believed that the crime was committed at Bethlehem, before the court could
proceed to extraneous testimony! This cannot be done, a jury must give verdict
upon all the evidence collectively; if the evidence is admitted, then the jury
is bound to respect the weight of it: the competency of that evidence is for
the court to decide, but the jury must estimate its weight.

The question for you to decide at this time, gentlemen of the jury, is,
whether upon the testimony of two witnesses there is ground to believe the act
was committed, and whether, from the prisoner's conduct at Bethlehem or
elsewhere, it is proved to be with a treasonable intention.

JUDGE PETER'S -- I think the overt act and the intention constitute the
treason; for without the intention the treason is not complete. If a man goes
for a private purpose, to gratify a private revenge, and not with a public or
general view, it differs materially. The intention may possibly be gathered at
the place where the act was committed, or it may not; if not, evidence is
admissible to prove it elsewhere.

The jury then withdrew, and the court adjourned for about three hours, when
they returned with the verdict GUILTY.

Judge Iredell then dismissed the jury, with the thanks of the court for their
patience and attention during the very fatiguing trial. This trial occupied the
unremitted attention of the court and jury from April 30 until May 9,
inclusive, (9 days) during which time the jury never separated.


Mr. Wynekoop, the foreman of this jury, made a short reply thereto, and the
court adjourned.

TRIAL OF JOHN FRIES, FOR TREASON: Recommenced, an account of a Motion made by
MR. LEWIS for a new Trial; grounded on the disqualification of JOHN ROADS, one
of the Jurymen on the former Trial. (See Appendix, No. II.)
CIRCUIT COURT OF THE UNITED STATES. PENNSYLVANIA DISTRICT.
JOHN FRIES was again arraigned on the indictment for treason See page 17.
, before the Honorable SAMUEL CHASE and RICHARD PETER'S, Esquires.

The prisoner pleaded, NOT GUILTY.

MR. LEWIS and MR. DALLAS, before engaged to plead for the prisoner, on account
of the conduct directed by the court, to be observed by the counsel, withdrew
their assistance; so that the prisoner was left without counsel; and on being
asked by the court, if he would wish to have some assigned, he did not accept
the offer.

THURSDAY, April 24.
Before the jurors were sworn in, they were individually asked (upon oath)
these questions: "Are you any way related to the prisoner?" They all answered,
"No." Have you ever formed or delivered an opinion as to the guilt or innocence
of the prisoner, or that he ought to be punished? The answer generally was, Not
to my knowledge. Some of the jurors said, they had given their sentiments
generally, disapprobatory of the transaction, but not as to the prisoner
particularly. These were admitted.

One of the jurors (Mr. Taggert) after he was sworn, expressed himself to the
court to be very uneasy under his oath: he then meant that he never had made up
his mind that the prisoner should be hung, but very often had spoken his
opinion, that he was very culpable; he did not, when he took the oath, conceive
it so strict, and therefore wished, if possible, to be excused. -- The court
informed the juror, it was impossible to excuse him, now he was sworn.

The court informed the prisoner, that he had a right to challenge 35 without
showing cause, and as many more as he could show cause for. Thirty-four were
challenged, and the following admitted and sworn on the jury:

Samuel Wheeler, Foreman; Henry Pepper; John Taggert; Cornelius Comegys;
Ephraim Clark; Thomas Bailey; Lawrence Cauffman; John Edge; Charles Deshler;
Henry Dubois; Isaac Dehaven; John Balliot.

Counsel for the Prosecution, MR. RAWLE, MR. INGERSOL.

MR. RAWLE
Then opened the charge exhibited in the indictment -- He observed, that the
jury must be aware of the very unpleasant duty he had to perform: he felt an
extreme difficulty of situation -- called forth by his duty to exhibit a charge
against the prisoner at the bar of the highest magnitude, who now stood to
answer, unattended by any legal advice; he felt impressed with the necessity of
sticking more than usually close to the line of his duty, which he should
endeavor to discharge as faithfully as possible. And he trusted that, while the
jury felt their relation to their unfortunate fellow-citizen at the bar, they
would, at the same time, make all suitable allowance for any errors which might
appear on his (Mr. Rawle's) part, though it was sincerely his desire to avoid
any, either in laying down the facts or the law, which he should do under the
direction of the court; and, he hoped, that the jury would carefully sift and
examine the law and testimony which his duty called upon him to advance, in
order to substantiate the charge.

MR. RAWLE then proceeded to open the charge -- he said, he should be able to
prove, that John Fries, the prisoner at the bar, did oppose the execution of
two laws of the United States; to effectuate which he was provided with men,
who, as well as himself, were armed, with guns, swords, and other warlike
weapons, which, by their numbers and military appearance, were sufficient to
accomplish their purpose, which was, not only to intimidate the officers of the
government appointed to execute the above laws themselves; but to release from
the custody of the marshal of Pennsylvania a number of persons who were held in
prison by the said marshal, and to prevent him executing process upon others.
All this was done, as stated in the indictment by a combination and conspiracy
to oppose those laws, by a large body of armed men, of whom the prisoner at the
bar was the chief, and commander.

MR. RAWLE then proceeded, under the direction of the court, to state the law.
-- The treason whereof the prisoner was charged was, "Levying war against the
United States." U. S. Constable. Art. 3. Sect. 3.

What he asked, was levying war against the United States?

He conceived himself authorized, upon good authority to say, levying war did
not only consist in open, manifest, and avowed rebellion against the
government, with a design of overthrowing the constitution: but it may consist
in assembling together, in numbers and by actual force, or by terror opposing
any particular law or laws. Again, there can be no distinction as to the kind
or nature of the law, or the particular object for which the law was passed,
since all are alike the acts of the legislature, who are sent by the people at
large to express their will. Force need not be used to manifest this spirit of
rebellion, nor is it necessary that the attempts should have been successful,
to constitute the crime. The endeavor, by intimidation to do the act, whether
it be accomplished or not, amounts to treason, provided the object of those
concerned in the transaction is of a general nature, and not applied to a
special or private purpose.

In order to effect the object of those embarked in crimes of this high nature,
it is well known that various means are necessarily employed; various acts may
be perpetrated to accomplish the main end: they may proceed, by the execution
of some enormous crimes, as burglary, arson, robbery, or murder, either, or all
of them; but even if one or all of these crimes were committed, except the
purpose should be of a general nature, they may form distinct and heinous
offenses; but the perpetrators may not be guilty of treason. If a particular
friend of the party had been in the custody of the marshal; if even a number
sufficient for the purpose should step forward and rescue such a person, if it
was not with a view to rescue prisoners generally, it would amount to no more
than a rescue; but, if general, it is treason. It is the views of the party
that fixes the crime, and therefore only the design is necessary to be known.

To prove that this doctrine was well established in the United States, Mr.
Rawle turned to 2 Dallas, 346 and 355, stating the opinions of the court in the
cases of Vigal and Mitchel, charged with, and convicted for treason. The attack
on Genesis Nevill's house was of this general nature, because he was an officer
appointed to execute the obnoxious law; and being to the officer and not to the
man that they objected, it was thought to be treason, and that decision was
well grounded.

He observed, that the clause in our constitution was founded on a statute
which was passed in England, to prevent the ever increasing and ever varying
number of treasons, upon the general and undefined opposition to royal
prerogative: the situation of things was such, previous to that period, as to
call forth from the stateman, from the philosopher, and from the divine, even
in those dark ages, the most vehement complaints: in attendance to these
reasonable and just murmurs, the statute was passed.

Mr. Rawle was then producing an authority, when Judge Chase said, the court
would admit, as a general rule, of quotations which referred to what
constituted actual or constructive levying war against the king of Great
Britain, in his regal capacity; or, in other words, of levying war against his
government, but not against his person, because it was of the same nature as
levying war against the United States would be applied here: so was that part
called adhering to the king's enemies: -- they may, any of them, be read to the
jury, and the decisions thereupon, -- not as authorities whereby we are bound,
but as the opinions and decisions of men of great legal learning and ability.
But even then, the court would attend carefully to the time of the decisions,
and in no case must it be binding upon our juries.

Mr. Rawle quoted Hawkins, B. 1. chap. 17. sect. 23. as an authority of
authenticity to prove, that not only those who rebelled against the king, by
taking up arms with the avowed design of dethroning him; but those who
withstood his lawful authority, and who endeavored to oppose his government;
who withstood the king's forces, or attacked any of hiss fortresses -- those,
in fine, whose avowed object was of a public and general and not of a private
and personal nature, were guilty of high treason. He also read Sir John
Friend's case from Holt, 681. and Damarree and Pinchases' case, 8 State Trials,
289.

JUDGE CHASE begged the attorney to read only those parts of the cases which
referred to what could be treason in the United States, and nothing which
related to compassing the king's death. -- It would be found, he observed, by
an attention to the last case, that because the intention, was a rising to
demolish ALL meeting houses, generally, it was considered to be an insurrection
against the toleration act, by numbers and open force, setting the law at
defiance. This would be found to be the opinion in Foster 213.

Mr. RAWLE said, thus he conceived it -- even if the matter made a grievance of
was illegal, the demolition of it in this way was, nevertheless, high treason,
because of the people so assembled taking the law into their own hands; thus in
Foster it would be seen that demolishing all baudy-houses, as such was high
treason, as much as demolishing all meeting houses, being equally an usurped
authority. He also read Douglas 570, Lord George Gordon's case, when it was
Lord Mansfield's opinion that any attempt, by violence, to force the repeal of
a law, or to prevent its execution, is levying war, and treason.

He considered, from those few authorities, that he was justifiable in saying
that a rising, with intent by force to prevent the execution of a law as well
as laws in general, preventing the marshal executing his warrants, and
preventing the other officers charged with the execution of the laws in
question, amounted to levying war, agreeable to the constitution of the United
States.

Mr. RAWLE then proceeded to state the most prominent facts which could be
produced in the course of the evidence, in which it would fully appear, he
presumed, that John Fries, the prisoner, was the most active in his opposition
to those laws and to every attempt to carry them into effect; that he in every
instance showed his aversion of, and opposition to the assessors, and
determination by threats and menaces to prevent them doing their duty, and that
whenever any force was used, or terrific appearances held up, he was the
commander and gave the orders to his men who, at times in great numbers joined
him; and that finally by threats and intimidation, equally the same in the eyes
of the law as force, he, the prisoner, did attain his object^ to wit, the
release of a number of prisoners who were confined for opposing the execution
of the law, and were actually in custody of the marshal in a house at
Bethlehem, which by reason of his having prisoners there, and his having an
armed posse to protect his lawful authority, was to all intents a fortress of
the United States -- and further that he did, completely for a time, prevent
the execution of the laws intended, in those parts, and thus did bid defiance
to all lawful authority.

COURT, to the prisoner, John Fries, you will attend to all the evidence that
will be brought against you; will attend to their examination, and ask any
questions you please of the several witnesses, or of the court, but be careful
to ask no questions wherein you may possibly criminate yourself, for remember,
whatever you say to your own crimination, is evidence with the jury, but if you
say any thing to your justification, it is not evidence, the court will be
watchful of you, they will check any thing that may injure yourself: they will
be your counsel, and give you every assistance and indulgence in their power.


WILLIAM HENRY, ESQUIRE called.

See his former testimony page 24, and page 82.

Mr. Henry related the first information he received of this opposition to the
laws in question, and their unwillingness to suffer the assessments. That on
application by Mr. Eyerly (the commissioner) he issued a number of subpoeneas
to bring before him sundry persons to examine these facts, which he found
ineffectual from the intimidations of a number of people who were met where the
examinations were to be held. The witness, understanding that the marshal was
to meet a number of persons upon whom he had executed process, thought it
proper to go to Bethlehem on that day, in order to prevent any extremities that
might be attempted. He related the arrival of Keefer and Paulus and others, and
afterward of about 70 or 80 foot, generally armed with guns, having shot
pouches and powder horns, and also of about 50 light horsemen with swords and
pistols, that of these men Fries, appeared to be the leader; that he was the
person engaged in negotiation with the marshal for the prisoners, whom the
witness understood he said he would have. That there were frequent cries out
of, "we will have the prisoners," and frequent threats thrown out, particularly
against Mr. Eyerly, Mr. Balliot, and himself (the witness,) sometimes pointing
their guns to the windows.

COURT. Was the prisoner present at these threats?


WITNESS. I cannot recollect, as I was about in different parts of the house --
one person I saw cock his piece several times to those standing on the stairs.
One of the riflemen came into the back room and swore, that if these damned
stamplers had given them an opportunity, they would have shown them how they
could have fought, and they would show them yet.


How long has the word stampler been in use in those parts?


Only since about the fall of '98. -- The witness farther deposed, that Fries
was distinguished from the rest by a black feather in his hat -- that the
persons who were in custody of the marshal resided from 30 to 40 miles from
most of those who came to rescue them, and near 40 miles from where Fries lived.


WILLIAM BARNETT (see page 28.)

Being one of the posse, was appointed by the marshal to meet and endeavor to
prevail on the armed party not to come into Bethlehem; he deposed that he
mentioned to them the western insurrection, and told them of the consequences
of resistance, but to no effect: Fries, the prisoner, said, he had had a fight
yesterday, and would have another today; the witness expected he had been in a
frolic. That the captain of the riflemen seemed determined to release the
prisoners, and indeed that was their common cry. The witness asked them if they
would not allow that if the prisoners had done wrong, they should suffer for
it: they answered they had no objections to that, but they should not be
dragged to Philadelphia, they should be tried at Easton, their own county town.
They appeared to be in liquor a little.

The witness was asked if he had any recollection about who would get the first
blow, or who were expected to fire on them (Fries and his followers.) The
witness had not a perfect recollection of it.

ATTORNEY. Do you not recollect any person saying "you must stay, strike, and
make as good as you can, if I fall or get the first blow," or something like
that, in the German language.


WITNESS. I do not recollect any such words.


JOHN BARNET (see page 31.)

Deposed that he was one of the posse at Bethlehem; that he saw the armed men
come into the town, the horse with their swords drawn, as usual, when they went
to war. When the witness stood guard on the stairs, Fries and another wanted to
go up; Fries had his sword, and the other a pistol: upon their asking for the
marshal, he was called, and Fries was let up to him, but the other was not
suffered to go up: one at a time the witness thought was enough. The witness
heard some of the prisoners at Bethlehem say, that they did not know the men
who rescued them, nor did they know of their coming, or wish to be rescued.

CHRISTIAN WINTERS (see page 34.)

Was one of the marshal's posse -- he related some conversation between the
marshal and the prisoner on the stairs: after he was relieved from that
station, he went down, when he asked the people out of doors what they were
doing: they said they would obey their captain's orders; the witness did not
know what captain they meant; they were all strangers to him.

ATTORNEY. Did any man strike at you!


WITNESS. No, but after the affray was over, there was one of them walked under
the stairs with his sword, of whom the marshal sent me to inquire his name: he
answered he did not mean to do any harm. Another said he did not mind these
damned st^mplers.


PHILIP SCHLAUH (see page 41.)

Deposed that he was at Bethlehem on the 7th, of March where he saw the
prisoner at the bar, who said to his company that he had been up with the
marshal, and that the prisoners were refused by the marshall, who said if they
were taken it must be by force -- "Now boys," said he, "I give you my orders;
we don't mean to hurt any body; we have to pass between 4 or 5 centries, I
expect I shall get the first blow, and when I get the first blow yo^ (...) do
as well as you can; will you agree to it boys?" "Yes" they (...)

Judge Peter's -- Do you recollect the very (...) Fries mentioned?


WITNESS. The very words were, striking his breast "I shall be the foremast
man, I expect I shall get the first blow, then do at well as you can."


ATTORNEY. Did he say any thing about firing?


WITNESS. No.


COURT. Do you remember any words he used?


WITNESS. No.


Christian Winters returned -- Having forgot to mentioned that when the demand
was made of the marshal, he told the prisoner he could not deliver up the
prisoners: Fries said "you are not to be blamed; you do your duty, and I give
you my word you shall not be hurt by my men, as for the rest I cannot answer."

SAMUEL TOON (see page 51.)

Related Something of the company proceeding to the bridge, the conversation
and occurrences there, and the mission to Bethlehem, in which he, and two
others were sent for the release of Kiefer and Paulus -- That when Stahler's
company were drawn up before the house, one of them, named Henry Hoover, said
if he only had eight men, he would go up and rescue the prisoners, when the
witness heard Fries answer that he should not behave himself so, for that was
not the way to go on. After a little time Fries said to his company "come on
boys, don't be afraid." This was after he had been up with the marshal. They
then wanted to press up stairs, and then the prisoners were delivered up. The
witness heard no other expressions from Fries.

ANDREW SHIFFERT (see page 56)

On the company meeting at Ritter's tavern the witness asked them what they
were going to Bethlehem for? They said "to release the prisoners." Then said
the witness, you must either fight or hide yourselves in the Buck wheat straw.
Ritter answered there was no danger of that, for when they come to see so many
in arms they would soon draw back, and would let the prisoners free.

ATTORNEY. Was there any thing said about whether to go with arms or without
arms?


WITNESS. There was nothing said against it, that I know of. I told them I
would rather go home.


WILLIAM NICHOLS (marshal) (see page 37.)

Related the receipt of the warrants, which he produced, and the first part of
his progress; also the circumstance that occurred with Shankweiler, and of the
commencement and progress of the affair at Bethlehem. Reasoning with the
prisoner at the bar, and his still persisting in his demand of the prisoners,
the witness said that it was a cowardly thing to oppose an individual thus
placed, but that if he had 20 armed men, the prisoners should not be rescued.
The prisoner laughed at that: on telling him that an armed force would be sent
up, he answered that they were able to come against any force.

COURT. Did he show any particular regard for these prisoners, or what was his
assigned reason for demanding them?


WITNESS. No he did not, he said the law was a bad one, and ought not to be
executed.


Question by the prisoner. The court here again begged the prisoner to say
nothing, nor ask any question that would tend to his crimination.
-- When the conversation passed between you and I, did I not ask you if these
prisoners could not be admitted to bail? -- I said I would come forward and
risk my life, that you should not be hurt -- Was it so or was it not?


WITNESS. Very possibly, but I do not recollect i^.


Had I any arms when I came up to you.


Not at that time.


The court then adjourned to dinner, first having placed the jury under two
sworn bailiffs, and qualified each juror not to speak to any one nor suffer any
one to speak to them, touching the matter relative to the trial of this issue.

JOHN DILLINGER (see page 57.)

Deposed his having left a message at Young Marks's house for him to meet the
next day to go to Bethlehem, and that Stahler who sent him, said it was very
hard to let these men (the prisoners) suffer by going down to Philadelphia.
Being at Bethlehem the next day, the witness saw the prisoner at the bar there:
hearing an uproar, the witness went into the house, where he heard the prisoner
(Fries) say, "draw near boys, don't be afraid." -- I pushed the people back, as
did several others there.

JUDGE PETER'S. Was it a common muster day?


WITNESS. No, I believe not.


CHRISTIAN HECKAVELTER qualified.

The witness resided in upper Milford township -- Soon after I received my
warrant as assessor of the township and was proceeding on the business, I was
told by my neighbors that the people of the township would not allow me to do
it. After I had been to a few houses, I was told if I went on, it should be at
my peril -- this was the latter end of November I believe. I then returned
home, and informed Mr. Balliot and Mr. Elliot, in order to consult them, what
should be done. They agreed to call a township meeting to collect the minds of
the people. After it was held, I received from a deputation of three men
appointed for that purpose, information that I must desist, for there was no
such law in existence. After that Mr. Eyerly informed me he had called a
meeting of the people at squire Schymer's, he took me with him. A number of
people assembled there, some armed and some without arms. Mr. Eyerly told them
he was come to explain the law to them. There was a question among them whether
it was a law or not; some said it was not in existence, and that it was a law
of his own making, for that he was able enough to make such a law himself; I
believe it was agreed among them that they would not have their houses measured.

COURT. Was there not frequent threats thrown out?


WITNESS. Yes there was; they also gave it as their positive declaration that
they would not submit to the law; this was their common opinion.


ATTORNEY. Do you know any thing of papers being pasted up with swords,
pistols, or threats, being painted or drawn on them?


WITNESS. No.


JOHN ROMICK,

Deposed that he was an assessor, in Macungy township

-- Not long after I received my commission, a women came to me, and said I
should not go on with that business, before I was prepared with an iron cap:
another old women soon after told (...) I should not venture to that business
of measuring houses: I would come in bad condition with it. I told her I did
not think it, because they were all Christians there about, and I believed
christians would not hurt me. The talk was, that in some houses they kept hot
water against the assessor came round to do his duty. After that I heard there,
that there had been several meetings like complots, or conspiracies to obstruct
the assessors, on that account I was frightened to make a beginning. I heard
that Mr. Heckavelter was stopped. Hearing that there was to be a meeting at
squire Schymer's I went there, where Mr. Eyerly explained the law.


ATTORNEY. After that, did the people let you go on?


WITNESS. No.


Q. Was there any sedition papers put up near you?


A. Yes, about three miles off -- near Millar's town, but I cannot tell what
they were; I never read them.


JACOB OSWALD

Deposed, That he was appointed assessor for Lynn township: That about
December, 1798, he came to about the ninth plantation, when he was stopped by
the people. -- I heard that there was to be a township meeting held, so I went,
and took two constitutions with me, and the proclamation of General Washington
to the Western insurgents in 1794. I also showed them my orders, and the act of
Congress. They thought Congress had no right to tax them: I showed them that
Congress had a right. They said, I should stop till the lower townships began
to measure, as Philadelphia and Germantown; so I was forced to stop. The
township was not assessed till after the light horse went up there, and then
the liberty poles were cut down.

ISAAC SCHYMER, ESQUIRE

Was an assessor for the township of Williams and Lower Sauchon; he deposed,
That he was proceeding on his business; and, on account of the talk of
opposition, wrote to a neighboring assessor to go about with him, but that he
refused on that very account: he then went by himself; at one place he was
stopped, when the man said to the witness, he would abuse him if he pretended
to measure his house. The witness said, he did not mean to quarrel with him; he
must make his returns to him in ten days. The man also said, there would be
danger in his going to take the rates.

In Lower Sauchon the witness also met with opposition: the men had gone from
their homes; but a quantity of women were gathered there, and compelled him to
desist.

JAMES WILLIAMSON, ESQUIRE

Deposed, That he was an assessor in Northampton county: That soon after he had
received the appointment, several of his near neighbors came and warned him not
to go about the township: That he attempted many houses, but they would give
him no information; whereupon he told them to bring their rates in ten days,
according to law: they answered, they would not bring them, they would make no
returns: every one said, he should offend his neighbors if he did. I then
thought it best to put up advertisements for them to meet together, on a
certain day, to consult what it was best to do: a very large party of them met.
After a little time, three or four seem to wish to disturb the meeting. One of
them asked for my authority: I showed them my appointment: they seemed to be
much opposed to what was done: I reasoned with them, but to no purpose; many of
them said, it was no law. I read the law to them: they were pretty well
satisfied while I was reading, till I came to where the valuation was
mentioned, then one of them cried out, it was a damned law, and they never
would submit to any such law. I told them it was a law, and as long as it was a
law, we must support it; they said they never would, and signified they would
^ather fight against it. I told them that fighting was attended with dangerous
consequences, for that men lost their lives in it; but they said they would
rather die than submit to it, or live under it; they had fought against such
laws, and they would again. They told me, that I should not go about to collect
the returns, they never would suffer it to be done; I should let the business
alone, and if any damage occurred to me by being fined, the township should
reimburse me. The whole body seemed to rise and give their assent to this.

JAMES CHAPMAN, ESQUIRE

Related nothing in his testimony different from his deposition in the former
trial, page 67.

JOHN RODRICK (see page 72.)

Did not vary from his former testimony, but shortened it, in the less
important parts.

WILLIAM THOMAS (page 58.)

Depose, That Fries and Kuder sent Marks and Gettman to bunt (he before said
find) the assessors: That upon their entering Quaker town, on the 6th of March,
the people fired all their pieces. He related their conduct to Mr. Foulke and
Mr. Child's there, and the meeting next morning to go to Millar's town, and
thence the circumstance till the arrival at their bridge; that they had a drum
and fife which was played, and that they were commanded by John Fries and
Kuder. -- He deposed, That Fries said to his men, For God's sake don't fire
except we are fired on first; after I am killed, then help yourselves as well
as you can. -- That about 30 followed Fries into the house, of which he was
one; some had arms, and some had not. Fries had his sword.

COURT. What did you go in the house for?


WITNESS. Why, Henry called me, and said I must come along.


Q. Did you know any of the prisoners?


A. No; none of them.


COURT. What did you go up to Bethlehem for?


WITNESS. Why, old Marks said, it was to show ourselves; but I cannot tell what
for.


Q. Was it to take the prisoners?


A. I do not know myself. The people of Northampton were going up to take the
prisoners, and we went to show ourselves.


Q. Were you armed?


A. Yes.


Q. How did the people go away after they got the prisoners?


A. Why, they got away as fast as they could: those that were on horseback rode
away as fast as they could, and those on foot ran away.


PRISONER TO THE WITNESS. When I came out to you and told you that the marshal
had showed me his order, had I any arms, or a sword?


A. No. The last time, when you told the men they must rescue the prisoners by
force, you had a sword.


COURT. Did you hear the people cry out, they would have the prisoners?


A. Yes; one Hoover, particularly.


PRISONER. Did you ever see me at any of the township meetings, except at
Kline's?


A. I never saw the prisoner at any meeting at all, as I was not at the meeting
at Kline's: I was only at the meeting at Mitchel's.


WITNESS. After we had come from Bethlehem three or four days, I told the
prisoner that I heard the light horse was coming up: the prisoner said no, it
was all settled and quiet: if they sent a child of ten years old, he (the
prisoner) would help the marshal to take them.


EVERHARD FOULKE, ESQUIRE (page 115.)

Deposed, That he was an assessor in Lower Milford: That he proceeded on in the
assessment until he met the other assessors, and the principal assessor, James
Chapman, at Jacob Fries's tavern, where they dined together; and after dinner
the prisoner came into the room, and said, he was sorry to see them there upon
that business: he warned them not to proceed any farther; if they did they
should be hurt; and then he immediately left the room, without even an answer.
He then mentioned the circumstance near Singmaster's, as related by Mr. Rodrick
(p. 71.) the prisoner seized the deponent's horse, but let him go again,
saying, he would take him the next day: That they had 5 or 700 men in arms, and
would come to his house and take him. He heard the firing at Quaker's town; the
circumstances which occurred there he related. Having taken the assessment
papers, the prisoner returned them, saying it was more than the witness
deserved.

Q. Did they say any thing about getting the law repealed?


A. I am not certain. -- The other people said they would submit; but not till
after the other states did: Fries said, they would never submit.


COURT. YOU are a magistrate, are you not, sir?


A. Yes.


Q. Did Fries know it?


A. Yes; he had many times known me in that capacity.


PRISONER -- When I took you from the people to the back kitchen, and away out
of the house backward, and helped you on your horse, Did I or not desire you to
go out of the way, so that the people should not see you?


WITNESS. Yes, you did take me out the back way, and said, Captain Kuder was
then commanding the people in the front of the house: you did desire me to keep
out of their way.


CEPHAS CHILD'S (see page 73.)

Related some of the prominant transactions at Quaker town, where he was much
abused, though not by the prisoner; but his papers, as coroner, were taken away
by the prisoner, and returned to him; when, having been warned not to proceed,
the witness told the prisoner he would not return to it in that capacity,
unless forced to it by law, as he had left it. One person who abused the
witness said, he had fought for liberty, and would fight for it again; but he
afterward returned, seemed sorry for it, and several times afterward,
acknowledged his crime, and hoped forgiveness. The general language of the
people was abuse to the "damned laws," as they called them.

ISRAEL ROBERTS (page 113.)

In several conversations with the prisoner, he heard him express his dislike
of the law. Having procured the law, and heard the prisoner say that he had
never read it, he desired him to examine it, which the prisoner said he would
do, and asked leave to take it home. -- The witness afterward asked his
(Fries's) son, what his father thought of the law? he answered, not much, he
believed. At a meeting held (perhaps at Mitchel's, p. 65 and 68.) an attempt
was made to read the law, but they would not suffer it: one man said, he knew
the law; another said, they wanted to hear none of our damned laws, nor would
hear it, and, stamping his musket on the floor, said, This is our law; we have
made a law of our own, and we are determined to support it. -- On the 5th of
March I met John Fries, when he appeared to be very ill humoured: I asked him
what was the matter? he said, the assessors had been about, and they should not
do it. He asked me, if they had taken the dimensions of my house? I said they
had. He asked me, if I had told any body of it? I said not. He seemed very much
opposed to the law, and said, his township should not be assessed till other
parts were gone through.

Q. Did you ever hear him say any thing about war?


A. I have heard him say many times if there was a war he would be in it: if
the French, or whoever invaded the country, he would oppose them. I mentioned
to him that government would send up an army. He said if they did, they would
turn about and join them, he was of opinion.


ATTORNEY. Did you ever recollect hearing him say, that if a beginning was made
it would go on well?


A. I do not.


FRIDAY, April 25. DANIEL WIEDNER.
Q. Did you, on the 6th of March, see a party of men marching down the road
from Jacob Fries's?


A. Yes; I saw a body of men march to Fries's, and then to Quaker town; some
were armed, and some unarmed. I went after them as far as Fries's.


Q. Had they a drum and fife?


A. Yes; they had when they came by my house, and by Jacob Fries's too.


Q. Did you see the prisoners with them?


A. Yes.


Q. Who appeared to have the command?


A. The prisoner and capt. Kuder. -- They wanted somebody to go after the
assessors: so Gettman, Marks, and two more went.


Q. Who wanted them to go?


A. The prisoner at the bar.


Q. What were they to do with them when they got them?


A Why they were to bring them to Quaker town.


Q. Were any of these four men who went after the assessors armed?


A. Yes.


Q. How many of them were armed?


A. I think Marks and Gettman were, or all of them; I am not sure. I think one
of the four was the prisoner's son: I do not know whether he was armed.


Q. Did you not meet at Marks's the next morning to go to Bethlehem?


A. Yes. When we left Marks's, we went on toward Ritter's tavern, and before
we got there, Marks's son was coming back, and held up his sword for us to
stop: he said that he thought it was all over before now; they were gone from
Ritter's tavern. Some agreed to go back, some said since they were gone so far
they would go through.


Q. Of which was the prisoner at the bar?


A. I think he was for going on.


COURT. Was William Thomas among you?


A. Yes.


Q. Was he for going on, or not?


A. I cannot recollect. -- We then went on to Bethlehem.


Q. Did the prisoner go into the house at Bethlehem, and what happened there?


A. Why, he went into the house, and when he came out, he said, the marshal
would not give up the prisoners without we should take them by force, and if
they had a mind to take them, he would go foremost. Fries and the rest then
went in, but I don't recollect whether he had a sword at that time: he had one
when we were going to Bethlehem.


GEORGE MITCHEL (page 64.)

Related the ground of going to Bethlehem, and their arrival there.

COURT. Did you see any of the people before the house point their guns?


A. No, not to my knowledge.


Q. Did you hear any threats used to Judge Henry or any other?


A. Not that I know.


PRISONER. At Marks's, the time I said I meant to oppose the law, the room was
pretty full of people; in what part of the room was it?


A It was on the right hand side of the room, on the bench.


Q. Was there any people by?


A. Not that I recollect.


COURT. Be cautious what you say, John Fries.


PRISONER. Do you not remember that I said (after the committee was agreed to)
I would come forward to the government, if they would send the order by a child
of ten years old, if I was sent for?


A. Not that I recollect.


The counsel for the prisoner here rested their evidence. The prisoner was
asked if he had any witnesses to produce: he answered, None.

MR. RAWLE
Said he felt himself so very peculiarly situated in this case, that he would
wish the opinion of the Court. The unfortunate prisoner at the bar appeared to
answer to a charge, the greatest that could be brought against him, without the
assistance of counsel, or any friend to advise with. -- To me, said Mr. R. the
evidence against the prisoner is extremely strong. It will be recollected, that
in opening the evidence, I informed the jury what points I should prove: I
opened my ideas of constructive law, and produced a few authorities in support
of my opinions. I believe it will be found, that in no material point have I
failed to substantiate what I first gave notice that I could prove. I therefore
conceive the charges are fully confirmed.

But although, if this trial was conducted in the usual way, and counsel were
ready to advocate the cause of the prisoner, it would now be proper on my part
to sum up the evidence as produced to the jury, and apply it to the law, in
order to see whether the crime was fixed or not -- under the present
circumstances, I feel very great reluctance to fulfill, what would in other
circumstances be my bounden duty, lest it should appear to be going farther
than the rigid requisition of my office compels me to. I therefore shall rest
the evidence and the law here, except the court think that my office as public
prosecutor demands of me to do it, or that I should not fulfill my duty without
doing it.

JUDGE CHASE. -- It is not unfrequent for a prisoner to appear in a court of
justice without counsel, but it is uncommon for a prisoner not to accept of
legal assistance. It is the peculiar lenity of our laws that makes it the duty
of a court to assign counsel to the person accused. With respect to your
situation, sir, it is a matter entirely discretionary with you whether you will
state the evidence and apply it to the law or not. There is great justice due
to a prisoner arraigned on a charge so important as the present: there is great
justice also due to the government. On the one hand an innocent person shall
not be made to suffer for want of legal assistance; on the other a guilty
person shall not escape through an undue indulgence, or the failure of the
accuser in a duty his office may require of him. If you do not please to
proceed, I shall consider it my duty to apply the law to the facts, the
prisoner may therefore offer what he pleases to the jury.


PRISONER. I submit to the court to do me that justice which is right.


JUDGE CHASE. That I will, by the blessing of God, do you every justice.


JUDGE PETER'S. Mr. Attorney, while you are justifiable in considering the
situation of the prisoner, that he might not suffer by any partial impressions
you may make on the jury, there is another consideration deserving attention --
there is justice due to the United States. Though I see no difficulty in
resting it here, yet, possibly persons who may have come into court since the
trial commenced may expect something of a narrative of the transactions, and
such a narrative may be of great help to the jury. I wish it to be done for the
due execution of public justice, and, God knows, I do it not with a desire to
injure the prisoner, for I wish not the conviction of any man. It is a painful
task, but we must do our duty. Still I think you are at liberty to fulfill your
own pleasure.


MR. RAWLE would, then, under a solemn impression that it was his duty, take up
some part of the time of the court and jury in relation to the prisoner at the
bar, a task rendered far more painful on his part, from the circumstance of the
prisoner's appearing there (unexpectedly) without counsel to plead his cause.
In as few words as possible he would endeavor to collect the most prominent
features of the testimony which had been produced, and to apply it to the law.

As he stated before, Mr. Rawle said, levying war in the United States against
the United States, was a crime defined by the constitution; in relation to the
republican form of government existing among us it could only consist in an
opposition to the will of the society, of which we all are members, declared
and established by a majority; in short, an opposition to the acts of Congress,
in whole or in part, so as to prevent their execution, either by collecting
numbers, by a display of force, or by exhibiting that degree of intimidation
which should operate, in either way, upon those charged with the execution of
the law, either throughout the United States or in any part thereof, to procure
a repeal, or a suspension of the law by rendering it impracticable to carry
such law or laws into effect in the place so opposing, or in any other part.
This offense he considered to be strictly treason against the United States.

The question then is, how far the case of the prisoner and his conduct merits
this definition? In order to be informed of that it was necessary to call to
recollection the evidence, so collected, as to display the train and progress
which marked its footsteps from its first dawning, till its arrival at the
fatal deed denominated treason.

It will first be observed by the testimony of several respectable witnesses
(Messrs. Heckavelter, Ramich, Schymer, Ormond, and Williamson) that attempts
were made and executed, by a combination, in which, unfortunately for him, the
prisoner at the bar was very active, to prevent the assessors from doing the
duty required of them when they accepted their office, and that this
combination existed both in Northampton and Bucks counties, and to such a
degree that it was impossible to carry the law into effect. In lower Milford
more particularly we have the evidence of four respectable gentlemen (Mr.
Chapman, a principal assessor, and Mr. Rodrick, Mr. Foulke, and Mr. Child's,
three assessors) who were employed in the execution of those laws. These
gentlemen say that they met with such opposition at an early period of the
insurrection, as deterred Samuel Clark from undertaking the business at all,
although he had taken upon him the office. From this difficulty, Messrs.
Foulke, Rodrick and Child's determined that they would proceed to assess lower
Milford township together, which they attempted, and did not desist until
compelled by the extreme opposition which their respective testimony relates to
have happened on the 5th and 6th of March, in their progress to, and at
Quaker's town, which ill usage is all corroborated by other witnesses. This
spirit of opposition to the laws, as exhibited generally, is also related by
Mr. Henry and Col. Nichols, the marshal, wherein it appears that process could
not be served, and that witnesses could not be subpoenead, being deterred from
the threats made to them by this extensive combination; and that in the serving
of process personal abuse was given, as well as to the assessors who attempted
to execute the law. In short the law was prostrate at the feet of a powerful
combination.

Mr. RAWLE here called to view the occurrences in Bucks county, as deposed by
Messrs. Foulke, Rodrick, Chapman, Thomas, Mitchel, and Wiedner, exhibiting a
disposition to insurrection by a great number of persons, and who engaged in
its acts; he referred to the meeting at Jacob Fries's, where John Fries, the
prisoner at the bar, expressed himself as determining to oppose and continue
hostile to the laws. The circumstance afterward near Singmaster's, where Mr.
Rodrick made his escape, and where, as well as at other times, the prisoner
forbade those officers to proceed, under threats of personal danger. It
appeared Mr. Rodrick had given offense, not by his conduct, but because he came
from a distance of ten or twelve miles into that township to prosecute his
duty. However the assessors met the next day, but were stopped at Quaker town,
where they were extremely abused. -- To be sure, while the prisoner at the bar
was in the room, and whenever he was present, their abuse was suspended, when
he absented himself, it was renewed. The papers were taken from Mr. Child's, and
also from Mr. Foulke, but returned, because they were not the identical papers.
Here it must be observed in justice to the prisoner that one more of his few
good actions appeared, which Mr. Rawle wished in his heart had been more
numerous. -- Fries assisted Mr. Foulke to get out of the house the back way,
and advised him to keep out of the way of the men.

On the evening of that day they went up to Miller's town: here Mr. Rawle
called to mind the message delivered by John Dillinger for convening the
meeting the next day; this message was the fruits of a consultation held at the
house of Jacob Fries, after they left Quaker town, when they determined to
proceed to Millar's town the next morning. The next morning they met and went
on as far as Ritters, where it appeared they were stopped for a short period by
young Marks, who had been sent forward, with information that the prisoners
were gone on to Bethlehem: a doubt being started whether they would not be too
late, it was debated, and at last determined to go forward: of this latter
opinion was the prisoner at the bar. It was in evidence that none of those
people knew the prisoners whom they were going to release: this Mitchell and
others swore.

Here Mr. Rawle thought commenced the overt act in the indictment; hitherto
only the general opposition to the law, and the intention with which the after
conduct was perpetrated, appeared. -- They proceeded to Bethlehem, and here the
officer of militia, the man who derived his power from the people, the
prisoner, Captain John Fries, whose duty, it was to support the law and
constitution of the United States, made a most distinguished figure. At
Bethlehem it appeared that the prisoner was to step forward to effect the
surrender of the prisoners, and of course to lay prostrate the legal arm of the
United States. These prisoners were in the lawful custody of the marshal, he
had lawful process against them from the district judge; they were in the house
appointed for their safe keeping until they should be removed; he kept guard
over them, and in order to execute his office he had provided, by virtue of the
powers given to the sheriff in the several counties agreeable to law, an armed
force called a posse committatus, or the power of the county. This force (about
16 or 17) he supposed sufficiently great to prevent the prisoners in his charge
being liberated, it appeared, however in the sequel that they were not
sufficient for that purpose. -- The prisoner with an armed force arrived at
Bethlehem, and proceeded on his mission to the marshal: he had a sword when he
marched his men into the town; but it appeared that he left it when he entered
on his other business, to wit, demanding the surrender of the prisoners; the
marshal answered, that he could not deliver them up. John Fries then returned
to his men; and from the testimony of Mitchel, Barnet, and Schlaugh, (this was
an important part of his conduct) he said, They must be taken by force; the
marshal says he cannot deliver them up; if you are willing, we will take them
by force: I will go foremost; if I drop, then take your own command. Words were
followed by actions; they went into the house, and the prisoners were given up.

This, Mr. Rawle thought, was an unquestionable, full and complete proof of the
commission of the overt act, and that overt act is high treason, as laid in the
third and fourth counts of the indictment, to wit, that they did, by force
prevent the marshal from executing lawful process, to him directed; and,
secondly, that they did deliver, and take from him certain persons, whom he had
in lawful custody; and, further, this was done by force and arms, of men
arrayed in a warlike manner, and by a number exceeding one hundred persons.
This the indictment justly calls levying war, and treason.

To him Mr. Rawle said, there was no doubt but the act of levying war was
completed in the county of Bucks, independently of all those actions at
Bethlehem; for there the prisoner and others were armed, and arrayed with all
the appearances of war: with drums and fifes, and at times firing their pieces;
and this to oppose the laws and prevent their execution, and there, by this
force, they executed one, and the main part of their plan; they there did set
the law at defiance: that was part of their grand object, and was done with a
general, and not with a particular view, an essential ingredient in treason.
Whether these actions were to be considered as a separate act of treason, or
whether they were to evince the intentions of the party, it certainly must be
considered as testimony, and such as must have an important weight toward the
verdict.

Gentlemen, said Mr. Attorney, you will consider how far the individual
witnesses are deserving your credit; if you consider them worthy of being
believed, and if the facts related apply to the law which I submitted to your
consideration, and which, from the silence of the court, I think you must
consider as accurate, if not I shall stand corrected by the court, -- there can
be but little doubt upon your minds, that the prisoner is guilty: if it be not
so, in your opinion, you must find him otherwise.

I have endeavored to do my duty with integrity. I have advanced nothing but
what appears to me to be clearly substantiated; but with you, gentlemen, and
with the court, I leave the truth of the opinion.

COURT. John Fries, you are at liberty to say any thing you please to the jury.


PRISONER. It was mentioned, that I collected a parcel of people to follow up
the assessors, but I did not collect them; they came and fetched me out from my
house to go with them.

I have nothing to say, but leave it to the court.


JUDGE CHASE Then addressed the JURY as follows:
GENTLEMEN OF THE JURY,
JOHN FRIES, the prisoner at the bar, stands indicted for the crime of treason,
of levying war against the United States, contrary to the constitution.

By the Constitution of the United States, art. 3. sect. 3. it is declared,
That treason, against the United States, shall consist only in levying war
against them; or in adhering to their enemies, giving them aid and comfort.

By the same section it is further declared, That no person shall be convicted
of treason, unless on the testimony of two witnesses to the same overt act; or
on confession in open court; and that the Congress shall have power to declare
the punishment of treason.

Too much praise cannot be given to this constitutional definition of treason,
and the requiring such full proof for conviction; and declaring, that no
attainder of treason shall work corruption of blood, or forfeiture, except
during the life of the person attainted.

This constitutional definition of treason is a question of law. Every
proposition in any statute (whether more or less distinct, whether easy or
difficult to comprehend) is always a question of law. What is the true meaning
and true import of any statute, and whither the case stated comes within it, is
a question of law, and not of fact. -- The question is an indictment for
levying war against (or adhering to the enemies of) the United States, is --
Whether the facts stated do, or do not amount to levying war, -- within the
contemplation and construction of the constitution?

It is the duty of the court in this case, and in all criminal cases, to state
to the jury their opinion of the law arising on the facts; but the jury are to
decide on the present, and in all criminal cases, both the law and the facts,
on their consideration of the whole case.

It is the opinion of the court, that any insurrection, or rising of any body
of people, within the United States, to attain or effect, by force, or
violence, any object of a great public nature, or of public and general (or
national) concern, is a levying of war against the United States, within the
contemplation and construction of the constitution.

On this general position the court are of opinion, that any such insurrection,
or rising to resist, or to prevent, by force or violence, the execution of any
statute of the United States, for levying or collecting taxes, duties, imposts,
or excises; or for calling forth the militia to execute the laws of the Union,
or for any other object of a general nature or national concern, under any
pretense, as that the statute was unjust, burdensome, oppressive, or
unconstitutional, is a levying war against the United States, within the
contemplation and construction of the constitution. -- The reason for this
opinion is, that an insurrection to resist or prevent, by force, the execution
of any statute of the United States, has a direct tendency to dissolve all the
bonds of society, to destroy all order, and all laws; and also, all security
for the lives, liberties, and property of the citizens of the United States.

The court are of opinion, that military weapons (as guns and swords, mentioned
in the indictment) are not necessary to make such insurrection or rising amount
to levying war; because numbers may supply the want of military weapons; and
other instruments may effect the intended mischief: The legal guilt of levying
war may be incurred without the use of military weapons, or military array.

The court are of opinion, that the assembling bodies of men, armed and arrayed
in a^warlike manner, for purposes only of a PRIVATE nature, is NOT TREASON;
although the judges, or other peace officers should be insulted, or resisted;
or even great outrages committed to the persons, or property of our citizens.

The true criterion to determine whether acts committed are treason, or a less
offense, (as a riot) is the quo animo or the intention with which the people
did assemble. When the intention is universal, or general as to effect some
object of a general public nature, it will be treason; and cannot be
considered, construed, or reduced to a riot. The commission of any number of
felonies, riots, or other misdemeanors cannot alter their nature, so as to make
them amount to treason; and, on the other hand, if the intention and acts
combined amount to treason, they cannot be sunk down to a felony, or riot. The
intention with which any acts (as felonies, the destruction of property, or the
like) are done, will show to what class of crimes, the case belongs.

The court are of opinion, that if a body of people conspire and meditate an
insurrection to resist or oppose the execution of any statute of the United
States by force, that they are only guilty of a high misdemeanor; but if they
proceed to carry such intention into execution, BY FORCE, -- that they are
guilty of the treason of levying war; and the quantum of the force employed
neither lessens, nor increases the crime; whether by one hundred, or one
thousand persons, is wholly immaterial.

The court are of opinion, that a combination, or conspiracy to levy war
against the United States is not treason, unless combined with an attempt to
carry such combination, or conspiracy, into execution; some actual force, or
violence, must be used, in pursuance of such design to levy war; but that it is
altogether immaterial, whether the force used is sufficient to effectuate the
object; any force connected with the intention, will constitute the crime of
levying war.

This opinion of the court is founded on the same principles, and is, in
substance, the same, as the opinion of the circuit court, for this district, on
the trials (in April 1795) of Vigol and Mitchell, who were both found guilty by
the jury, and afterward pardoned by the late President.

At the circuit court for the district (April term 1799) on the trial of the
prisoner at the bar, Judge Iredell delivered the same opinion, and Fries was
convicted by the jury.

To support the present indictment against the prisoner at the bar, two facts
must be proved to your satisfaction:

First. That some time before the finding of the indictment, there was an
insurrection (or rising) of a body of people in the county of Northampton, in
this State, with intent to oppose and prevent, by means of intimidation and
violence, the execution of a law of the United States, entitled "An Act to
provide for the valuation of lands and dwelling-houses, the enumeration of
slaves within the United States;" OR, of another law of the United States,
entitled "An Act to lay and collect a direct tax within the United States:"
and that some acts of violence were committed by some of the people so
assembled, with intent to oppose and prevent, by means of intimidation, and
violence, the execution of both, or of one of the said laws of congress.

In the consideration of this fact, you are to consider and determine with what
intent the people assembled at Bethlehem, whether to effect, by force, a public
or a private measure.

The intent with which the people assembled at Bethlehem, in Northampton, is a
necessary ingredient t^ the fact of assembling, and to be proved like any other
fact, by the declarations of those who assembled; or by acts done by them. When
the question is, "What is a man's intent?" -- It may be proved by a number of
connected circumstances; or by a single fact.

If from a careful examination of the evidence, you shall be convinced, that
the real object and intent of the people assembled at Bethlehem was of a public
nature, (which it certainly was, if they assembled with intent to prevent the
execution of both of the abovementioned laws of congress, or either of them)
it must then be proved to your satisfaction, that the prisoner at the bar,
incited, encouraged, promoted, or assisted in the insurrection, or rising of
the people, at Bethlehem, and the terror they carried with them, with intent to
oppose and prevent, by means of intimidation and violence, the execution of
both the abovementioned laws of congress, or either of them; and that some
force was used by some of the people assembled at Bethlehem.

In the consideration of this fact, the court think proper to assist your
inquiry by giving you their opinion.

In treason, all the participes criminis are principals; there are no
accessaries to this crime. Every act, which in the case of felony, would render
a man an accessory, will, in the case of treason, make him a principal. To
render any person an accomplice and principal in felony, he must be aiding and
abetting at the fact; or ready to afford assistance, if necessary. If a person
be present at a felony, aiding and a assisting, he is a principal. It is always
material to consider whether the persons charged are of the same party; upon
the same pursuit; and under the expectation of mutual defense and support. --
All persons present, aiding, assisting, or abetting any treasonable act, are
principals. All persons, who are present and countenancing, and are ready to
afford assistance, if necessary, to those who actually commit any treasonable
act, are also principals. If a number of persons assemble and set out upon a
common design, as to resist and prevent, by force, the execution of any law,
and some of them commit acts of force and violence, with intent to oppose the
execution of any law, and others are present to aid and assist, if necessary,
they are all principals. If any man joins and acts with an assembly of people,
his intent is always to be considered and adjudged to be the same as theirs;
and the law, in this case, judges of the intent by the FACT. If a number of
persons combine or conspire to effect a certain purpose, as to oppose, by
force, the execution of a law, any act of violence done by any one of them, in
pursuance of such combination, and with intent to effect such object, is, in
consideration of law, the act of all who are present when such act of violence
is committed. If persons collect together to act for one and the same common
end, any act done by any one of them, with intent to effectuate such common
end, is a fact that may be given in evidence against all of them; the act of
each is evidence against ALL concerned.

I shall not detain you at this late hour to recapitulate the facts; -- you
have taken notes, and they have been stated with accuracy, and great candor, by
Mr. Attorney.

I will only remark, that all the evidence relative to transactions before the
assembling of the armed force at Bethlehem, are only to satisfy you of the
intent with which the body of the people assembled there. If either of the
three overt acts (or open deeds) stated in the indictment, are proved to your
satisfaction, the court are of opinion, that it is sufficient to maintain the
indictment; for the court are of opinion that every overt act is treasonable.

As to accomplices -- they are legal witnesses, and entitled to credit, unless
destroyed by testimony in court.

If, upon consideration of the whole matter (law as well as fact) you are not
fully satisfied, without any doubt, that the prisoner is guilty of the treason
charged in the indictment, you will find him not guilty; but if, upon
consideration of the whole matter, (law as well as fact) you are convinced that
the prisoner is guilty of the treason charged in the indictment, you will find
him guilty.

The jury retired, for the space of two hours, and brought in their verdict,
GUILTY.

After the verdict was given, Judge Chase, with great feeling and sensibility,
addressed the prisoner, observing that as he had no counsel on the trial, if
he, or any person for him, could point out any flaw in the indictment, or legal
ground for arrest of judgment, ample time would be allowed for that purpose.

FRIDAY, May 2.
The Court this morning called before them Charles Deshler, a juror on the
above trial of John Fries, who, on the first evening of the said trial, on the
adjournment of the court, separated from the jury and retired to his lodgings.
Mr. Hopkinson, in behalf of Mr. Deshler, produced his own affidavit, and that
of two others, which proved, that on the said evening, Charles Deshler was
inadvertently separated from his brethren by the crowd, in going out of the
jury box; that he did not know to what place the jury had adjourned; that he
then proceeded to his lodgings, where he cautiously avoided all conversation
respecting the trial depending. -- The court, satisfied by this representation,
of the innocence of Mr. Deshler, ordered that he be discharged, and that the
beforementioned affidavit be entered on the record of the court.

JUDGMENT. Judge Chase's Address.
The prisoner being set at the bar, Judge Chase, after observing to Hainey and
Gettman that what he had to say to Fries would apply generally to them, the
judge proceeded --

JOHN FRIES -- You have been already informed, that you stood convicted of the
treason, charged upon you by the indictment on which you have been arraigned,
of levying war against the United States. -- You have had a LEGAL, FAIR and
IMPARTIAL trial, with every indulgence that the law would permit. Of the whole
panel, you PEREMPTORILY challenged thirty-four, and, with truth I may say,
that the jury who tried you, were of your own selection and choice. Not one of
them before had ever formed and delivered any opinion respecting your guilt or
innocence. The verdict of the jury against you was founded on the testimony of
many creditable and unexceptionable witnesses. It was apparent from the conduct
of the jury, when they delivered their verdict, that if innocent they would
have acquitted you with pleasure; and that they pronounced their verdict
against you with great concern and reluctance, from a sense of duty to their
country, and a full conviction of your guilt.

The crime of which you have been sound guilty is treason; a crime considered,
in the most civilized and the most free countries in the world, as the greatest
that any man can commit. It is a crime of so deep a dye, and attended with such
a train of fatal consequences, that it can receive no aggravation; yet the duty
of my station requires, that I should explain to you the nature of the crime of
which you are convicted; to show the necessity of that justice, which is this
day to be administered; and to awaken your mind to proper reflections and a due
sense of your own condition, which I imagine you must have reflected upon
during your long confinement.

You are a native of this country -- You live under a constitution (or form of
government) framed by the people themselves; and under laws made by your
representatives, faithfully executed by independent and impartial judges. Your
government secures to every member of the community equal liberty and equal
rights; by which equality of liberty and rights I mean, that every person,
without any regard to wealth, rank or station, may enjoy an equal share of
civil liberty, an equal protection of law, and an equal security for his person
and property. -- You enjoyed, in common with your fellow-citizens, all those
rights.

If experience should prove, that the constitution is defective, it provides a
mode to change or amend it, without any danger to public order, or any injury
to social rights.

If Congress, from inattention, error in judgment, or want of information,
should pass any law in violation of the constitution; or burdensome, or
oppressive to the people, a peaceable, safe and ample remedy is provided by the
constitution. The people themselves have established the mode by which such
grievances are to be redressed; and no other mode can be adopted, without a
violation of the constitution and of the laws. -- If Congress should pass a law
contrary to the constitution, such law would be void, and the courts of the
United States possess complete authority, and are the only tribunal to decide,
whether any law is contrary to the constitution. -- If Congress should pass
burdensome or oppressive laws, the remedy is with their constituents, from
whom they derive their existence and authority. If any law is made, repugnant
to the voice of a majority of their constituents, it is in their power to make
choice of persons to repeal it; but until it is repealed, it is the duty of
every citizen to submit to it, and to give up his private sentiments to the
public will. If a law burdensome, or even oppressive in its nature or
execution is to be opposed by force, and obedience cannot be compelled, there
must soon be an end to all government in this country. -- It cannot be credited
by dispassionate men, of any information, that Congress will intentionally make
laws in violation of the constitution, contrary to their sacred trust, and
solemn obligation to support it. None can believe, that Congress will wilfully,
or intentionally, impose unreasonable and unjust burdens on their
constituents, in which they must participate. The most ignorant man must know,
that Congress can make no law that will not affect them equally, in every
respect, with their constituents. Every law that is detrimental to their
constituents, must prove hurtful to themselves. From these considerations,
every one may see, that Congress can have no interest in oppressing their
fellow-citizens.

It is almost incredible, that a people living under the best and mildest
government in the whole world, should not only be dissatisfied and
discontented, but should break out into open resistance and opposition to its
laws.

The insurrection in 1794, in the four western counties of this state
(particularly in Washington) to oppose the execution of the laws of the United
States, which laid duties on stills, and spirits distilled, within the United
States, is still fresh in memory: it originated from prejudices and
misrepresentations industriously disseminated and diffused against those laws.
Either persons disaffected to our government, or wishing to aggrandise
themselves, deceived and misled the ignorant and uninformed class of the
people. The opposition commenced in meetings of the people, with threats
against the officers, which rip^ned into acts of outrage against them, and were
extended to private citizens. Committees were formed to systamatize and inflame
the spirit of opposition. Violence succeeded to violence, and the collector of
Fayette county was compelled to surrender his commission and official books;
the dwelling house of the inspector (in the vicinity of Pittsburgh) was
attacked and burnt; and the marshal was seized, and obtained his liberty on a
promise to serve no other process on the west side of the Alleghany mountain.
To compel submission to the laws, the government were obliged to march an army
against the insurgents, and the expense was above one million one hundred
thousand dollars. Of the whole number of insurgents (many hundreds) only a few
were brought to trial; and of them only two were sentenced to die (Vigol and
Mitchell) and they were pardoned by the late President. Although the insurgents
made no resistance to the army sent against them; yet not a few of our troops
lost their lives, in consequence of their great fatigue, and exposure to the
severity of the season.

This great and remarkable clemency of the government had no effect upon you
and the deluded people in your neighborhood. The rise, progress, and
termination of the late insurrection, bear a strong and striking analogy to the
former: and it may be remembered, that it has cost the United States 80,000
dollars. It cannot escape observation, that the ignorant, and uninformed are
taught to complain of taxes, which are necessary for the support of government,
and yet they permit themselves to be seduced into insurrections which have so
enormously increased the public burdens, of which their contribution can
scarcely be calculated.

When citizens combine and assemble with intent to prevent by threats,
intimidation, and violence, the execution of the laws, and they actually carry
such traitorous designs into execution, they reduce the government to the
alternative of prostrating the laws before the insurgents, or of taking
necessary measures to compel submission. No government can hesitate. The
expense, and all the consequences therefore, are not imputable to the
government, but to the insurgents. -- The mildness and lenity of our government
are as striking on the late as on the former insurrection; Of nearly 130
persons who might have been put on their trial for treason, only five have been
prosecuted and tried for that crime.

In the late insurrection, you, John Fries, bore a conspicuous and leading
part. If you had reflected, you would have seen, that your attempt was as weak,
as it was wicked. It was the height of folly in you to suppose that the great
body of our citizens, blessed in the enjoyment of a free republican government of
their own choice, and of all rights civil and religious, -- secure in their
persons and property, and conscious that the laws are the only security for
their preservation from violence, would not rise up as one man to oppose and
crush so ill-founded, so unprovoked an attempt to disturb the public peace and
tranquillity. If you could see in a proper light your own folly and wickedness,
you ought now to bless God, that your insurrection was so happily and speedily
quelled by the vigilance and energy of our government, aided by the patriotism
and activity of your fellow-citizens, who left their homes and business and
embodied themselves in the support of its laws.

The annual, necessary expenditures for the support of any extensive
government, like ours must be great; and the sum required, can only be obtained
by taxes, or loans. -- In all countries the levying taxes is unpopular, and a
subject of complaint. It appears to me, that there was not the least pretense
of complaint against, much less of opposition and violence to, the law for
levying taxes on dwelling-houses; and it becomes you to reflect that the time
you chose to rise up in arms to oppose the laws of your country, was when it
stood in a very critical situation with regard to France, and on the eve of a
rupture with that country.

I cannot omit to remind you of another matter, worthy of your consideration.
-- If the marshal or any of the possee, or any of the four friends of
government, who were with him, had been killed by you, or any of your deluded
followers, the crime of murder would have been added to the crime of treason.

In your serious hours of reflection, you ought to consider the consequences
that would have flowed from the insurrection, which you incited, encouraged,
and promoted, in the character of a captain of militia, whose incumbent duty it
is to stand ready (whenever required) to assist and defend the government and
its laws, if it had not been immediately quelled. Violence, oppression and
rapine; destruction, waste, and murder, always attend the progress of
insurrection and rebellion; the arm of the father would have been raised
against the son; that of the son against the father; a brother's hand would
have been stained with brother's blood; the sacred bands of friendship would
have been broken, and all the ties of natural affection would have been
dissolved.

The end of all punishment is example; and the enormity of your crime requires
that a severe example should be made to deter others from the commission of
like crimes in future. You have forfeited your life to justice -- let me
therefore earnestly recommend to you, most seriously to consider your situation
-- to take a review of your past life, and to employ the very little time you
are to continue in this world, in endeavors to make your peace with that God,
whose MERCY is equal to his JUSTICE. I expect that you are a Christian; and as
such I address you. Be assured my guilty and unhappy fellow-citizen, that
without serious repentance of all your sins, you cannot expect happiness in the
world to come; and to your repentance you must add faith and hope in the merits
and mediation of Jesus Christ. These are the only terms on which pardon and
forgiveness are promised to those, who profess the Christian religion. Let me
therefore again entreat you to apply every moment you have left, in contrition,
sorrow, and repentance. Your day of life is almost spent, and the night of
death fast approaches. Look up to the Father of Mercies, and God of Comfort.
You have a great and an immense work to perform, and but little time in which
you must finish it. There is no repentance in the grave; for after death comes
judgment; and as you die, so you must be judged. By repentance and faith, you
are the object of God's mercy; but if you will not repent, and have faith and
dependence upon the merits of the death of Christ, but die a hardened and
impenitent sinner, you will be the object of God's justice and vengeance. If
you will sincerely repent and believe, God has pronounced his forgiveness; and
there is no crime too great for his mercy and pardon.

Although you must be strictly confined for the very short remainder of your
life, yet the mild government and laws which you have endeavored to destroy,
permit you (if you please) to converse and commune with ministers of the
gospel; to whose pious care and consolation in fervent prayers and devotion, I
most cordially recommend you.

What remains for me is a very painful, but a very necessary part of my duty.
It is to pronounce that judgment, which the law has appointed for crimes of
this magnitude. The judgment of the law is, and this Court does award "that you
be hanged, by the neck, until dead:" And I pray GOD ALMIGHTY to be merciful to
your soul!

The following Charge, by Judge Peter's, was delivered to the Jury before the
Charge of Judge Iredell, in the first Trial, and ought to precede it in Page
164, but was unavoidably omitted in its proper place.
GENTLEMEN OF THE JURY,
AS this case is important, both in its principles and consequences, I think it
my duty to give my opinion, formed with as much deliberation as the intervals
of this lengthy trial would permit, on the most prominent points of law which
have been made in this cause. I have condensed my sentiments into as short a
compass as possible. I shall leave remarks on the evidence, and more enlarged
observations on the law, to the presiding judge, who will deliver to you the
charge of the court. At his request I state my individual opinion, though I do
not always deem it necessary, when there is an unanimity of sentiment in the
court.

1. It is treason "in levying war against the United States" for persons who
have none but a common interest with their fellow-citizens, to oppose or
prevent, by force, numbers or intimidation, a public and general law of the
United States, with intent to prevent its operation, or compel its repeal.
Force is necessary, to complete the crime; but the quantum of force is
immaterial. This point was determined by this court on a former occasion, which
was, though not in all circumstances, yet in principle and object, very
analogous to the subject of our present inquiries. I hold myself bound by that
decision, which on due consideration, I think legal and sound. I do not
conceive it to be overshadowed, or rendered null, by any legislative
construction contained in any subsequent act of congress. The law, though
established by legislative acts, or settled by judicial decisions, may be
altered by congress, by express words, in laws consistent with the
constitution. But a mere legislative construction, drawn from any act by
intendment, ought not to repeal positive laws, or annul judicial decisions. The
judiciary have the duty assigned to them of interpreting declaring and
explaining, -- the Legislature that of making, altering, or repealing laws. But
the decision of a question on the constitutionality of a law is vested in the
judiciary department. I consider the decisions in the cases of Vigol and
Mitchell, in full force, and founded on true principles of law. The authorities
from British precedents and adjudications are used as guides in our decisions.
I will not enter into a discussion whether we are bound to follow them; because
they are precedents, -- or because we think them reasonable and just.

If numbers and force can render one law ineffectual, which is tantamount to
its repeal, the whole system of laws may be destroyed in detail. All laws will
at last yield to the violence of the seditious and discontented. Although but
one law be immediately assailed, yet the treasonable design is completed, and
the generality of intent designated, by a part assuming the government of the
whole. And thus, by trampling on the legal powers of the constituted
authorities, the rights of all are invaded by the force and violence of a few.
In this case, too, there is a direct outrage on the judiciary act, with intent
to defeat, by force and intimidation, the execution of a revenue law, enacted
under clear and express constitutional authority. A deadly blow is aimed at the
government, when its fiscal arrangements are forcibly destroyed, distracted and
impeded; for on its revenues its very existence depends.

2. Though punishments are designated, by particular laws, for certain inferior
crimes, which, if prosecuted as substantive offenses, and the sole object of
the prosecution, are exclusively liable to the penalties directed by those
laws, yet, when committed with treasonable ingredients, these crimes become
only circumstances or overt acts. The intent is the gist of the inquiry in a
charge of treason; and is the great and leading object in trials for this crime.

The description of crimes, contained in the act, commonly called the Sedition
Act, lose their character, and become but component parts of the greater crime,
or evidences of treason, when the treasonable intent and overt act are proved.
So it is with rescue of prisoners; which, in the present case, was not an
independent offense, but an overt act of the treason. These were crimes --
misdemeanors -- at common law; and might have been punished by fine and
imprisonment when substantive independent offenses. But, when committed with
treasonable intent, are merged in the treason, of which sedition, conspiracy
and combination are always the harbingers. I do not think that the acts
relating either to sedition or rescue have altered the principle, though they
have defined and bounded the punishments. The law, as to treason, is the same
now, as if those offenses were still punishable at common law. The Sedition Act
cannot constitutionally alter the description o^ the crime of treason, to which
the combination and conspiracy to perpetrate this offense, with force and
numbers, are essential attributes. Numbers must combine and conspire to levy
war. But if these indispensible qualities of the crime are, by the Legislature,
declared only misdemeanors, and separated from the treasonable act, the
Legislature nullify the description of treason contained in the constitution;
and so indirectly alter and destroy, or make inefficient, this part of that
instrument. The congress neither possess, nor did they intend to exercise, any
such power. They could not (nor did they so intend) place the crime declared in
the constitution to be treason, among the inferior class of offenses, by
describing some of its essential qualities in the Sedition Act, and prescribing
punishments, when they solely constitute substantive and independent offenses.
Congress can only (as they have done) prescribe the punishment for treason,
regulate the trial, and direct the mode in which that punishment is to be
executed.

3. However indisputably requisite it may be to prove, by two witnesses, the
overt act for which the prisoner at the bar stands indicted, yet evidence may
be given of other circumstances, or even of other overt acts, connected with
that on which the indictment is grounded, and occurring or committed in any
other part of the district, than the place mentioned. Although the prisoner be
not on his trial, nor is he now punishable, for any other than the overt act
laid, other overt acts and other circumstances, parts of the general design,
may nevertheless be proved, to show the quo animo -- the intent -- with which
the act laid was committed. Indeed the treason would be complete, by the
conspiracy, in any part of the district, to commit the treasonable act at
Bethlehem, if any had, in consequence of the conspiracy, marched or committed
any overt act for the purpose, though the actual rescue had not taken place. So
we thought in the cases of the western insurgents, that the treason, concocted
at Couche's fort, would have been complete, if any had only marched to commit
the crime; though the design had not arrived to the disgraceful catastrophe it
finally attained. Indisputable authorities might be produced to support this
position.

4. The confession of the prisoner may be given in evidence as corroboratory
proof of the intent, or quo animo. But, although proved by two witnesses, being
made out of court, it is not of itself sufficient to convict. Two witnesses are
necessary to prove the overt act. But the intent may be proved by one witness,
collected from circumstances, or even by a single fact.

5. The doctrine of constructive treason has produced much real mischief in
another country; and it has been, for an age, the subject of discussions, among
lawyers, other public speakers and political writers. The greater part of the
objections to it are totally irrelevant here. -- The subject of them is
unknown, and may it ever remain so, in this country. I mean the compassing the
death of the king. It will be found that the British judges, since the days of
political darkness and bigotry have passed away, are to be found among the most
able and decided opposers of the abuses of this doctrine. They do not follow
decisions and precedents rooted in bad times, because they find them in their
law books. On the contrary, on a fair investigation it will be proved, that
those contrary to justice, reason and law are rejected It is not fair and sound
reasoning to argue against the necessary and indispensable use of construction,
from the abuses it has produced. What is there among the best of human (and I
wish I could not add divine) systems which has not been perverted and abused?
That there must be some defined sense and interpretative exposition made of the
terms "levying war," and when, and in what circumstances, it is levied "against
the United States," cannot be denied. The able counsel, in this case, who has
said the most on this subject, and traveled the farthest into the gloomy, dark
and tyrannical periods of the British history and jurisprudence, for melancholy
and disgusting proofs of atro^ious abuses, and even crimes, committed under
color of law, has, unavoidably, himself furnished also proofs of the necessity
we are under of some constructive or interpretative expositions. He, at first,
confined these expositions to three cases. Now if there is a necessity of one,
it shows that without supplementary interpretation, the law would be a mere
dead letter. Aware of the dangerous lengths to which the abuses of construction
have been carried, courts and juries should be cautious in their decisions; but
not so much alarmed about abuses, as to refrain from the proper and necessary
use of interpretation. I do not then hesitate to say, that the position we have
found established, to wit, that opposition, by force and numbers, or
intimidation with intent to defeat, delay or prevent the execution of a general
law of the United States, or to procure, or with a hope of procuring, by force
and numbers, or intimidation, its repeal or new execution, is treason by
levying war against the United States. And it does not appear to me to be what
is commonly called constructive, but open and direct treason, in levying war
against the United States, within the plain and evident meaning and intent of
the constitution.

6. As to the objections, founded on want of proof of regular appointments
under, and of the proper execution of the law called the house tax law, I do
not see that they apply. If the prosecution was definitely for opposing one or
more officer or officers of this tax law, the proof might be more ^igidly
required. But as all the necessary use made of these collateral and subordinate
circumstances, relative to the tax law officers, is for the purpose of showing
the quo animo or intent with which the treason alleged was committed, I
consider them as not relevant in this cause. It is even enough in criminal
prosecutions, more directly aimed at the specific offense of opposing au
officer, that he was an officer de facto.

7. As to the disarming and confining the two Videlles, or advance, of the
armed insurgents, by the marshal at Bethlehem, I think him legally as well as
prudentially justified in his conduct. Even a constable has a right to restrain
and confine, under strong circumstances of suspicion, persons whose conduct or
appearance evidence an intention to commit illegal and violent acts. Much more
so was the marshal (having notice of an intended rescue of his prisoners)
justifiable in seizing and disarming two of the armed body, against whom
existing circumstances raised strong and evident suspicion. But I think this
has been made more important than it really is. Because the release of these
men was not the object of, or even know to the prisoner at the bar and his
party, when they commenced their treasonable march, for the release of the
prisoners in the marshal's custody, at Bethlehem.

8. The President's proclamation should have been pleaded as a pardon, if it
was intended to be relied on as such. This not having been done, it is not
legally before us. But since it has been mentioned, I think it necessary to
declare it as my opinion, that it does not operate as a pardon to precedent
offenses. It is directed by law as a step, preparatory to applying an armed
force, against those supposed to have committed crimes and embodied for
unlawful purposes. It is a humane warning, calculated to prevent the effusion
of blood? Its allegations of facts, or its injunctions, have no operation in
the trial of the prisoner at the bar.

Whether the prisoner is or is not guilty of the treason laid in the
indictment, in the manner and form therein set forth, it is your province to
determine. It is the duty of the court to declare the law; though both facts
and law, which I fear are too plain to admit a reasonable doubt, are subjects
for your consideration. We must all obey our public duty, whatever may be our
private feelings. Mercy is not deposited in our hands. It is entirely within
the constitutional authority of another department.

The following opinion of Judge Peter's on the motion for a new trial was put
into our hands after the sheet was printed were it should have come in, which
is page 45 of the appendix.

ALTHOUGH I am not perfectly satisfied with the testimony, which is
contradicted by the juror on his oath; I will allow it to be taken for granted;
and meet the question on principle. I am in sentiment against granting the
motion for a new trial. Because -- 1. The juror said no more than all friends
to the laws and the government were warranted in thinking and saying, as the
facts appeared then to the public. Fries being generally alleged to be the
most prominent character, it was on this account, and not with special or
particular malice, that Rhoad's declaration was made.

2. If a juror was rejected on account of such declarations, trials, where the
community at large are intimately affected by crimes of such general importance
and public notoriety, must be had, in all probability, by those who only openly
or secretly approved of the conduct of criminals. This would be unjust and
improper, as it affects the government in its public prosecutions. Little
success could be expected from proceedings against the most atrocious
offenders, if great multitudes were implicated in their delusions, or guilt.

3. It is natural for all good citizens when atrocious crimes, of a public
nature, are known to have been committed, to express their abhorrence and
disapprobation, both of the offenses and the perpetrators. It is their duty so
to express themselves. This is not like the case of murder, or any offense
against as individual; or where several are charged and none remarkably
prominent. In this latter case selecting one out of the mass might evince
particular malice.

4. I have no doubt that declarations of an opposite complexion could be
proved; and yet the jurors were unanimous in their verdict. The defendant has
had a fair, and I think an impartial trial.

But as a division in the court, might lessen the weight of the judgment if
finally pronounced, and the great end of the law in punishments being example,
I, with some reluctance, yield to the opinion of judge Iredell. Although
justice may be delayed, yet it will not fail, either as it respects the United
States, or the prisoner.

SATURDAY, April 26, 1800. CONRAD MARKS
Was arraigned on an indictment for treason The conduct of Conrad Marks in this
transaction, might be seen in ^e course of the evidence on the first trial of
John Fries.
. He pleaded, Not Guilty.

The following PERSONS were admitted and sworn on the JURY.
Richard Downing, Thomas Morris, Jacob Grim, Eli Canby, Richard Roberts,
Francis Gardner, John Jacobs, Benjamin Morris, Anthony Oberly, John
Longstreith, William Davis, Llwellin Davis.
The cause was opened by the attorney of the district, (Mr. Rawle) who stated
the nature of the offense of which the prisoner stood indicted, and adduced a
number of witnesses on the part of the prosecution. Several witnesses were also
produced on the part of the prisoner. Mr. Ross and Mr. Hopkinson, who were the
counsel assigned by the court for the prisoner, very ably and ingeniously
defended his cause, at some length; and were fully answered by Mr. Ingersol on
the part of the prosecution. Judge Chase, in an elegant, learned and feeling
charge, addressed the jury, informing them of the law, and reciting the facts
as they appeared in evidence. The jury retired about twenty minutes past 11
o'clock at night. Judge Chase informed the jury, previous to their retiring,
that the court would wait till twelve o'clock, to see if they could agree on
their verdict; and that they must return to court and inform whether they could
agree or not. At that hour the jury returned and informed the court, that they
could not agree. The judges ordered that the jury be kept together in some
convenient place till Monday morning at ten o'clock, to which time the court
adjourned.

On Monday morning the jury returned a verdict, NOT GUILTY.

An indictment was afterward filed against the defendant for conspiracy,
obstruction of process, rescue and unlawful combination, on which he submitted
to the discretion of the court.

Without any farther examination, the court being fully apprised of his
conduct, Judge Chase passed the following sentence:

That he be imprisoned two years, and fined 800 dollars, at the expiration of
which, to give security for his good behavior, himself in 2000 dollars, and two
sureties in 1000 dollars each, and to stand committed till the sentence is
complied with.

Before the sentence, Mr. Ross addressed a few words to the court in his
behalf: he observed, that though his client had offended against the laws of
his country, yet he had been deceived into his opposition: it had been said,
from what he thought undoubted authority, that no such law was in existence. As
this was the case, and as his circumstances were low, he hoped the court would
consider his situation.

JUDGE CHASE said, he was a most atrocious offender; he had not the least doubt
but he was guilty of treason in a high degree, and that the verdict ought so to
have been found, and be have been made an example of. There must have been some
mistake as to evidence, or the jury could not have returned a verdict of NOT
GUILTY.

MONDAY, April 28. GEORGE GETTMAN and FREDERICK HAINEY
Were arraigned on an indictment for treason, to which they pleaded, Not Guilty.

The Counsel for the Prisoners were Mr. EDWARD TILGHMAN and Mr. MOSES LEVY.

The following PERSONS were the JURY:
Francis Gardner, Samuel Evans, William Preston, Richard Roberts, William Lane,
Godfrey Baker, Samuel Clarkson, Peter Shyner, Samuel Allen, John Stroud, Philip
Arndt, William Davis.
The trial took up two days; and on Wednesday morning the jury returned with a
verdict of GUILTY.

WEDNESDAY, April 30. ANTHONY STAHLER
Was arraigned on an indictment for treason, to which he pleaded, Not Guilty.

The Counsel for the Prisoner were, MR. HOPKINSON and MR. ROSS.

The following were sworn on the JURY:
Richard Robinson, Charles Deshler, George Illig, John Scarbord, John Jones,
John Edge, Jacob Grim, David Jones, William Preston, Thomas Morris, Peter Eler,
Abraham Heed.
The jury, on Thursday morning, returned with a verdict of NOT GUILTY.

The attorney lodged a detainer on a charge of conspiracy, etc. and on Friday
morning the grand jury returned against him a true Bill. Indictments for
treason had been found against Philip De^ch and Jacob Klein; but Mr. Attorney
entered a nolle proseque thereupon, and prosecuted for conspiracy, rescue, etc.
upon which the grand jury returned true Bills.

They submitted to the court; and after examining a few witnesses, and
ascertaining their circumstances as near as possible, the court sentenced each
of them to be imprisoned eight months, to be fined 150 dollars, and to enter
into recognizance for their good behavior for one year, themselves in 400
dollars each, with two sufficient sureties.

A BRIEF REPORT OF THE TRIALS
Of Henry Shiffert, Christian Ruth, Henry Stahler, Daniel Schwartz, sen. Daniel
Schwartz, jun. and George Shaeffer, on an indictment for an unlawful conspiracy
in the counties of Northampton and Bucks, to impede the operation of the act
laying a tax on houses and land by opposing the assessors in the execution of
their duty; for obstructing William Nichols esquire the marshal in the execution of
process, and for assisting in the rescue of several persons held in custody by
the said marshal.
FRIDAY May 10, 10 o'clock A. M.
THE jury being impannelled, Mr. M'Kean appeared as counsel for the prisoners
generally, and Mr. Dallas more particularly for George Shaeffer.

COLONEL NICHOLS

The marshal was the first evidence called. He related the circumstances which
occurred at Millar's town as it respected the rescue of Shankweiler, (see page
37.) and the absence of Shaeffer, who hearing that a bill of indictment was
found against, him came to the city to deliver himself up.

SAMUEL TOON

Was next called. His deposition related to the conduct of the two Schwartz's
and Stahler, differing very little from his former relation see (page 53 and
55) He was advised by old Schwartz to go to Bethlehem and take his trumpet, but
was unwilling, however, at length he complied.

ANDREW SHIFFERT

Related the same facts in substance as before, (page 56.) He saw Christian
Ruth going to Bethlehem, and while he was present heard some person say they
would take the prisoners from the marshal.

WILLIAM BARNETT

And Christian Roth's testimony related to the conduct of the elder Schwartz at
Bethlehem page 36.

WILLIAM HENRY, ESQUIRE

Was next sworn. He related the affairs generally as before respecting the
conduct of Stahler page 26. and Shiffert page 82. also of old Schwartz, who
appeared to pride himself in having two fine boys at Bethlehem.

JOHN FOGLE

A lieutenant in Jarrett's troop related some of the circumstances previous to
the march to Bethlehem -- his evidence had nothing striking in it, as he did
not go himself, except that Shiffert at Millars town advised him to go to
Bethlehem; and that if they would not take bail for Shankweiler, they would not
let them go to Philadelphia.

JOHN MORETZ

Deposed that he saw Stahler with others who said that they would go to
Bethlehem to see what they were going to do with the prisoners -- they did not
say they would release the prisoners -- he did not know them any way active in
breeding discontents. At a meeting to read the law, (page 49) one, he believed
George Shaeffer said it was no law, and if it was, they would not submit to it.
He talked very loud, and appeared much dissatisfied.

JACOB EYERLY

Went through his former evidence of the meeting at Schymer's page 49. and
related the general state of discontents through that part, and the prostrate
state of the laws: many he said objected to suffer the execution of the house
law, because it was not signed by Mr. Jefferson as Vice President (he being
absent at its passing) -- Old Schwartz told the witness that two of his sons
were there at Bethlehem, and that he had persuaded Toon to go, promising him a
dollar, and lending him an horse, advising him to take his trumpet that they
might make a good appearance: that Daniel Schwartz, jun. tore off Mr.
Balliott's cockade at Miller's town, and that they were both very abusive.

CHRISTIAN HICKAVELTER

Deposed, That he was an assessor in Upper Milford; he related the great
difficulties attending the execution of his duty. Did not know any thing more
of the defendants than what was related by Mr. Eyerly of George Shaeffer, page
49. He spoke of the elder Schwartz as a very quiet good neighbor,

JUDGE PETER'S

Then was sworn, to prove an examination of Schwartz, sen. taken before him,
which acknowledged that he had persuaded Toon to go to Bethlehem, and that he
was there himself, but that he did nothing, nor said any thing about the
rescue; but that he went merely out of curiosity.

JACOB SERNHER

Deposed, That he was told by George Shaeffer to tell Judge Henry to inform the
assessors not to come into Millar's town to assess the houses; for that there
was a man in town who was provided with a sword and pistols, and that he would
not suffer the houses to be assessed. He did not mention to the witness who the
man was.

DANIEL REISCH

Deposed, That George Shaeffer had told him that he would not suffer his house
to be measured, and he was a damned stampler if he suffered them to measure
his: That if the assessor came into their town, he should not come out again
with his life: that they had bound themselves together to oppose the execution
of the law; and if he, the defendant, was to be put to prison, there would be
fifty men unite to take him out.

JOHN SCHYMER, ESQUIRE

Related the circumstance of the meeting at his house, as deposed by Mr.
Eyerly, and that Shaeffer was very violent The evidence applied to the
defendants individually, is given more particularly in the charge of Judge
Iredell.
.

The evidence being gone through, Mr. M'Kean rose in the defense, in the course
of which he went through a variety of authorities to prove, that no conspiracy
was formed, because no compact whatever was entered into by the parties to
support each other, each individual acting and speaking, so far as they went,
separately. Here he read, 1 Hawk, 346. chap. 72, and the Sedition Act. sect. 1.
As to the rescue he said, it did not appear that the defendant were engaged,
for a rescue could not be accomplished without force, but no force whatever had
been proved upon them, 4 Blackstone, 131, and 345; 2 Hawk. c. 21. sect. 1 -- 3;
Pierre Williams, 484; 6 Comments, 230, and 2 Hawk, c. 19, sect. 5, were the
authorities he read. As to the opposition to the law, it appeared that they had
doubts, which, in their uncultivated state, and extreme want of knowledge, were
well grounded, that the law was in existence. He then concluded with a review
of the part which the defendants were severally said to have taken in the
transaction.

JUDGE PETER'S

Read the legal definition of force in 2 Hawkins, page 37.

MR. DALLAS went into a lengthy defense of George Shaeffer, after which Mr.
Rawle, attorney for the district, went into a definition of the different
counts in the indictment of conspiracy, unlawful combination, rescue, and
obstruction of process, applying the evidence so as to bring the charges home
on the several defendants: that they all had been guilty of conspiracy he
thought incontrovertible; because when a conspiracy was formed, all who were
ever present, as well as those more actively engaged in it were guilty, though
some might be superiors and some subordinate. All the defendants were
assembled, and therefore partook of the crime. Five of them were seen at
Bethlehem: Andrew Shiffert saw Ruth going to Bethlehem, and Toon saw him at
Bethlehem in company with the disturbers of the public peace. Old Schwartz was
at Bethlehem, and was engaged in counselling and advising an unlawful
assembling there, which was calculated to defeat the act. Young Schwartz was at
Bethlehem, and also was engaged in the insult upon Mr. Balliott to tear off his
cockade. George Shaeffer was at Bethlehem; but, though not in arms, though not
guilty of the rescue, was frequently engaged in opposition to the law, in
conspiracy against it, and in obstruction of process, on which account he may
be ranked among the most guilty. On the whole, he considered that each of them
partook of the crimes charged in the indictment.

JUDGE IREDELL, in his charge to the jury, observed, that there were three
counts in the indictment: First. Conspiracy to prevent the execution of the
law: to raise a conspiracy, several must be engaged, but it must be observed
that every one engaged, or joined therewith, was guilty of the conspiracy. It
was not necessary, under this indictment, as under that lately before the court
for treason, that two witnesses should substantiate any one fact, one would do;
nor was it necessary that any writing or agreement should be drawn between the
parties to create it a conspiracy: a meeting was held, the object of which was
but too well authenticated by previous conduct.

The second count concerned the rescue of the prisoners. It had been stated
that actual force must be used to make it a rescue: the learned judge said,
that if the object was obtained by intimidation, and the prisoners were
surrendered, it did not differ from force in the least, in a legal view: for if
an highway-man was to put a pistol to the breast of another, and demand his
money, as had been stated by Judge Peter's, in the case, 2 Hawk 37, and the
money was delivered, it was a robbery, though the pistol had not been fired.
The question was, were not the threatenings held out to the marshal the
immediate cause of his surrendering the prisoners, in order to prevent lives
being lost? With regard to the arrest, no doubt could be entertained that the
Lehi prisoners, as well as Ireman and Fox, were completely in the marshal's
custody. There are only two kinds of escape, one is voluntary, and the other is
negligent: the former is where the officer is agreeable to the escape, the
latter, as in the case before the jury, is, the officer not having power to
keep them, suffers them to go at large.

The third count respects obstruction of process. The judge said he did not
think it right to convict either of the defendants of the whole three counts,
because the rescue necessarily implied obstructions of process, no man could be
guilty of a rescue without obstruction of process, and therefore the counts
resolved themselves into two; if it was the opinion of the jury that either of
them were guilty of the whole, the verdict need only be given on the two first,
to wit: conspiracy and obstruction of process. As to the conspiracy, it cannot
be possibly doubted but there was one.

The judge then took up the individual conduct of the several defendants, after
the following order: -- First.

DANIEL SCHWARTZ, SEN.

By the evidence of the marshal and of William Barnet, he was seen at
Bethlehem, but he behaved civily, and was come there to know what they were
doing. Christian Ruth saw him there. Judge Henry deposes, that he appeared to
pride himself in his two fine boys who were there. Mr. Eyerly did not know that
he was active there, but he appeared quite jovial: he said he had two sons
there; that he requested Toon to go there, and advised him to take his trumpet
to look well. It was given in evidence, when told of his son pulling Mr.
Balliott's cockade from his hat, that if he had seen his son do it, he would
have whipped him, and he appeared to be sorry so much insult was given to the
marshal at Millar's town. Mr. Schymer says he was at the meeting at his house,
but cannot say he misbehaved.

DANIEL SCHWARTZ, JUN.

The marshal thinks he saw him at Millar's town, where he seemed to be a pretty
active and busy young man. Toon saw him at Bethlehem, but without uniform, and
cannot say he misbehaved, or interfered. Mr. Eyerly saw him at Millar's town
behaving very abusive, and threatening to beat them, and he thinks it was him
who tore the cockade from Mr. Balliott's hat.

HENRY SHIFFERT,

The marshal, saw at Bethlehem, and he believes he was armed. Toon saw him
there, and with a sword, which he drew. Fogle saw him at Millar's town, when he
taid, that if they would not take bail for Shankweiler, they would not let him
go to Philadelphia.

HENRY STAHLER,

The marshal also thinks he saw at Bethlehem. Andrew Shiffert saw him, both
there and on the road, in uniform. Moretz saw him on the road, and he said he
was going to see what was become of those prisoners. He was in uniform, with a
sword. Toon says that Stahler said he would not interfere in the rescue.

CHRISTIAN RUTH

Was seen at Bethlehem by Toon, in uniform, with a sword. Andrew Shiffert saw
him there and on the road. Some persons in his presence said, that they would
take the prisoners from the marshal.

GEORGE SHAEFFER

Was seen at Bethlehem by Shiffert, but without arms or uniform. William Barnet
saw him there; he said he was come there only to see some of his neighbors
going to Philadelphia; he said if the marshal wanted to take him, he would give
himself up: he did not appear to be one of the rioters. Judge Henry saw him at
Bethlehem; he did not appear to be violent, or use any offensive language; he
saw him much out of doors with the company, but not active. John Moretz saw him
at the meeting at Schymer's, where he talked very loud, as though he wished to
prevent Mr. Eyerly reading the law; and on some of them doubting whether it was
a law or not, be said, even if it was, they would not submit to it. Mr. Eyerly
and Mr. Schymer deposed the same, and that, he added "here I am, take me to
gaol, but you shall see how far you will bring me;" on which a number adds,
"Yes, let them but take one to gaol, we will soon have him out again." Mr.
Heckawelter says, that he told him he had abused his father something about a
liberty pole, and that be was come to give him a licking for it, for which he
followed him. Mr. Sterner says, he told him to tell Judge Henry about the man
with sword and pistol, who would oppose the assessors. Mr. Re^sch deposed, that
the defendant said he was a damned stampler, if he suffered his house to be
measured; he would not: that if the assessor came into his township, he would
not come out again alive; and if they were to take him to prison, there would
be fifty men to take him out again. Mr. Schymer said, that the defendant was
very much against choosing assessors, and was pretty violent; that he abused
Mr. Heckawelter about the liberty pole.

The judge said, he should forbear speaking particularly as to the nature of
the combination or conspiracy; but, if it was not predetermined, after meeting
together there, the very act of meeting became a conspiracy; if the defendants
came there after it began, not having a previous knowledge of it, it was their
duty to have withdrawn themselves; but if they did engage themselves
voluntarily and knowingly, though they knew nothing of it before, it was deemed
in law equally as much a combination as though they had predetermined it.

The jury withdrew, and next morning returned with the following verdict:

CHRISTIAN RUTH, HENRY STAHLER, and HENRY SHIFFERT, GUILTY, as to the rescue.

DANIEL SCHWARTZ, sen. GUILTY of the conspiracy, in advising an unlawful
combination.

GEORGE SHAEFFER, GUILTY of the conspiracy, in advising, and GUILTY as to the
rescue.

DANIEL SCHWARTZ, jun. NOT GUILTY.

The prisoners being severally called to the bar, Judge Iredell addressed them
to the following effect:

" George Shaeffer, Henry Stabler, Henry Shiffert, Christian Ruth, and Daniel
Schwartz,

"THOUGH the crimes of which you have been convicted, in some "respects, are
different in their nature, yet they all have reference to one common object,
that of defeating, by force of arms, the execution of an act of the Congress of
the United States. -- You and your confederates succeeded so far, as totally to
prevent, in one mode or other, the execution of that act, in a very important
part of this state. The act thus daringly opposed, which was for the collection
of tax on lands and houses, was framed with particular anxiety for the relief
of the poorer part of the community, and the burden of it must fall
principally on the rich. The ignorance of it which was affected, was without
the least color of excuse, because information was offered, which was
repeatedly rejected, and in some instances with tumult and disdain. Neither
could you fairly allege any ground for discontent, on account either of the
character or conduct of the officers concerned, because the former appears to
have been perfectly unexceptionable, and the latter in general meritorious in
the highest degree, as they united with that firmness which their duty
required, every endeavor consistent with it, to give all the information in
their power, and to execute the law in the manner most convenient for the
people. By your ill conduct, however, and that of your associates, a
considerable part of the three counties was inflamed into a state of
insurrection; the law in question lost all its efficacy: officers were insulted
-- and at length that daring and infamous outrage was perpetrated at Bethlehem
where a body of the militia itself marched in military array, and by force
rescued a number of prisoners from the custody of the marshal, whose conduct on
that occasion for courage, discretion, and propriety in every respect, is above
all praise. In consequence of such defiances of the constitution and laws of
your country, and the numbers and strength by which they were supported, it
became the indispensible duty of the government to exert the powers with which
it was invested to suppress this combination, and bring the principal
perpetrators of it to a trial for the offenses they had committed. The civil
magistrates having lost all their authority, (notwithstanding some of them
exerted themselves in an extraordinary manner, which deserves the lasting
esteem and gratitude of their country) a melancholy necessity arose for
employing a military force, which chiefly consisted in volunteer corpse, who had
nobly embodied themselves to defend the constitution, and laws of the United
States, whenever any occasion should arise, though undoubtedly hoping that
their services would be required, rather against the foreign enemies of their
country, than any within the bosom of it. The services of these gentlemen have
been attended with great benefit to their country, and great honor to
themselves; but there is too much reason to fear they must have sustained much
personal inconvenience, for which, as well as for other private injuries, and a
great additional expense and inconvenience to the public, the authors of those
outrages are alone accountable. You have each of you undergone a fair and
impartial trial, and have been convicted of one or more offenses charged
against you, for which it is now the duty of the court to pronounce the
sentence of the law upon you. The discretion which the law has confided to us,
we have endeavored to execute to the best of our judgment, considering on the
one hand the necessity of making proper examples to deter others from the
commission of the like offenses, which it seems to have been supposed would
always pass with impunity, and on the other hand paying a due regard to the
various circumstances which appear to have discriminated the conduct of each of
you.

The sentences were as follow:

That George Schaeffer, convicted upon two counts of the indictment, viz.
conspiracy and obstruction of process, pay a fine of 400 dollars, and be
imprisoned for eight months, for the first offense; for the second that he pay
a fine of 200 dollars, and be imprisoned four months, after the expiration of
the first term: and at the conclusion of the twelve months imprisonment, that
he give security for his good behavior for two years, from the expiration of
the period of his imprisonment, himself in the sum of 1000 dollars, and two
sureties in the sum of 500 dollars each.

That Daniel Schwartz, senior, convicted of conspiracy, pay a fine of 400
dollars, be imprisoned for eight months, and give security at the close of that
period for his good behavior for one year, himself in 1000 dollars, and two
sureties in 500 dollars each.

That Christian Ruth, convicted of aiding in the rescue, pay a fine of 200
dollars, be imprisoned for eight months, and give security for his good
behavior for a year, himself in 1000 dollars, and two sureties in 500 dollars
each.

That Henry Stahler, convicted of aiding in the rescue, pay a fine of 200
dollars, be imprisoned for eight months, and give a like security with Schwartz
and Ruth for his good behavior.

That Henry Schiffert, convicted also of aiding in the rescue, pay a fine of 50
dollars, be imprisoned eight months, and give security for good behavior for
twelve months, himself in 500 dollars, and two sureties in 250 dollars each.

The prisoners each to pay the costs attending the prosecution before they are
discharged from prison, and stand committed until the sentences be complied
with.

The court, taking into consideration the circumstances of the parties,
proportioned the penalties accordingly.

An abstract of the trial of JACOB EYERMAN, on an indictment for breaking
prison, conspiracy to oppose the law for laying a direct tax, and a tax on
houses, and for counselling and advising an unlawful combination and conspiracy
--
Before the honorable BUSHROD WASHINGTON and RICHARD PETER'S, esquires, in the
circuit court of the United States, held at Norristown, in the county of
Montgomery, and state of Pennsylvania.

WEDNESDAY, October 16, 1799.

The prisoner being arraigned, pleaded Not Guilty.

After the jury were sworn, Mr. Rawle, attorney for the district, opened the
prosecution by stating to the jury the sum of the indictment to be divided into
three separate and distinct charges, proceeding from the same transaction, and
partaking of the same guilt:

First, he said he should prove that there was or warrant issued by the judge
of the district to take the person of the prisoner into the custody of the
marshal, which was effected, but that he did break prison and go at large,
until by another warrant he was afterward taken in the state of New York.

Secondly, He should prove that the prisoner was engaged in a conspiracy, to
oppose the operation of two laws of the United States, by intimidating the
assessors while in the discharge of their official duty.

Thirdly, That the prisoner did counsel and advise an unlawful combination and
conspiracy to prevent those laws being carried into effect.

It was only three years and a half since he came into this country, -- and
though he had assumed the respectable character of a minister of the gospel;
though in that capacity he was bound to preach up submission to the laws of the
country, yet, in that short time, he had recommended, both by his advice and
example, in opposition to those laws by which the whole community were bound.

Mr. Rawle then related some circumstances that ocourred at Bethlehem, to which
place the defendant was brought prisoner, and in the custody of the marshal,
but availing himself of the opportunity there given to the prisoners to escape,
instead of again delivering himself up, he immediately fled, left the country,
and sequestrated himself in a remote part of the state of New York, where he
was discovered, and again taken into custody. This, he said, was punishable at
common law, independent of the sedition law lately passed, which only went to
explain the common law, and in many cases to ameliorate its rigor.

Col. NICHOLS the Marshal,

Deposed, that he received a warrant, by virtue of which the prisoner was
arrested, and brought into his custody at Bethlehem, and that he was rescued,
together with the other prisoners, by an armed force on the 7th of March last.
The witness then related the transactions attending his journey to, and at
Millar's town, and at Bethlehem previous to the rescue. See the first trial of
Fries.
After the prisoners were rescued, John Fries expressed a great solicitude for
the safety of Eyerman by returning, not having seen him among the others, and
asking me where was the minister? I told him that he was out of the house; he
said he was not, however he went out again, and there seeing him, appeared
perfectly satisfied. After this man was liberated, captain Jarret said he could
now march off his men. Upon the whole it seemed that Eyerman's deliverance was
a particular object with those people. He promised when in the room that if he
was rescued he would meet me the day following at Philadelphia to deliver
himself up, but he did not, and I never knew what become of him till he was
brought back by the deputy marshal of New York.

JACOB EYERLY,

Commissioner for the district, related the appointment of the assessors in the
different townships, and deposed, That the prisoner, at a meeting held in
Hamilton township, told the people that Congress had no right to pass such a
law, and if the assessors were to come to his house he would tell them so, and
not let them proceed to take his rates.

Mr. Eyerly and Judge HENRY both, informed the court of the general distracted
state of that part of the country, notwithstanding their endeavors to quiet the
minds of the people by explanation and advice so that the magistracy could not
execute their duty with safety; nor could the evidences called against those
who had opposed the assessors, be prevailed upon, without great difficulty, to
give their testimony, through a dread of the rage of the people.

JOHN SERFASS, ESQUIRE

Deposed, That he resided in Chestnut hill township, Northampton county: that he
was appointed an assessor under the law for laying a direct tax: so soon as the
people heard that he was appointed, they were much uproared against it. The
people were to assemble to consider the law, and I resolved to go to tell the
people they were doing wrong: accordingly I went, and there were 40 or 50
people assembled; but they were not in a military dress. This was sometime in
December. After I was there a short time, Jacob Eyerman, the prisoner, came in,
he began to rip out in a violent manner against this taxation, saying, that
Congress had made laws which were unjust, and the people need not take up with
them, if they did all kinds of laws would follow, but if they would not put up
with this, they need not with those that would come after, because it was a
free country; but in case the people admitted of those laws, they certainly
would be put under great burdens. He said he knew perfectly well what laws were
made, and that the President nor Congress had no right to make them. The people
in general thought that the minister was right, but I told them that he was
leading them wrong. I asked them whether they had heard or seen the laws? They
said no. I then told them the words, as near as I could recollect, but I found
very little heed taken of it. Mr. Eyerman said, that the people should not let
the assessors take down their taxation, and that they might abuse them ever so
much, there was no law could hurt them for doing it.

I shortly afterward gave notice to the people to meet at the same house, in
order to explain the law to them. Accordingly they met, and I explained the law
to them, and when I left them, they appeared very peaceable.

The second day of Christmas this man preached at a private house; as soon as
sermon was done, he went to the house of Conrad Crazy, but he no sooner came
in, than he began to run out against the taxation very much. There were about
fifteen or sixteen people present. He repeated then that he knew the laws very
well, and that Congress and the government only made such laws to rob the
people, and that they were nothing but a parcel of damned rogues, and spitz
bube, Highwaymen or thieves.
but that they (the people) had no right to submit to it. I told him that I had
told him before to quit doing that, that it was not his duty; that his duty was
to preach his sermon, and to quiet the people, or decide between them: if he
went on that way I should bring him to such damage as he would not like. With
that he did quit.

ATTORNEY. Did he, at that, or any other time, advise you not to be an assessor?

WITNESS. Yes. He told me often that it was better for me not to take up with
that commission, perhaps it might injure me, for I might meet with some evil.

Were the people of your township much opposed to the law?

Yes, they were so violent that I knew but one man that was the same side as
myself.

Did you think that such proceedings would have taken place, or, if they had,
that it would have arisen to such an height, if it had not been for the parson.

I am fully convinced it would not. I knew of no other person there who went
about to advise the people to opposition. He said he had a book of the laws,
and either that there was no such law in it, or else that the constitution
forbade such laws.

COURT. Did Eyerman appear to be a simple sort of a man, easily to be led
astray, or deluded?

WITNESS. NO, he was not thought so, he was always thought a very good preacher.

PRISONER to the WITNESS. Did I not tell you at Crazy's house that I did not
think any the worse of you for being an assessor, because you were sworn to
support the government, and had a right to speak for it?

WITNESS. At that house, when I spoke against his conduct, he said "aye, Mr.
Serfas is right, he is sworn to support the government."

PRISONER. Did I not pray for the government, President and Vice President?

WITNESS. Yes, you did when in the pulpit, but when you were out you prayed the
other way.

JOHN SNEIDER,

Deposed that he lived in Hamilton township, and knew the prisoner, who told
the deponent that a body should lay out against that house tax. As much as he
understood, the prisoner meant, to take arms against it. -- He said that if we
let that go forward, it would go on as in the old country, but that he (the
prisoner) would rather lay his black coat on a nail, and fight the whole week,
and preach for them Sundays, than it should be so.

ATTORNEY. How long has this man been at Hamilton?

WITNESS. About eighteen months.

The township was always peaceable I suppose before he came amongst you?

Yes, and I believe if he had not come, nothing would have happened of the kind.

SIMON HALLER,

Deposed that he resided in Hamilton township, and knew the prisoner, who was
very well liked as a preacher until lately. That the prisoner appeared to be in
opposition to the house tax law, but who was the leader of it he knew not. That
the prisoner came to the deponent's house, where conversation began about the
house tax, whereupon he said he did not care whether they put up with it or
not, for he had no house to tax. A person present answered but you have a great
quantity of books to tax. The prisoner answered that "if any body would offer
to tax his books he would take a French, a Latin,

an Hebrew, and a Greek book down to them, and if they could not read them, he
would slap them about their ears till they would fall to pieces." The deponent
saw the prisoner at Hartman's when he talked much against the tax, but could
not recollect what. The occasion of the people coning together then, was, that
there was preaching that day. The prisoner continued preacher to that
congregation till he was taken up.

JUDGE PETER'S,

Deposed that he issued a warrant to apprehend the prisoner, but he never saw
him until brought from New York. He also represented the general state of the
country to be such that, knowing the county magistrates could not execute their
duty, he was obliged to issue his warrants as judge of the district.

The evidence here closed, but the prisoner, his pecuniary circumstances not
enabling him to employ any counsel, refused to make any defense, but just
observed that if he had been guilty of any thing, it was contrary to his
knowledge, and he hoped, if the jury should find him guilty, that they, and the
court would take his case into consideration, and punish him as slight as
possible, and he would endeavor in the future course of his life to do better.

Ma. RAWLE in a short address to the jury quoted 2 Hawkins page 243. to show
that the prisoner was in lawful custody, and page 245. what was the force which
in law made breach of prison. page 249 stated that whoever broke from lawful
confinement was guilty of misprison, which was punishable by fine and
imprisonment.

The act commonly called the sedition act, he said, spoke of the second and
third counts in the indictment. (Conspiracy, and counselling a conspiracy.)
Respecting the crime of conspiracy he quoted 2 Hawkins page 119. which refers
to Blackstone page 392.

He just referred the jury to the testimony, to prove what part the the
prisoner had taken in either, or all the crimes alleged.

JUDGE WASHINGTON delivered a charge to the following effect:

GENTLEMEN OF THE JURY,
IT cannot be necessary that the court should detain you long in the charge on
the present occasion. The crimes with which the prisoner before you is charged
are, first, a combination with others, for the purpose of opposing the
government: secondly, advising and exciting others to this opposition; and
thirdly, in rescuing himself from the hands of the marshal, in whose lawful
custody he was.

Opposition to government seldom breaks out into overt acts, unless some
previous combinations have been made by persons who think themselves strong
enough to do it with effect; and this seldom happens, until some person or
persons, more knowing, and more wicked than the general mass of society,
endeavors to advise and mislead the ignorant and unwary, or less designing.
Thus to form a powerful combination, there must be a regular chain for that
precise purpose.

The offense or offenses with which the prisoner is charged is inferior to
overt acts, and the punishment is less. The only question for you to determine
is whether, upon evidence, the prisoner has been guilty of all or either, of
the offenses laid to his charge. It would be tedious and, I think, unnecessary
for me to go through the testimony, because it must be fresh in your minds.
Respecting a combination to oppose an act of Congress, the general
circumstances for your inquiry are such as will satisfy you of the existance of
such a combination. This, I think, is proved by the frequent meetings of the
people in the different townships of the counties of Northampton, Bucks, and
Montgomery, the declarations of the people when convened, and the threats so
frequently thrown out by them against the government, and the officers of
government. Attempts were frequently made, not only by the prisoner, but by
others to disunite the people, and to deter the public officers from executing
the duty reposed in them, and which they were sworn to perform, by pointing out
to them the dangers to which they were exposed, would they carry those laws
into execution. Unless you discredit the testimony which has been laid before
you, and that there is no cause for doing, it appears to the court that the
proof is as clear against him as any thing can possibly be.

That he was the prime cause and adviser of this opposition appears to be
proved by many witnesses, the respectability of whom has not been pretended to
be doubted.

Respecting the rescue, the attorney of the district has precisely laid down
the law to you. It does not follow, because a man escapes from prison, or from
the custody of an officer, (which is the same in law) that therefore he is an
offender within the law for which he was committed: nor does it follow that he
did not break prison, because the act of force was executed by others who were
in combination with him, and he in consequence thereof made his escape. He
consented, and showed that consent, by his escape, for whether the force was
used by himself or others, is immaterial.

From all the testimony, it appears that the prisoner, in his previous conduct,
took pains to stir up the discontents, and that the armed force came to
Bethlehem to rescue him, by their earnestness to set this man, particularly, at
liberty. Farther, his subsequent conduct proves his offense, for if he had not
been liberated by his own consent, he would have done as the others did, who
left the custody of the marshal at the same time: he would have given himself
up afterward; but on the contrary, he fled from his country, and secreted
himself, until taken by a new warrant in another district.

Gentlemen, it is your business to bring these facts into one view, and decide
whether the prisoner is guilty of one, two, or all of the counts in the
indictment: as you think, so you are bound to find.

In about 15 minutes the jury returned with a verdict GUILTY of all the three
counts.

Several other persons (upwards of twenty) were arraigned for misdemeanors, and
submitted to the court, respecting whose conduct some evidences were heard.

No sentences were passed at this session, because, on account of some
irregularities in the form of convening the court, it was obliged to adjourn,
and the whole of its proceedings were rendered invalid.

Eyerman, at the next term submitted himself to the court, when he was
sentenced to be imprisoned one year, to pay a fine of fifty dollars, and then
to give security for his good behavior one year, himself in 1000 dollars, and
two sureties in 500 dollars each.

FRIDAY, May 2.
The following persons, who submitted themselves to the discretion of the
court, and respecting whose crimes and circumstances some examination took
place, received the sentences severally annexed to their names, for conspiracy,
rescue and unlawful assembly.

Henry Jarret 1000 dollars, a years imprisonment. Conrad Marks 800 dollars, 2
years imprisonment. Valentine Kuder 200 dollars, 2 years imprisonment. Jacob
Eyerman 50 dollars, 1 year imprisonment. Henry Shankweiler 150 dollars, 1 year
imprisonment. Michael Smyer 400 dollars, 9 months imprisonment. Henry Smith 200
dolls. 8 months imprisonment. Philip Desch 150 dollars, 8 months imprisonment.
Jacob Kline 150 dollars, 8 months imprisonment. Harman Hartman 150 dollars, 6
months and 1 day imprisonment. Philip Ruth 200 dollars, 6 months imprisonment.
John Everhart 100 dolls. 6 months imprisonment. John Huber 150 dollars, 6
months imprisonment. Christ. Sox 200 dollars, 6 months imprisonment. John
Klein, jun. 100 dollars, 6 months imprisonment. Daniel Klein, Jacob Klein, Adam
Briech, G. Memberger, 150 dollars each, 6 months imprisonment. George Gettman,
William Gettman, 100 dollars each, 6 months imprisonment. Abraham Shantz, H.
Memberger, Peter Hager, 100 dollars each, 4 months imprisonment. Abraham
Samsel, P. Huntsberger, 50 dollars each, 3 months imprisonment. Peter Gable,
Daniel Gable, Jacob Gable, 40 dollars each, 2 months imprisonment.

Each of the above persons were required to enter into recognizance for their
good behavior.

APPENDIX. No. I. TRIAL OF JOHN FRIES FOR TREASON. Motion of Mr. Lewis for
removing the Trial.
APRIL 30.
MR. LEWIS preferred the following motion to the Court in writing.

AND now the prisoner, JOHN FRIES, being placed at the bar of this Court, at
the city of Philadelphia, being the place appointed by law for holding the
stated sessions thereof, and it being demanded of him if he is ready for his
Trial for the Treason in the Indictment mentioned, he moves, ore tinus, that
his trial for the same offense may not be proceeded on here, and that the same
may be had in the county in which the same acts of treason in the said
indictment mentioned are laid, and where the offense therein mentioned is
alleged to have been committed.

He stated this motion to be founded on an act of Congress entitled the
judiciary act, passed 24th September, 1789. Sect. 29, "That in cases punishable
with death, the trial shall be had in the county where the offense was
committed, or where that cannot be done without great inconvenience, twelve
petit jurors at least shall be summoned from thence." He stated the advantages
resulting from this section to the accused to be, that a man might be tried by
his peers, where he is known, and where there can be no difficulties to procure
witnesses in his behalf. This inestimable right, he said, was one of the
grounds of complaint to the United States, which promoted their separation from
the mother country, and this was one cause of her taking up arms. This
advantage, Congress had held in just estimation, and upon this, no innovation
was to be admitted, on which account the most pointed and positive terms were
used, and the divisions of vicinage reduced to counties. But nevertheless, he
observed, this rule had an exception, which was where "manifest inconvenience"
occurred, twelve jurymen were to be summoned from that county, and therefore
before the court could consider themselves authorized to proceed to the trial
in that place, their honors must be well satisfied that trial could not take
place in the county of Northampton without "manifest inconvenience." These
words did not refer to the inconvenience the judges might feel in tr^velling,
or the time spent, but an inconvenience arising from some cause which Congress
did not foresee at the time of the passing of the act. The trouble and
inconvenience to the judges could be no greater than to the prisoners, whom the
government had brought to this city.

Mr. Lewis said he was aware of an objection which would be raised to the force
of the section above quoted, founded on a subsequent law passed March 2d, 1793.
sect. 3. which directs that a judge of the supreme court, with a district
judge, "may direct special sessions of the circuit courts to be holden for the
trial of criminal cause, at any convenient place within the district, nearer to
the place where offenses may be said to be committed, than the place or places
appointed by by law for the ordinary sessions." The places appointed by law for
the state of Pennsylvania are, York town and Philadelphia. This he presumed
must refer to causes of a civil nature, or to criminal acts of a less grade
than what is peremptorily required in the act first quoted from, to govern
"cases punishable with death." The same act says, that trials in capital cases
should be elsewhere, and not at the stated places, unless manifest
inconvenience attend it. And what, he asked, was the great inconvenience in the
present case? Was there any objection of a nature to render it improper or
impossible to try the prisoner in that county? It was true that a considerable
number of persons in that county had been misguided, but was it to be inferred
thence that all were? Or that a fair trial could not be had there? No doubt an
able and impartial jury might be obtained in that place, and therefore an
impartial trial could be had. In bad times, with corrupt judges, if ever such a
time, and such judges should unhappily be in this country, the section of 1789
would form a protection to the citizen against any innovation of his privilege,
and prevent them dragging him from his family and friends to a distant part,
where he might be unknown, to be tried.

Surely it could not be urged that the safety of the United States, or the
protection of the court, made it necessary to try this cause in Philadelphia.
The prisoners might have been confined in the gaols of that county; the troops
of the United States were even now remaining there, to protect the law.

The vicinity of that spot to the witnesses who beheld the transactions was an
additional argument for the plea. Some to be sure had come to the city, others
perhaps might come forward, sickness or age might operate to prevent some
coming. It was also inconvenient to the prisoner in preventing his neighbors
or relatives affording him that comfort which they might wish. But all this, he
said, was immaterial, the law was definite, and nothing could supercede its
mandate. Here was a list of ninety-eight witnesses, furnished the prisoner by
Mr. Attorney, who were to appear against him, and hence the necessity of time
and opportunity being allowed the prisoner to examine that numerous train of
evidence, and to prepare to controvert them.

Mr. Lewis then referred to a similar motion which he made before the court,
respecting a person tried for high treason in the Western Insurrection, in
1795, for which he referred to Dallas's reports, page 18, vol. 3. The motion
was then rejected, but upon different grounds than could possibly be now urged.
Judge Wilson stated it as the opinion of the court, the plea being made at a
previous court, that the circuit court, at which the prisoner was to be tried
was so near, that there was not time to send to the witnesses and bail, on
account of the great distance of the county, from the city, as they were
subpoened to attend at the next session. The reason was, that the Supreme court
could not order a special session to overruled the stated session, aad
therefore the inconvenience was great and manifest; but no such excuse could
hold good in the present case: the mandatory language of the former clause must
be obeyed.

Further, he observed, that a man might be charged with the crime of treason,
and committed for that crime, or bound over, if the case would allow it, yet it
was impossible to know that he would be indicted for treason by a grand jury,
and no court held previous to the indictment, could say whether it was a case
punishable with death, or a misdemeanor, and therefore the time to move the
plea was the present time, after the indictment was returned, and when the
defendant was arraigned for trial, and till then the motion would be
inapplicable. He observed that he considered this motion of considerable
importance to the prisoner, and not to him only, but to every citizen of the
United States: this was the security of his rights, and those of every man in
the court, and therefore he hoped the justice of the court would grant the plea.

MR. SITGREAVES said he had not been able to distinguish whether this motion
had been preferred to the court as a matter of unqualified right, or whether it
was merely an application, as a matter of favor in this particular instance,
but he would attempt an answer to both. With respect to the 29th sect. of the
judiciary act, if the first part of the paragraph was to stand alone, without a
qualification, it would be a positive direction, and would not bear an
objection, yet there would be a difficulty arise how it could be executed: But
it was not so. At the time that law was passed, there were stated places, as
well as stated times for holding the federal courts, there was no provision
whatever for holding them elsewhere than the appointed place, although the
judges had special powers to alter the time of holding them: whether that
reason, or some other, excited the legislature to put the discretion as to
place in the judges also, he could not tell, but although the first direction
is positive, an alternative is immediately introduced: twelve Jurors summoned
from the county where the crime was committed may suffice, at the discretion of
the court, and this second branch of the rule is to avoid what the court may
judge a great inconvenience, against which no general rule of common law can
provide.

In order to prevent any mis-interpretation, and remove the embarrassments,
which a wrong use of the law of 1789 might produce, the provision of March 1793
still defines that discretion, without making any material alteration: that
says "the court might be held at any convenient place within the district,
nearer to the place where the crime was committed than the place for holding
the stated session." Certain it is that this provision does not require it to
be held in the same county; indeed it is extremely questionable, whether the
court have authority to remove it there; they may nearer the place, but the
word "nearer" excludes the place itself; if the place was intended, the
phraseology would be more accurately inserted. He would now remark that no
place nearer the scene of insurrection than this city could have been selected,
and here the discretion of the court had fixed it. The law must have been made
for one of two reasons: either for the facility of public justice, or to favor
the prisoner. Respecting the first, the crime was committed, not in one county
only, but in three adjoining counties, and therefore agreeable to the arguments
of the gentleman, the trial must be held in three counties, by three juries,
and the witnesses be harrassed to appear three times; but even if the court
should determine upon one of those counties for the trial, which was to be
selected?

MR. LEWIS questioned the propriety of this argument, since it appeared all the
cases of treason except one (in Bucks) happened in Northampton county, and no
inconvenience could accrue from holding the trials at one place.

MR. RAWLE said that he should produce evidence to prove the crime of treason
committed in the three counties.

MR. SITGREAVES proceeded to state that as the act of 1793 as well at 1798 left
a discretion for the court to determine according to existing circumstances,
and not according to any known definite principles of law, it would be
impolitic, if not illegal to hold the court in the county, this city being,
agreeable to one argument next to one of the counties, and on the other view,
the stated place for holding the courts, the arguments must fall, and the
motion be rejected. Philadelphia, he said was as near to the place where the
crime was committed as the court house of that county, and here it was probable
the purposes of public justice could be most completely answered.

If then the argument was not supported on public convenience, it must be the
convenience of the prisoner which the gentleman aimed at, but he had failed to
show any such thing, and therefore had precluded any answer. He had argued for
the comfort of the prisoner; having his neighbors about him, etc. but it must
be observed that the residence of the prisoner was in Bucks, whereas the crime
was committed in Northampton, and there he must have been tried, if the
decision should turn in favor of his arguments. Now, Philadelphia was as much
an adjoining county to Bucks, as Northampton, and therefore as much his
vicinage, and each place of holding the courts at about equal points of
distance from his residence. Even if it was held in Northampton county, it
would neither facilitate the trial, nor be of advantage to the person.

Another question he would suggest was, whether this application was made soon
enough. It was nearly, or quite a week, since the indictment was given to the
prisoner, and it was a much longer time since he was committed: if it was
proper that any application should be made to the court, either as a matter of
right or of favor, it ought to have been made in due time, so as not to delay
or defeat the question of public justice. It would be unnecessary to say that
the question was fully determined in the year 1795, and if it was a matter of
law, and as such mandatory, every case which was the^ decided on, was a case of
mis-trial, and the whole court and council must have been guilty of a great
dereliction. But he believed it was asked of the court at that time, not as a
matter of right, but of favor, and it appeared by the report quoted, that if
the favor could have been granted, it would, but the decision was against the
possibility of it, and certainly stronger reason would have weighed for it then
than now, on which account there is now at least, equal grounds for refusing it.

MR. RAWLE observed, that while he professed as much humanity as any gentleman
in court, yet as council for the prosecution he felt as much desire for the
just execution of public justice. He could scarcely persuade himself that the
gentleman who moved the court could be serious at this late period of the
business, -- after seven days had elapsed since the indictment was found, after
all the inconveniences of a preparation for trial had been incurred this new,
this additional inconvenience of summoning the witnesses and jurors to another
place, could not be either to the advantage of the prisoner, or agreeable to a
just construction of the law adverted to. The law of March 1793 does not apply
to a case which the offense first charged would make capital so as to effect
life. The question seriously was, Mr. Rawle said, whether granting the motion
would not deprive the country of prosecuting the trial at all, or even after
had full proof of the guilt of the prisoner it would not prevent the court of
the power of passing sentence. The act read by Mr. Sitgreaves gave the Judge
the power to hold courts throughout his whole district, 226, Vol. 2, Laws U. S.
but the act of 1789, which fixed the place, only gave the court power as to
times of holding special sessions 51, Vol. 1. The 29th section of that act was
absolutely very ambiguously worded, because the fifth section of the same act
had put it out of the power of the court to remove as to place. Whatever, then,
was the intention of the Legislature, the courts had not power to effect a
change, and when an act failed in explaining the intention, the intention could
not be carried into execution, to remedy the inconvenience of the court, being
bound in all cases as to place the clause of 1793 p. 226 passed.

Mr. Rawle contended that a special court was more than an adjourned circuit
court: it was a substantive court of itself, held for special purposes, and
could not issue certiorari for any other court; if therefore, a special court
was to be held for this trial, it must begin de noca: a new grand jury, and a
new petit jury must be called; the witnesses must be summoned anew, which would
be a bad precedent, besides a great delay. The impropriety was evident: after a
bill had been found the prisoner had seen a list of the Jury and witnesses;
after having had time to calculate its chances, at the seventh day of the
proceeding, he came forward to remove the trial! If the prisoner had not had
time to enquire into the character of the jurors or witnesses, some other
reason would have been given, but as nothing of that kind had been attempted,
and as the inconveniences of delay and removal were so manifest, he trusted the
court would not accede to the motion.

MR. DALLAS declared that it was not the design of the council for the prisoner
to try experiments by the present motion; they conceived that he had a right to
be tried, in the county where the crime was charged: the act of Congress was
mandatory unless "manifest inconveniences" should appear. He conceived that
distance could not be an inconvenience, because the act contemplated the
possibility of crimes being committed in Allegany as well as in Chester county.
Nor could time; the importance of a capital trial was not to be so played with;
Congress designed that an impartial trial should be had in all cases, without
regard to such trivial objections. He was sure the honorable court would not
consider their personal inconveniences as meant, and therefore should not
mention it. Mr. Dallas wished it to be observed that the crimes were recently
committed, and public justice had not been long suspended, and even if the
present motion was acceded to, the hand of public justice might shortly give
the blow, by appointing an early special session. It was not certain before the
court sat, that a bill would be found for high treason, merely because the
parties were bound over for high treason; and therefore the prisoner might not
be able to meet that charge: again, the time since the bill was found and the
party informed, and served with the enormous list of 98 witnesses, has been
very short; it was Wednesday last, seven days only, two of which must be left
out, Thursday having been the fast day, and Sunday intervening. Many of these
witnesses and jurors he had never seen nor heard of, and it was necessary he
should have time to enquire who they were; there had been no catches on the
part of the prisoners. It would be an easy thing for the court at this time,
since all the parties were upon the spot, to bind them over to appear again. In
the case read by Mr. Lewis, judge Wilson expressly declared that there was a
desire in the court to comply, but the difficulties were insurmountable. With
respect to the other cases, the mandatory language of Congress imposed a
necessity on the officers of justice, where it was possible. The clashing of
courts, he presumed, could not be held up for excuse at this time: he did not
know how much time the present circuit might consume, but as the supreme court
would not meet until August, no doubt there could be a period for the business
of a special court spared during the recess; but if the period should be filled
up, in the August session arrangements might be made to hold one. With respect
to the holding of district courts, Mr. Dallas observed, that the law, Vol. 1,
p. 49, 50. allowed a discretion as to the place of holding them; page 51, gives
discretion, as to the circuit court, to the judges of supreme court with
respect to time: these provisions respected all cases alike, within the
jurisdiction of those courts, but the subsequent act referred to, made an
exception with regard to cases of a nature highly criminal, or capital:
certainly then, if ever the Congress meant there should be a trial at all in
the proper county, one like the present must come under that intention. The
language of the two acts, page 67, Vol. 1, and 226, Vol. 2, Mr. Dallas observed
was different. He first declared, that cases punishable with death should be
tried in the county, etc. The second, that special circuit courts may be holden
nearer the place where the offenses may be said to be committed than the place
of the ordinary sessions; but one thing was worthy of notice: the first relates
only to offenses punishable with death, while the other is worded at crimes
only; of whatever nature. Cases of insurrection and rebellion ^^st have been in
the view of the Legislature, and in them it would be very probable part of more
than one county would combine, and they could have excepted such cases if it
had been meant so to do. It was farther said that part of the crimes were
committed in two counties, and therefore the prisoner had deprived himself of
the common law vicinage. This was not clear: the vicinage where the offense was
committed would at any rate have it in their power to declare what they had
seen of the conduct of the prisoner. As to the stage at which the application
was made, no loss of time had been made, and if it was, it would be extremely
severe, if in the power of the court to order it otherwise, that the prisoner
in so important a case should be injured thereby. On the whole, he trusted,
without manifest inconveniency should appear, that the court would grant the
motion.

MR. LEWIS said it was strange, mischievous and unfounded doctrine that this
application had not been made in time: three clear days from the notice of the
indictment being allowed by law to the prisoner, he was not bound to answer the
indictment until yesterday: the trial did not then proceed, and he appeared
this day, but in his sincere opinion, from mature reflection, two three nor
four days should have weight with the court, because the act of Congress was
binding upon them, whatever the learned gentlemen had advanced to the contrary:
he had a right to demand it, and if their honors, the judges, proceeded to hold
the trial in any but the right place, they, and not the prisoner, would offend.
Mr. Attorney had supposed if this was granted, all which had been done would be
null and viod, grant this for a moment, did Mr. Attorney or John Fries direct
the proceedings of the grand jury, etc. certainly the attorney. In this Mr.
Lewis believed he had done strictly ^ight, here was the proper place for the
issue to be joined; but Northampton is the proper place for the trial of that
issue. It was objected because it was said the crime was committed in three
counties; but suppose it were in three or thirty counties, the overt act in the
bill is laid in one county only, and there only does the law support the claim
for trial. The two laws referred to are unnecessary in capital cases, if they
do extend to them at all, because the first law makes ample provision not only
as to time, p. 51, but as to place, p. 67. and is not superceded by the other.
With reference, to the law, of 1793, page 227, which says, that criminal causes
may be tried nearer to the place where the offenses were said to be committed,
the argument was taken up by Mr. Sitgreaves to mean nearer to the county; hence
he says that Philadelphia county is the adjoining one of the insurgent
counties. In the Indictment Bethlehem is mentioned as the place; now the law
directs a special session to be held nearer to Bethlehem than is Philadelphia,
that act does not say whether it shall be held in or out of the county, but
near the place. The gentleman appeared to have thought he was in another place,
and not at the bar, in his view of the discretionary power of the court, which
would leave it to be regulated according to the ebbs and flows of the passions
of the judges, or the temper of the times; but he should recollect this
discretion was of a legal, and not of a political nature, which the necessity
of the case called for. All that must be considered to operate on the question
is, whether justice cannot be done between the United States and the prisoner,
if the trial is held in the county of Northampton; if it can, we rise to claim
this as the right of John Fries, and nearly allied to the interests of every
citizen.

JUDGE IREDELL said it was held by judge Hale, that an indictment was part of
the trial; if so, he fould be glad to be told what they were to do with the
present indictment, if the trial was to be removed? if so, the prisoner must be
indicted as well as tried in the county. Foster 235, and 236. Another question
would be, could the court order the dismissal of the indictment?

JUDGE PETER'S could not see how part of the proceedings of this court could be
transferred to a special court, and therefore how it could be removed to the
county, and while a doubt remained, it would never do to renovate a criminal
case of so much importance, he could not see the force of the reasoning in
favor of the removal. He thought that however humanity ought to lean toward a
prisoner, still the proceedings of the court ought to ensure justice to the
United States, and to the prosecution, and therefore that public justice ought
to be as well guarded as the prisoner's convenience: a fair and impartial trial
ought to be had, which he was certain could not be held in the county of
Northampton, and if he were now applied to in his official capacity to take the
necessary steps for that event he would refuse.

MR. RAWLE said there were opportunities enough for a motion like this to be
made before a bill was found, after the parties were bound over. The accused
ought to be preparing for trial from his first commitment, to remove all the
inconveniences which delay until after the proceedings were going on would
occasion: it appeared to him to amount to a technical trap, laid to involve
difficulties. It was well known that the prisoner could not wait till it was
too late to obtain many privileges to which he was entitled by an earlier
attention to his interests, of which the present was one. With respect to the
difficulties his honor, Judge Iredell, had mentioned on the indictment, they
were too serious and important to be dispensed with.

JUDGE IREDELL delivered his opinion to effect as follows: -- With regard to
the lateness of the application, as it does not relate to the merits of the
defense, I think the arguments in favor of the motion preponderate, and that
no advantage should be taken from the prisoner without full ground. It is
evident that, in this case a number of circumstances might be mentioned which
would render a trial inconvenient in the county of Northampton. I am inclined
to think with the council for the prisoner, that the court have the power to
order a special court to be held there if they should think proper, and
therefore I should not scruple to admit it, if all concurrent circumstances
admitted its prudence. The question then i^, whether according to the legal
discretionary power of the court, this court think it their duty to admit the
force of the motion. When these offenses were first known to have been
committed, and when the gentleman with whom I have the honor to sit was in
that country, it was possible for a court to have been ordered there for
trials, but it appeared to those with whom the power rested, to be improper.
And why? -- The president in his proclamation had publicly declared that the
lawful authority of that county could not be carried into execution without the
aid of a military force. Would it not therefore have been improper for us to
order a special court to be held at that place? If a special court could not
have been held there, the only thing to be done was to bind the parties over to
this court.

There are two very important difficulties in the way of this motion, I say
important, because they are such as no gentleman of the law can be perfectly
clear upon them. First whether, if we order a special court, we can order, by
any process known to the law, this indictment to be transferred to that court.
This is a doubt stated by judge Wilson, of the supreme court at the time of a
former motion alluded to; and I am inclined to think this was a great reason
which guided the decision, otherwise a doubt would not have been intimated. If
this cannot be done, what would be the consequences of the removal of the case?
If this indictment were to be taken there, with a doubt in point of law on it,
a motion might be made after trial, for a new trial, that not being regular,
part having been held in another place. Whether this would be moved or not I
cannot say, but I know at best it is doubtful. The court therefore ought to
proceed in the clearest manner not to run the risk of defeating the prosecution
of a cause so important. It is the great desire of this court to do the most
impartial justice between the public and the prisoner, and not from private
humanity on the one hand, or resentment on the other, to lean either way. As to
the common law principles of vicinage, there are advantages and these are
disadvantages attending it. The advantages are, that the parties are known by,
and know their jurors and witnesses, that their characters may be viewed, and
the most impartial justice done. But if nearly one whole county has been in a
state of insurrection, can it be said that a fair trial can be had there? We
may at least presume it could not, because the president of the United States
ordered a military force there, to enforce the execution of the laws. It was by
this military force that the prisoners are now convened in this city, and I
have reason to believe from the opinion and knowledge of the judge with whom I
now act, that it would be exceeding improper to hold the trials there. It was
hinted that troops are still there, and they could promote the execution of
justice; but what sort of justice is that of the sword? If they would operate
at all it would be by intimidation, and this would be to the prejudice of the
prisoner, and in no respect in his favor. This consideration alone in my
opinion would make it "manifestly inconvenient." for a trial to be held there.
With respect to the principles of common law, the gentlemen well know that the
venire may be changed, that is, that parts of the jury may be summoned from
other counties. I do not know whether there is a power in the courts to change
the venire in England in a criminal case, but I know that in some difficult
cases, where partiality was to be apprehended an act of parliament has been
passed to remove the trial: this was done respecting the rebellion in Scotland,
for the manifest reason of partiality. This proves that we ought not to look to
one side only, but to both, and then form our determination. Upon the whole I
am clearly of opinion that if the motion could be granted without running the
risk of these uncertainties, but certain inconveniences, it would not be
expedient to grant the motion, and therefore the trial must go forward.

APPENDIX No. II. MOTION FOR A NEW TRIAL OF JOHN FRIES, FOR TREASON.
MAY 14.
MR. LEWIS informed the court that the other day in coming into court, he
received a slight information, which he thought it his duty as advocate for the
prisoner, to make farther enquire into, but it was not till this morning that
he had been able to procure the depositions of witnesses to prove a fact, on
which he meant to ground a motion. He read the depositions to the court, which
imported that John Rhoad, one of the jurymen on the trial of John Fries, had
declared a prejudice against the prisoner, after he was summoned as a juror on
the trial. He now found that he could procure other affidavits to the same
fact, on the ground of which he "moved a rule to show cause why there ought not
to be a new trial." The prisoner had been brought into court in order to
receive sentence of death, but on Mr. Lewis's motion for a rule to (...),
judgment was (...) and he was (...) back (...).
He expressed himself aware of the lateness of the period, verdict having been
given, but the impossibility of proving the fact earlier, was a suffif^^ent
apology. He should forbear to enter into the merits of the motion at present.

Rule was granted and made returnable tomorrow morning.

Wednesday, May 15.
MR. DALLAS said it became his duty as advocate for the prisoner, to lay before
their honors the grounds on which they had moved for a new trial in the case
of their unfortunate client, in which he was sensible some little violence must
be offered to his feelings in whose behalf it was made, and particularly if
judgment should at last be pronounced upon him; but whatever the event, it
became their duty to prefer it, and he was certain that upon examination into
the facts, they must be justified in producing them, as the event must alter
the decision which had taken place. He was satisfied that the court, without
direct reference to authorities, would be inclined to listen to any thing that
could be offered upon good grounds in favor of life, or the chance of life.
With this confidence, he relied on the favorable attention which would be paid
by the court, and that the intervention of any trifling error in the
proceeding, may not expose the defendant to the danger of a favorable decision.

In making the motion, Mr. Lewis had laid before the court some affidavits in
order to prove tint one of the Jurors, after he had been summoned to attend the
trial did declare that the man should be convicted: in addition to that
circumstance, the following reasons should have been assigned in favor of the
motion:

First, That the marshal has, without any order or direction from the court or
judges for that purpose, returned a greater number of jurors than he was by law
authorized to do:

Secondly, That he returned them from such parts of the district as he thought
proper, and without the direction of the court or judges:

Thirdly, That the trial ought to have been held in the county where the
offense was committed, except manifest inconveniency should appear, and it does
rot appear from any part of the record of the court that any inconveniency did
prevent it, for whatever were the acts of the court they ought to have been
placed on the record, which not being done, is good ground for a motion.

JUDGE IREDELL, did not think that the Court were bound to assign a reason for
their judgment on the record of their proceedings, besides it was an high
contempt at this time to call for the renewal of an argument whereon a solemn
decisive opinion was delivered: he asked what part of the law required it: if
it was at that time omitted, it was in the power of the court to order it now;
or if they did not order the reasons to be inserted, the mere decision on the
face of the record was enough to make it authoritative.

MR. DALLAS said there was no intention of offering a contempt to the court,
and if there honors would attend they would be convinced there was not. -- The
judiciary act 29th section p. 67, vol. 1, Contemplates two things, first, trial
shall be had in the proper county without great inconvenience should appear,
but if it should so appear to the court, then, secondly, twelve petit jurors at
least shall be summoned from the county. From this it appears that before the
second branch of this clause can be executed, there must be a determination
upon the first; it must be evident that there are too great inconveniences to
admit of the trial being held there, and then the second must take place; and
further that it must be the act of the court to direct that twelve jurors shall
be summoned from the county. The court have great latitude in this discretion;
they have power to take the whole sixty from the county they please, but not
less than twelve; if therefore this discretion is given, and given to the
court, it is not in the power of any ministerial officer to exercise it without
the direction of the court: they are to be returned as the "court shall
direct." "These words more particularly relate to another branch of the
section, to wit: from what part of the district from time to time the rest
shall be called. The venire in this case was made returnable on the 11th of
April, this precept directs that the marshal shall return a list of sixty petit
jurors, and twenty four grand jurors, who appear to be all returned from the
county of Philadelphia. Your honors will observe that the marshal has authority
to summon not more than 60, nor less than 48. In this return he has summoned 60
from Philadelphia county, whereas twelve at least ought to have been summoned
from Northampton. The authority of this venire then is at an end, for it cannot
be pretended upon any authority or precedent, in a civil or criminal case that
a marshal or Sheriff has ever attempted to exercise such a power without a
precept in form, commanding him: and the award appearing upon the record. This
venire is completely satisfied, and all the authority given has been exercised
in the return of 60, and if he has returned more he must show authority for it.
With respect to the western insurrection, Judges Patterson and Peter's did not
adopt the state regulations with regard to the number of jurors, but any
deviation from that must be on the sole authority of the court. 2 Dallas 341,
2. Mr. Patterson was of opinion that the common law proceedings of the court of
King's bench ought to guide their proceedings upon a question of this nature,
since the act of Congress says nothing about number, but refers to state
proceedings, which is guided by that common law. To show the proceedings of
Kings bench, and to prove that the court alone had the direction of the venire
Mr. Dallas quoted the following authorities: 4 Blackstone 344, 3 Blackstone 352
Cooks Littleton 155, or Keyling 16 2 Hales pleas 263. -- besides he said the
same section gave direction as to the manner of issuing writs of venire facias
when returned by the court p. 68, to issue from the office of the Clerks of the
COURT. It is therefore incumbent on those who vindicate the legality of the
marshal's proceedings, to show that he acted with authority, viz. from the
clerk's office directed by the court. To show what authority he had to summon
89 jurors, when not more than 60 was usual; to show his authority for summoning
seventeen from Northampton and twelve from Bucks. If you take it as one return
it is a return of 89 jurors upon a precept which directs no more than 60, if
you take the surplus number over 60 as a separate return, there is no authority
at all for making it.

Mr. Dallas said he did not mean to controvert, for he respected the opinions
of the Court, but respecting holding the trial in the county, he would refer to
the 8th amendment to the constitution, p. 456, vol. 3. in these words, "In all
criminal cases the accused shall be entitled to a speedy and public trial, by
an impartial jury of the state and district wherein the crime shall have been
committed, which district shall have been previously ascertained by law." Then
referring to the judiciary act, and finding it there declared that the offender
should be tried in the proper county, the question then is, whether this is not
establishing a district as it respects capital crimes, except "manifest
inconvenience" prevent. If so, the place where the court is now sitting is to
be considered a foreign county, now where by certiorari an indictment is
removed in the king's bench, and where the jurors are to come from a foreign
county, then time must be allowed for the precept to issue, which must be in
the rule of the record, 2 Hawk. c. 27, sec. 1. This court is sitting in the
state of Pennsylvania, and the jurisdiction of the court is co-extensive with
it, and so is King's bench with the whole nation of England: the process of
this court may be sent into any county in the state, so may that of King's
bench to any county in England, 4 Hawk. c. 41, p. 376 -- 2 Hales pleas 260 -- 4
Hawk. b. 2, c. 27, p. 171. Douglas 590. In the present precept there does not
appear to be a return of 89 jurors authorized, but that 89 have been returned:
the supplementary return was made by the marshal without any act of the court,
and with any venire being duly issued, or any award to summon this jury to try
the prisoner. Seven of the persons who were on the list impannelled to try John
Fries, and who have given vi^dict, are not at all on the list summoned for the
trial: how came those seven persons then on this trial, respecting whom no
venire was issued? They were not called to attend by any process of the Court!
This was not the case in the western insurrection, for then, though a greater
number was summoned, it was upon the solemn decision of the Court, and by their
order that the venire was issued. [he read the venire then issued] In that
proceeding every thing is regular: the marshal receives express orders to
summon 12 jurors from Allegany, etc. but where are similar directions in the
present case? 4 Blackstone 369 -- 4 Hawk. c. 31, sect. 4. p. 240. ibid c. 27,
sect. 104, p. 175, are authorities to explain what is mis-trial, and are a
justification of the present application for a new trial. Hence it appears that
a mis-return of jurors is such an error, if they actually pass, as to make a
mis-trial, and the verdict is of course void. In this case 60 is returned upon
a schedule with the names annexed, and on another schedule a return by the
marshal of 17 from Northampton county, and 12 from Bucks, to which the marshal
signs his name, but no process was issued for these supplementary 29 names, and
it is clear from the instrument that 60 completed the return, only five of
whom were on the trial of the prisoner, and the other seven had no right to try
him, being drawn from a list which no proceeding had authorized. Where there
has been no process, no trial can proceed. Law of Errors, p. 65. We see what is
the effect of a person intruding himself into the jury, who has not been
lawfully summoned, 4 Hawk. c. 25, p. 16 -- the verdict is void, ibid. p. 17.
This will be granted. Mr. Dallas here recapitulated the objections he had
stated, and added that merely the appearance of the jurors, nor their having
been sworn, or having given verdict were objections sufficient to overturn the
motion.

He next made a few observations on the conduct of the juror, which he said was
not merely an expression of opinion, but a previous determination, and an
expression of fear if the prisoner should be acquitted, so that it was
impossible to hesitate that, if this was true, the juror did not give verdict
upon evidence, but was influenced by a previous bias, and prejudiced
determination: his going into the box with this partial mind, deprived the
prisoner of that chance which the law determines he shall have. It is necessary
that every jury should enter this box free from malice; but it was not so: this
juror labored under particular impressions, unfavourable to John Fries,
because he conceived he had been the leader of, and brought on this
disturbance, and therefore (...) to be hung: this will be proved to have been
more than once the language of the juror, and that he indulged himself in (...)
expressions. After running from place to place, influenced by a vindictive
spirit of prejudice, to express his desires, can it be contended that he was
capable of deciding on the guilt or innocence of the prisoner, by the weight of
the testimony only? There cannot be found a stronger case in the books. It is
not necessary or right to go into the testimony, or any of the circumstances of
the crime of the prisoner, to see whether the verdict was right or wrong; but
it is necessary to view the determination of this juror, who wished them all
hanged, and particularized Fries, First, his words were, "we will hang them
all: then he said, "I myself shall be in danger, unless we do hang them all."
This is not merely an opinion generally expressed, but the language of design
to convict at all events. If eleven out of twelve jurors had been of opinion
that an acquittal should take place, and this individual supposing he was in
danger had declared this opinion, and pointed out his view of the probable
consequences, would not the voice of the eleven be changed to guard against
this danger? 4 Hawkins, c. 4^, sec. 28. p. 399, supports the doctrine
generally, that if a juror (...) declared his opinion before hand, that the
party is guilty, or will be hanged, or the like, it is good cause of challenge:
but if from his knowledge of the case, and not from ill will to the party, he
has only declared his opinion, it is no cause of challenge. But even resentment
has not the influence upon a man's conduct which self-preservation has:
ill will is not the only ground of challenge; interest is as much so: if a man
had laid a wager another would be hung, this is not ill will, but would viciate
the juror. Therefore we must conclude that "ill will" in the above authority,
is put merely as an instance. Whether these words were spoken in warmth or not,
is immaterial; for it would be no alleviation; it is impossible that they
should have been expressed without ill will; and therefore the man is not
impartially qualified to pass upon the life or death of the prisoner. Salkeld
645 and 11 Modern 118. Upon the general ground of what could be with propriety
called misconduct in the person summoned to discharge the duty of a juror with
impartiality, he observed there could be no doubt upon the propriety of their
asking a new trial, nor upon the justice of one being granted.

MR. LEWIS mentioned 5 Bacon, 251 -- 2 (old edition) and 4 Blackstone 354 -- 5,
in order to show, that in criminal cases there should be no new trial, unless
it should appear that the former trial had been attended with fraud, etc. and
that a new trial in those cases might be granted after conviction, it Modern,
119. 5 Bacon, 243, and 3 ibid, 258 (old edition.) If he has declared his will,
touching the matter, it shall be cause. 4 Blackstone, 346, (old edition.) The
direction respecting the venire, he said, was entrusted to the law and not to
the marshal, and by that direction was exercised by the judges in 1795, and if
that was neglected, it was not legally executed. The court could, as then,
order the jury to be called from all parts of the State, and not to be left to
the marshal. 5 Bacon 242. is an instance in which a son was sworn into the
jury, (being the same name of John Pierce) instead of the father who was the
person summoned to attend, whereupon a new trial was granted, because the trial
was held by only eleven qualified persons as juro^^. If the sheriff did not
follow the direction of the law in respect to the venire, it was good cause for
a new trial.

MR. SITGREAVES said he did not think it necessary to controvert the position
which had been advanced by the gentlemen on the other side: that the court have
full power to order a new trial after conviction in certain criminal cases, as
well as civil under certain circumstances; but notwithstanding the authority of
the court to grant new trials was ascertained in some of the books, yet it
would appear that this power had never been exercised in any capital case; no
such case had been referred to, and he believed could not be found; he imagined
the reason why it could not, was, although courts had the full power, yet the
peculiar solemnity of a trial for a capital offense, and the great caution
which was used to guard the security of the prisoner against improper bias, or
wrong proceeding that may respect his guilt or innocence, with sufficient
mounds to prevent intrusion, and therefore conviction in such a case had not
yet been set aside. With respect to the qualification of a juror, objections as
to the array or to the poll ought to be received by a court with uniform
caution, after trial and verdict is passed, because there is so full and ample
opportunities given to the prisoner to deliberately enquire and make a good
choice: the whole panel which are summoned, must be given to the prisoner; a
certain time must be allowed before he can be called upon to answer the charge,
sufficient for him to enquire the character, interest, affection, or partiality
of the men: having this time and opportunity, so carefully secured to him by
positive institutions of law, it is not to be wondered that objections
afterward should be cautiously received by the courts. After having these
opportunities for examination, the law gives power to the prisoner to challenge
35 jurors arbitrarily, or without assigning a reason, and after that as many
more as he can assign just cause of objection to, and they will also be set
aside if his objection is well founded. To depart from this general view, and
make the particular application, which is by no means irrelevant in a question
of this nature, it is observable that the prisoner has actually had more than
common power to select a jury to his mind: of this whole list 33 did not
appear, and of the number that remained the prisoner challenged 35, so that he
had 68 entirely in his power as much as though all had been present, and he had
challenged 68. With respect to Mr. Rhoad the juror, there is something worthy
of remark: When Mr. Rhoad came to be called, and there was some difficulty
suggested as to his knowledge of the English language, although the court and
prosecuting council saw the force of the objection, he was retained at the
instance of the council for the prisoner, because they had exhausted all their
challenges, and they did not know that the next would be so agreeable.

MR. SITGREAVES next stated to the court what he thought to be the
unquestionable principles of law on the point in question. -- If a motion for a
new trial is received in a court for a criminal cause, it is under the same
rule and circumstances as for a civil cause, and in both depends on the
discretion of the court, and that discretion ought to be governed, not by any
precise set of rules now known in law, but in any way that will best perpetuate
justice, except there should appear a mandatory, imperative rule. If the law
says that upon conviction of a certain crime, a certain punishment shall ensue:
this is peremptory, and the court have no power to depart from ordering that
punishment. Wherever a discretion it left, it is meant that the court may use
that discretion, according as the nature of the case may require, and this is
left in the conscience and mind of the court alone, agreeable to circumstances
which grow out of the justice applying to the particular case. In the present
case therefore, the court are not to be governed by any set of precise rules,
but by an opinion of what will best perpetuate public justice. To be sure it is
a rule, that a new trial shall be granted where a verdict is given against
evidence, but even then it has been frequently refused, where they see the case
it plain. In civil causes it has been refused, when not to the interest of
justice to grant it. 2 Burrows, 936.

JUDGE IREDELL said he had not discovered any dictu^, which distinguished civil
from criminal causes, so that equal justice ought not to be administered; but
if either, surely a criminal case called most strongly for justice: it would
never do to apply casts so far, as to say, that if one man upon a jury was
discovered not to be fully impartial, a new trial should not be granted, when a
man's life was at stake.

JUDGE PETER'S said he always understood, that the power of granting a new
trial, was in the discretion of the court; and that its opinion ought not to be
turned by any vagaries, which should be presented, but be governed by a
reference to legal discretion; but at the same time, he could not say that the
court ought to throw entirely out of their view, all the evidence which had
been given in the trial, and every thing that had been done. If in the scale of
justice, there should appear to be any error, and the case is any way doubtful,
then the court will take advantage of a tri^le, in order to grant a new trial,
but where the court has been fully convinced that the verdict is right, then
the evidence ought to have some weight, as well at the law.

MR. DALLAS observed, that the motion was not in any regard to evidence, if so,
the weight of evidence must be considered; but it was alone on the point of
law, totally independent of evidence.

MR. SITGREAVES contended, that where a trial was necessary for the purposes of
justice, it rested between the judge and his conscience, and he was not to be
governed by any precise state of facts here or there: if, as is unquestionably
the case on the present occasion, a trial has been held, which for the patience
of investigation given to it by the court and jury, has scarcely had its equal
in this, or my other country; where the prisoner has had every indulgence, and
every capacity of talents, which this state can afford, to a^^ist him in his
defense; if after all this, a conviction has been the result of this minute and
laborious examination, it will at least be allowed, that the objection which
should have the ultimate effect of setting aside a decision and investigation
so solemnly and deliberately taken, should be grounded upon no slight matter,
but that the rea^^^ (...) completely authenticated, so as not to leave a doubt,
or the least ambiguity. If the facts related in the affidavits, had been known
to the prisoner, and mentioned when the juror came for his array, undoubtedly,
the legal investigation would haw taken place, and a solemn decision passed
thereon, which if true, would have been to disqualify the juror. Mr. S.
explained the different modes of challenge, and proceeded to question the
relation of the affidavits -- that these were words, said to be spoken a
considerable time before the trial, "some days:" the trial had been nine days
before the court, and it was probable, this declaration must have been made
fifteen days at least, that this important and often repeated conversation
should rest all this time in the minds of the witnesses, without a disclosure,
was very extraordinary, particularly so, when it was considered that they
attended the court every day, and at last the affidavits rested on the memory
of the witnesses, which must be very liable to mis-apprehension and error. This
is good reason for the objection, that the application is too late, and ought,
in a matter of so much importance, to have been mentioned sooner, if in the
knowledge of so many people, at such repeated conversations as the gentlemen
conceived.

Mr. Sitgreaves was proceeding here to read a written declaration of Mr. Rhoad
(the juror) as to the circumstances of the conversation, which as it was not
sworn to, was objected by the prisoner's counsel; the juror was at length
sworn, and the deposition was read to the court. Mr. Sitgreaves said he read
this, to show how easy it was to misapprehend not only the meaning of words,
but the words themselves. Another thing to be observed was, two of the
witnesses themselves at that moment, were prisoners out upon bail, under
indictment for misdemeanor, and therefore the affidavit of so respectable a
citizen as the juror, denying the fact, left a serious doubt as to the truth of
the others' depositions, but more as to the probability of mistake in the
relation. Mr. S. then went into a comparison of the affidavits, which he
contended were very dissimilar, and had much the appearance of wrong statement.
Whatever may be the difference of opinions, as to the discretion of the court,
when they are fully satisfied that the crime is well ascertained, both as to
law and evidence, yet it would not be doubted as the unquestionable right of
the court, to institute the most severe scrutiny in a matter which endangers
the whole of the former proceedings; the former proceeding which must be valid,
unless the most unequivocal testimony shall intervene to change it.

Mr. Sitgreaves said the conversation was of a general nature, and not to the
prisoner in particular, agreeable to the affidavits generally; it spoke of the
general effects of the insurrection in that country: indeed it was not to be
expected in a matter of such public concern as that unhappy affair, but every
man would express his opinion, and particularly those who resided on the spot;
therefore it could not evince any prejudice, and consequently not be lawful
challenge to the juror. He referred to 3 Bacon new edition Letter E section 12.
One affidavit only particularized Fries; and yet it appeared from Mr. Rhoad's
deposition to relate to one conversation only, therefore it was evident that
the relations differed, and were of course of a suspicious nature. If a man
draws a deduction from what he has heard, or from his own knowledge of an
event, and not from "ill will," it is no proof of prejudice or partiality, he
is still "indifferent" and open to impression: there must be an expression of
malice, of determination, to a particular case, and in a particular way.

Just cause of challenge may be, if one of the grand jury is impannelled on the
petit jury, because he may be said to have already "passed upon the case in
issue" 2 Hawk. 29. C 43. Where an action is dependant between a juror and
defendant, it is then challenge to the favor, Viner 21 title juries h. d. Cook
Littleton 157 d. Nothing that is merely an expression of opinion is cause of
challenge: nothing but what flows from a malicious heart against the prisoner
in particular; all the cases show the distinction, and there is not a single
case in which the declaration of a juror has been made cause of challenge but
to the favor, in which case triers are appointed by the court to examine
whether this predisposition does or does not appear. The present case therefore
is not cause of particular challenge, but of challenge to the favor, which was
not made in time. Mr. Sitgreaves then referred the court to some authorities 2
Rolls abridgment 657 -- 21 Viner title trial 266 and 272 -- 1 Salkel 153 and
one which occurred in this state when one Ann Clifton, was convicted for
murder, and one of the jurrors had made declaration before he was sworn
respecting the guilt of the prisoner.

JUDGE PETER'S said that he had given the marshal directions to summon jurors
from Bucks and Northampton: he was not certain whether it was given in writing
or verbally, but left it should not have been in writing he now gave it to the
prothonotary of the court. At the first appearance of it, he did not know
whether it amounted to treason, and therefore he thought particular directions
not necessary, but afterward, finding it more serious, he gave the directions
which had guided the marshal.

MR. RAWLE thought it easy to prove that the marshal was fully authorized to
summon from what part of the state he pleased, unless the court interfered by a
special direction, and then he was bound to obey the mandate. The marshal no
doubt understood that he was to summon from the state at large, conformable to
the directions of the law. With respect to the western insurrection, the fiat
of the court was obtained, but it was not so in the present case. Mr. Rawle,
he^e appealed to the prothonotary to know whether any instance of a special
direction of the court respecting venire had occurred since that period in any
capital case. Mr. Caldwell answered there had not.

Mr. RAWLE went on to mention the progress which had been made, and the time
and opportunities of which the prisoner might have availed himself, but these
he had neglected, and at this period, he came forward by his counsel to
challenge the array! Challenge, he observed, was of two kinds, the poll and the
array; if challenge was made to the poll, and the trial went on, challenge to
the array could not be made, because exception was before made, but he thought
it was clear the (...) was passed at which he might hive availed himself of the
challenge to the array. It was contended that the marshal had not made a proper
return to the venire, but authority had not been produced to prove the point,
yet authority could be found to prove that after the poll bad passed, even
before the trial, the array could not be challenged, because that was passed
too, but to what a much greater length had the present objection been delayed?
After having taken the chance of the verdict, and finding it unfavorable, then
to say it was irregular, and for a reason which might have appeared sooner, he
quoted 12 Mod. 567 and 584. 2 Lord Raymond 84, refering to the time when
exception may be made.

Farther, after all the chances which a prisoner could have, and complaints
made of irregularity as to the venire, the objection was farther extended to a
man who was summoned from the very county where the crime was transacted! Upon
this man the prisoner was willing to put himself for trial, rather than one he
did not know. See Danver's abridge. 354, 5 and 7. With respect to the number
returned. Mr. Rawle referred to Crookjames 467. 2 trials per page 599. 21 state
trials, 707. There might be more than 60 returned; in regard to the western
insurrection he said there were 108 summoned. The words of the v^^ire directing
the marshal are, that he cause to come to the court, so many a certain day; it
is therefore proper that a certain number should attend, and to ensure the
number necessary to meet the challenge, the marshal usually summons a greater
number than are mentioned, but if a greater number do attend, then the
super-numerary are stricken off. In the present case the number in the venire
was exceeded by 29, and yet 38 less attended at any one time than were
summoned, the prisoner had been tried by one of these 5^^ seven of whom were
from his own neighborhood, and men in whom he thought he could place his life
with safety. In order to confine the number within some bounds so as not to
exceed reason in case a marshal or sheriff could be found to make that improper
use of his power, and take the citizens from their business or their homes
unnecessarily, an officer so offending can be prosecuted for misdemeanor, but
this was not the case. Where there is more than a sufficient number summoned
for the purpose of trying a civil cause, which in Pennsylvania is confined to
48, and more than that number should attend, and one of them sworn on the trial
is taken from those over the 48 that attend, then no doubt it would be
mistrial, because the summons was unlawful; so in the present case, if one of
the jurors had been of the 48 over the number 60, had more than 60 attended it
would have been a mistrial, because the venire ordered the marshal to cause but
60 to appear, (but that objection even would have been insufficient at this
stage of the trial) and more he had no right to bring.

As to the propriety of summoning 12 from Bucks and 17 from Northampton, there
appears to be no wanton exercise of power in the marshal, because he acted
under the authority of the judge of this court. The gentlemen could not show an
authority which made it necessary for the marshal to have a certificate to
empower him to do this, and if it was necessary, the certificate of the judge
appearing upon the record would make it valid. But even if had not received the
authority of the judge, the act of Congress would have been a sufficient
warrant for his conduct. P. 67 vol. 1. twelve at least are to be summoned from
that county, and 17 are summoned. The act of summoning is properly the business
of the marshal, if he has official notice, in any shape, that such a trial for
a capital offense is coming forward, which would entitle the prisoner to be
tried by twelve jurors from the proper county if he makes the provision which
the law requires, he has absolutely and completely acquitted his office, as
well technically as formally. The return which has been produced embraces the
whole number of 89, sixty of whom are of the county of Philadelphia, and if
there is any technical alteration in the form necessary to give it legal
precision and effect, it is now in time to alter it, but there is none
necessary.

Mr. RAWLE said he considered this proceeding as having received the full
sanction of the court, in the certificate given by the judge. First because no
opposition had been made to it, and secondly because (the whole number not
having appeared) it was not excepted to at that time. The list out of which the
seven jurors from the country were taken, he called a supplementary list, which
completed the former list, and though not annexed to that panel was connected
with it, filled up and made a part of it, on which an award was entered. The
cases referred to had respect to a foreign country, but in a district, one
county was not foreign to another, and therefore Bucks, Northampton and
Philadelphia, stood in one exact situation. 2 Hawk C. 41. B. 2. Dyer 118.

Mr. RAWLE concluded by saying that he looked upon all the proceedings in the
present case as perfectly regular and complete, to which no exception could
justly be taken by the prisoner, and he hoped the effort would miscarry, since
every means had been used in the defense during the long and patient
investigation which had taken place, and after a vredict had been so solemnly
pronounced by men whom the prisoner had such a fair means of choosing to answer
his best purpose.

The attorney general, and council agreed, and the court ordered that the
deponents should give testimony, and be cross examined in court, on each side.
Also that the witnesses should be examined separately, and kept out of the
court, so as not to hear the evidence given by each other.

Thursday May 16.
NICHOLAS MAYER's Deposition. The reporter has introduced the depositions
immediately before the oral testimony, in order to give a fair opportunity of
examining into the correspondence of the two relations.

The United States, v. John Fries.
Pennsylvania, ss.
NICHOLAS MAYER of the city of Philadelphia being duly sworn, makes oath, and
faith, that some time after John Fries, abovenamed, was brought to this city,
this deponent went to a place called Lesher's yard, near the Northern
boundaries of the city of Philadelphia, and in going into it, he saw several
people there from Northampton county, and among others, Mr. John Rhoad of the
said county, who afterward served, as this deponent is informed, as a juror,
on the trial of the above indictment, against the said John Fries -- That the
people then present were talking about the said John Fries, and one of them
said, "some people think he will be hung." This deponent answered "I do not
think he will be hung." On which the said John Rhoads said " what of it, if
Fries will be hung -- such a man like him ought to be hung, who brings on such
a disturbance." -- That some of the persons with whom the said John Rhoads was
then talking appeared to be of a different opinion from him, and they were
disputing about it; and the said John Rhoads appeared to be quite serious and a
little warm, in what he then said respecting the said John Fries; and this
deponent further says, that he never mentioned any part of the foregoing
conversation to the said John Fries, nor has he any reason to believe that the
said John Fries has any knowledge thereof.

NICHOLAS MAYER.
Sworn in open Court, May 14, 1799.(A true copy,) D. CALDWELL, Clk. Circuit
Court.

NICHOLAS MAYER's oral Testimony interpreted.
MR. LEWIS -- You were present at a conversation in which John Rhoad a juror on
the trial of Fries, was in conversation on the event of the insurrection, etc.
please to inform the court the particulars of it.


WITNESS. The words I heard from Mr. Rhoad were spoken in German, it was at
Scidell's tavern in the Northern Liberties -- when I came into Lesher's yard I
saw several people there from Northampton county whom I knew, among others was
one Mr. Rhoad, whom I know very well: they were talking about Mr. Fries: one
man stood up and said he thought Mr. Fries would be hung, I replied myself that
I did not think he would be hung; with that Mr. Rhoad began to say, in German,
"what of it, if Fries was hung; such a man as Fries ought to be hung," and he
appeared to be very warm, which surprised me. I went away then, and left them
still arguing about it; they were talking about Fries.


COURT. Do you remember the time?


WITNESS. I cannot remember exactly: it was some time after Fries was brought
to town; perhaps three or four days.


COURT. Did you go into the house at all?


No, I was not in the house.


Do you remember whether Harman Hartman was present or not?


No, there were some people there, but I do not know who.


Do you know Daniel Heberly?


No, I do not.


COURT. Do you remember whether Rhoad said any thing, and what, as to Fries
bringing on the disturbance?


I cannot say as for that.


After the question was put the same again, upon a short recollection the
witness said. Yes.

Do you think you heard all that passed upon that subject?


No, I did not.


The United States, us. John Fries.
Pennsylvania, ss.
DANIEL HEBERLEY of Macungy township, in Northampton county, being duly sworn,
makes oath and says -- That a day or two before the above indictment
commenced, he, this deponent was at the house of an innkeeper in this city,
whose name he does not recollects where he saw John Rhoad, one of the jurors on
the trial of the above indictment, and several other persons who were
conversing respecting the said John Fries, and the other insurgents, when the
said John Rhoad said "that they should hang all these chaps, and that they
"ought not to be permitted to live in the country." -- This deponent never
mentioned any part of the said conversation to the said John Fries, nor has
any reason to believe that he has any knowledge thereof.

DANIEL HEBERLEY.
Sworn in open Court, May 14, 1799. (A true copy.) D. CALDWELL, Clk. Circuit
Court.

DANIEL HEBERLEY's testimony interpreted.
MR. LEWIS. Relate to the court whether you were present at a conversation
between Mr. Rhoad and others about John Fries, and where and when it occurred.


WITNESS. It was on a Monday or Tuesday, I am not certain which, of the first
week after I came to town, and it happened in Seidell's room.


ATTORNEY. Were you not down twice?


WITNESS. Yes, but this was the last time: (about the 24th of April, he came to
town the 22d,) they were talking together, Rhoad and Shankweiler at the stove,
about the business they were come down to the city upon -- I did not pay very
particular attention to all that they said, but I understood so much as was
said, that they would hang the whole tote of them, but particularly Fries:
Rhoad said this: I did not pay particular attention to the rest, but this I
particularly minded in order to tell his comrades, that he might be struck off
the list of jurymen, and not come upon the jury: so I immediately informed
captain Jarrett of it.


COURT. Have you had any conversation with Jarrett to day?


WITNESS. No, I did not speak to him, but I saw him in the court.


COUNSEL. Did Rhoad say any thing like this: that these people ought not to
live in the country, and if he did, what was it?


WITNESS. I paid no attention to that: I was not very near, and did not hear
that: there was a pedlar in the room that laid his pack on the table between
Rhoads and me.


COURT. Did or did not Rhoad keep saying other things although you do not know
what they were?


WITNESS. I know that he spoke more to Shakweiler about it, but I do not
recollect what it was.


The United States, us. John Fries.
Pennsylvania, ss.
HARMAN HARTMAN of Macungy township, in Northampton county, being duly sworn,
makes oath and says, that about three or four days before the trial on the
above indictment commenced, he, this deponent was at the house of -- Seidel,
innkeeper near the northern boundaries of the city of Philadelphia, where he
saw John Rhoad, one of the jurors on the trial of the above indictment; and
several other people who were converting respecting the said John Fries and
other persons late charged with treason, when some of the persons present said
"it was hard they should be so long in prison and so far from home," when the
said John Rhoad answered "it was very right, he was glad of it, and that they
should hang every one of them." And the said John Rhoad further said "that he
should not be safe at home if they did not hang them all." This deponent never
mentioned any part of the above to John Fries, nor has he any reason to
believe that he has any knowledge thereof.

HARMAN HARTMAN.
Sworn in open Court, May 14, 1799. (A true copy.) D. CALDWELL, Clk. Circuit
Court.

HARMAN HARTMAN's Testimony interpreted.
WITNESS. I was at Seidell's tavern three or four days before the jury were
called upon, to try Fries -- the Monday or Tuesday before the trial began.
There was a conversation held by several persons saying it was very hard for
them that they must be down here, and some of them in gaol. Whereupon Rhoads
said he was glad it went so, or he (Rhoads) should not be safe if they were at
home: they ought all to be hung.


COUNCIL. Who was by at the time besides Shankweiler?


WITNESS. There was another person bye, named Adam Stephan, from that part of
the country, that heard it.


COURT. Did he mention Fries's name or not?


WITNESS. I cannot particularly say, I did not pay particular attention at that
time, but they had considerable conversation, and that was the purport of it.


Were many people in the room?


Yes, the room was very full, and I was engaged in conversation myself,
therefore I did not attend particularly.


COURT. Did you hear the whole conversation, or only a part of it?


Only part of it: I came in, and they were then conversing already.


ATTORNEY. Was Heberley in the room?


Yes, Heberley, Stephan, Shankweiler and more, but I do not recollect them.


Do you know Nicholas Mayer?


No, I do not.


ATTORNEY. Who did you mention this conversation to afterward?


WITNESS. I do not recollect that I mentioned it to any body. --


I afterward passed by several times, and saw Rhoad speaking to other persons:
I thought it rather hard before they knew what the crime was, that they should
say so much.


Did you mention it to no one? Recollect.


I believe I mentioned it to some of the people who lodged in the same house:
Henry Jarrett was one of them.


ATTORNEY. Had you any conversation with Jarrett to day upon the subject?


WITNESS. I spoke to him this morning out of court, but nothing particular.
Since that I mentioned it to Henry Schiffert, Valentine Keenly and Dewald
Aldbrecht, but cannot particularly recollect what time I mentioned it.


COURT. Did you mention to any of them before the trial came on?


WITNESS. Yes.


COUNSEL. Did you ever mention it to Fries?


WITNESS. NO, I never had an opportunity -- I never knew his name 'till this
disturbance took place.


HENRY SHANKWEILER, sworn. Testimony interpreted.

Were you present at any conversation between Rhoads and others respecting
Fries, etc.


WITNESS. Yes; it was at Sidell's tavern.


When?


It was the week after I came down -- since the court began.


ATTORNEY. What time of the week?


WITNESS. I think toward the latter end -- Thursday or Friday.


COUNSEL. What passed there?


WITNESS. Rhoad said it was very well it happened, or went on so, for they
should be no longer safe at home else.


What went so?


That the people were taken prisoners.


Relate how the conversation began, and what were the very words, as near as
you can.


WITNESS. Some of the country people said it was very hard they were brought
down here prisoners; in answer to that Rhoad used these words. Rhoad further
said, that they ought to be hanged, and Fries must be hanged, for he had been
the leader of it, or of them to go to Bethlehem, and he took the prisoners from
the Marshal.


ATTORNEY. Were Hartman and Heberly present?


WITNESS. Yes, I slept with them in the same room.


Do you now sleep with them?


Yes.


COURT. Did they sleep in the same room with Rhoad?


Yes, all three of us.


COURT. Did the conversation pass in that room?


WITNESS. The conversation was down stairs, where they were, in the bar room
drinking; but he related the same up stairs too.


COUNSEL. DO you know John Fries?


The first time I saw him was at Bethlehem.


Did you ever see him since?


Only here in court, except once at Mark's, when I came to Philadelphia to
deliver myself up.


Did you ever tell Fries of this?


No.


HENRY JARRETT, sworn.

COUNSEL. DO you know Daniel Heberley?


Yes.


Did he communicate to you, and at what time, a conversation between Rhoad and
others about Fries?


WITNESS. I cannot particularly mention the day, but one day he came to me in
the court house at yon window, telling me that I must tell either Fries or his
attorney that he should challenge him, because he had said at Seidell's tavern
that Fries must be hung.


Did he tell you any thing farther?


No.


How long was this before the trial begun?


I cannot tell, but it was before.


Did you tell either Fries or the counsel?


I believe I did not, but I think, if I am right, I told it to somebody.


I had not seen Fries, only in the bar, and never told him.


After a short pause, the witness thought he had told it to Judge Mulhollan,
but was not certain. I told it several times, but I cannot swear when or to
whom.


Evidence against the motion.

JOHN MULHOLLAN, sworn.

He deposed that he had a distant idea, something like a dream, but had no
recollection of what it was. On the court applying the question, he did not
recollect any thing said to him by Mr. Jarrett about challenging Rhoad, but he
was not certain whether he did not say that he would not like to be tried by
him.

COURT. Did he assign any reason?


WITNESS. No, I believe not.


COURT. Had you any conversation afterward with John Fries on that subject, or
did Fries ever consult you as to the challenge of his jurors?


WITNESS. No, never.


COURT. Nor his counsel?


WITNESS. Yes, they asked me what I knew of the jury: I told them nothing, but
from the temper of the times I would rather lie in prison for years than be
tried at this time.


COURT. Did you mention to Fries what Jarrett told you?


WITNESS. I do not know; I took but little notice, but let it pass on.


The deposition of JOHN RHOAD.
United States, us. John Fries.
Having heard three depositions read in the above cause, to wit: the
depositions of Herman Hartman, Daniel Heberley and Nicholas Mayer, I do
solemnly declare, that I never did use the expressions imputed to me by these
deponents.

I recollect that I was in conversation with sundry persons at Seidell's
tavern, at which, the said Hartman, Heberley and Mayer were present, in which
the late disturbances in Northampton county were mentioned, and I there
expressed myself to the following effect, and no other effect nor purpose
whatever, viz. That unless a stop was put to such proceedings, as have lately
taken place in Northampton county, especially at Bethlehem, I would not wish to
live in that part of the country.

And I have not, at any other time expressed myself to the effect, stated in
those affidavits.

I further declare, that I went to the trial of the said John Fries, with a
mind perfectly open to conviction, as to his guilt or innocence, and that
before I assented to the verdict, I deliberately weighed and considered all
that had been adduced in his favor.

JOHN RHOAD.
Sworn in open Court, May 15, 1799. D. CALDWELL, Clk. Circuit Court.

The oral Testimony of JOHN RHOAD (interpreted.)
Mr. SITGREAVES. Do you recollect any conversation between Shankweiler,
Heberly, Hartman and yourself at Seidell's tavern?


WITNESS. Yes, perfectly well, but I do not recollect that they were all
present: some of them I know were. They said it was hard for them (Fries and
others that were here) to come down, as they were in poor circumstances, it
would cost them so much trouble and expense, whereupon I said that it had been
very hard for us (the witness and others in that country) in the winter and in
the spring to be up there: I think I said that if the government had not power
to bring those people to trial, or before the court, we could not live in the
country, nor in any other country: whereupon they said that the prisoners got
severely punished for it; I said that the punishment would be according as the
law would inflict. They then dispersed -- this was in the yard, before the door
at the side of the house.


ATTORNEY. Had you any conversation of the same kind in the room or by the
stove?


WITNESS. Yes, I talked about it with Hartma^ near the stove.


What time?


It was in the first week, toward the latter end of the week, near as I can
recollect, but I cannot perfectly recollect. Hartman did not say it plain, but
he as much as gave me to understand that it was hard, or not right that they
(the prisoners) should come into that trouble, for that two might swear against
me and bring me to the same place; I thereupon said that neither two nor ten of
them could bring me to the same place, as I had never drawn in the same yoke
with him, (Hartman) against the government. If they were to swear, I would
prove before all the magistrates in the place, that I never had any thing to do
with it, but was always in favor of government. This is all I can recollect.


ATTORNEY. Was there nothing at this conversation said about Fries and the
other people?


WITNESS. No, I then went away from the stove.


COURT. Did you ever talk with Shankweiler about it?


WITNESS. I believe he was present.


Did you to Herberly?


He was likewise there -- in the house or at the door.


COURT. Do you recollect saying to either of them that they (the prisoners)
ought to be hanged -- either in the stove room or in the bed room?


WITNESS. I do not recollect that I said any thing. I took particular care not
to say any thing of that kind, since I have been summoned on the jury, because
I new it was necessary to take care.


COURT. Some were saying you were warm: were you warm or offended in
consequence of what Hartman said to you?


Yes, it was disagreeable to me, and offended me, else I should not have said
so much.


ATTORNEY. At the first time you come down had you conversation with Nicholas
Mayer, or any body else?


I do not recollect: I know I have seen Nicholas Mayer before, but cannot say
where.


How long did you stay in town the first time?


From evening till the next day at noon only -- I came in about eight o'clock,
and went away about three or four next day.


COURT. Did you say any thing about the proceedings at Bethlehem in Northampton
county?


WITNESS. I recollect that there was a talk, but I cannot recollect the
conversation itself.


Do you recollect saying that you would not wish to live in the country, except
a stop was put to such proceedings?


Not at that time, but I believe I recollect something of the kind afterward.


COURT. What did you say?


WITNESS. I said that if the government had not the power to punish the evil,
or evil doers, I would not wish to live in such a country. I do not recollect
any more.


COUNSEL. At this last time did you see Nicholas Mayor?


I did see him; but I am not certain whether it was before the door, or in the
house.


COURT. When did you come to town the second time?


WITNESS. On the 22d of April, at eight in the morning.


COUNSEL. Had you any conversation with Mayer then?


I never had any conversation with him, but I saw him in the yard.


MICHAEL SNYDER was next sworn as to the character of John Rhoad the juryman;
he deposed that he had known him 27 or 28 years, during all which time he had
been a good character, and a man of veracity. He did not think he would talk
farther then he could make appear.

JOHN MORETZ deposed that he had known him about 25 years, he was a very clever
honest man; a man of truth as much as he knew of him: he could say nothing
against him.

PHILIP WALKER did not know him very particularly, but he never heard any thing
amiss of him: as much as he knew of him he was an honest man.

JACOB ARNOT junior had been acquainted with Mr. Rhoad some years, and believed
him to be a man of unblemished character, as good as any in that country.

MR. SITGREAVES said he would not have troubled the court again, upon this
question, had circumstances rested as they were before the evidence, but upon
investigation palpable differences would be discovered between the affidavits
and the verbal relations, not only of the deponents with themselves, but which
other. He then analized and compared the affidavits of Mayer, Heberly and
Hartman, which he only recommended to the examination of the court, and he
thought the difference must appear so essential as to give a serious doubt of
the accuracy or truth of either, while the character of Mr. Rhoad was
unimpeachable.

MR. LEWIS said if any trifling difference appeared in the affidavits from the
relation, it was easily accounted for in the manner the affidavits were taken:
those of Heberly and Hartman, were taken in his office, and interpreted by a
German, from whom he had very great difficulty to collect the meaning in
English. Only one of these affidavits were taken by himself, the other by Mr.
Ewing, a young gentleman, student in his office [Mr. Ewing corroborated the
fact: "that he could not understand what the interpreter said."]

MR. LEWIS then mentioned the grounds upon which the rule to show cause had
been granted; whether either, or all of these grounds had weight in them, he
would not undertake to assert; but certain it was, that it was the duty of the
prisoner's counsel to lay them before the court, and wait the event, which if
favorable, would cause a new trial: if not, they should be satisfied with
having discharged their duty; in either case, they should cheerfully submit to
the opinion of the court; and he was sorry to see that the last question, to
wit, That the trial ought to have been held in the proper county, had given any
discomposure the court: he then explained the reason, to show the court that it
was not agitated out of any disrespect to their former decision, which was that
"manifest inconvenience" did prevent the trial being held there, but this did
not appear on the record. In criminal prosecutions, and especially capital
cases, it was usual for the prisoner's counsel to avail themselves of every
slip and inaccuracy, and therefore he was excuseable in the present. He quoted
4 Burrows, 252.

It was common for the court to err, and in such a case, he considered himself
in duty bound to point it out to them, and he was satisfied if that error was
of consequence enough, the court would grant a rule thereupon, and thus retract
from their former opinion, which they were fully authorized to do. He referred
to ^ Blackstone 391 -- 1 Burrows, 393.

MR. LEWIS then went on to point out the propriety of granting a new trial in
criminal as well as in civil cases, although the prosecuting counsel, had
enforced the want of precedent, as a reason against it; indeed he said it was
evidently of more consequence, and therefore he supposed it had been the more
strongly opposed: a man's life and his fame was of more value than a part of
his property, and he had no doubt that, whatever might have been the verdict,
the court would go as far in granting it. It was admitted that the court had
the power, if it had the power, there was no doubt but the honorable judges
would exercise it according to their conviction.

Mr. LEWIS said the council for the prisoner did not come forward to prove that
the verdict was given against evidence, but to insist that the prisoner had
been tried by eleven jurors only, for the other stood indifferent as he stood
unsworn, they went further -- they went to prove that there was an essential
error in the panel, and thus the prisoner was bereft of those benefits, to
which the law entitled him. If we prove this, said he, we do not address
ourselves to the discretion of your honors; it is not a matter of will, it is a
matter of justice, to which we are entitled. As it respects the evidence, you
are not at all to consider its weight: the evidence may be clear, and yet the
verdict may be wrong given, because of the incompetency of the jurors. The
gentlemen have said the period for application is past -- it is too late, --
but with all their talents and industrious researches, those learned gentlemen
have not been able to produce a single authority to support the doctrine that
it is too late; after conviction, or even after condemnation, the court have
authority to order a new trial; no time is specified to limit the discretion,
if the reasons are good. If the law has not distinguished the period, those
gentlemen are certainly unwarranted in saying it is too late. 2 Strange, 968,
is a case where an argument was held on a plea for new trial, but not a single
argument is used, that a new trial could not be held on capital cases: that
seems to be taken for granted.

It was argued against a new trial, in capital cases, that the court proceeded
more deliberately, and more cautiously, and because the prisoner was allowed a
challenge of his jury. The argument amounts to this: because the law requires
more caution, and gives the prisoner more advantages where his life is at
stake, for that reason, he should have less advantage and less indulgence, or
in other words, because the benignity of the law allowed more benefits in the
awful event of life or death; therefore in another point, essential to the
prisoner, he should be bereft of an advantage, enjoyed by one indicted for an
assault, or in a common civil cause. It may be argued, that the benevolence of
the executive, may extend mercy to the prisoner, because of any irregularity in
evidence or proceeding, but this will not satisfy the law; it is an hazard at
best, while the law gives him the certain advantage of a new trial. The power
and right of granting a new trial in some cases, is admitted; now if any of the
witnesses or jurors could be proved to have perjured themselves, the evidence
being first given, and the verdict pronounced; this, it will be allowed, would
have weight to grant a now trial; but the case before the court, goes as far,
if not farther; and if there should appear an extreme error in summoning, the
jury, or that one of the jurors had disqualified himself from wearing the
characteristics of an unbiassed man, then it must equally appear, that there
has been an infringement of a legal right, sufficient to lay the foundation of
a second hearing.

Another doctrine that was insisted on was, that it was discretionary in the
court; that where they were satisfied with a verdict, although against
evidence, no new trial ought to be granted: there may be instances of a civil
nature, in which that doctrine will be allowable, but they differ materially
from the one now before the court, and therefore will not apply: that
application may go to the favor of the court, where they see the evidence
strong, but no favor can be exercised, nor is any asked in this case; we only
appeal to the justice of the case.

It was said by one of the gentlemen, that this juror's declaring his
sentiments, was only cause of challenge to the favor, for which triers ought to
have been appointed, and the qualification or disqualification of the juror
been determined by them, but for which it was now too late. Mr. Lewis denied
the position. He had already proved, both on his own declaration, and by the
evidence, that it did not come to their knowledge, until after the verdict was
given, and therefore they came forward as soon as they were obliged: this was
allowed a sufficient excuse in Salkeld 645, and 11 Modern 119, and therefore
the objection was unimportant. The witnesses could not inform John Fries, for
he was in gaol; he could not know it, until yesterday morning when the motion
was made in court, for the witnesses had no knowledge of each other, so as to
be able to communicate it. 3 Bacon 258 -- 9, says, that it is particular cause
of challenge, if a juror has declared his opinion touching the matter. In
causes of particular challenge, the court is to inquire into the truth of the
fact, and no triers are to be called, and if they find the cause a true one,
they are not to judge, nor to be left to discretion, but, they must try the
issue again. This is the doctrine of ancient law and usage, 266 Bacon. Then all
the argument about triers is out of the question, the question is, whether the
juror stood indifferent, or whether he was under the influence of bias, and a
prejudiced mind: the law compels the issue to steer clear of friends or
enemies: no partiality whatever is to predominate; but can any man in the
world, say that Rhoad's mind was free from prejudice, when he took
opportunities to make such declarations?

MR. LEWIS then went into an examination of the evidence and depositions. Now
suppose the court to believe the fact nearly as stated by the evidence, Mr. L.
asked, whether it was possible, consistent with law or justice, to believe that
a just verdict was given, or that any man ought to suffer under such a verdict?
Suppose the whole twelve to have made similar declarations, it would require no
argument to convince the unbiassed that the consequence must be fatal.

It has been attempted to be proved, that even such a declaration was no ground
of challenge, if it was not made from malice; but what is the meaning of an
independent man? It means a man who stands on the high ground of justice and
impartiality, and is not warped by prejudice, nor warmed by resentment -- quite
free from interest in the issue: also a man whose judgment has not been made up
in favor of either the one party or the other, for if it has, though he may be
an honest and well meaning man, it is not likely that his mind would be freely
given according to evidence. Without he is free from these entanglements upon
his mind, he will -- he must err. Now, it appears by the evidence of even Mr.
Rhoad himself, that he was warm, and might have forgotten the expressions, and
nothing can be shown, but that Mayer, the witness, who has lived in thas
country, is a man of good character; however, he must be supposed so, until he
can be proved otherwise. Mr. Lewis remarked, that the witnesses spoke of
different conversations: Mayer of one, when Rhoad came first to town; the
others of two afterward, in the room where they were sitting, and in the
bed-room. He contended that no material, although a verbal difference did
exist; but the testimony of Rhoads differed materially from them all; his
verbal testimony and deposition was also different, as might be seen. But Mr.
Lewis said, he doubted whether the testimony of Rhoad in this matter, was legal
evidence or not, because it was a matter in which he was materially concerned,
however they had not much objected, as there was a considerable difference in
evidence going to a court, and to a jury; he had no doubt, their honors would
make the necessary allowance.

Although Rhoad was not sworn at the time he used these expressions, he was
summoned on this trial, and it was on high misdemeanor, whether it was
indictable or not, he would not say, but it was a very imprudent disposition:
to encourage or even suffer. In Salkeld, 153, Cook's case, chief justice Holt
holds, that if a man ought not to be compelled to prove that he is a party,
neither should he be allowed to prove that he is not a party, by his own
evidence: this applies to Rhoad giving evidence, in which his character is
concerned. 4 state trials 747 -- 8 the case appears more fully: such a conduct
is here declared to be scandalous, and a misdemeanor, and the man ought not to
be on any jury. By four witnesses, neither inconsistent with themselves, nor
with each other, Mr. Lewis said this fact was clearly proved, and he thought
incontrovertibly so: of the respectability of those witnesses, he knew nothing;
but nothing disrespectful had been proved, and consequently not their
incompetency.

JUDGE PETER'S said that he did not know about their swearing falsely, nor could
he say any thing about Mayer, but of the others he well knew that one was
extremely stupid, and the others deeply prejudiced, on which account, their
evidence should be carefully scrutinized, and carefully received.

The necessity of great precaution and care, Mr. Lewis was willing to admit;
but this stupidity was a good apology for their not revealing the fact, until
it was drawn from them: their ignorance indeed, was deducible from the whole of
their conduct, and the opposition they made to the government, but it did not
strike at their credibility: uninformed, and misinformed as they were, their
verity might be good. They were under indictments, and therefore perhaps afraid
to speak; besides, coming from different parts of the country, they knew not
John Fries: but let their offense or situation be what it may, they may be
honest men, and men of truth and integrity, and therefore they must stand upon
as good a footing as witnesses could stand.

We must take it for granted then, said Mr. Lewis, that the juror made these
declarations, and if so, according to the law of England, and of the United
States, he is disqualified from the office, otherwise, that most invaluable
right, trial by jury, would be eminently impaired.

MR. LEWIS then examined some authorities which had been quoted by the
prosecuting counsel, some of which were irrelevant, and some he thought not at
all applicable. With respect to the case of Ann Clifton, as quoted from the
Pennsylvania practices, the juror declared that he did not know how any body
could do otherwise than bring her in guilty, but he did not speak as a juryman.
The court were of opinion, it was not sufficient to grant a new trial. The
objection of the court was not because it was a capital case, but they gave as
a reason, that these words were not sufficient to vitiate a juror: his mind as
a juror, he declared was still open to conviction.

It was stated, that the application ought not to be listened to, because the
prisoner had the challenge of sixty eight in effect, out of the whole panel:
how this was meant to be applied, he could not discover, but one fact was
plain, that the smaller number there were summoned above 35, the better choice
there was for the prisoner, and therefore the whole number cannot be made to
exceed 60, agreeable to common law. Mr. Lewis then observed, that one remark of
Mr. Rawle, that Mr. Rhoad was the last they could challenge, but they would
rather have him, than trust to the next, was a plain implication that they were
ignorant of the fact, instead of militating against the motion. In order to
remove every suspicion of inaccuracy from the former testimony, he said, he had
happily been able to procure one, whose respectability could not be questioned,
and which he should now introduce to the court.

GEORGE YOHE, sworn.

COUNSEL. Were you present when any conversation took place between Rhoad and
other respecting Fries and others? -- relate the particulars.


WITNESS. A few days after Mr. Rhoad came down, he was at my house, sitting at
my stove, with two other gentlemen, farmers I believe: they were having
conversation a good while before I came out of the bar, when I stood up by
them: they were talking about the insurgents and Mr. Fries, and those who came
from Northampton: they were mentioning that those people there, who were not of
the same opinion as those now brought down, were in danger, and some of them
ought to be hung, and Fries in particular. One of them mentioned that if Fries
knew that, he would not have him on the jury; Rhoad said that it was not his
wish to come on the jury. I heard no more, but returned into my bar.


COURT. Do you recollect that Mr. Rhoad mentioned any reason, why they ought to
be hung?


WITNESS. No, I do not recollect.


COUNSEL. You are confident that he said Fries in particular?


Yes.


Cross examination. What language was it spoken in?


WITNESS. German.


Did Rhoad lodge at your house at that time?


No.


Who were present at the time?


I do not know who they were.


To whom did you mention this circumstance, and how came you first to be
brought before the court?


I mentioned that such things were said in my house, when I heard that it was
brought forward; that was the first time.


How long had you known Rhoad before?


Six or seven years.


COURT. Do you recollect any persons particularly, who were present at that
time?


WITNESS. No, there were more people present, but they were at the other end of
the room.


How long was it since?


It was soon after they came down; he was here ever since.


Friday, May 17.
MR. LEWIS resumed his argument in favor of the evidence, which he said, had
not Mr. Yohe came forward, the others being suspected, would have been a
question, whether the negative testimony of Mr. Rhoad, in which he was a party,
or the positive testimony of four others, who were not concerned, had the most
weight; but now, taking it for granted, that Rhoad is mistaken, it can be only
accounted for in two ways: first, that his memory failed him; or secondly, that
he was extremely prejudiced: imputing nothing corrupt to him, still we cannot
allow him to be less so than any one of the five witnesses we have brought to
controvert his assertions: allowing him not to be free from prejudice, he
cannot be supposed to be capable of judging for himself.

MR. LEWIS then mentioned another objection founded on the act which says, in
cases punishable with death, the trial shall be held in the county, etc. To
remove this, one of two things must take place: the court in whom is the
discretion, must, from facts within their own knowledge, or facts laid properly
before them, order it elsewhere; otherwise secondly, it must take place in the
city of Philadelphia, as a matter of course, as the law has, without a contrary
necessity, fixed on the county, no entry need be made: but if that necessity
did exist, it ought to be entered. How the order was taken, and by what
application the court was removed, he would not say, all he contended for, was,
that it must appear the court did so adjudge it, and for good reasons. The
court could not be changed, but under certain circumstances; these occurring
must appear on the record of the court. A motion was agitated on this point,
and decided against, but all that appears upon record, is that the motion was
refused: whether amendment can or cannot be made after trial, he would not
contend, but he had doubts. He quoted Hawk. C. 22, 129. Lord Raimond 1^1.

Farther. The court did not direct from what part of the state the jury were to
come, but left it to the marshal, or else the marshal exercised it without
authority or power. To him the judiciary act sect. 29 appeared too plain to be
mistaken, or to be open to construction: by this it appeared that part of
judicial proceedings was left -- not to the marshal, but to the judge of the
court, and on him it was enjoined as a duty, which, if left to the marshal,
would give just cause of exception in the power of the prisoner: This was the
practice of the marshal; a practice entirely new, and could have no manner of
weight, because the contrary was the positive law of the land, and if so,
nothing could contravene it; it was so except that power was transferred to the
marshal from the court, for if this could be left, be did not see why a great
part of the duty of a judge could not be left for the marshal to exercise as
well! The marshal could upon the same principle, assume the bench and try
causes, because the law in that part of his duty does not assign it more to the
judge than in the other. Certain duties were assigned to the judge, to the
clerk, and to the marshal, to which each was respectively bound. The first
state trials were in 1795, and there both the judges gave the order in court,
how the jury should be summoned, directing that at least 48 should be summoned
to attend for the trial of certain persons, and at least 12 from the proper
counties -- 48 were to come from the state at large. The venire facias must be
signed by the judge and sent to the marshal as his direction, otherwise a
separate order of direction so signed, though not on the venire may answer the
purpose. Respecting the twelve from the county, Mr. Lewis said he concurred in
sentiment, that it was not necessary the direction should be given, because the
law required it as indispensible, on which account he supposed it was that
judge Peter's just reminded the marshal that capital acts had been committed in
certain counties. In answer to this it was said that the whole directions were
given by the judge, but he contended that the whole must be in conformity, and
must come from the court, and the marshal could not take it up of his own
accord. It was said that there had been but one instance of this special order;
true, but there had no more than one instance occurred to occasion it. If
Congress had not thought it a power necessary to be exercised by a judge, it
would not have been a law, and though exercised but once, or although not at
all it was equally so, for the law may sleep, but it cannot die, nor will it be
called up, but when occasion demands.

Farther. The marshal, without any direction from the court, or a judge
thereof, has returned a greater number of jurors than he was legally authorized
to do. By the act of Congress, a single judge is empowered to hold court in
certain cases, but if that judge was to give an order out of the time of
holding court, it would be considered as an act of the judge and not of the
court, and therefore not an official nor legal order. The venire in the present
instance is not signed by the judge, but by the clerk, wherein a return of
sixty is authorized, but not a word about the county, therefore the sixty are
summoned from the state: thus the venire goes to the marshal, whom the judge
sees, and informs him that the case is capital, on which account, in addition
to the sixty returned in the venire, he makes a due and regular return of
twelve from one county, and seventeen from another, signed with his own name:
no doubt this was in consequence of the intimation received from the judge. He
had before gone as far as his authority led him, and now he annexes twenty-nine
in a separate paper under the same order, which gave no such directions, but
only that not less than forty-eight nor more than sixty should be summoned. The
panel is completed, but whether the intimation or order of the judge was
given before or after, we know not: to give the intimation was right, but a
wrong use was made of it, for those from the county ought to have been included
in that panel, which he might have included, by first striking out the same
number, any time before it came into court, and there his power would have
ended, and every thing would have been right except his having had no order
from the judge; but twenty-nine more are annexed, which not being done under
the venire was improper, and if it had been, it would have been equally so,
because not authoritatively given. The court have power to direct such a return
as they think proper, under the direction of the law, but if this is the act of
a clerk, judge or marshal, it is irregular. Part of the number of sixty, and
not beyond it, should come from the county, except the express order, of, and
signed by the court, should otherwise direct. But in this case even the twelve
is exceeded, and seventeen more annexed: under that venire he might have
returned the whole from the county, but he could return no part above sixty.
Here is a certificate produced by his honor Judge Peter's, signifying that he
had told the marshal it was a capital case, and twelve must be summoned from
the county of Northampton: this is to be filed as an excuse for the surplus,
for there cannot be an additional venire! In the trials of 1795, there were 108
jurors summoned, 72 from the state at large and 36 from three counties named,
but that was by different pannells, and the same could have been done now in
the like way, and with the like authority, but this surplus is not to be
annexed to the single panel. This certificate of the judge cannot amount to
any thing whatever, and his honor could not have meant to give it as any thing
like legal authority, all the official acts of a judge must be in writing, some
way or other in order that he may be made responsible, otherwise it must;
depend upon his memory, and too much upon his will. But this never can be meant
as a legal act.

In 1795 an act of Assembly of Pennsylvania, limited the greatest number of the
jurors to be summoned from the state at large to sixty, and not less than
forty-eight. The court determined that they could not be governed by act of
alterably but by common law. See 2 Dallas, but still the matter was left to the
judges, and not the marshal: the judges exercised discretion according to
circumstances, but the act of Congress requiring twelve from the county remains
binding, and is preserved as an invaluable privilege to which every man is
entitled; he can be tried by men of his own neighborhood, and surely if this is
such a privilege in common law, and esteemed in England as well as America, he
has a much greater chance of getting his neighbors from the smaller number than
from the greater; and if this number is farther exceeded by twenty-nine, the
chance is still less. The marshal may be a man of virtue -- such is the present
marshal; but a man of a different character might succeed him, and he is to
hold his place during will and pleasure. Now if it is considered as a privilege
that a man should have as many of his neighbors as he can to try him, and the
increase of number diminishes that privilege, and, increased to a certain
extent, almost annihilates it, and if it is considered that the marshal has
this authority, (which I deny) how little chance has the prisoner, and how much
power has the marshal over him! For this reason the law intrusts the court with
this power, and will not, nor has ever entrusted it to the marshal. (He here
quoted 3 Bacon 245, and Keyling 16.) The cases referred to by Mr. Rawle; Mr.
Lewis said was done by separate pannels, as in 1795 -- 2 Hale, 263 -- 4 Black.
344 -- 11 Mod. 1 -- and 5 Bacon, 244.

When these directions are not complied with, the proceedings are null and
void, for the sheriff not following the order of the court are good reason for
a new trial, and therefore we conclude that the present jurors, seven of them
actually serving, not being summoned by the order of the court, but by an
assumed power of the marshal, both as to place and number, makes a mis-trial.
21 Viner, 172, has a case similar to the present: one person on the jury was
illegally admitted, accordingly the court set aside the verdict: on the present
occasion there are seven illegally admitted. There was a case when two
indictments were brought in, and two pannels summoned, but it happened that the
one summoned to try A, tried, B, and vice versa: -- they were tried and both
convicted; but on the plea, new trials were ordered because they were not the
men summoned for the purpose -- 2 Hawk. C. 27, sect. 108, 9, 10. See law of
errors 65. The authorities referred to show how it may be amended -- the court
are bound to render all which has been done null and void. In Aurundell's case,
6 Cook, the error was as to the jury process for murder: the court set aside
the verdict, seeing that while there was error in the jury process, his life
had not even been put in danger: every thing else was regular -- the jury was
returned from the parish where the offense was laid; (the very parish, and not
the city was named,) the trial went on, and no challenge was made in the array,
but for the above reason all was set aside, and a venire facias de novo
granted. -- Thus it may be seen challenge to the array after challenge to the
poll is not too late, if good cause be assigned -- 2 Lord Raymond, 884.

The gentleman on the other side has opposed a specious argument as to number,
to wit, that the words of the venire are, you shall cause to come before the
court such a number, and therefore, although a much greater number were
summoned, and no more than the legal number appear in court, there is no cause
of complaint, but this is the common form of a venire. But in what manner is
the officer to compel the panel to appear before the court? By summoning them,
otherwise they are fined. In a legal view as it respects the venire, they did
all appear before the court. Hale, Blackstone, nor any of the authorities say
how many shall come, but how many shall be summoned.

Mr. LEWIS here concluded a very laborious investigation of the points of law
referring to the motion, and submitted them to the consideration of the court,
trusting that if his client was at last to fall a victim, it would be to the
sword of justice, and not to the present state of public opinion, seeing that
the important proceedings on his case would operate as a precedent to be
transmitted down to posterity. He would leave the event with full submission,
impressed with a firm reliance on the impartial and just decision of the court.

Mr. DALLAS observed that the jurors were not alone summoned from Northampton
county, but five on the jury were from Bucks county.

Mr. RAWLE answered that there was a bill of indictment for treason committed
in Bucks county, and therefore the marshal had summoned them to be ready. They
could as well be on the present jury as those from Philadelphia, since there
were twelve summoned from the proper county, and the law not departed from in
that respect.

The court, observing that the deposition of Mr. Rhoad, and the evidence given
by Mr. Yohe contradicted each other, suggested the propriety of confronting the
witnesses in open court, in order to distinguish where the error was,
accordingly

JOHN RHOAD was called.

COURT. Do you recollect being at the house of George Yohe, since you came to
town to attend court?


WITNESS. Yes.


Do you recollect being engaged in any conversation relative to the insurgents.


Yes, there was some conversation about it.


Did you talk about John Fries?


I cannot recollect; it was a general talk about the business, but not of Fries
in particular.


What did you say? Recollect.


There was not much said -- there was one behind the settle talked about
setting up liberty poles, but I did not know the man. Yohe said that if they
put up liberty poles it would do no harm, because for liberty they could do
what they pleased. Whereupon I said that the liberty poles had occasioned a
great deal of offense and dispute. The man then went away, when I said to Yohe
that that man seemed very merry: he answered that he was there every day, and
that he got drunk. I do not recollect any thing more that was said, I was not
above five minutes in the house.


COURT. Were you there at any other time?


WITNESS. Not in the house, but I was before the door.


Where did you lodge the first night you came to town?


At Seidell's.


Do you recollect any other person who was present at this time besides Yohe
and the drunken man?


No.


Do you recollect sitting by the stove at any time, in conversation with two
farmers about this insurrection?


No.


Do you recollect being at Yohe's any other time?


I was at Yohe's no more than that once, and then did not sit down.


MICHAEL SNYDER, sworn.

ATTORNEY. What did Mr. Yohe say to you after he went out of court yesterday;
did he not tell you, that you were present when Rhoad made use of the words
alluded to?


WITNESS. Yes, he said, I believe you was there when he said it.


Do you know any thing about it?


I do not know that I saw Rhoad there at all: I lodged in the house, but was
sometimes in, and sometimes out of it. I told him I did not know about it.


GEORGE YOHE again called.

COURT. The court are very desirous of your giving evidence to day, on the
subject you did yesterday, in the presence of Mr. Rhoad, left there should be a
misunderstanding.


WITNESS. Mr. Rhoad was sitting in my room at the stove, some days after he
came down, two other gentlemen with him; they had some conversation before I
came out of my bar, when I stood behind the stove: they were talking about the
people that came from Northampton, and the insurrection, and mentioned Mr.
Fries: Mr. Rhoad said that those people who were not of the same opinion as
these insurgents who came down, were not safe; and Rhoads farther said, that
some of them ought to be hung, and Fries in particular. I returned into my bar,
and then I was called into another room. I sat there some time afterward, but
did not hear any thing in particular.


COURT. Had they been sitting there sometime before?


Yes.


What time of the day was it?


I cannot tell, but I think it was in the forenoon.


Can you tell who the other men were?


I cannot, they were strangers to me, and appeared like farmers.


Did you know any more who were in the room?


There were six or seven more, I think Michael Snyder was one, but I think
there were none within hearing.


Was any thing said about Mr. Rhoad being on the jury?


Nothing that time that I recollect. I knew before that he was one. The man
that was sitting by his side, said that if Fries knew that, he would not have
him on the jury; he replied, that he wished he would not have him.


Do you recollect any thing else?


No.


MR. RHOAD went to explain to Mr. Yohe some part of the conversation, but Mr.
Yohe could not recollect it, as he said he went in and out about his business.
Mr. Yohe said Mr. Rhoad was often in his house, which contradicting what Mr.
Rhoad had sworn before, that he was never in the house but once, and then not
five minutes, and did not sit down, the court asked Mr. Rhoad to recollect
whether he was never there but once. He then answered, that he believed he was
twice, or perhaps three times, before he was called upon the jury.

COURT to MR. RHOAD. Was that after you was summoned down on the jury or before?


RHOAD. The last time I came down, and before the jury were sworn. I came there
to inquire about a man, and I believe it was one of the men who was sitting
with me at the stove.


To MR. YOHE. Did you sit down with them?


No. I stood a little, and returned to the bar.


MR. RHOAD having said he never sat down, Mr. Yohe reminded him of some of the
circumstances, and said that he was sitting there more than half an hour; but
Mr. Rhoad could not be brought to recollect it.

COURT to RHOAD. Do you recollect either of the two men that were in
conversation with you?


RHOAD. I do not recollect seeing any person there, that I was acquainted with,
but Mr. Snyder.


COURT to YOHE. Was this a serious conversation about the prisoner?


YOHE. I do not know, but I thought so. I knew he was summoned upon the jury,
on that very account, I took particular notice.


The court desired Mr. Yohe to repeat the words used by Mr. Rhoad in the same
language, (German.) He did so, and Mr. Erdman the interpreter, declared them
precisely what had been before sworn to.

MR. RHOAD declared again that he never had said so.

The examination here closed, and the court adjourned for about four hours, to
give the judges opportunity of examining the authorities.

In the Evening the Court again meet.
JUDGE PETER'S observed that the opinion of lord chief justice Trevy, in 4 State
Trials was much to the point, but that question was not determined by the
court. In a question of so much national importance as the present, Judge
Peter's thought it his duty to give au opinion. -- A man who lives in the county
where insurrection has happened, his impressions of injury from the repetitions
of such scenes will be stronger than might be expected in other men, and
therefore all that Rhoad said about it being unsafe for the friends of
government to live there, is accounted for, and no way improper for him to
speak. I think Rhoad an honest man, and do not think he had any malice against
Fries more than any of the rest, but I think he must have forgotten. As to what
appeared to strike Mr. Lewis with such force, does not appear to me important.
I think the proceedings might have been more regular, but yet I think they were
regular enough to stamp the event with a sufficient sanction. The proceedings
were much the same as the court of Oyer and Terminor, when the sheriff summons
a number more than is wanted, in order to have them ready, and when twelve are
wanted, they are taken out of that number. This venire issued by the same
course as all others do, perhaps not knowing the offenses would be capital,
(...) it appearing otherwise afterward, agreeable to act of Congress some were
summoned from the proper counties. The venire says the number is not to exceed
60, yet these words do not designate more than those in the practice of England
which directs 12, but 24 is generally returned. To be sure the court might have
given the order, but I do not see how this could be done without the defendant
lying in gaol, or a special court being holden. There is some weight to be sure
in the arguments on that point, but they are not so important as they were held
up to be. The marshal having ready a certain number, when the issue was joined,
then, and not before, was the number who did appear, made to appear in court.
The panel was returned, and furnished to Fries, on which, the trial was
suffered to proceed, and on that account I think it appears it was approved of
by the court, which is a sufficient designation.

JUDGE IREDELL -- The question which the court have now to decide is certainly
as important an one as ever was before a court. With regard to any interest,
the government could be supposed to have in the event, or the feelings of
private humanity or compassion as men, for the very unhappy situation of the
prisoner -- these must both be sacrificed to that impartial justice which our
duty preremptorily commands us to exercise according to the best of our
capacities. Sure I am that it is always my disposition so to be influenced, as
I am convinced it is also of the judge with whom I have the honor to sit on the
bench.

It is admitted, I believe on both sides, that it is in the power of the court
in criminal cases to grant a new trial in favor of the prisoner, though they
cannot to his perjudice, and it must be readily admitted that it must be the
most obvious considerations, which could possible under it the duty of the
court, lest they too readily grant a new trial: for if the power is placed in a
court, it is proof that it must, or might be sometime exercised, and if ever
proper occasion arise for the exercise of it, it must depend on some
particular, strikingly applicable circumstances.

With regard to the particular circumstance now brought forward, that one of
the jurymen made certain declarations unfavorable to the justice, a prisoner
has a right to expect, I must confess that until the evidence yesterday given
by Mr. Yohe, I was not satisfied that he had said any such thing as could give
the court full ground to believe him improperly biassed, so as to admit just
cause for a new trial; but that testimony corroborating the testimony of those
before given on which, independantly, we could place but little dependence,
strikes me with great force, otherwise I should have entertained some doubt
owing to their different relations of apparently the same event. This caution
was invigorated by the very excellent character which the juror had borne. From
this I have every reason to believe that he has not wilfully done any thing
wrong, nor sworn to any thing which he does not believe to be true. From the
relation, it was difficult to arrange the particular parts of the conversation
so as to make it accord at any interval of time, on which account I was
extremely desirous that Mr. Rhoad and Mr. Yohe should be confronted, and
questions put to remind each other of (...) facts, so as both might accord; but
it does appear that Mr. Rhoad's memory is extremely defective in some material
points, and therefore, without any impeachment we may presume it was a gross
mistake. It is the clear opinion of the court in 4 State Trials, that if a
juryman, not out of particular malice against the individual, but from any
other cause appears to have formed a predetermined opinion, he was not fit to
be a juryman, and it was therefore good cause of challenge. In that case the
expressions used were much similar to the present case: that opinion appears to
be grounded upon the supposition that were a man, from any ill motives, or
otherwise, forms an opinion strongly on his mind, an improper bias is extremely
difficult to get clear of, and will influence an honest man unwarily to give a
wrong verdict, and to these circumstances every man is liable. It is impossible
for me to resist the impression, from the number of depositions produced, that
Mr. Rhoad must, at different times, have used expressions similar to those
related by Mr. Yohe, but I can readily conceive that such expressions were used
with an innocent intention, and without meaning to prejudice himself from
afterward serving as an honest juryman, yet I cannot be certain, but it might
originate from a predisposed opinion of the guilt of the man, and therefore it
must render him less able to discriminate facts, but if no such idea of guilt
did exist, according to the authority stated, it would be good cause of
challenge, if known, but if not known until after verdict is given, it would
then be sufficient time, for what is good cause of challenge previous to trial,
is good ground for a motion after verdict. It is very much to be regretted that
the witnesses who heard these declarations did none of them communicate it to
the counsel or the prisoner before the jury were sworn, because he might have
been set aside, and much unnecessary public expense and disstress to the
unfortunate man, besides delay of the execution of justice, in this particular
case, been prevented.

It being admitted that the court may grant a new trial in criminal cases upon
sufficient cause to show, and it following that they ought to do it if shown, I
farther think that if there is cause of challenge before, there is equal cause,
if it is proved that the juror was biassed, to order it, after verdict is
pronounced, whatever delay or inconvenience may result therefrom; that can be
no reason to withhold a privilege to which a prisoner is entitled: from these
views, I think it my duty to vote for a new trial in the present case, as the
fact appears too clear to be controverted. In this event, there will be still
an opportunity for the prisoner to be freed, and justice be done between
himself and his country.

With regard to the point of law, if my mind had not been clear on the evidence
respecting the juror, I should have been decidedly against a new trial, and
accordingly should have taken the trouble more fully to have delivered my
sentiments; it being so, I shall now make but a few general remarks. As to the
point, that the record should evince the proceedings of the court, otherwise
they are invalid, with reasons why trial could not be held in the county, I
think there is no necessity of the reasons appearing on the record of court. If
the question had stood simply upon this ground, it would have been immaterial;
but it did not: application was made to the court, after several indictments
were found, alleging that the trials ought to be held in the county, whereupon
the court declared opinion, that "great inconvenience" prevented a compliance
with the motion: but farther, it appeared to be gone out of the power of the
court, because the indictment had been found in this court, which must be
considered a part of the trial; and the law means the whole proceeding shall be
in one place, so that the indictment must have been found in that county,
otherwise the trial by jury could not be held there. These were the reasons
which operated to influence the court to refuse the application. In this
dilemma, it was impossible for the court to say the trial should not proceed
here; and had it been removed, a new indictment could not have been found; if
it had, the trial could not proceed upon two indictments. The only times for
considering this question, I believe, was, when this man was charged with the
offense, before he was committed, or even after the court sat, and before the
indictment was brought into court. If it had been the opinion of the judge who
committed him, that trial could be held there, then it could have been referred
to the supreme court, who, if they had been of the same opinion, would have
ordered a special court. But from the state of that county, no one can believe
that trial could have been held there in any way conducive to justice, or so as
to make the proceedings of the court such as they ought to be, because the
President has declared, by proclamation, that the law could not be executed
without military assistance, which I never wish to see guard a court of justice
as matter of choice, though unavoidable necessity may sometimes make it prudent.

With regard to the summoning the jury, it is to be observed that the practice
now used, was an established usage of this court for many years past, which is
a sanction sufficient, if no positive law nullifies it. The venire, issued in
this form, in my opinion, did issue with the sanction of the court, and had the
same effect, as though the express order of the court had been annexed. It
appears that it was not known, at the time the venire issued, that any cases
were punishable with death, and of course not necessary to include a special
provision for twelve to come from the county. Mr. Lewis made a concession,
which, if right, did away the whole of this objection: he said, that upon the
marshal's receiving information (whether it came from the judge or not) that a
case punishable with death had occurred, he had a right, without any order from
the court, written or verbal, to summon a greater number of men than in other
cases: the words of the law are, not that he should summon twelve, but twelve
at least; but be observed that this should not exceed, but be included in the
number sixty. I do not know what authority he had to limit the number to sixty,
in this or any other case. The law intends that a prisoner shall have a chance
of men from his own neighborhood; certainly then the greater the number which
comes from it, his chance is proportionably increased, therefore it can never
prejudice the prisoner. I think that if the marshal should extend the
discretion given him to an unnecessary number, it would operate to the vexation
of the persons summoned, and they alone would have cause to complain. Formerly,
by law, a sheriff was directed to summon twelve, but by usage, he actually did
summon twenty-four, yet all above the twelve appeared to acquiesce, and it
could not be of disadvantage: so in the grand jury for twenty-four, forty-eight
was summoned: the power was assumed and not complained of. I presume that if
the marshal had authority to return that number, without a venire or precept,
he was not limited as to number; and that when they came here, they formed the
jury attending court. I am farther of opinion, that when the panel was
presented to the prisoner, that panel obtained the full sanction of the court,
as much as though they had given the order.

So far as to substance. With respect to form, the words are, after joining the
issue, "let the jury come." That is a direction given by the court to the
marshal to summon the jury, but as it would be inconvenient for him to summon
the jury after this order, which is for him to do it without delay, those
jurors already summoned appear in court, so that if it was entered upon record
it would appear that after the prisoner was arraigned, and issue joined, the
marshal had directed these men to come, and they had come. It appears to me
that whether the marshal summoned the jurors of his own accord, or whether they
were summoned under the express order of the court after issue was joined, in
substance and in form the law is so far complied with as to do perfect justice.
Though I am not certain that my opinion on these points of law are right, not
having had much time to examine, yet I am strongly of that opinion at present;
however I have thought less and said less upon them than if the main object of
the motion rested on it.

Sensible of the importance of the question, and that if life is once lost it
can never be recovered; having aside the question which involves doubt, and
resting on the facts which have appeared before the court, I deem it my duty to
say that A NEW TRIAL OUGHT TO BE GRANTED.

JUDGE PETER'S. Upon the points of law urged, I should have thought proper to
have given my opinion, although they would have materially differed from that
of a gentleman whose law knowledge I much respect; yet I think it at this time
unnecessary to say any thing farther than that I agree in the opinions of the
gentleman with whom I sit.

As to the other point, to wit the conduct of this juror, I confess that my
mind is not completely made up: I think that all which can be said on that is,
that no juryman ought to go into that box with prejudice upon his mind. In a
case which the public at large must feel materially interested, it is
impossible to keep the mind from being affected; all the citizens will have
their feelings; the question then in, whether this one individual had or had
not particular malice against the prisoner? If not the evidence would weigh
lightly on my mind: upon this point I confess myself to have doubts.

These very striking expressions the juror swears he cannot recollect using,
although the others swear that he did use them. I am still doubtful, from the
light opinions I entertain of all the witnesses except one, whom I do not know,
but if any impressions are made upon my mind favorable to the motion, his
evidence has made them, otherwise I could not hesitate what opinion to form.

I know the event of a refusal; I know that a division of the court will be the
consequence, and the man must be left to the mercy of the executive. Individual
punishment is nothing to public example; on the other hand the consequences of
a new trial would be to delay the exercise of justice. I am satisfied that the
prisoner has had a fair and impartial trial, with all the advantages he could
desire; but as I think public example is the only object which the law
contemplates, and as that public example will have a far more forcible effect
when every excuse is removed, and the public fully satisfied with the
proceedings of this court, which may not be the case if a division of the court
takes place, I rather yield my opinion to the necessity, than a conviction of
the justice of a new trial. On these accounts I submit to say that THERE SHALL
BE A NEW TRIAL.

CIRCUIT COURT OF THE UNITED STATES. DISTRICT OF PENNSYLVANIA, Directed by the
judge of the district to be held at Norristown, proclamation whereof was made
by the marshal. Begun October 11th, 1799, BEFORE JUDGES BUSHROD WASHINGTON, AND
RICHARD PETER'S, Esquires,
JOHN FRIES and the other prisoners for treason and misdemeanor were brought up
at this court, but a sufficiency of jurors did not appear to proceed to trial.
October 15.
MR. DALLAS contested the jurisdiction of the court upon the general position
that an indictment found in the city and county of Philadelphia, could not be
tried at a court holden at Norristown. The constitution and laws of the United
States, he observed, were founded upon this principle: that the criminal should
always be tried as near the place where the crime was committed as
circumstances would admit; which was to be in the county, unless manifest
inconvenience should operate to prevent it. The circuit court could appoint
special courts for the trial of criminal cases, but not for civil cases. Laws
of United States p. 226 vol. 2.

But the district judge ordered the court to be holden at this place, agreeable
to the powers he was vested with by the quarantine and health law, passed
February 25th 1799. Sect. 5th and 7th reads thus: Sect. 5th It shall be lawful
for the judge of any district court of the United States, within whose district
any contagious or epidemical disease shall at any time prevail, so as in his
opinion, to endanger the life, or lives of any person or persons confined in
the prison of such district, in pursuance of any law of the United States, to
direct the marshal to cause the person or persons confined as aforesaid, to be
removed to the next adjacent prison, where such disease does not prevail, there
to be confined until he, she, or they, may be safely removed back to the place
of their first confinement, which remove shall be at the expense of the United
States.

Sect. 7. That whenever, in the opinion of the chief justice, or in case of his
death, or inability, of the senior associate justice of the supreme court of
the United States, a contagious sickness shall render it hazardous to hold the
next stated session of the said court at the seat of government, it shall be
lawful for the chief or associate justice, to issue his order to the marshal of
the district within which the supreme court is by law to be holden, directing
him to adjourn the said session of the said court to such other place within
the same, or any adjoining district as he may deem convenient; and the said
marshal shall thereupon adjourn the said court, by making publication thereof
in one or more public papers printed at the place, by law appointed for holding
the same, from the time he shall receive such order, until the time by law
prescribed for commencing the said session. And the district judges shall,
respectively, under the same circumstances, have the same power, by the same
means, to direct adjournments of the district and circuit courts within the
several districts to some convenient place within the same respectively.

Neither time nor place could be changed in civil cases, but both time and
place might be changed in criminal cases.

MR. DALLAS then proceeded to apply these laws to the present motion: supposing
that the place of trial ought to have been at or near where the crime was
committed, yet it was determined at the March term that it should not be held
nearer than at Philadelphia, although Norris town was nearer than Philadelphia.
It was then laid down as an established principle by both the judges, that the
indictment was part of the trial, and where the trial was commenced, there it
must be concluded; and therefore a motion to remove the prisoners for trial to
the county where the offenses were committed, were overruled.

First, he would observe, that the trial ought to have been held in the county:
the judiciary act, vol. I. p. 67, provided that the trial should be in the
county where the crime was committed. Subsequent to that, an amendment to the
constitution (8th) was passed, providing, "That in all criminal prosecutions,
the accused shall enjoy the right to a speedy and public trial, by an impartial
jury of the State and district wherein the crime shall have been committed."
From this Mr. Dallas conceived it clear, that what was called district in the
constitution was synonimous county in the law, and recognized that expression,
and therefore he thought they ought to be tried in one of those counties, and
at no other place.

But in criminal cases, there was a discretionary power in the court, or in the
district judge, to remove the court in case of contagious sickness, as well as
a power to remove the prisoners.

The 5th section only provides for the removal for safe keeping of the
prisoners to the next adjacent prison, until they can with safety return. The
court could be taken any where; but the prisoners could not be taken any where:
it must be only to the "next adjacent prison, where such disease does not
prevail." Norris town, he contended, was not the next adjacent prison: it was
to be the next prison, to an adjacent prison, and to one where the sickness
does not prevail, if it was in the power of the court to dispense with one of
these reasons, it was with all. Norris town was 17 miles from Philadelphia,
Chester was but 15, the difference to be sure was but small, but if the words
of the law were not binding in every part, the same discretionary power might
have removed the court 100 miles. The prisoners were therefore not to be tried,
but to be kept till they could be removed back with safety.

JUDGE PETER'S said, he contemplated Chester, but he had heard that there were
some cases of the fever there, and he knew it had before been much afflicted
with it; he therefore did not consider himself so closely bound as to be forced
to go there.

Mr. DALLAS said, vague report was not to be attended to, or he believed it
would be a reason against going almost to every place: a court was held at
Chester on the 9th inst. He believed Chester answered the perfect description
of the law. But, he said, the prisoners were removed, not merely for
safe-keeping, but for trial; however, he conceived the former decision, "that
the trial was begun where the indictment was found," must prevent the trials
being held any where but in Philadelphia, because the indictments were found
there. Though a habeus corpus was powerful in its operation, yet it was
certainly not meant to be in direct opposition, and to supercede an act of
congress. Nor was the personal inconvenience of the court to be considered; the
act of congress was peremptory, and could not be dissented to from any cause,
without it was by a repealing clause.

He hoped the court would give an opportunity to his colleague (Mr. Lewis) who
was now absent, to give his ideas on the subject. He was sent for, and expected
shortly.

MR. RAWLE contended, that there was no division contemplated but that by which
the United States were divided into 13 districts; he thought it impossible to
conceive that "district" meant a county, and therefore the reference to the 8th
amendment of the constitution, he thought, no support to the argument.

With respect to the power of the court to try the causes, Mr. R. thought it
clear, that as both in civil and criminal cases, the courts could be removed,
both with respect to time and place, under certain circumstances, so could the
business of the court also; this was a matter of course, and therefore the
power of habeus corpus, to bring all the prisoners up, was in the court. If it
were not so, in vain would be the provision (at times of sickness) of the
constitution, which directed a speedy trial, because inevitable delay must take
place, or the lives of the court and jury, as well as of the prisoners, be in
great hazard. He conceived, that the 5th section, which provided for the
removal of the prisoners, was scarcely conformable to that part of the
constitution which provided for a "speedy" trial, because, if the construction
was, as supposed, by the other counsel, it infringed on the prisoner's right:
they had no power to keep a man in long confinement, until his guilt was
ascertained; and no prevalence, of disorder could authorize them to it.

The gentleman said, that they were to be taken away for safe-keeping, until
they could be returned in safety to the prison from whence they were taken.
Now, suppose, for instance, those to be removed, who had been sentenced for
eight months imprisonment, and that time expired, whilst they were at some
other prison, on account of the prevailing sickness, could it be supposed that
the law contemplated that they should be kept till they could with safety be
returned? He presumed not.

Would they not thereby have suffered false imprisonment by being confined
longer than the judgment of the court ordered? Most certainly they would.

As to the next convenient prison, Mr. Rawle thought the wor^ were not very
perspicuous, not sufficiently, he thought, at to measure geometrical distances
to a nicety. He took it to be one of those cases which would bear a reasonable
and circumstantial construction, and which was left in the judgment of the
judge, whether it was convenient and safe to be rigorously executed, or not:
there might be an alarm of disorder sufficient to warrant the judge to say,
that it was not safe to lodge the prisoner in one place, and, as another was
about the same distance, where no such alarm existed, he thought himself
justifiable in ordering their removal to the latter: for though there was
provision to remove them once, there was no provision to remove them away
again, even in case of alarm, except it was back to the same prison they first
were in. Upon the whole, as to removal, he thought the judge had executed his
duty and his clemency. If it had not been right, the prisoners should have
complained at the time of their removal, but they were all perfectly satisfied.

With respect to the effect the removal would have to the jurisdiction of the
Court, he thought the arguments at the last court respecting trial in the same
county, would not apply. He (...) to the argument of Judge Wilson in the case
of Hamilton, Dallas Reports, 2 vol. p. 760. The Court had power in every county
in the state, because the whole state constituted but one district, in which
the law directs them to be tried.

He did not suppose the matter of convenience was any question at all: nor did
he believe the Judges would be in the least guided by it.

As to the business began in Philadelphia, in as much as the indictment was
there brought in, it was stated, that the trial must be continued there. This
might be also the means of delay, which the constitution provided against; but
he believed the argument could be answered in another way. The court was held
in Philadelphia, and this business was continued, and therefore wherever the
court sat, therefore its business must follow it. What would be the effect
else, of an indictment being found in Norris-town, and the cause being
continued over? Must the court remove back here at another session, to try the
cause here? This would bring the court into a continual state of vibration, and
justice be much delayed. He thought the court was competent to take up what
remained of former sessions.

MR. DALLAS hoped the court would consider the great inconvenience of the
trials, especially on the treason cases, now going on: the deranged state of
the country, owing to the disorder which had driven numbers of citizens from
their homes, would make it ruinous to the prisoners; it would prevent the
prisoners the opportunity of inquiring the characters of the jurors, and also
of procuring witnesses. It would doubtless endanger his life.

Agreeable to Mr. Rawle's argument, Mr. Dallas contended, that the 5th and 7th
sections of the Quarrantine Law were at war with each other, and not only so,
but with the general policy of the laws and constitution. But these two
sections, in his opinion, were distinct in their nature and object, and no
repealing clause had ever been passed, and therefore each part must be carried
into effect. The 8th section provided for the removal of the prisoners, but
there was not a word about trial in it. By the 7th section it would appear,
that the district judge might take the court to Pittsburg if he pleased; he was
not restrained at all; but there was no such power given to him respecting
prisoners; he could not take them farther than the nearest prison of safety.
How could these two sections be reconciled? Why were not the two sections
formed upon one principle, if they were so connected as the gentlemen supposed?
Of what avail would it be to take a court to a place where there was no power
of taking the prisoners, who must be tried, before that court? But so it might
be, if the reasoning which had been given was right. Had not the 5th section
been introduced by the legislature, then, indeed the whole jurisdiction would
have been removed with it.

With respect to the indictments that might be found in Norris town, the court
having been held agreeable to the 7th section of that law, the question of
precise distance being set aside, undoubtedly they would go to wherever the
court would remove. Inasmuch as justice could not be done to the prisoners, and
inasmuch as the former decision prevented the trial being held any where but at
the place in which it was begun, he hoped the trials would not be proceeded on.

MR. LEWIS arrived in court, and apologized for not being able to attend
earlier: he had not sufficiently weighed the motion, he said, to be able to add
any thing to the ground ably argued by his colleague, and therefore wished to
leave it to the decision of the court.

JUDGE WASHINTON said, nothing was more clear than that the fifth and seventh
sections of the Quarrantine Law were, for different purposes: the ^th only
relates to the removal of prisoners, that they might not fall a prey to any
contagious disease that might occur wheresoever they may be confined; and this
removal was not for the sake of trial, but for safe keeping. It was doubtful,
previous to the passing of this act, whether the marshals had power to remove
them, whatever might be the cause, or however dangerous to them to remain in
prison; but against this doubt and danger, Congress provided. The 7th section
applies altogether to the removal of the court for the purpose of trial of
causes, both criminal and civil. But all the acts that have been mentioned may
be reconciled together, and all with the constitution. The count, without any
restriction as to the place of its session, if a contagious disease shall
occur, are to be convened for the purpose of trying causes at the stated
session; and, it is to be remembered, that this is not a new, nor a special
court, but an adjourned stated court, merely removed from one spot to another,
to be holden there: of course, all the trialas pending, and before the court at
any former term, are to come on at the place so changed; for the court is the
same: the arguments of Mr. Attorney were sound, and need not be repeated.

On these grounds, the court thought that the trials ought to go on, and
therefore the motion was overruled.

WILLIAM W. WOODWARD, No. 17, Chestnut Street,
HAS just published the First and Second volumes of Dr. Witherspoon's works, in
two large and handsome Octavo volumes -- the last volume will be published in
about three weeks, and will be exceeding valuable, as it will contain among
other useful and entertaining matter, Lectures on Moral Philosophy and
Criticism, which are now printing from the original -- and the Publisher is
happy to say that it will be correct, as a gentleman who was intimately
acquainted with the Doctor and his handwriting, is assisting the printer in
correcting the press -- The complete set in 3 volumes, will be 6 dolls. 75
cents.

The Publisher has on hand, a few copies of the late IMPORTANT TRIAL OF WILLIAM
COBBETT.

This was an action brought against him for a libel, by Dr. Benjamin Rush --
price 371/2 cents, printed on the same type and paper, and a page of an equal
length and width of the present trial, and will make a very handsome octavo
volume when bound together.

WILLIAM W. WOODWARD Keeps on hand a large and general assortment of books and
stationary.

KOTZEBUE's PLAYS

In 25 numbers, are for sale as above. Those gentlemen who subscribe for the
whole, will be furnished at 25 cents each; but those who purchase but a few
copies, will be charged according to the size of the different publications. As
they are printed, they are forwarded from New York. Five numbers are already
received.

Printing business executed with accuracy and dispatch, in all its branches.


