BYSTANDER; on A SERIES OF LETTERS ON THE SUBJECT OF THE "LEGISLATIVE CHOICE"
OF ELECTORS IN MARYLAND.

In which the Constitutional Right to a Legislative Choice in that State, and
the Necessity of adopting it, for the present Election only, in order to
counteract the Artifices of the Anti-federalists in Virginia and other States,
and to prevent a President from being elected by the MINORITY of the Nation,
instead of the MAJORITY, are considered and fully proved.

ADDRESSED TO THE PEOPLE OF MARYLAND.

BALTIMORE: PRINTED BY VUNDT AND BROWN, NO. 12, SOUTH GAY-STREET, M,DCCC.

To the PEOPLE of MARYLAND:
FELLOW-CITIZENS,
THE following pieces were originally addressed to the Editors of the Federal
Gazette in Baltimore, and published in that paper. It being thought, by some
persons whose opinion deserves respect, that a republication of them, in a form
more connected, and more convenient for circulation and perusal, might be of
use, they are now presented again to your consideration.

Their author is a person residing among you, whose present lot in life, as
well as his future hopes, is embarked in the same bottom with yours; and who,
therefore, has a common interest with you, in the great subject to which he
calls your attention. It is by no means necessary that you should know his
name. It is not by the authority of names, but by truth, that the
determinations of freemen ought to be guided. If opinions be founded in reason,
and statements supported by fact, it is of no importance by whom they are
advanced.

In attempting, however, to impress on your minds the necessity of adopting the
legislative choice of electors, at this time, he thinks it important to declare
to you, that he is decidedly in favor of district elections, whenever they can
be permanently and universally established. This can be done only by an
amendment of the constitution. Such an amendment, he knows it to be the
intention of a federal member of congress, with whom he is well acquainted, to
propose at the next session of that body. It may also be proposed by the
legislature of Maryland. By instructing your members in the ensuing assembly to
propose it, you may greatly promote its adoption by the other states. Should it
be adopted, of which I think there is little doubt, all the states will stand
on equal ground, in the future elections of a chief magistrate for the nation.
The people, in districts, will every where choose the electors. The mode cannot
be altered by one state, as Virginia has lately done, in order to favor unduly
the success of a particular candidate. And the chief magistrate of the nation
will be the fair choice of a majority of the nation.

This will be the effect of establishing, universally and permanently, the
choice of electors by the people in districts; and this is the wish of the
federal party. They will exert themselves to obtain it. But till it is
obtained, while the friends of Mr. Jefferson in one state abolish district
elections to favor him, I trust that you will be convinced, by a candid perusal
of the following papers, that it is both just and necessary for the friends of
Mr. Adams, in this state, to employ the same weapon in defending themselves,
and in preventing the rights of the majority from being usurped by the minority.

BYSTANDER.
No. I.
Messrs. YUNDT and BROWN,
THE alarm which the anti-federalists feel, at the idea of changing the mode of
election in this state, so as to counteract the policy of their party in
Virginia, is perfectly natural and well founded -- And their conduct, in
attempting to raise a clamor against the measure, is altogether consistent with
the principles whereby their party has, at all times, been actuated. To change
the mode of election in Virginia, so as to deprive the federalists in that
state of all share in the choice of electors, was, as they well knew, the only
step which could give their party a chance of success. Therefore they took it;
and it was applauded by the party throughout the union, as a master-stroke of
policy. Blind and foolish as they are, they did not recollect, or did not
foresee, that the blow was capable of being retorted on their own heads.

Finding now that this retort is likely to be made, they wake from their short
dream of success, and cry out against the measure, as in the highest degree
unjust. They now affect a wonderful solicitude about the "rights of the
people," which they say would be invaded and even destroyed, by the measure of
choosing electors by the legislature. Having first taken the step themselves,
for their own benefit, they are now wonderfully alarmed lest the federal party
should take it also, and thus restore the balance of fair choice.

But they do not recollect, that the rights of the people are as effectually
preserved by a choice by the legislature, as in any other mode. The
constitution is the work of the people; the expression of their will, and the
fence placed by themselves round their rights. Nothing, therefore, which is
expressly authorized by the constitution, can be contrary to the rights of the
people. Whatever is done pursuant to the constitution, is their own act,
flowing from their own authority, and therefore not only consistent with their
rights, but even an exercise of those rights.

But the constitution provides, that the electors shall be appointed in such
mode as the legislature of each state shall direct. -- Consequently, any manner
of choosing which the legislature shall direct, is conformable, and not
contrary, to the rights of the people.

Virginia, they tell us, did not resort to a choice by the legislature, but
only to a general ticket, which is still a choice by the people, and therefore
fair and proper. Shallow pretext! Does not a general ticket in Virginia produce
precisely the same effect, that a choice by the legislature would have
produced? Does it not as effectually deprive the federalists, who are the
minority in the state as well as in the legislature, of the six votes which
they would have gained by the district election? Every man must see that it
does, and that, therefore, there is no sort of difference between the two
modes, except that the choice by the legislature is attended with the least
trouble, tumult and inconvenience, and for that reason preferable to the other.
The result is precisely the same; but by the choice by the legislature, it is
produced with less inconvenience than by a general ticket.

Virginia, they further tell us, was not the first to take this step. She was
forced into it, in self-defence, and in order to counteract the policy of other
states. But this is a mistake in point of fact. Virginia set the example of
choosing the mode, with a view to a particular election, and to this particular
election. -- Pennsylvania had no established mode -- she had chosen in
different ways at different elections. The law under which the last choice was
made, was a temporary law, and had expired when the legislature of that state
last met. The federal party contended for a district election; that mode of
which the anti-federalists of this state are so greatly enamored. The
anti-federalists in that state, acting in perfect concert with those of
Virginia, opposed this fairest of all possible modes of election, and opposed
it with such violence and obstinacy, that they prevented any law from passing,
and seem fully resolved rather to leave their state without a vote, than to
yield to district elections. So much for the attachment of the anti-federalists
in Pennsylvania to this fairest of all possible modes, with which the same
party here are so much in love.

Why are they in love with it here? Because they expect to gain some votes to
their party by it. Why are they opposed to it in Pennsylvania and Virginia?
Because they expect their party to lose some votes by it there. The end
therefore is the same, namely, to ensure the success of their party, although
the means are different: and their great solicitude for the "rights of the
people" turns out, in this case as in so many others, to be nothing more than a
desire to promote their own views. Those rights are sacrificed without the
least hesitation, whenever the sacrifice can promote a party purpose.

In all the other states, except Pennsylvania, the mode of election was fixed,
and the federalists were well content to let it remain so. They were content
that this election should be made, according to the same principles that
governed the former. But the anti-federalists set the example of change, where
it suited their purpose to make it. Having done so, they stickle violently to
preserve the old mode, where that happens to suit them best.

It is said by their advocates, that they attempted to change the mode in
New York, and to introduce a district election, instead of a choice by the
legislature. This example is unfortunate. The anti-federalists themselves
introduced the choice by the legislature in New York, in spite of the efforts
of the federalists; and their object was to promote the election of general
Clinton, as vice president, in opposition to Mr. Adams. When they found that
this work of their own hands was likely to operate against themselves, they
wished to change it, and to resort again to district elections.

We are told that the legislature of Maryland, at its last session, had the
general ticket scheme of Virginia before its eyes, and yet took no step to
counteract it; and this is used as an argument against calling the legislature.
But here again these ignorant persons mistake or mistate the fact. The
legislature of this state never had the Virginia general ticket scheme before
its eyes: It had adjourned long before that scheme was adopted in Virginia, and
even before the intention to adopt it was publicly avowed. The law for carrying
it into effect, was one of the last acts of the session. It was not introduced
till a day or two before the adjournment, and then was hurried through with
indecent haste. We all know the feint that was practiced, most probably with a
view to deceive the legislature of Maryland, on the subject of this law. It was
talked of; the pulse of the legislature was felt; the scheme was well matured
and completed. Now in order to gain time, and to deceive the opposite party, by
which means some of them might be prevailed on to go home, its authors gave out
that it was abandoned. One of their chiefs, colonel Tailor, carried his
duplicity so far as actually to go home, giving out that he was gone for the
session. The scheme being ripe for execution, he suddenly returned, the bill
was introduced, and pushed through the two houses with unprecedented celerity;
and then the legislature adjourned. All this was some time after the
legislature of this state had adjourned. Consequently, that body never had the
measure under its eye, and nothing can be inferred from its omitting to take
any countervailing step.

The truth of the whole matter is, and it need not be concealed, that while the
mode of choosing electors remains on its present footing, variable according to
the will of the state legislatures, variations will be made, in some states, to
serve the canditate who may happen to be the favorite there. This has been done
in Virginia. The anti-federalists began the game. Other states must play it
against them, in order to prevent the election from becoming perfectly unfair;
from being controled by the minority. Massachusetts has set the example of this
retort; and the anti-federalists, awaking from their golden dream of power and
office, begin to quake and cry out. Maryland, I have no doubt, will follow up
the blow; in which case their defeat is certain. This they well know; and hence
their new found solicitude for the "rights of the people," which they utterly
disregard, for district elections, which they first set aside.

Let an uniform and fixed mode of choosing electors be proposed, and the
federalists will agree to it. They will even propose one themselves, at the
next session of congress. All then will stand on the same ground; and the mode
of choice cannot be changed to suit party purposes of the moment. But while
this mode remains changeable, if one party be allowed to change it where it
suits them, and to prevent change where the other party might gain by it, the
election becomes manifestly unfair, in its general result, which is the only
proper method of considering it; and the case put by the "Marylander," at which
your correspondent the "Voter," is so much displeased, the case of a man
attacked with a bludgeon and defending himself with his fist, manifestly occurs.

Lest it should be pretended that such a step on the part of Maryland, as is in
question, would render the general result of the election unfair, I pledge
myself to show, on a future occasion, and to show from a fair and accurate
survey of the continent, that if district elections were every where
established, the result would be still more favorable to the federal party, who
have a large majority in the nation at large, than it can be, supposing
Maryland to follow the example of retort set by Massachusetts, and to adopt the
mode of choice by the legislature. In the meantime I remain a dispassionate,
though not an indifferent

BYSTANDER.

No. II.
ON a former occasion I pledged myself to prove, by a fair survey of the
continent, and a statement of the strength of parties in each state, that if
district elections for president and vice president were universally
established, which ought to be, and I trust will be, done by an amendment of
the constitution, Mr. Jefferson could have no chance of being elected; but on
the contrary, that the result, in that case, would be far less favorable to his
party, than even in case Maryland, to counteract the measures of his
supporters, should adopt, for this time, the plan of choosing by the
legislature.

Col. Mercer indeed asserted, in a late public speech, that the democrats would
come in, meaning that Mr. Jefferson would be elected, unless nineteen
twentieths of the freemen of America should be prevented from expressing their
sense in the election: but this assertion, like so many others of the same
gentleman, served only to show that he was utterly ignorant, or utterly
regardless, of the facts. Let us see who these nineteen twentieths of the
freemen of America are. We will begin with New Hampshire, and counting the
number of votes in each state as we pass, proceed to Georgia and Kentucky.

New Hampshire has six votes. The elections there have always been by a general
ticket. The anti-federalists, who never could gain a vote in this mode, have
asserted that they could get one by a district election. More than one they
have never claimed. Let them have it. ^ The elections in Massachusetts, which
has sixteen votes, have heretofore been of a mixed nature; the greater part of
the electors being chosen by districts, the rest by the legislature. The
anti-federalists do not pretend, that a district election would give them more
than two in this state. They claim no more. The truth is that they would have
very little chance for more than one: but we will give them all they claim. 2
Rhode Island gives four votes, and Connecticut nine: The choice is by the
legislature in the first, and by a general ticket in the last. The
anti-federalists do not pretend, that, by any mode of election, they could get
a vote in either of these states. Vermont gives four votes -- choice by the
legislature. Here they might get one by a district election; though it is not
very certain. We will however allow it to them. 2 New York gives twelve votes
-- choice by the legislature. In no state are parties more equally divided than
in this. The majority leans sometimes to one side, and sometimes to the other,
and has generally been governed by the city election. Out of the city, there
is, in the legislature recently chosen, a clear majority for the federal party.
Were electors chosen by districts, there is, therefore, the utmost reason to
suppose, that six votes would be on one side, and six on the other; and in that
manner they may be safely counted. 6 New Jersey gives seven votes -- choice by
the legislature. By districts three of these might be given to the anti-federal
party; though no ground of probable calculation exists for more than two. We
will, however, give them three. 3 Pennsylvania gives fifteen votes -- choice
sometimes by districts, and sometimes by a general ticket. The federal party
have always, till the present legislature, possessed a clear and even a large
majority in both branches. Even now they have a majority in the whole
legislature; their majority in the senate being seven, and that of the
anti-federalists in the other house, only two. But if we take the votes on the
election for governor, as a fair criterion of the strength of parties, we shall
find that the anti-federalists are in the proportion of eight to seven. Mr.
M'Kean had, I think, 38,000 votes, and Mr. Ross 33,000. The difference, I
perfectly recollect, was about 5000, not more, and the whole number about
70,000. It must be recollected, moreover, that the majority of Mr. M'Kean was
given by the two insurgent counties of Berks and Northampton, which were almost
unanimous in his favor; and that in the rest of the state Mr. Ross had a clear
majority. It is also to be remembered, that a majority of the counties was in
favor of Ross; and that a vast number of the votes for M'Kean, were obtained by
the impositions practiced on the Germans, relative to the house tax; which have
since been detected and done away by the actual assessment. From these datums
we may very safely conclude, that, by a district election, the anti-federalists
could not gain more than nine votes in Pennsylvania -- that number we will
allow them The fair calculation, indeed, is, that they could get but eight,
eight to seven being their proportion, in the votes given for governor.
. 9 Delaware chooses by the legislature, and gives three votes; of which, by a
district election, the anti-federalists might probably, though by no means
certainly, obtain one. 1 Maryland chose first by a general ticket. The present
established mode is by districts. She gives ten votes, of which the
anti-federalists have not the least probability of getting more than three by
the district election, should it continue. There are but two districts on which
they count with confidenc; that composed of Baltimore and Harford counties on
the western, and that composed of Queen-Anne, Talbot and Caroline This appears
to be a mistake, Caroline county belonging to another district. It need not,
however, be remarked, that this mistake makes no difference in the calculation.
counties on the eastern shore: And even in those they are by no means safe.
They have hopes of two other districts. The cities of Baltimore and Annapolis,
with the county of Anne-Arundel, compose one; the counties of Washington and
Allegany the other. In the first of these they even affect to be confident; but
their secret convictions are far different. They know that in the election
between general Smith and Mr. Winchester, they had a majority in Baltimore town
of only 300, and that many who supported genesis Smith, are now decidedly for the
federal elector. They also know that in the election between Mr. Thomas and Mr.
Sprigg, there was in the city of Annapolis and Anne Arundel county, a much
greater majority for the federal candidate; and that, consequently, should
things remain as they were, the latter majority must overpower the former, and
the federal elector be carried. They therefore found their hopes, entirely, on
the vain expectation of a change in their favor in the public sentiment; of
which there is not the least prospect or appearance. As to Allegany and
Washington, it is less certain. The former county is known to be nearly
unanimous for the federal candidate, while the latter, which is much larger,
and the strong ground of the anti-federalists, is much divided. From this state
of things nothing certain can be concluded. At the last election, Mr. Lynn, of
Allegany, who had but little strength in Washington, was the federal candidate.
The election was extremely close, but he succeeded. In the present, Mr.
Williams, of Washington, who is very strong in that county, and will be as
strongly supported in Allegany, which is a most federal county, as Mr. Lynn
himself, is the candidate; from which arrangement a much more favorable result
than that of the last election, may be expected. Upon the whole we may
conclude, that the anti-federalists have some chance, though but a small one,
in these two districts; and that in the other two the probability is strongly
in their favor. This will warrant the further conclusion, that no probable
ground exists for the expectation, on their part, of more than three; and
nothing like certainty of more than two. We will, however, allow them three. 3
Virginia gives twenty-one votes; and always chose by districts, till that mode
was altered by the late legislature to serve the purpose of the present
election, and silence the voice of the people in six or eight districts. It is
well known, that had the district election been suffered to remain, the
federalists had the utmost probability of gaining six votes, and very fair
prospects of eight. We will take only six, and allow the other fifteen to the
anti-federalists. 15 North Carolina gives twelve votes -- choice by districts.
The most recent and authentic information, authorizes the confident expectation
of five votes, and gives solid ground for counting on seven. We will take five
only, and leave the seven others to the anti-federalists. 7 South Carolina
gives eight votes, and has always chosen by the legislature, which is still the
established mode. Out of the six representatives from that state, five are now
decidedly federal -- three have almost always been so. From this circumstance
it may fairly be presumed, and I believe there can be no doubt of it, that on a
district election, there would be at least four votes out of eight for the
federal candidate. I believe that the number would be greater; but take it at
four, and it leaves for the anti-federalists 4 Georgia gives four votes: choice
by a general ticket. There is great reason to suppose that on a district
election, there would be at least one for the federalists. We will, however,
being uncertain on that point, give the whole four to the anti-federalists. 4
Tennessee gives three, and Kentucky four votes. The former chose last time by
the legislature; what the present mode is I do not know. The latter, I believe,
chooses by districts. We will give all these votes to the anti-federalists,
though one in Tennessee might be hoped for. 7 63

Thus it appears that were district elections universally established, the
anti-federalists, on the most liberal allowance, could get but sixty-three
votes in all the states, out of one hundred and thirty-eight, of which it
requires seventy to make a majority. That is, that if the sense of the nation
could be expressed, by the fairest of all possible modes, a general election by
the people in districts, there would be a large majority of the nation against
that candidate, whom his friends are now attempting to smuggle in, by changing
the mode of election from districts to a general ticket, where it suits their
views, and clamoring, at the same time, for district elections, where they hope
to get something by them.

In Virginia they began the game. They took away the fair mode of district
elections, and substituted a general ticket, whereby the voice of six federal
districts was silenced in the election of president. In Pennsylvania they
contended to the last for a general ticket, and refused to the federalists a
district election, on the fairest division of the state, which was repeatedly
offered to them. A person, indeed, under the signature of "A Pennsylvanian,"
who is said to be Mr. Dallas, has had the unaccountable effrontery to assert,
in a paper of this city, that the anti-federalists in the Pennsylvania
legislature, did not object to the principle of a district election, but to the
mode of dividing the state; an assertition which that person himself, and every
man in Pennsylvania, knows to be false. In Maryland, on the contrary, these
same friends to Mr. Jefferson, hypocritically affect the most violent
attachment to district elections, raise a loud clamor about the rights of the
people, and contend, tooth and nail, for that very mode which their coadjutors
have abolished in Virginia, and prevented in Pennsylvania; hoping by these
means to cheat the federal party, who constitute the majority in Maryland, as
well as in the nation at large, out of their choice, out of their right, as a
majority, to have a president of their choice, and to impose on the nation a
chief magistrate to whom the majority is unquestionably opposed. In a
subsequent number, I will examine, more at length, this pretense about the
rights of the people, whereby they are attempted to be cheated, in fact, out of
their rights; and the foundations of this clamor, by which the good sense of
the majority is attempted to be imposed on, and a president to be chosen by a
factious minority. In the meantime, I will ask the federalists in Maryland, who
constitute the majority by the confession even of their opponents, what is the
right which they hold most dear? Is it not to have a president of their own
choice? If so, will they suffer themselves to be defrauded of this dear and
substantial right, by a few cant phrases; by the artifices of the enemies of
government in other states, aided by their noisy clamors in this? Should such
be their conduct, I shall indeed be an acquiescent, but an astonished

BYSTANDER.

No. III.
IT has formerly been shown, by a fair survey of the continent, and a reference
to public and undeniable facts, See the preceding number, and the calculations
and statements there made, which have not been denied or disputed.
that were district elections established in Virginia, Pennsylvania, New York,
and throughout the union, Mr. Jefferson could not possibly get more than
sixty-three votes, out of one hundred and thirty-eight; which is the whole
number of votes for president and vice president. This number is seven short of
a majority. The majority of the nation is therefore opposed to Mr. Jefferson,
and in favor of Mr. Adams, general Pinckney, or some other federal candidate.

The anti-federalists of Virginia, who are a majority in that state, knowing
this to be the true state of the matter, abolished the district election in
their state; where Mr. Adams and general Pinckney would, upon that plan, have
got six votes at least. By this step they took six votes from those candidates,
and gave them to Mr. Jefferson. Situated as the election actually is in the
other states, these six votes, taken from Mr. Jefferson's opponents by
depriving them of district elections, and added to him, will secure him the
election, though the majority of the nation is against him; unless Maryland,
where the federalists are a decided majority, should take the same step in her
own defense. Unless by setting aside district elections, for the present,
Maryland should deprive the anti-federalists of their influence in this state,
as the federalists of Virginia have been deprived of their influence in
Virginia, and should restore the election to its fair balance, the president of
the United States will be chosen by the minority of the nation. This it is the
determination of the federalists of Maryland, that is of the majority, to do;
not by stealth and underhandedly, but openly, upon fair and avowed principles,
and with the concurrence of a majority of the people.

The anti-federalists, alarmed at the idea of seeing their unjust advantage
thus snatched out of their hands, and the election of president placed again
under the control of the majority, make a terrible outcry against this plan.
They become, all at once, the zealous defenders of district elections; which
they have so lately trampled under foot on the other side of the Potowmac, and
do now obstinately oppose in Pennsylvania. They say that the right to district
elections, which they themselves have abolished in Virginia in order to promote
the election of Mr. Jefferson, and do now resist in Pennsylvania for the same
purpose, is a most sacred right; and that an attempt to change them, even for
this time alone and in order to counteract the plans of the same party in
Virginia, ought to be treated by the people of Maryland, as an invasion of
their dearest constitutional privileges.

The foundations of this clamor I now intend to examine. I intend to enquire
into the nature and extent of this constitutional right. I intend to show that
the substantial constitutional right of the people of Maryland, which is a
right to have a president whom they approve, is in fact invaded by those who
make this clamor; and can be protected and secured by no other means, than a
change in the mode of choosing electors. I intend to show that should the
electors be appointed by the legislature, they will be, to all intents and
purposes, chosen by the people of the state at large.

PART FIRST. Of the Constitutional Rights of the People, relative to the
Election of President.
Let us in the first place ask what is the constitutional right of the people,
relative to the choice of president? I answer, their constitutional right is,
to have the president chosen by electors appointed in each state, "in such
manner as the legislature thereof shall direct." Hear the constitution.

"The executive power shall be vested in a president of the United States of
America. He shall hold his office during the term of four years; and, together
with the vice president, chosen for the same term, be elected as follows:

"Each state shall appoint, in such manner as the legislature thereof may
direct, a number of electors equal to the whole number of senators and
representatives to which the state may be entitled in the congress, etc.

"The electors shall meet in their respective states, and vote by ballot for
two persons," etc.

This is every word contained in the constitution, on the subject of appointing
electors. Each state, we see, not the people of each state, but each state in
its united political capacity as a state, is to appoint a certain number of
electors. And how are they to be appointed? By districts? By a general ticket?
By the legislature? No! But in such manner as the legislature of the state
shall direct. So says the constitution. Such are its plain and express words.
The legislature of each state, therefore, has a constitutional right, to direct
the mode of appointing electors, and to direct it in whatever manner it shall
think fit.

But no, say the anti-federalists, those skilful expounders of the
constitution. When the constitution says that "each state shall appoint
electors, it does not mean each state in its political capacity as a state --
but the people of each state, as individuals." Let us try this explanation by
the constitution itself, and by the construction which it has received from the
people of the several states.

When the constitution means that the people of the states shall act, it
uniformly mentions the people. When it means to speak of the states in their
political capacities, it always uses the word "states" alone.

Thus, in the 10th section of the 1st article: " No state shall enter into any
treaty of alliance," etc. No state shall, without the consent of congress, lay
imposts, etc. No state shall, without the consent of congress, lay any duty of
tounage," etc.

So in the 2d section of the 3d article: "The judicial power shall extend to
controversies between two or more states, between a state and citizens of
another state -- and between a state, or the citizens thereof, and foreign
states, citizens or subjects."

"In all cases affecting ambassadors, other public ministers, and consuls, and
those in which a state shall be party, the supreme court shall have original
jurisdiction."

So in section 3d of the 4th article: "New states may be admitted by congress
into this union; but no new state shall be formed or erected within the
jurisdiction of any other state, nor any state be formed by the junction of two
or more states, or parts of states, without the consent of the legislatures of
the states concerned," etc.

So in section 4th, same article: "The United States shall guarantee to every
state in this union a republican form of government," etc. And in section 5th,
"No state, without its consent, shall be deprived of its equal suffrage in the
senate."

So in the 9th section of the 1st article: "The migration or importation of
such persons as any of the states now existing shall think proper to admit,
shall not be prohibited," etc.

In all these instances, it is perfectly clear, that the word state is used to
signify, not the people of the state, but the state itself, in its collective
capacity, as a community and body politic. When the constitution, therefore,
using the same expression, says, that " each state shall appoint electors, in
such manner as the legislature thereof shall direct," does it not evidently
intend to convey the same meaning, and to speak of the state in its political
capacity? Does it, contrary to its constant tenor and meaning in every other
part, intend to say that the people of each state, individually, shall appoint
electors? When it means to introduce the people in their individual capacity,
what is its language? Let it speak for itself.

Section 2. article 1. "The house of representatives shall be composed of
members chosen every second year, by the people of the several states." Is this
the same language? Does it convey the same meaning? If the constitution had
meant that the electors, as well as the representatives, should be chosen by
the people of the several states, would it not have said so, in express terms,
in one case, as well as in the other? Certainly it would.

We are therefore warranted to conclude, that as the constitution has provided,
not that the people of the several states should choose electors, but that each
state should choose them, it meant, in this instance, as in every other where
the same expression is used, to speak of the state in its collective political
capacity, and to provide that there should be a certain number of electors for
each state, and that the legislature thereof should direct, in whatever manner
it might think fit, the mode of making the appointment.

"Each state shall appoint, in such manner as the legislature thereof may
direct, a number of electors equal," etc. Is not this, when compared with the
constitution itself, and the language used by it in every other part, so plain
that he who runs may read?

What has been the construction put on it by the states? Surely their opinions,
not warped by particular objects and the purposes of the moment, but
deliberately and uniformly expressed, will be allowed to possess some weight in
a question like this.

There have already been three elections of president. In all of them,
South Carolina has chosen the electors by the legislature. Tennessee having
been but lately erected into a state, has chosen but once, and then it was by
the legislature. In all three, Jersey and Delaware have chosen by the
legislature. In the two last, certainly, and I believe in all three, New York
has chosen by the legislature. Every choice that Rhode Island has made, if I
recollect aright, has been by the legislature. At the last election, and I
think at some of the former, Massachusetts chose part of her electors by the
legislature.

Thus we see, that out of sixteen states, seven, not under the influence of any
particular project, not with a view to any party election, but freely and
impartially, have adopted the mode of appointing electors by the legislature;
thereby declaring, in the most authoritative manner, their opinion about the
true meaning of the constitution. This declaration the people of those states
have approved; for otherwise, they would have expressed their discontent; and
by electing different persons into the legislature, would have caused the
adoption of a different mode.

Two other states, New Hampshire and Vermont, are said, and I believe truly, to
have lately adopted the same mode; not in order to secure all the votes to the
federal interest, for of that they were sure, by the established mode of a
general ticket; but for the purpose of preventing votes from being thrown away
from either of the federal candidates. Thus nine states have concurred in this
construction of the constitution; which indeed, as we have seen, is so plain
from the face of the instrument itself, that one is at a loss to conceive, how
it could ever have been called into question.

PART SECOND. That the substantial constitutional Right of the People of
Maryland, the Right to have a President chosen by the Majority, is invaded by
district Elections; and can be restored only by a Legislative choice of
Electors.
I most readily admit that the people have a right, a most undoubted right,
under the constitution, not indeed to vote immediately in the choice of
electors, but to influence substantially, and direct, not only that choice, but
the choice of president also. The president is the elective chief magistrate of
the nation. He ought to be chosen by the majority of the nation. The sense of
that majority ought to be fairly expressed. This is the real substantial right
of the people. To have a chief magistrate who is the choice of the majority;
not to choose electors in this, that or the other manner, or to vote for this,
that or the other man as an elector. The latter is the shadow; about which none
but children or blockheads can be solicitous, nor any but designing party-men
would make a fuss. The former, to have a president of their choice, is the
substance; and whatever tends to secure that substance, to promote that choice,
promotes, instead of subverting, the "rights of the people."

People of Maryland, who is your choice as president? Whom do you wish to have
as chief magistrate? You answer, at least a large majority of you, who must
speak for the whole, answer, Mr. Adams or general Pinckney. -- Whom do you wish
to prevent from being elected president? The same majority answers, Mr.
Jefferson. Who are they then, who wish to take from you your rights? Those who
have destroyed district elections on the other side of the Potomak, in order to
secure the election of Mr. Jefferson, while they loudly clamor for them here
for the same purpose; or those who wish, by introducing the choice by the
legislature, to replace the election in the hands of the majority, and continue
Mr. Adams, the man of your choice, in the presidential chair? Turn then, with
just disdain from the noisy, deceitful, designing demagogue, who proves that he
holds your rights and your understandings in equal contempt, by endeavoring to
impose on the one, in order to beguile you of the other; by endeavoring to pay
you for substance with words; to persuade you that in order to preserve the
right of voting in a particular mode, you must submit to have those votes
rendered absolutely ineffectual, and a chief magistrate imposed on you, who are
the majority, by the tricks and clamors of a profligate minority.

Is there any man in any district or county of Maryland, who wishes for the
election of Mr. Adams, who prefers him to Mr. Jefferson, and yet does not see
that his rights, which are to have a chief magistrate of his own choice, are
substantially promoted and secured by whatever constitutional measure tends to
secure the man of his choice? Is there any Marylander, who prefers Mr. Adams to
Mr. Jefferson, and is yet so foolishly attached to voting at a particular
election, as to sacrifice the former object in order to retain the latter? Is
there any such Marylander, who can be persuaded by the advocates of Mr.
Jefferson, to sell his birthright for a mess of pottage? Why does he wish to
vote? Is it that he may go to the polls, and pronounce the name of Jeremiah
Townley Chase, of Philip Thomas, or of any other person; or that he may promote
the election of Mr. Adams as president, in preference to that of Mr. Jefferson?
If the latter be his object, surely the most effectual steps for attaining it,
must be the most conformable to his wishes, and to his rights.

The president is the elective chief magistrate of the nation, and ought,
therefore, to be the fair choice of a majority of the nation. District
elections, I know, are, in themselves, the fairest mode of expressing that
choice; but in order to be fair, they must be general and permanent. If one
state can change from a district election to a general ticket, or a legislative
choice, and not another, the election becomes unfair, and the minority may
choose instead of the majority. Of this any one may be convinced, by a very
simple illustration.

Suppose three neighboring states, like Delaware, Maryland and Virginia, to
form a separate union, to have three votes each for president, and to elect by
districts. There will be nine votes in all, and five will be a majority.
Suppose that in Virginia two are for Mr. Jefferson and one for Mr. Adams, and
in Maryland two for Mr. Adams and one for Mr. Jefferson, and in Delaware two
for Mr. Adams and one for Mr. Jefferson. Or in figures thus: Mr. Adams. Mr.
Jefferson. Virginia 1 2 Maryland 2 1 Delaware 2 1 5 4

There will then, in the three states, be five votes, by district election, for
Mr. Adams, and only four for Mr. Jefferson. Mr. Adams, therefore, will be the
choice of the majority, by the fairest of all possible modes, the district
election. Ought he not to be president? Every body must say yes.

But suppose that the friends of Mr. Jefferson, in Virginia, where they have
the majority, should abolish the district election, and adopt a general ticket;
whereby Mr. Adams would be deprived of his one vote in that state, and the
whole three would be secured to Mr. Jefferson. Suppose further, that neither
Maryland nor Delaware, in both of which Mr. Adams's friends are the majority,
should follow the example. The election would then stand thus: Mr. Adams. Mr.
Jefferson. Virginia 0 3 Maryland 2 1 Delaware 2 1 4 5

Mr. Jefferson would get a majority, five votes, and would be president, to the
exclusion of Mr. Adams; who would nevertheless, possess the wishes of a
majority.

But if the friends of Mr. Adams in Maryland should retort on Virginia, by
adopting a general ticket, or a legislative choice, the election would be
restored to its true balance, and the majority of votes would be given back to
Mr. Adams, to whom, he being the choice of the majority of the people, it
properly belonged: Thus, Mr. Adams. Mr. Jefferson. Virginia 0 3 Maryland 3 0
Delaware 2 1 5 4

If after the friends of Mr. Jefferson in Virginia, had taken this step of
abolishing district elections, in order to secure to him all the votes of that
state, they, or their partisans here, should come and tell us, that it was
contrary to the rights of the people to retort the blow, and restore the
majority of votes to him who possessed the majority of wishes, should we hear
them with patience? Should we suffer ourselves to be tricked out of our rights
by so contemptible an artifice? If we did, we should richly deserve to become
hewers of wood and drawers of water, for the first knave we might chance to
meet.

This example needs no application. The very case has happened. The numbers
indeed are different, but the principle and the result are the same. Attend for
a moment to the statement, and you will see it.

Pennsylvania will have no election. The federalists, friends of Mr. Adams,
contend for a district election. The anti-federalists, friends of Mr.
Jefferson, oppose it; and as they have a majority of two in one branch of the
legislature, they, sooner than consent to district elections, prevent a law
from passing and deprive the state of her vote. Take away her 15 votes, and
there remain, in the rest of the union 123, of which 62 is a majority.

Of these 123 Virginia gives 21, Massachusetts 16 and Maryland 10 -- in all 47.

Of the remaining 76 Mr. Jefferson may get exactly one half, 38, but no more.
That is, 4 in Georgia, 8 in South Carolina, 7 out of 12 in North Carolina, 3 in
Tennessee, 4 in Kentucky and 12 in New York -- 38. The other half will be for
Mr. Adams and general Pinckney, viz. 6 in New Hampshire, 4 in Rhode Island, 9
in Connecticut, 4 in Vermont, 7 in Jersey, ^ in Delaware, and 5 out of 12 in
North Carolina -- 38. So that taking away Massachusetts, Maryland and Virginia,
the rest of the states are equally divided between the two candidates; and the
election, therefore, depends on these three states.

In a district election, (the mode established in those three states, before
the friends of Mr. Jefferson in Virginia abolished it there, in order to
promote his election,) those three states would, it is well known, stand as
follows: Mr. Adams. Mr. Jefferson. Virginia 6 15 Massachusetts 14 2 Maryland 7
3 27 20

In giving Mr. Jefferson 2 votes by districts in Massachusetts, and 3 in
Maryland, we allow him the utmost to which his partisans lay claim. On the
contrary, in giving Mr. Adams only 6 in Virginia, we take the lowest
calculation that his opposers have ventured to make for him. The calculation
is, therefore, as favorable to Mr. Jefferson as it can be made; and yet we see
that it gives a majority of 7 votes against him in those three states. As the
rest of the continent is equally divided, those 3 states govern the election,
and upon the whole vote Mr. Adams and genesis Pinckney get a clear majority of 7.

Virginia, understanding this matter, alters the mode of election, abolishes
district elections, and thus takes from Mr. Adams his 6 votes in Virginia, and
gives them to Mr. Jefferson. The poll, then in those 3 states, stands thus: Mr.
Adams. Mr. Jefferson. Virginia 0 21 Massachusetts 14 2 Maryland 7 3 21 26

And the majority of 5 is thus given to Mr. Jefferson, who becomes president;
although upon a fair expression of the public voice, by district elections,
there was a majority of 7 against him.

Here Massachusetts interposes, and does all that she can to restore the
balance, and to throw back the election into the hands of the majority. She
adopts the legislative choice, and by that step takes from Mr. Jefferson the
two votes which he would get in that state, and gives them to Mr. Adams and
general Pinckney. The election then stands thus: Mr. Adams. Mr. Jefferson.
Virginia 0 21 Massachusetts 16 0 Maryland 7 3 23 24

Still, however, the balance is not restored; for Mr. Jefferson has gained 6
votes in Virginia to which he was not entitled, and has lost but 2 in
Massachusetts. He is still 4 gainer by the abolition of district elections. It
depends on Maryland to restore the balance, and replace the election in the
hands of the majority. Unless she does it, the president will be chosen by the
minority of the nation.

Should she act with sense and vigor; should she despise the clamors of this
minority, who are endeavoring by fraud and tricks to palm a spurious president
on the nation; should she substitute the legislative choice instead of the
district election, the poll will stand thus: Mr. Adams. Mr. Jefferson. Virginia
0 21 Massachusetts 16 0 Maryland 10 0 26 21

The balance, even then, will not be completely restored. The friends of Mr.
Jefferson will have gained six by their maneuver in Virginia, and will have
lost but five by the counteraction of Massachusetts and Maryland. The majority
will not be as much against Mr. Jefferson, as it certainly would be on a fair
district election. But it will be against him. The man who is the choice of a
majority of the people, will obtain a majority of votes; and will be elected
president: and the fraudulent arts of the anti-federalists, for smuggling in a
president who is not the choice of the majority, will be completely baffled.

But should the state of Maryland suffer itself to be bullied out of its rights
as a state, by the clamors of the partisans of Virginia; should the majority of
the people of Maryland, who are friendly to the administration, and desirous of
the re-election of Mr. Adams, suffer themselves to be tricked out of their
right to a president of their own choice, by the artifices of the minority, Mr.
Jefferson's adherents? then will fraud be triumphant over right, the fair voice
of the nation will be suppressed, and a man be placed in the presidential
chair, contrary to the wishes of the American people.

This must be the consequence of suffering district elections to remain in
Maryland, while they are abolished in Virginia. Yet this consequence, we are
told, must be submitted to, because to change the mode of election, and adopt
the legislative choice, would be an invasion of the rights of the people! In
order to preserve their right of voting, their votes, when given, must be
rendered ineffectual! In order to preserve their right of voting, they must be
deprived of the right of having a president of their own choice, and compelled
to take one who is the choice of the minority! A left handed way this, of
preserving the rights of the people!

PART THIRD. That if the Electors are appointed by the Legislature, still both
they and the President will be chosen by the people, who elect the members of
the Legislature.
But how are the people deprived of their right of voting, by transferring the
choice of electors, from districts to the legislature? Do not the people choose
the members of that legislature by which the choice of electors is made? Do
they not choose those members with a direct view to that choice of electors?
And do they not, in this way, as effectually influence the election of
president, as if they themselves chose the electors? Most certainly they do.
Let us take Ann-Arundel county, as an instance, or Baltimore county. The people
of Anne-Arundel county, a large majority of them at least, are in favor of Mr.
Adams as president, in preference to Mr. Jefferson. They will vote for Mr.
Chase, should district elections remain. Why will they vote for Mr. Chase?
Because they know that he, as an elector, will vote for Mr. Adams. Their
object, therefore, is to promote the election of Mr. Adams. If, therefore,
instead of voting for Mr. Chase, in order that he may, if chosen, vote for Mr.
Adams, they should vote for Dr. Wharfield, major Brogden, Mr. Worthington and
Mr. Weems, who as members of the legislature will choose an elector that will
vote for Mr. Adams, do they not as effectually influence and promote the
election of Mr. Adams in one case as in the other? Is not the president as much
chosen by them in one case as in the other? How then are they deprived of their
right of voting in the election of president? In either case, they choose the
men by whom the president is chosen. The only difference is, that in one case
they vote for four men who will choose Mr. Adams as president, and in the other
case they vote for one man who will choose Mr. Adams as president. The result
is exactly the same, as far as respects the influence of the people in the
election. In both cases they substantially choose the president, by choosing
the men by whom he is to be chosen, and choosing them with an express view to
that choice. In one case, moreover, they have the trouble of two elections;
first for members of assembly and secondly for electors; whereas in the other,
one election is sufficient.

And yet there are persons who hold the understandings of the people in such
contempt, as to tell them, that they will be deprived of their votes in the
election of president, by transferring the choice of the electors from
themselves to the legislature, whose members they themselves are to choose!

There is one other argument of most conclusive force, for the legislative
choice, to the people of Baltimore, Allegany and Anne-Arundel counties. In each
of those three counties there is a majority of federalists. If, therefore, the
electors are chosen by the legislature, the federal majorities in those three
counties, will have their due weight in the election of electors and of
president: for they will each choose four members of the legislature; and those
members will have an equal vote with the members of any other counties in the
choice of electors. Of consequence, those counties will have as much influence
in the election of president, as any other three counties in the state.

But how will it be if the district election should continue? Allegany is
united in the same district with Washington. In Washington there is an
anti-federal majority, which may overbear the federal majority of Allegany; and
in that case the county of Washington chooses the elector, and Allegany is
deprived of all influence in the election of president. The same observation
applies to Anne-Arundel county, which is united in the same district with
Baltimore town; and to Baltimore county, which is united with Harford. In case
of a district election, those two counties may be deprived of all influence in
the choice of president; since their federal majorities may be overpowered by
the anti-federal majorities of Baltimore town and Harford county: whereas
should the legislature appoint the electors, their members will have their due
weight in the appointment, and of course in the election of president.

The remark will also apply to the city of Annapolis, which is connected, in
the district election, with Baltimore town: and perhaps to Talbot county; where
there is reason to believe that the majority is federal, and will be overborne
by the anti-federal county of Queen-Anne.

CONCLUSION.
Why then, people of Maryland, are the advocates of Mr. Jefferson so clamorous
in favor of district elections here, after having abolished them in Virginia,
and successfully opposed their establishment in Pennsylvania! Is it from
affection to the rights of the people, about which they affect to have become,
all on a sudden, so zealous! No, no. The veil is too thin to resist the most
ordinary penetration. If they were indeed actuated by a sacred regard to the
rights of the people, they would wish to see the sense of the majority prevail.
If they were indeed actuated by a sacred regard to the rights of the people,
they would make no attempts to deprive the people, under flimsy pretexts, of
their only valuable substantial right, their right to a president of their
choice! If they were indeed of opinion that district elections are a sacred
right of the people, they would not have abolished them in Virginia, and
prevented them in Pennsylvania! They would not contend for one right on one
side of the Potowmac, and for another right on the other side! Whence then
their newfound and clamorous zeal for district elections; with the vital blood
of which the hands of their friends beyond the Potowmac are still reeking? The
secret lies here. They know that by district elections in this state, Mr.
Jefferson might get two or three votes, and therefore they struggle to retain
them. They knew that by district elections in Virginia, Mr. Adams would have
obtained six or eight votes there; and therefore they exultingly abolished them
in Virginia. They know that by district elections in Pennsylvania, Mr. Adams
would divide that state with Mr. Jefferson, and probably get a majority: and
therefore they oppose their establishment there; in hopes of at length wearying
out the federalists, and obtaining a general ticket, whereby all the votes
would be secured to their candidate. This is the true secret of their conduct,
and not an attachment to district elections, or the rights of the people; for
both of which they manifest the utmost contempt, whenever it suits their
purpose to trample them under foot.

Their real object is to secure the election of their candidate, by all means,
fair or foul; to impose him on the nation as president, contrary to the clear
and known wish of the majority; to stifle the voice of that majority, by
artifices in one state, clamors in another, and the violation of every right in
a third; while district elections are their stalking horse, and a clamor about
the rights of the people is the instrument wherewith they work.

People of Maryland, distrust such clamors. When the wolf, with his jaws still
red with the gore of the lamb, affects an extraordinary solicitude about the
safety of the sheepfold, believe that he is as much in earnest, as the
adherents of Mr. Jefferson are, when they affect an ardent attachment to
district elections on one side of the Potowmac, after having just finished
their destruction on the other side. The clamor about district elections and
the rights of the people, coming from such a quarter, is most evidently
intended as a cloak to conceal the most fatal attack that can be made on your
rights; an attack on your right to a chief magistrate chosen by the majority of
the nation. This is the great essential right, for the preservation of which,
all subordinate rights are instituted. Distrust the men who advise you to
adhere to the latter at the expense of the former. While that great right, the
right of being governed by a chief magistrate chosen by the majority, shall
remain to you unimpaired, your liberties will be safe. Let that once be
snatched from you; let the choice of chief magistrate once be transferred from
the majority to the minority; and whether it be done by fraud or by force, by
the violence of strangers, or the artifices of some among yourselves; the
effect is the same. Your solid valuable rights are annihilated; all that could
distinguish you as freemen disappears; and your boasted liberty becomes an
unsubstantial name, "the baseless fabric of a vision."

I have now, Messrs. printers, executed as well as I am able, the task which I
sometime ago undertook. I have executed it with a zeal inspired by truth, and
warmed by the cause for which I contend, the rights of the majority, and the
fair choice of a chief magistrate by the suffrage of the American people.
Whatever success may attend my feeble exertions, I shall enjoy the satisfaction
resulting from a consciousness of having discharged my duty, according to my
station, and to the best of my abilities; and confiding the event to that
Providence, which in so many trying emergencies, has watched over the destinies
of the American nation, I shall remain a resigned, though anxious

BYSTANDER.


