Mr. DEHON's DISCOURSE, OCCASIONED BY THE DEATH OF General WASHINGTON.

A DISCOURSE, DELIVERED IN NEWPORT, RHODE ISLAND; BEFORE THE CONGREGATION OF
TRINITY CHURCH, THE MASONIC SOCIETY, AND THE NEWPORT GUARDS: THE SUNDAY
FOLLOWING THE INTELLIGENCE OF THE DEATH OF GENERAL GEORGE WASHINGTON.

BY THEODORE DEHON, A. M. RECTOR OF TRINITY CHURCH IN NEWPORT.

NEWPORT: Printed by HENRY BARBER, M,DCCC.

TO THE WARDENS AND VESTRY OF TRINITY CHURCH, THE GRAND MASTER OF MASONS IN
RHODE ISLAND, THE MASTER OF ST. JOHN'S LODGE, AND THE COMMANDER OF THE COMPANY
OF NEWPORT GUARDS, THIS DISCOURSE, PUBLISHED AT THEIR REQUEST, IS HUMBLY
INSCRIBED

BY THEIR FRIEND AND SERVANT, THE AUTHOR.

A Discourse.
II SAMUEL, iii. 38. KNOW YE NOT THAT THERE IS A PRINCE AND A GREAT MAN FALLEN
THIS DAY IN ISRAEL.
SACRED are the sorrows for departed worth. Just and manly is the sigh, which
passes from the bosom at the remembrance of goodness and greatness expired. --
When death diffuses uncommon horror by laying his wasteful hand upon wisdom,
valor, and every venerable excellence, when human nature loses its nobles, and
a nation is in tears, it is virtue to weep; it is religion to be sad. Oh, sons
of my country, ye cannot but mourn! Ye, daughters of America, ye are amiably in
tears! For the beauty of our Israel is fallen -- The staff of its (...) is no
more! -- Death, giving his strongest proof, that no greatness can awe, nor
entreaty divert him from his prey, has taken our Washington from among us; and
we are left to strive to sooth our anguish, by musing upon his virtues, and
paying our humble tribute to his name.

ON this melancholy occasion, no words occur to me more suitable to guide the
meditations of our agitated minds, than the passage I have selected, for the
motto of this discourse. It is the tender lamentation of the destined ruler of
Israel, at the death of the Commander in Chief of their hosts. While similarity
of characters gives peculiar pertinence to the words, they have too a plea in
your feelings: for with the most plaintive pathos, which nature can express,
sorrow sits speaking from countenance to countenance; and her yet repeated
theme is, "there is a PRINCE and a GREAT MAN fallen this day in Israel."

HERE let us consider, what in the eye of reason and Omniscience imparts luster
to the character of a Prince, and constitutes the eminently great man. -- We
will then pause, and contemplate his exit from the world, with its
circumstances, and effects. -- And your hearts will expect, what my feelings
will dictate, the obvious conclusion; which the occasion requires.

IN the first place, a broad basis of civil greatness is laid by him, who
becomes the noble and virtuous founder of an empire. To give existence to an
independent people, and establish their national being among the kingdoms of
the earth, is the sublime work only of uncommon talents. It fills us with lofty
conceptions of the character, by whom it is effected; and obtains the
admiration of remotest posterity. In all ages, nations with assiduous pride
have embalmed the memories of their founders. Time, the demolisher of every
glorious fabric, has generally respected their names. Base measures, and
selfish considerations, have sometimes disgraced this vast achievement of man;
and left us to admire the greatness of the work, without one sentiment of
regard for the agent. ROME's founder was ignoble. -- The MEDES owed their
empire to a monster. -- But, the man, who, animated by the generous thought of
extending the dominion of liberty, and giving a distinct field to the exertions
of his countrymen, effects the independence and establishment of a nation, who,
without other motive, than a desire to render his people great and happy,
founds their empire in right, and would have it grow by the vigor of freedom,
law, and virtue, who, regardless of personal emolument, seeks only to be loved
by them as their affectionate civil father, such a man must be considered, as
raised up by Heaven in a favored land, to conduct one of those grand
operations, which involve almost an infinitude of interests; together with the
fate, and character, of millions of the human race.

To lay this unperishable basis of renown is indeed a rare glory. It has
belonged only to a few distinguished beings, who have been endowed for the work
with uncommon powers and resources. Many have been protecting rulers of a
people; and raised them to eminent greatness and refinement. But, few virtuous
founders of empires have ennobled the annals of the world.

IN the ruler, however, there are definite characteristics of true greatness
and glory. Wisdom, firmness, and integrity, are the essentials of excellence in
a Chief. An active, observing mind, enriched with a knowledge of human nature,
and of the experiments of past ages in governing men -- a prudence, inspiring
calm surveys of the natures, prospects, dangers, and resources, of his people
-- an uniform form collectedness, guarding him against surprise and despondence
in urgent moments, enabling him to assert and discharge his duty, and rendering
him unmovable by the calumnies, to which the conspicuous must ever be exposed,
-- above all, an integrity, which scorns disguise, which impenetrable and
lustrous, like polished steel, holds not a moment the breath of flattery nor
abuse, which, unaffected by sinister considerations, is anxious only to be
faithful to its trust -- these are properties, which form the chief, whose
glory is pure, and whose greatness is real. In his station as rule^, he stands
like a venerable column, raised by his people's hearts, concentrating in
himself, and exhibiting to the world, his country's triumphs, dignity, and
justice.

THE seat of power is not, however, the only place, where we are to look for
the traits, which form the glory of a prince, and constitute the truly great
man. In every act of his life, we may see love for his country influencing his
conduct; and eminent personal magnanimity. It is not power, that he covets. It
is not for the sake of ruling, that he holds the civil reins. In whatever
station he can most serve his country, whether as the leader of her hosts, as
the guide of her councils, or, as a fixed luminary, in private life shedding
the affecting luster of unaspiring virtue, that station is his choice. -- Is he
in the field? The love of conquest does not inflame his breast. His procedure
is not governed by an insatiate zeal for triumph. He is, indeed, courageous;
and aims by skill and kindness to call forth all the prowess of his troops. But
his only object is to defend his country's rights. So soon as her honor
permits, his language is that of the chief, whom the text bewails; " Shall the
sword devour forever? Know thou not, that it will be bitterness in the
latter end?" II Samuel, ii, 26.
Is he in the cabinet? No thirst for fame, no selfish ambition, no ignoble
hopes, instigate his counsels. His country's character is his own. Her
prosperity is his aggrandizement. His steady aim is to conduct her to greatness
and felicity, by arts, frugality, order, and virtue, under the blessed influences
of peace. If he be raised to sovereign authority, no pomp of honors, nor pride
of pre-eminence, can debase his patriot mind. -- When he has established the
empire of his wishes, seen it in good organization, and can safely resign the
superintendence of it to another, he appears most truly great, if a rare
magnanimity prompt him to display the noblest act of public virtue, by
relinquishing station, and power, and their flattering concomitants (...)
retire (...) and exhibit, as a citizen, an obedience to the laws, which as a
ruler, he enforced.

BUT public achievements and public honors will not finish the character of a
prince and great man. There are private virtues, which, though of smaller
luster, are of divine nature. Without these no greatness is complete. Here is
the defect of many of the he^^es of antiquity. Here is the imperfection, which
we must over regret, in many renowned characters. -- They display grandeur of
exploit, great prowess in arms, deep skill in legislation: but their noble
virtues are alone. They want attendants. We see none of the humble, humane,
domestic virtues; without which all glory is deficient. They possess strength
of mind: but we have to deplore its rudeness. We find in them collectedness;
but we look in vain for humanity by its side. They show us integrity; but we
are obliged to mark the want of courteous ease, to render it agreeable. --
Intent only upon being public heroes, some of them, alas! have been private
brutes. Without the amiable qualities of the heart, popular deeds purchase but
a tinsel renown. He, who is great in worth, as well as name, endeavors to
blend with the glories of a Chief, the virtues of a man. One aim regulates his
life -- to exalt human nature, while he serves his country. He is, therefore,
studious of every excellence; and his private virtues soften the brightness of
his public accomplishments into the most endearing loveliness.

To crown the glorious properties of the truly great character, RELIGION reigns
in his bosom. A prince, or ruler, without religion, wants the best glory of
humanity. He is destitute of that, which, as a principle, gives worth to every
action; and, as an excellence, reflects a nobler luster upon the most finished
human greatness. The virtuous prince, and real patriot, perceives in the
sentiment, which leads him to GOD for guidance, the most useful truth he can
exemplify to his country. For them, it is necessary to improvement and to
happiness. In him, it dignifies, every applauded quality. Venerable, as of
etherial nature, is the glory, with which the religious principle invests civil
greatness; and now, that the Eternal FATHER "has spoken to us by his SON," the
CHRISTIAN GRACES, more than the themes of ancient fame, ennoble the Chief; and
perfect the man.

WE have now seen the properties, which form a character, princely indeed; and
eminently great. Let us pause -- and contemplate the exit of such a man from
the world, with its circumstances, and effects.

IN itself, it is peaceful and glorious. Sweet is the review, which he takes of
life. Soothing are the prospects, which he sees in death. But for his country's
good, he would not wish to defer the hour of departure. He expects in it an
honorable rest from his anxious cares for his country's safety and
improvement. It promises him a freedom from that monstrous ingratitude, which
(O shame to our nature!) not celestial perfection could escape. He knows, he
shall leave a spotless same, which posterity will venerate. And A CROWN IS
BEFORE HIM, IN A REALM OF ETERNAL PEACE. Resigned to the will of his GOD, he
waits his messenger. Death cannot deprive him of his luster. The Sun, which
shone bright through the day, sets in mild splendour at eve; and, save THE BEAMS
which pensive reflection holds, carries its greatness and its glories with it.

BUT, though the departure of such a character from the world is, in itself,
peaceful and glorious, deep shades of gloom pervade the regio^, he leaves; and
mournful darkness, fixed upon every object, he illumined, speaks bereavement.

IN the relatives and friends, whom he loved, and in the societies, with which
he was associated, the death of the truly great man touches every tender nerve
of sorrow. -- The ties, with which nature, or appropriate affection, unites
individuals with such a character, must be inexpressibly strong and dear. The
pride and pleasure, which we feel, in being any way related to such greatness,
renders him the glory and delight of each fraternity, that enrols him among its
fellows. Every object connected with him, the near persons of his household, the
partners of his confidence, and companions of his life, the societies, civil
and religious, to which he belongs, all shine, distinguished, in the luster of
his name. What a loss then do they sustain, when he expires! How involuntarily
do their faces gather anguish! They heave the sigh of regret -- They seek the
sympathy of grief -- They wear the insignia of sorrow -- But -- alas! The heart
of the relative is rent! The boast of the societies is gone!

TO A NATION the death of such a Prince and great man is one of the most solemn
bereavements, it can sustain. In his country such a man is a center of union, a
source of light, and a reservoir of strength. In his country such a man is more
treasure, than all its revenues: more glory than all its achievements. In his
country such a man is heaven's gift -- the best of national distinctions -- a
kind of guardian angel. His name is a host. His renown is at once the envy, and
the dread, of every foe. His inhabitance is dignity and defense. So long, as
she retains him, his country FEELS HERSELF GREAT. How awful, then, the event,
which ta^^s him from her. It is like the withdrawal of light, when a cloud
passes over the earth, whose portentous gloom fills every one with dismay. His
exit is felt by his country in every member; and mournful are her aspect, and
thoughts. A solemn knell moans through the bereaved land. Gaiety stops, to muse
on the sad tidings. Industry pauses, to wipe away a tear. The wise, with
anxious sorrow, presage the consequences. And the matron, with pious
patriotism, tells her little ones, who is dead. The sorrowing fathers of the
land assemble. Upon one object they are all intent -- how they may best honor
the departed hero. While thus they seek to sooth the public grief, even calumny
ceases from her rudeness; hushed by the solemnity of general mourning. Religion,
sympathising, sanctifies the affliction. The nation pays its funeral tributes
to the worthy. And long, long, is his country mindful of her loss. Long, very
long, is she sad, that her "prince and her great man is fallen."

FINALLY, when such a character dies, THE WORLD is affected -- the whole family
of man mourns. Such great and good men ennoble human nature. In all countries
their names are honored; and their virtues revered. Man, wherever he is, will
admire such conspicuous and uncommon worth. He sees a dignity, imparted by it
to his species, which produces in his bosom a glow of noble emotions. --
Congenial greatness discovers in it a majesty, bestowed on eminent stations;
not borrowed from them; and is excited to an imitation of its peculiar
excellencies. The blow, therefore, which takes the virtuous chief and truly
great man from earth, is felt by the world. The regret, it occasions, is not
confined to place; but is as extensive, as human interests, and the bosoms of
men. Man respects greatness: and his self-love, as well as philanthrophy,
causes him to mourn, when the luminaries of his race expire.

SUCH are the properties, which shed glory on a prince* and form the truly
great man. And such his exit from this terrestial scene, its circumstances, and
its effects.

HAVE not your hearts, my friends, discerned at every step the lineaments of
WASHINGTON? -- Have you not anticipated the remark, that all the solid glory of
a prince, and every property of the truly great man, existed in that finished
character? -- I avoided making the application, as we passed; lest your
admiration of such illustrious greatness might be damped, by the chilling
emotions, which come over the mind at every mention of his name. But it was
vain. His virtues were too dear to you not to have been instantly recognized.
Your listening griefs quick felt, and told, that in the qualities and exit of
eminent greatness I described your departed hero. Yes -- what was said, was in
all parts applicable to him -- I see him in the field, in the council, in the
temple, in his dignified retirement, and at death, displaying every virtue,
which can adorn the soldier, the statesman, the citizen, and the christian.
But, while we triumph in the thought, that it was reserved for our country, at
this late age of the world, to produce THE MAN, who should exhibit in his
character AN ASSEMBLAGE OF ALL HUMAN EXCELLENCIES, the blood retreats cold to
the heart, and the spirits faulter, at the recollection, that now -- he is no
more! No more shall our country console herself under every prospect, that she
has in one man enough to render her more eminent, than the nations of the earth
-- No more "shall his name prove a rampart, and the knowledge that he exists a
bulwark, against the secret and open enemies of his country's peace." PRESIDENT
ADAMS's speech at his first inauguration to the presidency of the United States.
-- No more shall all earthly powers fear and respect our land, because HE
dwells here; and court our alliance to be related to him -- No more shall the
old and the young feel a pride in being his cotemporaries; and point to beams,
retained by THE PATRIOT MOUNT, Mount Vernon in Virginia, -- the residence of
Washington.
when the glory of their country is low -- He is gone from our admiration! We
think Heaven's Council has called him home. The noble chief is buried from our
sight -- And the memory of the just is blessed.

SOLEMN to annual regret be the day, on which he expired. Sacred be the
reflection, which marks in his exit the transitoriness of all human greatness.
Humble, and entire, be our resignation to the will of the all-wise Disposer of
events. -- Let us honor the memory of the departed great man in the way, which
he would approve. This is by imitating his virtues; and by using his example to
animate the sons of our land in the path, which he pursued. -- Yes, thou
Illustrious spirit, each parent in the empire, thou did found, shall teach
his babes, and bid them in future times teach theirs, that they are descended
from a noble civil Father, who loved the glory of his country; and, while he
sought it in heroic deeds, forgot not the excellence of virtue nor the holiness
of religion. -- Ye fathers, who hear me, ye confirm this declaration -- Ye
American mothers, I but speak your intentions. If the souls of the departed
have cognizance of things below the skies, the glorified Chief shall enjoy a
reward of his labor for his country's welfare, in beholding his work and
virtues continued, to her praise, by the imitating gratitude of far distant
descendants. Thus shall his NAME be useful to his country for ages to come. --
Thus may each individual sanctify the sorrows of his land. Thus may successive
generations sooth the wound, which cannot be healed: -- 'till grief shall be
lost in that sublime veneration, which History will exact of posterity, FOR THE
MEMORIES OF THE GREAT AND THE GOOD, till the globe, they ennobled, is wrapped in
ruin.

FINIS.
A PRAYER WHICH PRECEDED THE DISCOURSE.
ALMIGHTY and immortal God, whose days are without end, and whose judgments are
irreproachable, look down from heaven, we humbly beseech thee, upon a mourning
land, and behold the sorrows of the people, whom thou have afflicted. In thy
wisdom thou have seen fit to take from our Country the man, whom thou did
give for her glory and defense. The excellent of her counselors is fallen; and
the valiant of her hosts is no more. Verily for this our hearts are pained; and
our anguish, O God, is exceedingly great. What shall we say? Where shall we go?
How shall we humble ourselves under thy heavy hand? Thou art teaching us, that
we may not put our trust in princes, nor in the best of the sons of men, for
their breath goes forth of their nostrils, and then all their thoughts perish.
Thou art teaching us, that the good and the great, though they be called gods,
must die like men; and making us feel, how fallacious are the hopes of man. We
do to day call to our remembrance a chief, dear to his country as her best
possession, a noble, distinguished above the rulers of the earth, now laid in
the dust by thy awful providence, and vanished like a blissful vision of the
night. While we bend and weep under thy irreversible decree, suffer us to
deprecate the consequences, which anticipation fears from this event. When it
is told in Gath, let not the Philistines rejoice. When it is published in the
streets of Askelon, let not the children of the uncircumcised triumph. -- In
our councils let thy Spirit be instead of him, whom thou have taken away. And,
when thou bring the terror of battle upon our land, wilt not thou, O God, go
forth with our hosts? We submit to thy will; commending our country unto thee,
and all her Interests. Thou know, Lord, the secrets of our hearts, shut not
thy merciful ears to our prayers. Show her servants thy work, and their
children thy glory: and the glorious majesty of the Lord our God be upon her:
prosper thou the work of their hands upon her; O prosper thou their handy work.
And now, O God, we beseech thee to look down upon us, thy unworthy servants,
and assist us in the work and service, in which we are engaged. Grant, that in
our homage to our departed hero, no improper sorrows may disgrace us as
christians; but in all our works, begun, continued, and ended, in thee, may we
glorify thy holy name; and finally, by thy mercy obtain everlasting life,
through Jesus Christ, our Lord, who taught and commended us, when we pray to
say,

Our Father, who art in heaven, etc.


