AN ACCOUNT OF THE TRIAL OF THOMAS COOPER, OF NORTHUMBERLAND; ON A CHARGE OF
LIBEL AGAINST THE PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES; TAKEN IN SHORT HAND.

WITH A PREFACE, NOTES, AND APPENDIX, BY THOMAS COOPER.

Philadelphia: PRINTED BY JOHN BIOREN, NO. 83, CHESTNUT STREET, FOR THE AUTHOR.

April 1800.

PREFACE.
I have looked over the following account of my trial: so far as my memory
serves me, it is as accurate as such a publication can be, except perhaps in
Mr. Rawle's reply; which without meaning to pay the Attorney General of the
district, any unnecessary compliment, was in my opinion delivered in neater
language than is reported here: the reporter accounts for this from the
difficulty of hearing Mr. Rawle. I am pretty sure there is no substantial error
in any part of the publication. I have thought it a duty to myself to add the
notes and appendix; the public will judge of their contents.

The Citizens of this Country may learn some useful lessons from this trial;
and principally, that if they mean to consult their own peace and quiet, they
will hold their tongues, and restrain their pens, on the subject of politics:
at least during the continuance of the SEDITION LAW; a Law, which I do not
think "the powers that be," will incline to abolish. As it is, the plainest
truths, and the most notorious facts, may be controverted and denied; and the
innocent and well-meaning asserter of them, may be driven with impunity, to
spend his time and exhaust his finances, in procuring proof strictly legal of
what no man in common life pretends to doubt. Long before my trial I foresaw
this: and stated as an instance in point, the very case of evidence that
actually occured respecting the claim of Robbins. (vide the essay on the
Sedition Law, in my political essays.)

I was previously determined, not to be put to the trouble and expense of
sending for evidence from Danbury to Charlestown; or to be kept under Dionysian
tyranny, from court to court, and from term to term, with the sword of the law
suspended over my head, dependant on the tender mercies of an ex-officio
accuser to spare the thread. I preferred to ascertain whether the evidence that
common sense would not reject, was likely to be admitted on a political trial.
I preferred final to preliminary punishment, nor did I want to suffer the
crafty malignant kindness of a noli-prosequi when my proofs were known to be
complete. Let the reader consider the danger of uttering a truth, when he finds
that I could not substantiate the notorious affidavit of Jonathan Robbins,
without sending 750 miles for the copy of a record, which Mr. Pickering so
strangely omitted to procure. Reader, when you have perused this trial, shut
the book, and reflect. I dare not state the conclusions with which it is
pregnant, but which must force themselves with melancholy conviction on your
mind: ask yourself however, is this a fair specimen of the freedom you expected
to derive, from the adoption of the Federal Constitution? And whether the Men
who can sanction these proceedings, are fit objects of re-election?

THOMAS COOPER.
Prison of Philadelphia, May 1st. 1800.
PROCEEDINGS IN THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE United States. HELD IN THE CITY OF
PHILADELPHIA, FOR THE DISTRICT OF PENNSYLVANIA, APRIL 11, 1800.
Against Thomas Cooper, Esquire. of Northumberland, under the Act of Congress,
passed July 14th 1798, entitled An Act in addition to the Act entitled "An Act
for the punishment of certain crimes against the United States," commonly
called the SEDITION LAW.
ON Wednesday, the 9th of April 1800, Mr. Cooper was informed by Mr. Hall the
Marshal of the Court, that a writ was issued against him for a libel. Mr. Hall
wished to know when it would be convenient for Mr. Cooper to attend at judge
Peters's on the occasion, and the next morning at 10 o'clock was fixed for that
purpose. On attending there, judge Peter's showed Mr. Cooper a paper, of which
the following is a copy: The publication of it appeared to be attested by John
Buyers, Esquire. of Sunbury in Pennsylvania The passages printed in italic in the
last paragraph, were those selected for prosecution. The other assertions in
this paragraph were not included in the indictment.
.

TO THE PUBLIC.
TO THE PRINTER.
SIR,
I should not condescend to answer anonymous slander, but the information on
which the falsehoods contained in the following paragraph are grounded, must
have been originally derived from the president himself. I cannot believe him
capable of such misrepresentation, for I still think well of his intentions,
however I may disapprove of his conduct: but the following narrative will show
that some of his underlings are capable of any thing.

From the Reading Weekly Advertiser of October 26, 1799. COMMUNICATION.
Thomas Cooper's address to the readers of the Sunbury and Northumberland
Gazette of which he was editor, having been republished in this State, with an
introduction, approbatory of the piece, a correspondent wishes to know if it be
the same Thomas Cooper, an Englishman of whom the following annecdote is
related? If it is, every paper devoted to truth, honor, and decency, ought to
give it a thorough circulation.

Not many months ago, it is said, a Mr. Cooper, an Englishman, applied to the
President of the United States to be appointed "agent for settling the
respective claims of the citizens and subjects of this country and
Great Britain." In his letter he informs the President that although (he Thomas
Cooper) had been called a Democrat, yet his real political sentiments are such
as would be agreeable to the President and government of the United States, or
expressions to that effect. This letter was accompanied with another from Dr.
Joseph Priestly, who did not fail to assure the President of the pliability of
his friend Cooper's democratic principles. -- The president, it is said,
rejected Cooper's application with disdain, and Priestly's with still stronger
marks of surprise, saying, it is said, as he threw the letter on the table,
does he think that I would appoint any Englishman to that important office in
preference to an American? -- What was the consequence? When Thomas Cooper
found his application for a lucrative office under our president rejected, he
writes in revenge the address which appeared in print, and dr. Priestly exerted
his influence in dispersing this very address, which he must know was the
offspring of disappointment and revenge!!!

The address is as cunning and insidious a production as ever appeared in the
Aurora or the old Chronicle, and as for impudence, it exceeds or at least
equals, Porcupine himself. Priestley and Cooper are both called upon to deny
the above narrative. A recourse to the letters themselves would establish the
accuracy of this anecdote even to a syllable.

Yes; I am the THOMAS COOPER, alluded to; luckily possessed of more accurate
information than the malignant writer of that paragraph, from whatever source
his intelligence was derived.

About the time of the appointment of commissioners under the British treaty,
doctor Ross, who had sedulously brought about an intercourse of civility
between Mr. Liston and myself, urged me to permit him to apply on my behalf to
that gentleman for one of the appointments that must then take place. He
pressed on me the folly, as he termed it, of my confining myself to
Northumberland, his earnest wish to see me settled in Philadelphia, and the
duty I owed my family to better my situation by every means in my power. He
stated that mr. Liston he knew thought highly of me, and though the post of the
fifth commissioner was probably then disposed of, there must be an agent for
the British claimants; an office which from my situation as a barrister in
England, and my knowledge of mercantile transactions, I was peculiarly fitted
to fill. I replied that he probably over-rated Mr. Liston's opinion, and his
own influence, and that at all events my known political opinions must render
it equally improper for Mr. Liston to give, and for me to accept, any office
whatever connected with the British interests. That Mr. Liston and I understood
each other on this question, and had hitherto avoided all politics whatever.
That being an American I should not object to any office under this government,
if I could fairly obtain it; but that I would never consent to any application
to Mr. Liston.

Through Mr. Coleman's interest, Mr. Hall of Sunbury, was complimented with the
offer of being appointed agent of American claims. On mentioning to Dr.
Priestley one night at supper that Mr. Hall had declined it, Dr. Ross's
persuasions occurred to me, and I said that such an office as that would have
suited me very well. Dr. Priestley replied if that was the case, he thought he
had some interest with Mr. Adams, with whom he had long been acquainted, and
who had always expressed himself in terms of the highest friendship: that as he
never intended to ask any favor of Mr. Adams for himself, I might as well let
him try for once to ask one for me. On my objecting that Mr. Adams's politics
and mine were probably very different, Dr. Priestley declared that this so far
from being an objection, might be an inducement in my favor; for if Mr. Adams
meant to be the ruler of a nation, instead of the leader of a party, he would
be glad of an opportunity to exhibit such an instance of liberal conduct. At
length I consented, expressly requesting Dr. Priestley to take care that Mr.
Adams should not mistake my politics. In consequence of this conversation Dr.
Priestley wrote the following letter; not a few months, but above two years ago.

August 12, 1797. Dear sir,
It was far from being my intention or wish to trouble you with the request of
any favors, though it is NOW in your power to grant them; and it is not at all
probable that I shall ever take a second liberty of the kind. But circumstances
have arisen which I think call upon me to do it once, though not for myself but
a friend. The office of agent for American claims was offered I understand to
Mr. Hall of Sunbury, and he has declined it. If this be the case, and no other
person be yet fixed upon, I shall be very happy if I could serve Mr. Cooper, a
man I doubt not of equal ability and possessed of every other qualification for
the office, by recommending him. It is true that both he and myself fall in the
language of our calumniators, under the description of democrats, who are
studiously represented as enemies to what is called GOVERNMENT, both in England
and here. What I have done to deserve that character you well know, and Mr.
Cooper has done very little more. In fact we have both been persecuted for
being friends to American liberty, and our preference of the government of this
country has brought us both hither. However, were the accusations true, I think
the appointment of a man of unquestionable ability and fidelity to his trust,
for which I would make myself answerable, would be truly such a mark of
superiority to popular prejudice as I should expect from you. I therefore think
it no unfavorable circumstance in the recommendation. That you will act
according to your best judgment I have no doubt, with respect to this and other
affairs of infinitely more moment, through which I am persuaded you will bring
the country with reputation to yourself, though in circumstances of such
uncommon difficulty, perhaps with less ease and satisfaction than I could wish.
With my earnest wishes for the honor and tranquillity of your presidency, I
am, etc.

JOSEPH PRIESTLEY.


This letter was accompanied by the following from myself.

SIR,
On my expressing an inclination for the office which Mr. Hall has declined,
Dr. Priestley was so good as to offer his services with you on my behalf.

Probably the office will be filled, 'ere this letter can reach you: probably
there may be objections to nominating a person not a native of the country:
probably the objection mentioned by Dr. Priestley may reasonably be deemed of
weight in my instance. Be all this as it may, I see no impropriety in the
present application, to be appointed agent of American claims, for it is still
possible I may suppose more weight in the objections than they will be found to
deserve. If it should so happen that I am nominated to that office, I shall
endeavor to merit the character the doctor has given me, and your esteem. I
am, etc.

THOMAS COOPER.


Is this the letter of a MAN, or not? I do not appeal to the cowardly
propagator of anonymous falsehoods, but to the public. What is there in it, of
vanity or servility? Do not these letters take for granted that I am a
democrat, though not a disturber of all government; and that what I am I shall
remain, even though it be deemed a reasonable objection to my appointment? Is
this, or is this not, adhering to my principle, whatever becomes of my interest?

Nor is it true that my address originated from any motives of revenge. Two
years elapsed from the date of those letters before I wrote any thing on the
politics of this country. Nor did I recollect them at the time. -- Nor do I see
the objection to taking any fair means of improving my situation. This is a
duty incumbent on every prudent man who has a family to raise, and which I have
already too much neglected from public motives: nor can any office to which I
am eligible in this country, recompense me for the offers I rejected in its
favor. But it is not in the power of promises or threats, of wealth or
poverty, to extinguish the political enthusiasm which has actuated my conduct
for these twenty years. -- The prudence of middle age and the claims of duty
may make me cautious of sacrificing my interest, but they cannot induce me to
sacrifice my principle.

Nor do I see any impropriety in making this request of Mr. Adams. At that time
he had just entered into office; he was hardly in the infancy of political
mistake: even those who doubted his capacity, thought well of his intentions.
He had not at that time given the public to understand that he would bestow no
office but under implicit conformity to his political opinions. He had not
declared that "A Republican Government may mean any thing;" he had not yet
sanctioned the abolition of trial by jury in the alien law, or entrenched his
public character behind the legal barriers of the sedition law. Nor were we yet
saddled with the expense of a permanent navy, or threatened under his auspices
with the existence of a standing army. Our credit was not yet reduced so low as
to borrow money at 8 per cent in time of peace, while the unnecessary violence
of official expressions might justly have provoked a war. Nor had the political
acrimony which still poisons the pleasures of private society been fostered by
those who call themselves his friends and adherents; nor had the eminent
services of Mr. Humphreys at that time received their reward. Mr. Adams had not
yet projected his Embassies to Prussia, Russia, and the Sublime Port; nor had
he yet interfered as President of the United States to influence the decisions
of a Court of Justice. A stretch of authority which the Monarch of Great
Britain would have shrunk from; an interference without precedent, aga^^st law
and against mercy! This melancholy case of Jonathan Robbins, a nat^^e citizen
of America, forcibly impressed by the British and delivered up with the ad^ice
of Mr. Adams to the work trial of a British court martial, had not yet
astonished the republican citizens of this free country. A case too little
known, but which the people ought to be fully apprized before the election, and
they shall be.

Most assuredly had these transactions taken place in August 1797, The
President Adams would not have been troubled by any request from

THOMAS COOPER.
NORTHUMBERLAND, Nov. 2, 1799.
Mr. Cooper gave bail for his appearance at the ensuing court, himself in 1000
dollars, and Israel Israel, esquire. in the like sum.

On the second day of the court (Saturday) the grand jury found the following
bill of indictment (presented ex officio by William Rawle, esquire. the United
States' attorney for the district of Pennsylvania) a true bill.

CIRCUIT COURT of the United States for the Pennsylvania district, April term,
1800.

The United States us. Thomas Cooper, Indictment for a seditious libel.
INDICTMENT.
The grand inquest of the United States of America, in and for the Pennsylvania
district, upon their respective oaths and affirmations, do present, that Thomas
Cooper, late of the district of Pennsylvania, attorney at law, being a person
of a wicked and turbulent disposition, designing and intending to defame the
President of the United States, and to bring him into contempt and disrepute,
and to excite against him the hatred of the good people of the United States,
on the 2d of November, 1799, in the district aforesaid, and within the
jurisdiction of this court, wickedly and maliciously did write, print and
publish a false, scandalous and malicious writing against the said President of
the United States of the tenor and effect following, that is to say: -- "Nor do
I [himself the said Thomas Cooper meaning] see any impropriety in making this
request of Mr. Adams: [meaning John Adams, esquire. President of the United States]
at that time he had just entered into office, he [meaning the said President of
the United States] was hardly in the infancy of political mistake: even those
who doubted his capacity [meaning the capacity of the said President of the
United States] though it well of his [meaning the said President of the United
States] intentions. And also the false, scandalous and malicious words of the
tenor and effect following, that is to say: -- Nor were we [meaning the people
of the United States] yet saddled with the expense of a permanent navy, or
threatened under his [meaning the said President] auspices with the existence
of a standing army. Our credit [meaning the credit of the United States] was
not yet reduced so low as to borrow money at eight per cent. in time of peace,
while the unnecessary violence of official expressions might justly have
provoked a war.

And also the false, scandalous and malicious words of the tenor and effect
following, that is to say: -- Mr. Adams [meaning the said President of the
United States] had not yet projected his [the said President of the United
States meaning] embassies to Prussia, Russia and the Sublime Port, nor had he
[the said president of the United States meaning] yet interfered as president
of the United States to influence the decisions of a court of justice -- a
stretch of authority which the monarch of Great Britain would have shrunk from
-- an interference without precedent, against law, and against mercy. This
melancholy case of Jonathan Robbins, a native citizen of America, forcibly
impressed by the British, and delivered up with the advice of Mr. Adams
[meaning the said president of the United States) to the mock trial of a
British court martial had not yet astonished the republican citizens of this
free country; [meaning the United States of America] a case too little known,
but of which the people [meaning the people of the said United States of
America] ought to be fully apprized before the election, and they shall be," --
to the great scandal of the president of the United States -- to the evil
example of others in the like case offending against the form of the act of the
congress of the United States in such case made and provided, and against the
peace and dignity of the said United States.

W. RAWLE, Attorney General.
JOHN BUYERS, esquire. Witness, D. CALDWELL.


To this bill of indictment Mr. Cooper put in the plea of not guilty, and also
pleaded the truth of the facts in justification. He directed subpoenas to be
issued for the President of the United States, for Timothy Pickering Esqr.
Jacob Wagner, (a clerk in Timothy Pickering's office,) and John Davenport Esqr.
Member of Congress. Previous to directing the Subpoenas', he stated to the
court, that he understood it had been customary, and was considered as a proper
practice to prevent any question arising on the subject of privilege, that when
a member of the Legislature was intended to be subpoenaed during session, for
the court from whence the subpoena issued, to write to the Speaker of the House
requesting that the House would permit the process to be served. If that were
the practice, Mr. Cooper begged the court would be pleased to conform to it in
the present instance on his behalf.

Judge Chase. I know of no such practice and no such privilege. I do not know
that any such privilege is given by the Constitution, and if it be not given
there, I cannot give it. I do not like setting precedents of this nature. The
court will do its duty, and direct process to be issued upon any man whatever
his situation may be, if the law does not exempt him from it: I shall certainly
write no such letter.


Mr. Rawle. I believe Sir, the practice has been to apply in that manner. I
believe the Judges of the supreme court of this state after deliberation,
determined on the expediency of proceeding in that way to avoid giving occasion
for any dispute on the subject.


Judge Peter's. When I was the Speaker of a single Legislature, I have had
letters of that kind addressed to me for a similar purpose.


Mr. Dallas. I beg leave to suggest to the court, that the practice of writing
to the Speaker in such a case was adopted to avoid the difficulty that might
arise from the clashing of jurisdictions: If a subpoena were served on a member
of the Legislatue during session, and he did not choose to attend, the next
process of the court (if prayed for,) must be attachment; and attachment cannot
be enforced without arrest: But the members of the Legislature are privileged
from arrest during session.


Judge Chase. Sir, the court thank you for your suggestion as Amicus Curiae;
but we should take care to avoid this clashing of jurisdictions. If the member
subpoenaed during the session would not attend, we would issue no attachment,
we would put off the cause till his attendance could be compelled. Mr. Cooper
may take out his subpoena's, we shall write no such letter.


Judge Peter's. I wish it to be understood that in my opinion, no such process
ought to issue to members of the Legislature during session; for I do not
approve of issuing process which we cannot enforce.

Mr. Cooper on coming into the court on Wednesday morning (the time appointed
for bringing on the trial,) enquired if his subpoena's had been served, and
particularly the subpoena directed to the President of the United States.


Judge Chase. No Sir; the clerk of the court showed us your directions to him,
to subpoena the President of the United States, and we directed him not to
issue the subpoena; we thought the proceeding very improper.


Mr. Cooper. Will the Court have the goodness to hear rne on that question?


Judge Chase. Certainly Sir; go on.


Mr. Cooper. I did not expect (may it please the court) that any objection
would have been made to issuing this process to procure the attendance of the
President. It is the duty of every good citizen for the furtherance of justice,
to give his testimony when duly called upon for that purpose by the process of
a court of justice. Before I determined on applying for this subpoena, I
examined (as it was my duty to do) the Constitution of the United States, to
discover if any privilege of exemption from this process was given to the
President by that Constitution: I could find none; If the the gentleman whose
duty it is to conduct this prosecution, or the court will be kind enough to
point out any such exemption, I shall most willingly retract my error; but if
the Constitution and the laws of our country confer no such privilege on the
President, it is not in the power of this court to supply what they have
omitted: notwithstanding the application to the court on Monday last, for a
letter to the Speaker, proceeded from myself, I was glad to hear the opinion of
your Honor that you would not undertake to confer privileges which the
Constitution had not granted: if no such exemption then can be claimed in your
opinion by any member of our Legislature, why should it be assumed by the
President? if the Constitution does not give him this privilege of exemption, I
may claim the subpoena as a matter of right.

There is a farther and a peculiar reason in this cause, why the President even
if he had this privilege should not claim it as against myself; if I call him
into this court, who compels me to do it? Himself. Who has he to blame for the
trouble I may occasion him by his attendance here? Himself. The publication for
which I am indicted is not a voluntary effusion, it was forced from me -- I was
compelled to write it in vindication of my own character, grossly and falsely
attacked in consequence of a disclosure on the part of the President, of what I
cannot but deem private correspondence. It is from information then, proceeding
directly or indirectly from himself, that I was first compelled to appear
before the public, and am now dragged into this court to vindicate my character
against anonymous slander and legal accusation. -- If for no other, for this
reason may it please the court, in my opinion the President ought to appear.
Nor in such a country as this, do I see why this exemption should be granted to
one man and not to another. This is, and I hope, will long continue a
republican country. A government of equal rights and equal Laws. -- But the
privilege now claimed is out of harmony with these equal principles of
republican government; and I hope the decision of the court in the present case,
will authorize us to believe that no man in this country, is possessed of a
situation so elevated as to be above the Laws, or of any privileges paramount
to justice.


Judge Chase. We have heard you Sir; patiently; and in consideration of your
being without counsel, we have permitted you to say what we would not have
suffered any counsel to advance: Sir, we consider your situation, but you have
totally mistaken the whole business. It is not upon the objection of privilege
that we have refused this subpoena: This court will do its duty against any man
however elevated his situation may be. -- You have mistaken the ground. -- We
are of opinion that in the case of a prosecution for a libel tending to bring
the President of the United States into contempt, he cannot be compelled to
appear at all. What? shall you bring the President on such an prosecution, into
this court to prove your charges? to ask him, did you do so and so? were you
guilty of maladministration? Sir, this cannot be permitted, and if you had been
a lawyer you would not have made the request.


M. Cooper. I have great deference for the opinion of the Court, but this is a
new point: will the Court be good enough to hear me upon it?


Judge Chase. No Sir; the Court will not hear you after they have given their
decision: It was a very improper and a very indecent request.


Mr. Cooper. I assure the Court, I am not guilty of intentional impropriety.
But a preliminary question will arise between Mr. Rawle and me not connected
with the substance of the Indictment: cannot I have the benefit of the
President's testimony on that question?


Judge Chase. No Sir; He cannot be brought here at all upon this Trial. Are you
ready to proceed.


Mr. Cooper. I believe Sir, I shall be.


The Jury were then called, but before they were sworn, Mr. Cooper suggested to
the court that some of the passages charged in the indictment were grounded
upon certain addresses to the President in the summer of one thousand seven
hundred and nintey-eight, and the answers thereto; that he had applied to Mr.
Rawle to admit as evidence of those documents, the publications of them in the
common newspapers; that he meant to use Fenno's paper for the purpose; that
Mr. Rawle at first consented, but had since written him a note retracting that
assent, that if the court should decide when the cause had gone half through, that
such evidence on the part of the defendant was inadmissible, he would be
compelled to move the court to put off the cause till he could procure the best
evidence, the nature of the case would admit of, and which Mr. Rawle seemed to
insist on, namely official copies of those documents.

Judge Chase. When the question comes before us we will cconsider it. In the
mean time you must go on your own way and judge for yourself. But, Mr. Rawle,
what objection have you to admit the newspapers to be read (that is so far as
they are relevant to the question,) if you have no reason to suspect their
accuracy?


Mr. Rawle. I beg leave to state to the court, that on Mr. Cooper's applying to
me on this subject, I at first consented, but afterward I retracted that
consent for the reasons assigned in the following letter which I sent him, Sir,
Upon further consideration of the request you made to me this morning as to
admitting the printed addresses to, and answers from the President of the
United States on your trial, I am apprehensive some inconvenience may result
from it as it is impossible for me to be certain whether inaccuracy in some
instances or design in others, may not have rendered the printed accounts
unfaithful transcripts of the originals.

I am therefore under the necessity of recalling my assent, even under the
limitations that were connected with it, and of informing you that the evidence
necessary for your defense must be adduced in the usual and legal form.

I trust that so short a space of time has elapsed since our communication that
no inconvenience to you will result from it, but should it be the case I shall
make no opposition to a commensurate prolongation of the time previous to the
trial, so that you may be as fully prepared as if the conversation of this
morning had not taken place.

I am Sir, your most obedient servant, W. RAWLE.
April 15th. 1800. four o'clock P. M.
To THOMAS COOPER. Esquire.

the court will see therefore that I cannot properly assent to the admission of
evidence of this kind.


Judge Peter's. It is quite time enough for us to decide this question when it
comes regularly before us.


Mr. Cooper. If that be the case I must not in point of prudence subject myself
to the hazard of being deprived of a most material part of my testimony on a
legal objection; and though I think the evidence I offer could be legally
supported, See the case of Rex v Holt 5 T. Rep. 442. hereafter quoted.
yet I must run no risk: I therefore pray the court to defer the trial until I
can procure office copies.


Judge Chase. Will you be ready on Saturday Sir?


Mr. Cooper. If I can procure the copies I shall.


Judge Chase. Sir, that is not the question. If your evidence is not ready we
shall judge of that, then.


Mr. Cooper. I shall be ready on Saturday.


The court met A^pril 19th. at 9 o'clock.

Mr. Cooper addressed the court as follows, The court may perhaps remember the
proposals I made to the Attorney General respecting some public documents,
which I meant to give in evidence as they were published in a news-paper
wherein all the acts of government were usually inserted: that paper was
Fenno's United States Gazette. The Attorney General Mr. Rawle did not
understand at first as he afterward informed me, that I meant to use Fenno's
papar, or he would have admitted it.
thought it his duty to object to this kind of evidence, since either from
design or inaccuracy, mistakes might take place in the publications.

I was extremely desirous at that time to have met the charge substantially;
the court however, thought Mr. Rawle might insist on my producing official
copies of such documents as were necessary for my defense.

In conformity to this expectation, I have endeavored to procure those copies
without delay. Much of the supposed libel is founded on expressions contained
in certain addresses to the President in the summer of one thousand seven
hundred and ninety-eight, and his answers thereto. On the authority therefore
of the case of the King us. Holt, in 5th. term, reports page 442. I applied by
letter to the Secretary of State, who returned for answer the next morning that
there were none of those addresses or answers deposited in his office; on
receiving this information I sent directly the following note to the President,
No. 61. Walnut near Dock Street. Sir,
Being indicted for a supposed Libel in the circuit court of the United States
now sitting in Philadelphia, I find it necessary to apply for official copies
of the papers of which I transmit an enclosed list. I applied yesterday
afternoon to the Secretary of State, who ha^ just now sent me word they are not
to be found in his office.

I beg therefore that your Excellency would have the goodness to direct your
secretary to make them out for me as expeditiously as possible, and to accept
of the present application as legal notice of my request.

I am, your excellency's obedient servant, THOMAS COOPER.


to which I received no answer that day. The next morning conceiving there was
a mode of expediting the business, I sent my son to purchase a book purporting
to be "A selection of addresses and answers to and from the President of the
United States in the year one thousand seven hundred and ninety eight," with
this book I sent to Mr. Shaw, (the private secretary to the President,) the
following note,

Mr. Cooper presents his respects to Mr. Shaw, and being desirous of saving
time and trouble, takes the liberty of suggesting whether the collection of
addresses and answers herewith sent, might not be collated with the originals,
and then copies would only be necessary of those wanted by Mr. Cooper, which
the volume does not contain.


Mr. Shaw returned the following answer:

Mr. Shaw informs Mr. Cooper, that he will not receive any information
concerning answers to addresses from this house.

April 18th. 1800.


Judge Chase. I suppose you mean the President's house? was he there at that
time?


Mr. Cooper. I ^ was at the President's house. -- Under the circumstances I
have related, I do not think it possible for me safely to go on, while the
person who may fairly be considered in some degree as my prosecutor, holds in
his possession the legal evidence on which I must rest my defense. Nor indeed
is Fenno's paper quite accurate, for in a collated copy, procured for me by
Colonel Lion from the office of the Secretary of War, I find manuscript
corrections, although they are not very material.

I presume there is the same law for Mr. Rawle as for me, and as he objected to
the production of news-paper evidence in the first instance, so may I, on the
same grounds: therefore I move the court to put off the trial until I can
procure the papers required.


Judge Chase. You are mistaken in supposing the prosecutor of this indictment
is the President of the United States. It is no such thing. -- It is at the
suit of the United States you are indicted, for publishing a false scandalous
and malicious libel, with intent to defame the President of the United States.
-- Nor do I understand that the Attorney General objected to your producing the
testimony you mentioned. -- But your mistakes must fall on yourself. -- You
must take the chance. -- Nor had you a right to make these assertions unless
you had proof that would bear you out in them.

If in making those assertions you relied on the public papers it was at your
own risk; and it was your own fault not to have had authentic copies. You think
that you have a right to obtain official copies of what may be necessary for
your Defense, you are greatly mistaken, See the case of the ship Columbus, and
the Act, quoted in the Appendix.
. No law that I know of, authorizes you to require them, and I see no reason
why the proper officers should give copies.

You suppose that the offices of government ought to be open to your inspection
-- it is not so -- even if you had these copies the court would determine on
their admissibility as evidence. If you offer newspapers, the court will
determine whether they can be given in as evidence or not. If you wish to abide
by your own judgment, you must stand or fall by it. But do not take it for
granted that you may examine witnesses or produce evidence that has nothing to
do with the cause.


Mr. Cooper. Since the court is of opinion that I cannot produce this evidence,
which I consider as material to my Defense, and as I am not fully prepared for
trial, expecting that I could obtain this evidence, I wish the trial to be put
off on other grounds.


Judge Chase. If you can show good grounds the court will consent to put it off.


Mr. Cooper. I have Subpoenaed several members of the Legislature, but I am
apprehensive they deem it inconsistent with their duty to attend, and I am
given to understand that there is a difference of opinion on this question:
whether they will appear when called I know not. If they do not, I fear I
cannot go on.


The court enquired of the Marshal whether he had Subpoenaed the witnesses? On
being answered in the affirmative, they directed the witnesses to be called,
viz. Timothy Pickering, Jacob Wagner, John Davenport, Albert Gallatin, Thomas
Pinckney, Robert Goodloe Harper, Edward Livingston, Colonel Matthew Lion, John
Langdon.


No one appeared.

Court. Mr. Pinckney has informed us that he will attend.


Mr. Cooper. As the evidence of some of these gentlemen is material, I wish the
court to put of my trial, until I can procure their attendance.


Court. Sir you must move it upon affidavit, and then the court will consider
of it. But take care it will justify you.


(The substance of the affidavit was: that the witnesses therein named who had
been Subpoenaed and did not attend, were material witnesses, and who the
Defendant understood and believed were capable of giving testimony of facts
maerial to the issue joined).

After the affidavit had been read, the court said:

This affidavit is not sufficient, you do not state your reasons why you
believe they are material witnesses. As you are without Counsel the court will
show you more indulgence. Had Counsel offered this affidavit we should not
allow any explanatory affidavit to be made, but we shall allow you to make one.
Therefore take time for your affidavit.


Whilst Mr. Cooper was preparing his affidavit, Judge Chase (after some
conversation with a gentleman near him said) I am inclined to think the
witnesses will all attend. Therefore call them, I am informed that they will
all attend. Mr. Harper and Mr. Gallatin were in court, we had better send for
them. We must no doubt pay attention to the conveniences of the house.

Judge Peter's. If the gentlemen will voluntarily appear, it is well; if not, we
cannot compel them.


Court (to the Marshall) Go and ask them if it is convenient to attend?


Judge Peter's. I have seen several of them. They will attend. The officer says
they will attend.


Mr. Cooper. If that be the case I have no objection; but as I did not expect
my trial to commence this morning, my papers are not here. Will the court
permit me to go for them?


Court. No doubt Sir, no doubt.


Mr. Cooper On his return into court said, I do not know whether the witnesses
whom I have subpoenad will attend or not, but at all events I am ready to go on
upon the proofs I have.


Court. Call the Jury.


NAMES OF THE JURY,
Andrew Whelen, Foreman. George Holsten, Abraham Bickley, Charles Deshler,
George Slough, William Young, Samuel Evans, Henry Pepper. George Ellig, William
Guier, Ely Canby. Peter Shyner.
W. RAWLE, Attorney General Began by observing that the Defendant stands
charged with attempts which the practice and policy of all civilized nations
has thought it right all times to punish with severity. With having published a
false scandalous and malicious attack on the character of the President of the
United States with an intent to excite the hatred and contempt of the people of
this country against the man of their choice.

It was much to be lamented that every person who had a tolerable facility at
writing should think he had a right to attack and overset those authorities and
officers whom the people of this country had thought fit to appoint. Nor was it
to be endured that foul and infamous falsehoods should be uttered and published
with impunity against the President of the United States, whom the people
themselves had placed in that high office, and in which he has acted with so
much credit to himself and benefit to them. Thomas Cooper stands charged in the
indictment as follows -- (here the Attorney General read the indictment) It was
a sense of public duty that called for this prosecution. It was necessary that
an example should be made to deter others from misleading the people by such
false and defamatory publications. There was a peculiarity in the manner also
of this publication; we generally observe that persons who take these
liberties, endeavor to avoid punishment by sheltering themselves under
fictitious signatures or by concealing their names; but the Defendant acted
very differently. Being of the profession of the law, a man of education and
literature, he availed himself of those advantages for the purpose of
disseminating his dangerous productions in a remote part of the country where
he had gained influence. Such conduct must have arisen from the basest motives.
It would be proved to the Jury that at the time of this publication, the
Defendant went to a magistrate and acknowledged it to be his production in the
same formal manner as if it had been a deed.

A conduct so grossly improper, had occurred in no instance within his
recollection and the manner constituted no slight aggravation of the offense.
Indeed it was high time for the law to interfere and restrain the libellous
spirit which had been so long permitted to extend itself against the highest
and most deserving characters.

To abuse the men with whom the public has entrusted the management of their
national concerns, to withdraw from them the confidence of the people, so
necessary for conducting the public business, was in direct opposition to the
duties of a good citizen. Mischiefs of this kind were to be dreaded in
proportion as the country around is less informed, and a man of sense and
education has it more in his power to extend the mischief which he is inclined
to propagate. Government should not encourage the idea, that they would not
prosecute such atrocious conduct, for if this conduct was allowed to pass over,
the peace of the country would be endangered.

Error leads to discontent, discontent to a fancied idea of oppression, and
that to insurrection, of which the two instances which had already happened,
were alarming proofs, and well known to the jury.

That the jury, as citizens, must determine whether from publications of this
kind the prosperity of the country was not endangered; and whether it was not
their duty, when a case of this nature was laid before them and the law was
applicable, to bring in such a verdict as the law and the evidence would
warrant; and show, that these kind of attacks on the government of the country,
were not to be suffered with impunity.

Court. This indictment is founded on a statute which you will be pleased to
read to the jury.


Attorney General here reads the act as follows:

Sec. II. And be it further enacted, That if any person shall write, print,
utter or publish, or shall cause or procure to be written, printed, uttered, or
published, or shall knowingly and willingly assist or aid in writing, printing,
uttering or publishing any false, scandalous and malicious writing or writings
against the government of the United States, or either house of the congress of
the United States, or the president of the United States, with intent to defame
the said government, or either house of the said congress, or the said
president, or to bring them or either of them, into contempt or disrepute; or
to excite against them, or either or any of them, the hatred of the good people
of the United States, or to stir up sedition within the United States or to
excite any unlawful combinations therein, for opposing or resisting any law of
the United States, or any act of the president of the United States, done in
pursuance of any such law, or of the powers in him vested by the constitution
of the United States, or to resist, oppose, or defeat any such law or act; or
to aid, encourage or abet any hostile designs of any foreign nation against the
United States, their people or government, then such person, being thereof
convicted before any court of the United States having jurisdiction thereof,
shall be punished by a fine not exceeding two thousand dollars, and by
imprisonment not exceeding two years.

Sec. III. And be it further enacted and declared, That if any person be
prosecuted under this act, for the writing or publishing any libel aforesaid,
it shall be lawful for the d^fendant, upon the trial of the cause, to give in
evidence in his defense, the truth of the matter contained in the publication
charged as a libel. And the jury who shall try the cause, shall have a right to
determine the law and the fact, under the direction of the court, as in other
cases.

John Buyers, sworn. examined by Mr. Rawle.

Q. Do you know this paper? (hands a paper to him)

A. Yes.

Court. Look at the back of it?

Q. Who brought that paper to you?

A. Thomas Cooper.

Q. At what time?

A. The evening of the sixth of December, 1799.

Court. Where?


A. At my my house at Sunbury. He came to me at the door of my house. Asked me
to walk in. We walked in. This was between candlelight and day light. He asked
for a candle. He perused this paper, which I have in my hand, pointed to his
name, and said, this is my name, and I am the author of this piece.

There was nothing further passed, only he said, this may save you trouble
another time. I knew very well what he meant by it.

Q. Did you give intimation of this to any one?

A. I gave it to Mr. Rawle's Deputy, who prosecutes for the United States.

Cross-examined by Mr. Cooper.

Q Had not you and I been in the habit of frequently joking each other upon
political subjects?

A. O yes -- very often.

The Attorney general here read that part of the publication which is included
in the indictment, for which reason it is omitted here.

MR. COOPER's DEFENSE:

Gentlemen of the Jury,

If it were true, as it is not true, that in the language of the attorney
general of the district, I have been guilty of publishing with the basest
motives a foul and infamous libel on the character of the President; of
exciting against him the hatred and contempt of the people of this country, by
gross and malicious falsehoods -- then indeed would it be his duty to bring me
before this Tribunal, it would be yours to convict, and the duty of the court
to punish me. But I hope in the course of this trial, I shall be enabled to
prove to your satisfaction, that I have published nothing which truth will not
justify. That the assertions for which I am indicted are free from malicious
imputation: and that my motives have been honest and fair.

You will observe, Gentlemen of the Jury, that the law requires it to be proved
as a necessary part of the charge, that the passages for which I am indicted
should be false and scandalous, and published from malicious motives: and
before you will be able, consistently with your oaths, to convict upon this
indictment, you must be thoroughly satisfied that both these parts of the
charge are well founded. Nor does it appear to me that the expression of the
act, to bring the President into contempt, can be fulfilled if the accusation,
as in the present instance, related to an examination of his public conduct,
and no improper motives are imputed to him. And that I have carefully avoided
imputing any impropriety of intention to the President even in the very paper
complained of -- that the uniform tenor of my conduct and language has been to
attribute honesty of motive even where I have strongly disapproved of, the
tendency of his measures, I can abundantly show.

Gentlemen of the Jury, you, and all who hear me, well know that this country
is divided, and almost equally divided, into two grand parties; usually termed,
whether properly or improperly, Federalists and Anti-Federalists: and that the
governing powers of the country, are ranked in public opinion under the former
denomination -- of these divisions, the one wishes to increase, the other to
diminish the powers of the Executive; the one thinks that the people, (the
Democracy of the country) has too much, the other, too little influence on the
measures of government: the one is friendly, the other hostile, to a standing
army and a permanent Navy: the one thinks them necessary to repel invasions and
aggressions from without, and commotions within; the other, that a well
organized Militia is a sufficient safeguard for all that an army could protect,
and that a navy is more dangerous and expensive than any benefit derived from
it can compensate: the one, thinks the liberties of our country endangered by
the licentiousness, the other, by the restrictions on the Press: Such are some
among the leading features of these notorious divisions of political party. It
is evident, Gentlemen of the Jury, that each will view with a jealous eye the
positions of the other, and that there cannot but be a bias among the partisans
of the one side, against the principles and doctrines inculcated by the other.
In the present instance I fear it cannot but have its effect: For without
impeaching the integrity of any person directly concerned in the progress of
the present trial, I may fairly state, that under the Sedition Law, a
defendant, such as I stand before you, is placed in a situation unknown in any
other case.

Directly or indirectly, the public, if not the private character of the
President of the United States is involved in the present trial. Who nominates
the judges who are to preside? the juries who are to judge of the evidence? the
Marshal who has the summoning of the jury? the President. Suppose a case of
arbitration concerning the property of any one of you, where the adverse party
should claim the right of nominating the persons whose legal opinions are to
decide the law of the question, and of the very man who shall have the
appointment of the arbitrators? what would you say to such a trial? and yet in
fact such is mine, and such is the trial of every man who has the misfortune to
be indicted under this law. But although I have a right to presume something of
political bias against my opinions, from the court who try me, to you who sit
there as jurymen, I am still satisfied you will feel, that you have some some
character to support and some character to lose; and whatever your opinions may
be on the subjects alluded to in the indictment, you will reverence as you
ought the sacred obligation of the oath you have taken.

Gentlemen of the Jury, I acknowledge as freely as any of you can, the necessity
of a certain degree of confidence in the executive Government of the Country.
But this confidence ought not to be unlimitted, and need not be paid up in
advance; let it be earned before it be reposed; let it be claimed by the
evidence of benefits conferred, of measures that compel approbation, of
conduct irreproachable. -- It cannot be exacted by the guarded provisions of
Sedition Laws, by attacks on the Freedom of the Press, by prosecutions, pains,
and penalties on those which boldly express the truth, or who may honestly and
innocently err in their political sentiments. -- Let this required confidence
be the meed of desert, and the public will not be backward to pay it.

But in the present state of affairs, the Press is open to those who will
praise, while the threats of the Law hang over those who blame the conduct of
the men in power. -- Indiscriminate approbation of the measures of the
executive, is not only unattacked, but fostered and received with the utmost
avidity. -- While those who venture to express a sentiment of opposition must
do it in fear and trembling, and run the hazard of being dragged like myself
before the frowning tribunal, erected by the Sedition Law. -- Be it so; but
surely this anxiety to protect public character, must arise from fear of
attack. -- That conduct which will not bear investigation will naturally shun
it; and whether my opinions are right or wrong as they are stated in the
charge, I cannot help thinking they would have been better confuted by evidence
and argument than by indictment. -- Fines and imprisonment, will produce
conviction neither in the mind of the sufferer, nor of the public.

Nor do I see how the people can exercise on rational grounds their elective
franchise, if perfect freedom of discussion of public characters be not
allowed. -- Electors are bound in conscience to reflect and decide who best
deserves their suffrages; but how can they do it, if these prosecutions in
terroren^ close all the avenues of information, and throw a veil over the
grossest misconduct of our periodical rulers.

Gentlemen of the Jury,

After having offered these preliminary remarks, I shall give an account of the
paper on which I am accused, and then proceed to examine the charges of the
indictment in the order in which they are laid: much that I intended to have
advanced I must relinquish, that I may not trespass too long on your time, or
weaken the effect of my own defense by fatiguing your attention.

The scored paper now handed to me by the attorney general, suggests an
observation, which, though trite, is material. Upon the plan usually adopted in
these ex officio accusations, a good Christian might easily be proved an arrant
atheist. "The fool has said in his heart there is no God." Take the four last
words and they are atheistical: take the sentence and it is scripture. So, take
the marked passages in this paper and they may perhaps be forced into something
like improper imputation against the president: take the paper itself, and the
very first paragraph is a plain and positive approbation of his intention.
Though I must acknowledge, that however upright I might formerly have believed
his motives of action, I cannot upon reflection, pay that tribute to his
conduct or his motives on the present occasion.

The general circumstances that gave rise to the paper I now hold are these:
Dr. Priestley, a man whose name implies a greater combination of learning,
science, and ability, of important discovery, of exertion for the benefit of
mankind, and of private integrity, than any other man now living can boast --
whose conduct toward me in the instance detailed in this paper is praise
sufficient to bear up my mind against any consequences which the present trial
can produce -- had long been an acquaintance and an intimate acquaintance of
Mr. Adams in England and in this country. The letters of the latter to dr.
Priestley are full of strong expressions of friendship and esteem. Relying upon
this long intercourse of cordiality between them, dr. Priestley urged me to
permit him to write to Mr. Adams on the subject of a vacancy mentioned in this
paper, and which as you will have it before you when you retire, I shall not
read at length. This application was from one friend to another; upon the face
of it a confidential communication; although containing nothing but what might
do credit to all the parties concerned. Mr. Adams, however, did not think it so
confidential; and from some disclosure on his part has been founded the base
and cowardly slander which dragged me in the first instance before the public
in vindication of my moral and political character, and has at length dragged
me before this tribunal, to protect, if I can, my personal liberty and my
private fortune against the legal attack of an ex officio information. Hence it
is evident, gentlemen of the jury, that this is not a voluntary, but an
involuntary publication on my part: it has originated not from motives of
turbulence and malice, but from self-defence; not from a desire of attacking
the character of the president, but of vindicating my own. And in what way have
I done this? My motives, my private character, my public character, were the
object of falsehood and calumny, apparently founded on information of high
authority. In reply, I give credit to the intentions of the president, I say
nothing of his private character, and I attack only the tendency of measures
notorious to the world, which having been known to disapprove publicly, I was
charged with being ready from motives of interest, to approve privately. I
think, gentlemen, you cannot help feeling this contrast of behavior, and if
the president is satisfied with his side of the picture I am with mine.

The FIRST article selected for accusation is, that at the time I allude to, he
was but in the infancy of political mistake. Why this expression should have
been fixed on as seditious I know not, unless it be that quem deus vult perdere
prius dementat; for have we advanced so far on the road to despotism in this
republican country, that we dare not say our President may be mistaken? Is a
plain citizen encircled at once by the mysterious attribute of political
infallibility the instant he mounts the presidential chair? If so, then indeed
may it be seditious to say he is mistaken; but before you can condemn me for
this kind of sedition you must become catholic believers in this newfangled
doctrine of infallibility. I know that in England the king can do no wrong, but
I did not know till now that the President of the United States had the same
attribute.

I have said (and I am accused for saying it) " that even those who doubted his
capacity thought well of his intentions." Is it a crime to doubt the capacity
of the President? Suppose I had said that there were some who did not give him
credit for capacity sufficient for the office he holds, is that a crime? Or if
in them, is it a crime in me, who have not said it? Nor can the word capacity
here be fairly construed into any other than a comparative meaning; for surely
no one who has read his Defense, as it is called, of the American Constitution,
or who reflects that he has had abilities enough to raise himself to his
present situation, can say that he is devoid either of industry or talents. But
those who voted for his opponent must have believed Mr. Adams of inferior
capacity to that gentleman. Of that number was I; of that number was at least
one-half of the people of the United States. If it be a crime thus to have
thought and thus to have spoken, I fear I shall continue in this respect
incorrigible. But if of two constructions the one is absurd, improbable and
unfavorable, surely it should be rejected in favor of that meaning which was
most likely to have occurred, and which in its effects will do least injury to
a defendant like myself. This is common, this is legal charity.

Nor had we yet under his auspices, been saddled with the expense of a
permanent navy.

Gentlemen is it true or not that we are saddled with the expense of a
permanent navy? Is it necessary that I should enter into a detail of
authorities to prove that the sun shines at noon day? But farther, is it true
that we incur this expense under his auspices and sanction?

I have before me two publications, the one the Gazette of the United States,
published by Mr. Fenno in this city; and another in a form more portable and
convenient, purporting to be a selection of addresses and answers to and from
the President during the summer of 1798. Not having been able to procure office
copies of the documents I wished to refer to, I must offer in evidence such
publications as I can find; that class of publications, upon which in fact the
mind of the public is usually made up; and upon whose authority the electors of
this country determine the characters whom they honor with their suffrage.
Indeed if the opinion that fell from the court this morning be accurate, that
no man should hazard an assertion but upon sufficient and legal evidence, and
if documents from the public offices in proof of notorious facts are required
as such evidence, then are the mouths of the people completely shut up on every
question of public conduct or public character: but I cannot help thinking it a
fair and reasonable position, that a defendant in such a case as this should be
permitted to offer to the jury any evidence that appears to him a sufficient
ground for his assertion, and let them decide on its credibility.


Judge Chase. What is it that you say sir fell from the court? They have not
yet decided what was or what not proper evidence for you to adduce. The court
said if you thought the public documents at your service you were mistaken. If
you undertake to publish without having proper evidence before you to justify
your assertions, you do it at your own risk. Most assuredly in common traverses
you could not offer the evidence you mention. But we acknowledge that in such a
case as this greater latitude may be given. If you say the president did write
a letter you must prove it. We should incline to admit gazettes and acts of
public authority and notoriety: you might read the speech of the President to
both houses of congress in evidence. If you want to prove that the President
advocated a navy, you may read the journals of congress or any authentic public
document.


Mr. Cooper. If I am defeated in my endeavors to procure these documents, I
must offer such evidence as I can procure; and where there is no reasonable
suspicion or assignable motive why the publications I offer should misrepresent
the transactions I allude to, the probability is in favor of their accuracy;
especially when the printers of them are severely punishable for wilful
misrepresentation or gross mistake in detailing the public acts of government.


Judge Peter's. I admit a great many things from Mr. Cooper who is without
counsel, which I would not admit from others.


Judge Chase. You may read any thing and every thing you please.


Mr. Cooper. Then read the following extracts: Answer of the president to the
address of the Boston Marine Society. (Patriotic addresses printed for John and
W. Folsom, at Boston, 1798) p. 93. Floating batteries and wooden walls have
been my favorite system of warfare and defense for this country for
TWENTY-THREE years. I have had very little success in making proselytes. At the
present moment however, Americans in general, cultivators as well as merchants
and mariners, begin to look to that source of security and protection, and your
assistance will have great influence and effect in extending the opinion in
theory, and introducing and establishing the practice.

To the same purpose is the answer of the President to the young men of Boston.
To arms then my young friends, to arms: especially by sea, to be used as the
law shall direct let us resort; for safety against dangers which we now see
cannot be averted by truth, reason or justice. Pat. add. p. 38.

In unison with these opinions of the President the Secretary of the Navy, Mr.
Stoddart, presented a report to congress early the next session (2d Jan. 1799)
recommending (p. 1) a navy of 12 seventy-fours, as many frigates, and twenty or
thirty smaller vessels: in another part (p. 2 and 16) he recommended an
addition of 12 seventy-fours to the existing establishment. -- Some of the
reasons given by Mr. Stoddart deserve our most serious attention. The passages
I allude to are these. Rep. p. 2. Whether this security can be afforded unless
we are able to command our own coast; and whether the union of all the states
can long be preserved without it, are questions that merit the most serious and
attentive consideration of American legislators. I forbear to a well on this
fruitful, perhaps delicate topic.

P. 3. Thus then, whether our object be to prevent invasion -- to protect our
commerce -- to obtain a speedy and proper peace -- to maintain peace hereafter
-- or by affording security to every part of our country, to guard against the
long train of ills which must result from disunion, etc.


Surely after these statements it will not be denied that our navy is
established under the sanction, not to say express recommendation of the
President.

In the passage thus indicted, there is no expression of blame against the
measure, nor any imputation of improper motive or conduct to the President on
account of it: but I scorn this subterfuge of construction: I did mean when I
wrote it to imply a disapprobation of the measure: I thought it objectionable
at the time; I think so still. I have elsewhere Political arithmetic, published
by Campbell, Philadelphia.
stated my reasons for this disapprobation, and why we are protecting our
commerce at double its worth: I shall not therefore detail my reasons for this
opinion, but appeal to you, gentlemen of the jury, if I have the misfortune of
differing in opinion with the President on this subject, as wiser heads have
done before me, whether I ought to be indicted and punished for this
disagreement. Our opinions are not in our own power; they are the inevitable
result of such evidence and argument as we happen to light upon: at all events,
let me ask, have I proved the facts as stated or not? If I have, you cannot
find me guilty consistently with the law that has been read to you, or the
oaths you have taken.

It is farther imputed to me as a crime, that I have said, under the auspices
of the President we are threatened with the existence of a standing army.

I feel it very difficult to prove facts so notorious as those I am charged
with asserting. Gentlemen of the jury, have we or have we not a standing army?
Is it or is it not sanctioned with the approbation of the President?
Independent of his official approbation giving to our mil^tary establishment,
he has certainly expressed himself voluntarily much in favor of the measure.
Is his reply to the address of the young men of Boston, pat. add. p. 37, he
says, that this country never appeared to him to be in greater danger than at
that moment from within or without -- never more urgently excited to assume the
functions of soldiers. And to the students of Dickinson College, pat. add. 240,
he hopes, that none but those who feel a natural genius and disposition to
martial exercise "and exertions will ever be called from the field of science,"
etc. These are certainly evidences of his approbation of a military force
distinct from the militia; evidences confirmed by the repeated official
statements and reports The report of Colonel M'Henry to the President, of
December 24, 1798, and by him recommended to the consideration of congress,
contemplates an army of 50,000 men, to put us on safe ground. I shall extract
from the report of Colonel M'Henry of 5th January to the President and the 13th
of February, 1800 to congress, hereafter.
of the present executive department on the same subject. Without his
approbation we could not have had a standing army, and to the inhabitants of
our towns and villages who have eyes and ears, no farther proof than the use of
them is necessary that we have one.

This measure, like the former, I certainly meant to inculpate; and if I most
sincerely disapprove it, I shall not hold an opinion unconfirmed by ancient or
modern history, or by testimonies of weight among the dead and the living,
whose authority Mr. Adams himself will not disallow. Is it necessary for me,
gentlemen of the jury, to enumerate the many governments in ancient and modern
history called republics, which a standing military force has overthrown, and
converted into despotisms? Timotheus overthrew the liberties of Corinth;
Agathocles of Syracuse; Pisistratus of Athens, Marius and Sylla, with their
contending armies deluged Rome in blood. Caesar by his army completed the
destruction of its government. Under the emperors the proetorian guards became
the disposers of the empire. -- Let the reader consider the instances of
Gustavus Ericson in Sweden, of Francis Sforza in Milan; of Oliver Cromwell and
genesis Monk in England, and the recent conduct of Buonaparte in France, and deny
if he can the natural hostility between an army and liberty.
No man can have read history without remarking it, or perused any of the
modern discussions on this subject Gordon and Trenchard's tracts in particular,
to which I may venture to add my own continuation in Cooper's reply to Mr.
Burke's invective.
without finding them enumerated. Are we ourselves unacquainted with the
inconveniences attending them, or are the particular objections to a standing
army in such a country as ours so deep and difficult as to require diffuse
illustration? I think not; I think I may safely venture to trust to your
recollection of recent events in support of the disapprobation, I certainly
meant to cast on a standing army in any form, or to any extent, or on any
pretense, except perhaps the dubious necessity of actual invasion.

General Washington, whose opinions every man who hears me will listen to with
respectful attention, was a decided enemy of these kind of military
establishments. In his speech to both houses of congress, December 1793, he
apologizes thus for having recommended certain measures of a military nature:
Nor can such arrangements with such objects be exposed to the censure or the
jealousy of the warmest friends of republican government. They are incapable of
abuse in the hands of a MILITIA, who ought to possess a pride in being the
depository of the force of the republic, and may be trained to a degree of
energy equal to every military emergency of the United States. Again -- In that
last and most deliberate act of his most useful life, his farewell address to
his countrymen, he expresses himself thus -- Hence likewise they will avoid the
necessity of those overgrown military establishments which under any form of
government are inauspicious to liberty, and which are to be regarded as
particularly hostile to republican liberty. Such are the sentiments of general
Washington toward the close of a public life that gave him pec^liar
opportunities of judging on this subject. See appendix, No. 2.
Nor has Mr. Adams himself been at all times so favorable as he seems to be at
present to the modern system of standing armies. "We have seen," says he,
(alluding to England) one of the first nations in Europe, possessed of ample
and fertile territories at home, and extensive dominions abroad, of a commerce
with the whole world, immense wealth, and the greatest naval power which ever
belonged to any nation, who have still preserved the power of the people by the
equilibrium we have been contending for, by the trial by jury, and by
constantly refusing a standing army. The people of England alone, by preserving
their share in the legislature, at the expense of the blood of heroes and
patriots, have enabled their kings to curb the nobility without giving him a
standing army. Mr. Adams is certainly more accurate in his theory than his
facts. It is surprising to me that any man can have read the history of
England, particularly the quarrels between the monarchs of that country and the
house of commons, from William the Third, to George the Third; the various
protests of the minorities in the house of lords on the subject of standing
armies; the observation in Cato's Letters, and the Tracts of Gordon and
Trenchard, and yet assert that there was no standing army in England at the
time the above passage was written. Did not Mr. Adams know that the soldiery in
England are enlisted for life, although the mutiny bill is annual, and the
appropriations annual?


Hence then we see that whatever the President may be now, the time has been
when he was not an advocate for a standing army; if the President has thought
fit to change his opinion, still I hope it is no crime in me, to have retained
mine. The next charge, is that which respects the projected Embassies to
Prussia, Russia and the Sublime Port. Mr. Pickering who is on the bench with
the court, can prove the persons appointed, the date of their appointment, and
their salaries. But this will be to occupy time in proving a matter of
notoriety, and I feel now disinclined to enter into all the details of
conclusion which the facts he could tell us would lead me to. I have much yet
to go through; I feel the effect of interruption, and therefore without
resorting to his testimony, I shall observe very briefly in the first place,
that the obvious tendency of these appointments, beside providing for those who
are nominated to them, is to put us in a way of being drawn into the vortex of
European politics and European quarrels, with which we have nothing to do:
2dly. That they are commercially useless; the commerce of this country to those
places does not furnish profit enough to pay the expenses of cur diplomatic and
consular establishments there. 3dly. That they have hitherto produced no
national benefit whatever, so far as the the public yet know; and 4thly. I am,
as a citizen of this country, a sincere convert to the doctrine of General
Washington in his farewell address. Hear his words: The first rule of conduct
for us in regard to foreign nations, is in extending our commercial relations
to have with them as little political connection as possible; so far as we have
formed engagements, let them be fulfilled with perfect good faith: here let us
stop. Europe has a set of primary interests, which to us have none or a very
remote relation. Hence she must be engaged in frequent controversies, the
causes of which are essentially foreign to our concerns. Hence therefore it
must be unwise in us to implicate ourselves by artificial ties in the ordinary
vicissitudes of her politics, or in the ordinary combinations and collisions of
her friendships or enmities, again: why forego the advantages of so peculiar a
situation? why quit our own stand upon foreign ground? why by interweaving our
destiny with that of any part of Europe, entangle our peace and prosperity in
the toils of European ambition, rivalship, interest, humor or caprice. It Is
our true policy to steer clear of all permanent alliances with any portion of
the foreign world: so far, I mean, as we are now at liberty to do it; for let
me not be understood as capable of patronizing infidelity to existing
engagements. But in my opinion it would be unwise to extend them.

Here then, Gentlemen of the Jury, do I stand before you, indicted for being an
advocate for the doctrines, solemnly and deliberately recommended to his fellow
citizens, by GEORGE WASHINGTON.

But we have borrowed money says this paper of mine, at 8 per cent in time of
peace. -- Have we or have we not? If we have, am I guilty of a crime in making
the assertion? or can you really deem it necessary that I should adduce proof
to establish this fact? But perhaps Mr. Attorney General may say, I meant to
imply a censure on the President for his sanction to this measure: I did so. --
I think the causes of the Loan, the measures that produced it, had a tendency
unfavourable to the interest of the country: I have already urged what I had to
say on our permanent navy, and our standing army, and therefore I shall not
repeat the objections. -- I think the loan was extravagant, for in no period of
war do I recollect that Great Britain has ever offered this high interest. I
think the interest thus given improper, as a sanctioning of usury by
Government, while our laws repress it individually, I dread the principles of
all Loans; for I abhor a funding system and a national debt. -- If thus to
think be a crime, I must patiently abide the punishment. -- Nor do I see why
this expense should have been made necessary by any previous measures, while
the state of our finances was so unfriendly to any expenditure that could have
been avoided. -- If Mr. Gallatins book on the finances of this country, be not
authority, it ought to be. -- In page 48 and the subsequent pages of that book,
you may find that about the time when General Washington declined and Mr. Adams
accepted the Presidency, our receipt and expenditures about balanced each
other; they were in round numbers 6 million of dollars per annum. I hold now in
my hand the report of the committee of ways and means of February 21st. 1800,
published by order of the house of Representatives of Congress, from page 15
whereof it appears that the estimated revenue for the year 1800, is only
9,301,258 dollars, while the estimated expense is 15,393,034* leaving a
deficiency of above 6 million of dollars! As the example of borrowing at 8 per
cent is now set; time only can show us how much of this alarming deficiency is
to be made up by such loans, at this enormous interest. If this be the price of
borrowing in time of peace what will be the interest demanded in a period of
war! Is this giving a proof of our strength, or of our weakness?

This money was borrowed when the violence of official expressions might have
provoked a war.

Gentlemen of the Jury, the court will concede that Vattel's Treatise on the
Law of Nations, is a book of acknowledged authority: and from that book I will
read a quotation or two. Nothing is more opposite to the duties of humanity nor
more contrary to the society which should be cultivated by nations, than
offenses or actions which give a just displeasure to others. Every Nation
therefore should carefully avoid giving any real offense: I say a real; for
should he who manifests a displeasure at our behavior when we are only using
our rights or fulfilling our duties, he is to blame, not we. Offenses excite
such asperity and rancour between nations, that we should avoid giving room
even for ill grounded offenses, when it can be done without any inconveniency
or failure in our duty. It is said that some medals and dull jests, were what
irritated Lewis XIV against the United Provinces, and were the chief cease of
his expedition in 1672, by which that Republic was brought to the brink of
ruin. L. 2. Chapter 1. 19.

Again, L. 3. Chapter 4. 65. In so civilized an age, it may be unnecessary to
observe, that in these pieces, published on account of a war, all opprobrious
words are to be avoided, together with every expression indicating hatred,
animosity, and rage, as these can only excite the like sentiments in the enemy.
A prince, both in his discourses and in his writings, ought to observe the most
noble decency. He is to respect himself in the person of his equals: and though
it is his misfortune to be at variance with a nation, shall he inflame the
quarrel by offensive expressions, and thus deprive himself of the hopes of a
sincere reconciliation? Homer's heroes called each other dog and drunkard, and
in their wars they observe no manner of decorum, they were filled with the most
brutal outrages. Frederick Barbarossa with other Emperors, and the Popes their
enemies, treated each other with the same roughness and violence. Let us
congratulate our age on the superior gentleness of its manners, and not deny us
an empty politeness, customs which have consequences truly beneficial.

Thus far Vattel; and I most sincerely wish it were in my power to congratulate
my fellow citizens of America, and the administration of our country, with
having uniformly preserved that tone of superior gentleness, and beneficial
politeness, so wisely recommended by our author.

But I have no such congratulations to make; and it is to me a very unpleasant
task to detail, though in my own defense, those official expressions on the
part of the President, which have given undoubted cause (and in my opinion just
cause) of offense to France. I shall pass by the abberations from decorum of
language which I might quote from the documents of secondary officers, and
confine myself however unpleasantly, to those which the President himself has
thought fit to furnish or to sanction. I have many of them to adduce; but I
feel fatigue; and it is a task too irksome to wade through the whole collection.

Gentlemen of the Jury, these are expressions respecting the characters and
conduct of the French rulers, and of the French nation, that I am about to
quote. I know that reflections have been thrown upon many persons in this
country, especially if they are not natives, as too much addicted to French
politics. I hope it will not be improper to obviate that stigma in my own case:
nor do I know how to do it but by quoting a passage published by myself, when
this imputation and this trial could not have been in contemplation.


Mr. Rawle. Does the court conceive this can be evidence?


Judge Chase. Surely not: but let Mr. Cooper read what he pleases.


Mr. Cooper. By no means: I shall not deliberately avail myself of what is not
evidence, and perhaps this is not strictly so.

But, Gentlemen of the Jury, in a cause like this, so completely political, I
know the bias that may arise from these collateral suspicions and party
imputations; and I wish if I can, to meet and to refute them as they arise. In
the present instance, if they are entertained by you, they will be ill founded
and unjust. I am American enough to feel that both the belligerent powers have
furnished us with a just cause for war, if common prudence had not forbidden
our resorting to it. (To Mr. Rawle) All my extracts contain references to
Fenno's Gazette, but as the selection of addresses is more handy than the files
on the table, I will use it till you wish to see the Paper itself respecting
any of my quotations.

In the President's answer to the address of the inhabitants of the town of
Arlington and Sandgate in Bennington county Vermont (Pat. ad. p 11, Fenno July
2, 1798) he says, I have seen in the conduct of the French nation for the last
12 years, In the President's inaugural speech of March 4, 1797, he says "if a
personal esteem for the French nation formed in a residence of seven years
chiefly among, and a sincere desire to preserve the friendship which has been
so much for the honor and interest of both nations, etc."
a repetition of their character displayed under Louis the 14th. and little
more excepting the extravagancies which have been intermixed with it of the
wildest philosophy that was over professed in this world since the building of
Babel and the Fables of the Giants who by piling mountains on mountains invaded
the skies. If the spell is broken, let human nature exult and rejoice.

In the address of the Mayor, Aldermen etc. of the city of Vergennes in Addison
county Vermont, patr. ad. 14. Fenno July 12, 1798, there is the following
passage: The perfidious republic which boasts of its terror and prowess to us
is more terrible in vice and impieties than in arms.

In his answer the President replies your opposition to that policy, if indeed
it can be called policy, which is equally destructive of persons things and
nations, does honor to your understanding and dispositions.

In page 35 of the Pat. ad. the same kind of language is used in an address
from the young men of Boston, wherein they say at a period when a powerful and
perfidious nation aspiring to the dominion of the world, annuls in the career
of her pride all bonds of national amity.

In the address from Concord in Massachusetts pat. ad. 49. they cordially
acquiesce in the vigorous measures adopted by our executive toward an aspiring
power, who unprovoked, encouraged the piracy and perfidy of Gothic darkness and
Vandal barbarity; who has perpetrated crimes unparrallelled in the history of
man! France grasping at universal domination has abandoned every moral and
religious principle, trampled on sacred faith, sported with national laws, and
demanded pecuniary exactions which bankrupt our nation and make us slaves
indeed of a free and independent people.


Mr. Rawle. I do not want to interrupt Mr. Cooper, but (I presume from
inadvertence) he has read the addresses to the President as if they were the
answers of the President. I do not think he wishes to mislead, but this is
improper, I do not find that the answer to the address of the young men of
Boston Lord Kenyon has decided 5 Term Rep. 442, that both addresses and answers
are matters of State.
contains the passage he has quoted.


Judge Chase. I wish Mr. Cooper to do and say whatever he chooses; go on Sir.


Mr. Cooper. If I have committed a mistake I am very sorry for it, but I have
committed none: where this language is permitted or encouraged -- where the
answers re-echo or approve the addresses, that approbation amounts to an
adoption by the President. For instance, in the answer to the last address I
read, the President begins Gentlemen, I thank you for this address, Your
encomiums on the executive authority of the government is in a high degree
flattering. Sir, I have a right to contend that this retort complimentary, on
the part of the President, is a direct approbation of the language of the
address. I need not however refer to the addresses at all, for I have enough
among the answers in the twenty other instances I have selected, completely to
establish my position; not that a few cases of harsh and intemperate language,
have inadvertendly escaped through warmth of temper and a sense of national
provocation, but that they have been systematically, perseveringly, indulged in.

But I begin to grow weary of this cause; and I feel disinclined to fatigue
myself and you still more by wading through this collection of unpleasant and
irritating expressions: nor do I think it worth while to employ my time and
yours in contending every technical objection. I did not fully expect such
frequent interruptions, on a trial of this nature, or to have fought my way,
per tot ambages, per tot discrimina rerum. I shall quit therefore the paper of
extracts Vide Appendix no. 3.
I hold in my hand, and quote no more of them. But these addresses and answers
are not the only foundations of the assertions I made. The French themselves
have complained of this violent language and unjust accusation of their
principles and conduct. They have felt the indignity, and have expressly made
it an obstacle to negotiation. In page 19 of the instructions to the Envoys,
etc. published by the Secretary of State, in conformity to the resolution of
Congress of June 22, 1798, those Envoys inform us that M. Y. took out of his
pocket a French translation of the President's speech, the parts of which
objected to by the Directory, were marked agreeably to our request to M. X. and
are contained in the exhibit A, (this exhibit I need not read at length: it
will be found in p. 24 of the book I am quoting.) Then he made us the second
set of propositions, which were dictated by him and written by M. X. in our
presence, and delivered to us, and which translated from the French are as
follows: There is demanded a formal disavowal in writing, declaring that the
speech of the Citizen President Barras did not contain any thing offensive to
the government of the United States, nor any thing which deserved the epithets
contained in the whole paragraph.

In another part of the same page the envoys tell us M Y. informed them that
"the directory were extremely irritated on account of some parts of the
President's speech." Now, gentlemen of the jury, that speech is mildness itself
compared with the extracts I have read, and was prepared to read to you from
the addresses and answers of the President, published in the same month with
this very book.

In page 92 the Envoys give us a translation of the letter of M. Talleyrand,
the minister of foreign relations, to them. In p. 97 there is the following
paragraph of that letter. The newspapers See Appendix No. 4.
known to be under the indirect control of the cabinet, have, since the
treaty, redoubled the invectives and calumnies against the republic and against
her principles, her magistrates and her envoys. Pamphlets openly paid for by
the minister of Great Britain, have re-produced in every form those insults and
calumnies, without a state of things so scandalous ever having attracted the
attention of the government which might have repressed it. On the contrary the
government itself was inte^^ upon encouraging this scandal in its public acts.
The executive directory has seen itself denounced in a speech delivered by the
President in the course of the month of May last (O. S.) as endeavoring to
propagate anarchy and division within the United States. The new allies which
the republic has acquired, and who are the same that contributed to the
independence of Americans have been equally insulted in the official
correspondencies that have been made public, or in the newspapers. In fine, one
cannot help discovering in the tone of the speech and of the publications which
have just been pointed out, a latent enmity which only waits an opportunity to
break out.

Gentlemen of the jury, after the serious manner in which the tone of official
expressions had been noticed by the French nation -- after it was made an
avowed obstacle to negotiation -- where was the prudence or propriety of a
persevering reiteration of language such as I have read to you? For my own
part, I cannot help thinking such conduct in a public character rash and
indecorous, and highly deserving the reprehension I have expressed.

The next and last point, that which seems to be the most serious of all, is,
the interference of the President in the decision of a court of justice in the
case of Jonathan Robbins.

This case has received such full and such recent discussion; it has been so
much talked of in congress, and written of out of congress, that I do not think
it necessary to enter into all the details of evidence and argument which would
have been necessary could I have presumed you unacquainted with the subject. I
shall, however, prove to you, gentlemen of the jury, that there has been such
an interference on the part of the President, that it was not only without, but
against precedent and against law; and if so, you will also conclude with me
that it was against mercy. Here is the message of the President to congress on
the case of Jonathan Robbins, authenticating the communications of Mr.
Pickering. In page 5 Philadelphia, June 3d, 1799. Sir,
Mr. Liston, the minister of his Britannic majesty, has requested, that Thomas
Nash, who was a seaman on board the British frigate Hermiora, and who he is
informed is now a prisoner in the jail of Charleston, should be delivered up. I
have stated the matter to the President of the United States. He considers an
offense committed on board a public ship of war, on the high seas, to have been
committed within the jurisdiction of the nation to whom the ship belongs. Nash,
is charged, it is understood, with piracy and murder, committed by him on board
the abovementioned British frigate, on the high seas, and consequently "within
the jurisdiction" of his Britannic majesty; and therefore, by the 27th article
of the treaty of amity with Great Britain, Nash ought to be delivered up, as
requested by the British minister, provided such evidence of his criminality be
produced, as by the laws of the United States, or of South Carolina, would
justify his apprehension and commitment for trial, if the offense had been
committed within the jurisdiction of the United States. The President has in
consequence hereof authorized me to communicate to you "his advice and request"
that Thomas Nash, may be delivered up to the consul or other agent of
Great Britain, who shall appear to receive him.

I have the honor to be, etc. etc. (Signed) TIMOTHY PICKERING.

The honorable Thomas Be, esquire. Judge of the district of South Carolina.


Mr. Pickering states, that he had communicated Mr. Liston's application to the
President, and that Nash (Robbins) is charged, as it is understood, with piracy
and murder, committed on board a British frigate on the high seas; the
President gives his opinion on the subject of jurisdiction, and on the
construction of the clause of the treaty; and authorizes Mr. Pickering to
communicate the President's ADVICE and REQUEST that Nash should be delivered
up. Now, gentlemen, without entering into any argument on the question of
territorial jurisdiction; or the construction of the clause of the treaty --
without going into the point that the crime of piracy gave jurisdiction to the
court here -- I rest my assertion that the President interfered improperly on
this; that if he had authority to do what he did, he would not have advised and
requested, but REQUIRED AND DIRECTED: an advice may be rejected; a request may
be refused, without attaching blame to the person who by this language is
permitted to exercise his own judgment and inclination. Either the President
had authority to interfere or he had not; if he had authority, the language
should have been peremptory and not subject to excuse o^ evasion. If he had not
authority he should not have interfered at all. But it is as evident as
language can make it, that the President doubted of his own jurisdiction;
advice and request is the expression of hesitation and distrust; he felt the
impropriety of his conduct at the time, and his language bears the impression
of his feelings.

I might have made enquiry by testimony into the circumstances attending the
trial of the sailors from the Hermione before his honor Judge Chase, in
New Jersey. In those cases we hear of no such interference, though I have
understood they were precisely similar to that under discussion: but I really
feel myself too much exhausted to go into any verbal testimony on this head of
the charge, though I had much to examine.


Court. Then if you do not mean to examine witnesses, the gentlemen who attend
on this occasion need not be detained.


Mr. Cooper. Certainly not now: I must relinquish my intentions, for I shall
not be able to go through with them.


Court. Sir, the court do not want to press you; they will wait for an hour if
you wish it to give you time to recruit your strength.


Mr. Cooper. I am much obliged to the court, and to the gentlemen who have
attended; but I shall proceed and finish as soon as I can.

I have said this was an interference that the monarch of Great Britain would
have shrunk from. Let the case be pointed out if it can, when a monarch of
Great Britain has made such an attempt. I know of none; and I know also enough
of the law and of the spirit of that country, to be satisfied, that no such
attempt would be ventured on there.

It is without precedent -- I say further, it is against precedent. I hold in
my hands the case of the United States us. judge Lawrence (p. 42 of 3 Dall.
Rep.) The substance of that case is this: Capt. Bar of the French vessel le
Perdrix, abandoned his ship, became resident at New York, was claimed as a
deserter by the Consul of the French Republic, and required to be delivered up
under the 9th art. of the consular convention between the United States and
France, which authorizes the mutual delivery of deserters to the consuls or
vice consuls of the respective Countries, on demand made in writing to the
Courts, Judges, and officers competent; and on proof by the exhibition of the
Ship's Roll, that the persons required were part of the Crews. The French
consul could not produce the original register or role d'equipage, but a copy
only: this, Judge Lawrence thought insufficient evidence under the clause of
the Convention. The Minister of the French Republic then applied to the
executive, complaining of the refusal, and the present motion was made in order
to obtain the opinion of the Supreme Court (of the U. S.) upon the subject for
the satisfaction of the Minister. After counsel were heard in opposition to the
motion the Attorney General (Bradford) in reply premised that the Executive of
the U. S. had no inclination to press upon the Court any particular
construction of the article on which his motion was founded, but as it was the
wish of our Government to preserve the purest faith with all nations, the
President could not avoid paying the highest respects and the promptest
attention to the representation of the Minister of France, who conceived that
the decision of the district Judge involved an infraction of the conventional
rights of his republic, ***** In the present case from the nature of the
subject as well as from the spirit of our political constitution, the Judiciary
department is called on to decide. For it is essential to the independance of
that department, that judicial mistakes should only be corrected by judicial
authority. The President therefore introduces the question for the
consideration of the Court, in order to insure a punctual execution of the
Laws, and at the same time to manifest to the world the solicitude of our
Government to preserve its faith and to cultivate the friendship and respect of
foreign nations.

Here then in both cases, (the constitutional powers of Genesis Washington and Mr.
Adams being the same) a foreign Consul claims a Man to be delivered up under a
Clause of a treaty. The claim in both cases is made to a district Judge: in
both cases the foreign Minister afterward applies for the same purpose to the
President of the U. S. and at this point, the Similitude ends. For Genesis
Washington did not hazard an opinion of his own or exert executive influence in
favor of the application from the French minister, but introduced the question
for the consideration of the Court -- Mr. Adams did hazard his own opinion in
favor of Mr. Liston's application, and advised and requested Judge Be to
conform to it. Genesis Washington had no inclination to press upon the Court any
particular construction of the clause in the Treaty Mr. Adams not only
inclined, but indulged his inclination in pressing upon Judge Be that
construction of the clause in the Treaty which was most favorable to the
British claim. Genesis Washington deemed it essential to the independence of the
Judiciary Department, that judicial mistakes should be corrected by judicial
authority -- Mr. Adams not so tender of judiciary honor and independence,
boldly satisfied the scruples of Judge Be by executive authority. Genesis
Washington from the nature of the subject, as well as from the Spirit of our
political Constitution left the judiciary department to decide the question --
The nature of the subject and the spirit of our political Constitution, were no
obstacles to Mr Adams; he decided the question himself without being restrained
by the one consideration or the other. In the case of capt. Bar, Genesis
Washington had a pretense for interfering, which Mr. Adams had not; for it was
the application of the consul alone that gave jurisdiction to Judge Lawrence --
whereas the charge of Piracy in the case of Robbins brought him completely
within the jurisdiction of our Courts, even though it had been legally
established that he was a native subject of the British monarch. Genesis
Washington acted in a new case; he had no previous decision to guide his
conduct; he can counter to no precedent of authority, to no case in point; no
charge of Piracy gave undeniable jurisdiction: even though his good sense had
not prevented his interference with Judge Lawrence, the mistake might in him
have been forgiven -- But Mr. Adams had a precedent to go by; he had law to
guide his conduct? the case in point was within the compass of his information;
the example set by his predecessor,

Gentlemen of the jury, after these observations it will be for yor to decide
whether I have asserted too much in saying that Mr. Adams interfered without
precedent and against law -- might I not have been justified had I gone a
little farther? ^f he did so, it was against mercy, for the man was hanged.

In this message of the President there are certificates from certain persons
of the town of Danbury denying that any man or any family of the name of
Robbins had been known for many years within that town. There are two or three
singular circumstances attending these certificates.


Mr. Rawle. This is information subsequent to the libel.


Judge Chase. Is not the whole of the Message of the President subsequent to
the publication charged in the indictment? If so, how can it be evidence? Sir,
you had not this evidence before you when you wrote that paper.


Mr. Cooper. Sir, the point in question is, the truth or falsehood of the
charge. I had evidence sufficient before me when I wrote it; sufficient to
satisfy my own mind: what if I have still better evidence now? Is the fact the
less true because the President confirms it? The facts had been published in
almost every paper of the United States -- they were detailed at length in a
publication then before me, and now on the table, by a most respectable member
of the Senate, Mr. Charles Pinckney; which I do not offer in evidence because I
know it will be objected to. Besides this, I have already stated that these
facts are and must be to the jury, matters of recent and public notoriety: they
are so referred to by Mr. Pickering in his own report: they have boen given in
all the debates in Congress lately published, and even now daily publishing;
and I have a right, as I think, to adduce this message, at least as additional
and corroborative testimony. But the issue between us is, TRUE or NOT TRUE; the
issue is not, had I the best evidence at the time I wrote or not. Whatever
evidence I possessed at the time I wrote, it is enough for me at this time, to
prove that what I wrote was and is true: and the message goes directly to this
point.

Gentlemen of the Jury, I say there are two or three singular circumstances
attending these certificates. They also, are far more liable to this objection
than the evidence I have offered; for they have been pressed into the service,
long after the publication of Robbins's affidavit that he was a native
American. These certificates do not state that no such family as Robbins, was
known in the neighborhood of Danbury, as I sincerely believe may yet be
proved. Vide appendix No. ^.
The time of the enquiring into this fact is also curious: While Robbins was
alive, while he claimed (for I again repeat it as a notorious fact, and a fact
referred to by Mr. Pickering himself in the first page of the Report, that he
d^d claim) to be a native American, no enquiry was thought necessary: while he
could have an opportunity to repel by evidence a counter affidavit, none was
made: nay the Judge himself appears to have thrown the consideration of
citizenship out of the question. -- But now, when Robbins has been delivered up
and executed -- when the enquiry can do him no service, and he is no longer
alive to direct or to benefit by it, it has become an important question! The
industry of Mr. Pickering has been exerted to bring us proof from all quarters,
from Connecticut to Jamaica: the guarded evidence of the wise men of Danbury,
and the disinterested testimony of Sir Hyde Parker are set in array against the
claim of Robbins. The President transmits this accumulation of irrefragable
proof to Congress; our Representatives debate upon it; and the citizenship of
Robbins at length becomes a question most material to be ascertained Why?
because the affidavit of Robbins, and the impression made by Robbin's claim
must be counteracted. But is not the pains thus taken, full evidence of the
Notoriety of the claim!
; If the evidence I have offered is objectionable, what shall we say to Mr.
Pickerings authorities? It is well that Congress is not scrupulous about the
admissibility of testimony: It is well that the evidence contained in the
Presidents message on this part of Robbin's history, was not subjected to as
many tests as I have had to combat!

Gentlemen, I do contend that this is not like a trial on a matter of property,
where every technical objection to evidence is admissible. That evidence which
does in fact, and ought in reason, to decide your political conduct when you
are out of that box, is the kind of evidence which ought to decide mine; and it
is unreasonable in my opinion on a political trial to require any other; or to
harrass a defendant by putting him to the enormous trouble and expense of
traveling from one end of the Continent to the other, to bring forward legal
evidence of a fact which nobody doubts before hand. I do contend, Gentlemen of
the Jury, that there are, and may be certain facts of public politics
sufficiently notorious to obviate the necessity of legal proof, and whose
notoriety, is itself a matter of fact, which may in all cases be safely left to
a jury to judge of.

The affidavit of Jonathan Robbins so often published, so commonly known, whose
authenticity has never been scrupled, though its veracity has lately been denied,
is one of those notorious facts that fall within the spirit of the preceding
observations. While Robbins lived, it was uncontradicted by equal evidence;
indeed it is so still: I had reason to give credit to it at the time I wrote,
and I believe in the probability of it now.

Gentlemen, I have gone through all the charges; and I am satisfied that I have
brought in support of my assertions, the best evidence the nature of my case
would admit of. -- It is true by resorting to Danbury for depositions and to
Charles Town for records, I might have made the evidence in the last charge,
more complete; but I did not and do not think them necessary to produce further
conviction on your minds, than you feel on the subject already. This is an
important point under the law in question. If such strictness of testimony is
required, there is an end at once of all political conversation in promiscuous
society. The time, the labor, the difficulty, the expense, the barrassment and
fatigue, of mind as well as of body, which such doctrine would occasion, to
every citizen whom a corrupt administration might determine to ruin, would be
an engine of oppression of itself sufficiently powerful to establish a perfect
despotism over the press* and would be a punishment for innocence before trial,
too severe to be inflicted on sedition itself. I think you must feel the truth
of these remarks: the proceedings on this trial, irresistibly suggest them.

Gentlemen, if the assertions I have made are true, whatever the motives of
them may be, you cannot find me guilty. But I think it impossible if you
consider the paper all together that you can ascribe the publication of it to
malice: it is on the force of it not voluntary but compelled. I have in the
very outset of the paper spoken well of the President: I have been in the habit
of thinking his intentions right, and his public conduct wrong: and that this
has been the general tennor of my language and behavior, I believe I can even
now bring proof enough from among my friends and my neighbors. Mr. Cooper
calls two witnesses.


Judge Chase. This is not necessary: it is your conduct, not your character
that is in question. If this prosecution were for a crime against the United
States, you might give evidence to your character and show that you have always
been a good citizen, but this is an indictment for a libel against the
President, where your general character is not in question.


Mr. Cooper. I am satisfied. -- I shall fatigue the Jury no longer. -- But rest
my defense here.


Mr. RAWLE, in reply: --

Gentlemen of the Jury,

The defense you have just heard is one of the most extraordinary and
unexampled I ever remember to have witnessed in a court of justice. It is no
less than to call into decision whether Thomas Cooper, the defendant, or the
President of the United States, to whom this country has thought proper to
confide its most important interests, is best qualified to judge whether the
measures adopted by our government are calculated to preserve the peace and
promote the happiness of America. This, however, does not seem to me the real
point which you are to try; and I shall therefore (under direction of the
court) proceed to state what I conceive to be the question which you, Gentlemen
of the Jury are now called upon to determine. Thomas Cooper is charged in the
Indictment with having published a false scandalous and malicious libel with
intent to defame the President of the United States and to bring him into
contempt and disrepute, and to excite against him the hatred of the good people
of this country. In the act which defines this offense, and points out the
punishment, a liberality of defense is given, unknown I believe in any other
Country Mr. Rawle forgot that the same defense is given in England under what
is called Mr. Fox's bill.
where the party is tried for a libel on the Government. Here, the defendant is
allowed under the third section of that act, to give in evidence the truth of
the matters charged as a libel in the publication, and the Jury have a right to
determine the Law and the fact under the direction of the Court. The true
spirit of the Law is that the defendant shall not be found guilty of publishing
defamatory writings, unless they be false, nor although they may be false, shall
he be considered as guilty under the law, unless the intent of the publication
appear to be malicious.

That such publication has proceeded upon a knowledge of the truth, he is
permitted to give as matter of evidence; and if true, it must be allowed to go
far to satisfy the minds of the Jury, that the malicious motives imputed to him
are not true. In private actions for slander, where a man seeks pecuniary
redress for the injury his character has sustained, the defendant is entitled
to give in evidence as a defense to the action, the truth of the words spoken
or the written libel; and if the truth of the assertions be proved, it will
amount to a justification. There is no difference then between the defense that
may be set up to an action of slander, or libel on a private person, and that
which is permitted under the law whereon this indictment is grounded.

The defendant has undertaken to satisfy the mind of the Jury that in this
publication he had no malicious intention against the President of the United
States; I join issue with him on the point, and request your particular
attention to it. He alleges that he did not impute improper motives to the
President, and attempts to substantiate his allegation by referring you to his
declaration in the outset where he says that "I cannot believe him (the
President) capable of such gross misrepresentations, for I still think well of
his intentions, however I may disapprove of his conduct," but to this I shall
add that he goes on and concludes with a paragraph, evincing in the clearest
manner a settled design to persuade the public that the President of the United
States is not fit for the high office he bears, and of this you must be fully
convinced from the whole tenor of the expressions which have been read to you
in the Indictment.

It is very far from my views to press hard upon any part of his long address
to you, or to make use against him of any unguarded expression, which on more
deliberate consideration he might have omitted or corrected; yet when I cannot
but observe from the whole tenor of his present argument, as well as from his
publication, that his object is not so much to convince you Gentlemen of the
Jury, that his assertions are true, as to cast an unmerited reflection on the
general character and conduct of the President, I cannot help suspecting him of
the motives he disclaims, and I must do my duty by exposing the design as well
as the fallacy of the justification he has set up.

The defendant has used a little observation respecting the separating in the
indictment the text, from the context, as I believe he was pleased to term it;
and argued that by this means the most upright intentions and laudable
expressions might be perverted from their true and obvious meaning. Such an
insinuation however is not calculated to influence your minds. In framing an
indictment it is my duty to leave out matters of little importance, and to
introduce those circumstances only that are truly and legally reprehensible:
and he well knows that he can read if he pleases the whole of the publication,
and that you will have it with you when you consider of your Verdict. You will
judge therefore whether by this observation it was his, or whether it is my
design to confound and perplex the sense.

Whether the reflections he has thrown upon the conduct of Government in so
many instances throughout his defense as well as in his publication, evince the
regard he professes to entertain for the intentions of the President, is to me
as it will be to you extremely dubious; nor have those professions been
confirmed by the singular manner in which he has cited and selected the
passages on which his defense has been grounded. Throughout the quotations he
has made, particularly from the addresses to the President, and the answers to
them, there has been a series of misrepresentations which it will be my duty to
observe upon when I come to consider that part of the charge and his
vindication of it. But it is fair to observe that if from the perusal of
partial extracts and passages selected from various publications he has thought
proper to publish a libel, such as that for which he is indicted against the
character of our President, there is no excuse for his conduct; if on the other
hand he had the whole of the publications before him, and has extracted from
them partially and unfairly, his conduct is still more reprehensible, and there
is the less excuse, as it is evident, and as you Gentlemen of the Jury, must
have observed, that he is a man of talents and letters.

Mr. Cooper has thought proper to take up the several passages of his
publication in the order in which they stand in the indictment, and in replying
to what he has said I shall follow the order he has pursued.

I pass over the passages respecting the incapacity of the President, and the
infancy of political mistakes as of no great importance, and proceed to that
part of the publication which accuses our Chief Magistrate of having sanctioned
and promoted, a permanent navy, a standing army, and a loan at the high
interest of 8 per cent in time of peace, while the unnecessary violence of
official expressions might justly have provoked a war.

Here then the implication against the President is that at the same time when
he was unnecessarily plunging us into a War he promoted a Navy, a standing
Army, and borrowed money at an exorbitant interest, the one measure calculated
to enslave and the other to oppress. But Gentlemen, how has the defendant shown
this, what proof has he offered that these are measures for which the President
in particular is blameable? Need I recall to your recollection the Summer of
the year 1798 when in consequence of the disgraceful and insulting treatment
and rejection of our envoys by the French Government, the Citizens of this
Country from every part of the United States addressed the President approving
his measures and pledging their support? Amongst others the Marine society at
Boston came forward congratulating the American Nation that their beloved
Washington has been succeeded by a Man who treads with equal steps the honest
plain and strait road so strictly followed by that wise and able statesman.

In this particular case gentlemen, with your permission I will read the whole
of the answer (reads the answer from Patriotic Addresses, page 95.) Now
gentlemen I appeal to you, was it not natural and becoming, that in answering
the address of a marine society, the President should dwell upon the topic most
congenial to their institution? Those who do not look with a jealous eye on
every action and catch with a propensity to blame at every word he utters,
those who know the character of that gentleman in private life, and who have
impartially witnessed his unremitting endeavors to promote the defense and
welfare of his country can surely find nothing but what they may sincerely
praise in the answer I have just read to you.

The next passage Mr. Cooper has quoted is from the address of the young men of
Boston: this address and the answer has been used for two purposes to support;
his position that the President had recommended a navy and an army. Gentlemen I
will read the whole of the answer (reads from page 370 Patriotic Address.) I
confess I was much surprised to find that after the President had recommended
them to follow the "example of their fathers, one of whose first principles it
was to unite in themselves the character of citizens and soldiers, and
especially to preserve the latter always subordinate to the former." I was very
much surprised to find that such an answer could be quoted as reprehensible.

To arms then my young friends to arms especially by sea, to be used as the law
directs. Gentlemen can such sentiments so honestly guarded, be tortured into
proof of the Presidents intention to plunge us into a war, to introduce a
standing army and a permanent navy? Gentlemen these are not the conclusions you
will draw. The paternal care of the President has hitherto happily watched over
this country, and he knew and wisely signified the time when we ought to be
prepared for those gloomy events, which we had too much reason to expect.
Whether the adduction of these passages can support the defendant in his
defense against a malicious libel you are the best judges.

The defendant has read to you a passage culled from the answer of the
President to the students of Dickenson college, wherein he hopes that none of
them but such as feel a natural genius and disposition to martial exercise and
exertions, will ever be called from the pleasing walks of science to repel any
attack on their rights, liberties and independence: surely gentlemen if a
moderate and affectionate sentiment of this kind, is to be tortured into an
approbation of a military force or a standing army, the most innocent
expressions are not safe from perversions. I cannot however forbear to remark
with how little propriety the defendant has complained of passages being
selected from his publication for indictment without the context as he calls
it, when his whole defense rests upon passages thus picked out, to suit the
unfair and malicious purposes of his defense, an epithet which I feel myself
entitled to use, when I consider how that defense has been conducted and on
what it rests.

But gentlemen of the jury, the defendant must have very little knowledge of
the existing circumstances of this country, Either Mr. Rawle or I, must have
very little knowledge of the existing circumstances of this country. I fear he
is liable to the retort, mutato nomine de te fabula narratur. The term standing
army we got from England, when it is applied to a military force in continual
and not in periodical discipline like the militia. In that country there has
been a standing army i. e. a continued military force independent of the
militia for 150 years at least; the men are enlisted for life and yet the
mutiny bill under which that force exists is annual. Does Mr. Rawle know or
does he not, that in the 5 year-army of this country as judge Chase would call
it, -- the men continue to be enlisted for 5 years from the date of their
enlistment. So that at the end of 2 years for instance, a man is not enlisted
for 3 years but still for 5 years! Does Mr. Rawle know that this is conformable
to the recommendations of the Secretary at war in his report transmited to
Congress 13th January last? and that the recruiting instructions are to (...)
purpose?
when he talks to you of a standing army. There neither is nor can be a
standing army in this country, the appropriations for the pay of the army
cannot be made for more than two years at a time, nor has the President more to
do with the army than the Congress or the Senate, Yes he had: for the measures
originated from the suggestions in his speeches to Congress, and the reports of
his Secretary of war.
and the reflections thrown upon your first magistrate are equally applicable
to your representatives. A man so ignorant of the subject, or whose reading has
been so careless, is very unqualified to cast a reflection on the conduct of
our government, or to instruct the people on the nature and tendency of the
measures of administ^ation.

With respect to the loan at 8 per cent. if money has been borrowed at that
rate of interest, of which however the defendant has produced to you no proof,
it has been done under the authority of Congress and their measures Mr. Rawle
probably forgot that the President was authorized to borrow upon such terms,
and conditions as he thought most advantageous to the United States; and that
the rate of interest was the measure of the Executive Department.
in this respect the President has sanctioned as he had a right to do, and as I
think (confiding in his wisdom and integrity) he has rightly done.

Gentlemen, I do not pretend to be a judge of the propriety of this measure.
The Defendant says no other country has borrowed at so high a rate of interest
in time of peace; but neither is he qualified to judge of this any more than
myself; those who are qualified and who have been appointed for the purpose,
have judged for the nation; and I am satisfied as I doubt not you are. But to
raise surmises and suspicions of the wisdom and design of measures of this
kind, which he cannot know sufficient of to explain, or the people to
understand, is evidence in my opinion that his design at least was to excite
the hatred of the good people of this country against their President.

The Defendant proceeds to charge the President with unnecessary violence of
official expression that might justly have provoked a war. Gentlemen, you all
of you know the provoking and unjustifiable conduct of the French Nation
toward our envoys: the repeated designs and attempts of this country to
procure an adjustment of differences on equitable grounds, and the strange and
unexampled propositions made in return by the Government of France. It is not
for me to dilate upon these topics, or on the depredations subsequently
committed by that Nation on the American Commerce, you all of you know, you all
of you must have felt in some degree the consequence of her injustice: the
President, far better acquainted with these proceedings against America and the
tendency of them, made use of such expressions as the state of the country and
the sentiments of the people required. Of this he was the best judge, and I
doubt not in this instance as in every other of his wise and patriotic
administration he judged for the best. The Defendant however still wiser than
the President judged otherwise, and has accordingly ventured to advance before
the public the harsh Crimination we are now considering.

Gentlemen, the Defendant has quoted passages from the address of the
inhabitants of Vergennes in Vermont. I have before remarked to you the
singular, and I think the unfair method of selection the Defendant has adopted;
and the impropriety of stating the sentiments of the address itself as if it
were the answer of the President and attributable to him. I will read you the
passage (reads it.) no such passage appears in the answer of the President, and
whether the sentiments contained in it are true or not, they purport to be the
sentiments of others and not of the President. Such is the way in whick this
Defense has been conducted, I will not go through the rest of Mr. Coopers
quotations, because I do not think they have produced any effect on your minds
or on the minds of the Court, which it is necessary for me to obviate.

The Defendant next recurs to the complaints of the French Government to our
Envoys of the Expressions in the President's Speech. No doubt Gentlemen, it was
the interest and the inclination of the French Executive to raise up some
frivolous objection to the conduct of our Government that they might have some
plausible pretext to justify their own.

But I am fully satisfied as I hope and believe you are, that the President of
the United States had sufficient foundation for all that he has said on the
conduct of France toward this country, and I shall leave you to judge for
yourselves whether he or the Defendant are the most proper to decide what
conduct or language ought to have been adopted on such provocation.

The next and most serious part of this Indictment is that which relates to
Thomas Nash, or, as he has been called, Jonathan Robbins. Gentlemen I will read
you the passage in the Indictment (reads it.) Now Gentlemen it is important for
you to remember the remote part of the country where this libel was published,
and the class of people among whom it was disseminated, Mr. Rawle is mistaken
in his ideas of the people of Northumberland county. They are as capable of
judging as the generality of the people here. There are some men there who hold
the same politics with Mr. Rawle (not meaning to include his deputy) of as much
natural talent and as much legal acquirement, and as ready to defend the
measures of the government without pay, as he for the fees he receives. But the
good sense of the people is a full balance for the combination of talent
devoted to the measures of administration.
and consider what must be the effect of assertions thus boldly advanced and
strongly stated. Mr. Cooper either had evidence before him of the facts he has
asserted respecting this Nash or Robbins, or he had not. If he had no evidence
-- what shall we say of a man deliberately propagating among an ignorant
people, libels of the most serious nature and accusations against the highest
characters, which if he does not know to be false he cannot know to be true? In
support of his assertions he has read to you the Message of the President of
the United States on the subject of Thomas Nash, or rather he has read in
detached parts in a mutilated manner the Letter of Mr. Pickering: it is
observable that he could not have had this evidence before him at the time he
wrote, and yet this is the only evidence he has offered to the court in his own
defense on this part of the charge.


Mr. Cooper. I do not wish improperly to interrupt Mr. Rawle, but I did state,
that I had other evidence before me: that the facts had been very generally
published in the newspapers of every description: that they were commonly known
and much discussed: that I offered the Message of the President as additional
and corroborative testimony of what was very generally known to the public.
Beside this, I had before me Mr. Pinckney's letters containing all the facts:
these also were published in the papers before they were collected in a
pamphlet, and that pamphlet was publish- in August 1799; while the paper
indicted was not published till November 1799.


Judge Chase. Sir you must not indirectly accuse the court of want of
indulgence: there has not been any evidence denied you: you may even go into
fresh evidence now, if you please.


Mr. Cooper. Sir I do not complain of want of indulgence.


Mr. Rawle, in continuation: Since the defendant has thought fit to read only a
part of Mr. Pickerings letter, I will read the whole of it (Reads mr.
Pickering's letter before given in a note.) You observe gentlemen of the jury,
that Mr. Cooper omitted all that passage beginning with "Provided no evidence
of his criminality, etc." This opinion, given by the President, was confirmed
by the vote of the House of Representatives in rejecting a motion criminating
his conduct; and it would be confirmed by Mr. Cooper himself as a lawyer, if he
had duly considered the subject, or if his opinions had not been warped by the
influence of his political prejudices. But gentlemen, suppose the President had
not done his duty, as he did -- that he had not directed this Nash to be
delivered up, then would the party opposed to his administration, have raised
an outcry as loud, and perhaps better founded than they have made already. No
conduct of the President however wise, no motives however pure, could screen
him from the attacks of party spirit. But he has honestly endeavored to
preserve the good faith of the country by carrying a treaty into effect, and I
trust he will receive the applause of impartial and competent judges for his
behavior on that occasion.

Gentlemen you have attended to the words of this charge in the indictment, and
you cannot but be impressed that they convey on the face and in the very tenor
of them, a ccnclusive proof of a mala men's, of a malicious and deliberate
intention to injure the character of the President; no man can read them
without receiving this impression from the perusal.

I have not touched on the article respecting the embassies to Prussia, Russia,
and the Port, because I did not think it of importance sufficient to occupy
much of your time. Indeed, I believe no embassy was ever sent to Russia. But it
was projected (my expression) Mr. King was authorized to confer with the
Russian ambassador on the subject.
There is enough for your consideration against the defendant, without dwelling
on these lesser articles of the indictment.

Gentlemen I have no personal animosity against Mr. Cooper, but I have
instituted this prosecution because I thought it my duty so to do, and I must
make those remarks which the same duty calls forth.

The defendant has endeavored to show that his publication was without malice,
but his conduct with 'squire Buyers and his expressions in that publication
prove otherwise; the nature of his defense, though he has stated his opinion of
the good intention of the President, evidently shows that he meant to justify
his own conduct and language throughout. You Gentlemen of the Jury under the
direction of the court, will decide whether he has presented to you such a
justification as will entitle him to your verdict in his favor.


JUDGE CHASE's Charge to the GRAND JURY.
Gentlemen of the Jury. ( The reader is requested to pay attention to this
charge: it is accurately taken. Some of the points worthy of observation, I
have made short notes upon; others I must discuss in my letter to the Judge
)

WHEN men are found rash enough to commit an offense such as the Traverser is
charged with, it becomes the duty of the government to take care that they
should not pass with impunity -- It is my duty to state to you the law on which
this indictment is preferred, and the substance of the accusation and defense.

Thomas Cooper the Traverser stands charged with having published a false
scandalous and malicious libel against the President of the United States in
his official character as President. There is no civilized country that I know
of that does not punish such offenses; and it is necessary to the peace and
welfare of this country, that these offenses should meet with their proper
punishment, since ours is a government founded on the opinions and confidence
of the people. The Representatives and the President are chosen by the people.
It is a government made by themselves; and their officers are chosen by
themselves; and therefore if any improper law is enacted, the people have it in
their power to obtain the repeal of such law or even of the constitution itself
if found defective, since provision is made for its amendment. -- Our
government therefore is really republican, the people are truly represented
since all power is derived from them -- it is a government of representation
and responsibility -- all officers of the government are liable to be displaced
or removed, or their duration in office limited by election at fixed periods --
there is one department only, the judiciary, which is not subject to such
removal; their offices, being held "during good behavior" and therefore they
can only be removed for misbehaviour.

All governments which I have ever read or heard of punish libels against
themselves. If a man attempts to destroy the confidence of the people in their
officers, their supreme magistrate, and their legislature, he effectually saps
the foundation of the government -- ( I would ask the Judge, whether if the
Supreme Magistrate adopts measures inconsistent with the public interest, it is
not the duty of every good citizen to expose him to the public? and whether
there may not be a Government still existing although the Chief Magistrate and
every Member of the Legislature were changed? what is the use of Election in a
free Government, but for the People to express whether their Supreme Magistrate
and their Legislators deserve their further confidence or not?
) A republican government can only be destroyed in two ways; the introduction
of luxury, or the licentiousness of the press. ( On this most extraordinary
portion, I would ask, 1st. what Government ever was destroyed by the
lincentiousness of the Press? 2ly. what Government ever was destroyed by
Luxury? 3ly. whether a standing army has not been the principal cause of the
destruction of every Government ancient or modern that approached to a Republic?
) This latter is the more slow but most sure and certain means of bringing
about the destruction of the government. The legislature of this country
knowing this maxim, has thought proper to pass a law to check this
licentiousness of the press -- by a clause in that law it is enacted (reads the
second section of the sedition law.)

It must therefore be observed, Gentlemen of the Jury, that the intent must be
plainly manifest; it is an important (...) in the law, for if there is no such
intent to defame, etc. there is no offense created by that law

Thomas Cooper then, stands indicted for having published a false scandalous
and malicious libel upon the President of the United States with intent to
defame the President, to bring him into contempt and disrepute, and to excite
against him the hatred of the good people of the United States. This is the
charge: The Traverser has pleaded Not Guilty, and that he has not published,
etc. with these views -- he has also pleaded in justification (which the law
provides for) that the matters asserted by him are true, and that he will give
the same in evidence.

It is incumbent on the part of the prosecution to prove two facts, 1st. That
the Traverser did publish the matters contained in the indictment. 2d. That he
did publish with intent to defame, etc.


For the intent is as much a fact as the other, and must be proved in the same
manner as other facts; and must be proved as stated in the law of Congress --
the mere publication is no offense; and in making up your verdict, though you
consider them separately, you must take the whole tenor and import of the
publication, since the offense is commuted by the two coupled together,

First then as to the publication.

The fact of writing and publishing is clearly proved, nay in fact, it is not
denied -- it is proved to have taken place at Sunbury a considerable distance
from the seat of government: It appears from the evidence, that the Traverser
went to the house of a justice of the peace with this paper, whom, of all
others, he ought to have avoided. ( Is it a crime that I do not shelter myself
under anonymous signature? that what I do, I do openly? This man had already
been employed as the too^ of a party secretly to hunt out evidence against me:
I kenw it. I felt myself conscious of no crime: was it criminal in me to banter
the official zeal of a party runner?
) For he must know that it was the duty of the justice of peace to deliver it
immediately to those who administer the government: He did so. It was indecent
to deliver such a paper to a justice of the peace, and the manner in which it
was delivered was yet more outrageous -- if it was done in joke as the
Traverser would wish to imply, it was still very improper -- but there was the
same solemnity in his expression "this is my name, and I am the author of this
hand-bill" as if the Traverser was going to part with an estate. -- This
conduct showed that he intended to dare and defy the government, and to provoke
them, and his subsequent conduct satisfies my mind, that such was his
disposition. -- For he justifies the publication in all its parts, and declares
it to be founded in truth -- it is proved most clearly to be his publication.
It is your business to consider the intent as coupled with that, and view the
whole together. You must take that publication and compare it with the
indictment, if there are doubts as to the motives of the Traverser he has
removed them, for though he states in his defense that he does not arraign the
motives of the President, yet he has boldly avowed that his own motives in this
publication were to censure the conduct of the President, which his conduct, as
he thought, deserved. -- Now Gentlemen, the motives of the President in his
official capacity, are not a subject of enquiry with you. Shall we say to the
President, you are not fit for the government of this country? It is no apology
for a man to say, that he believes the President to be honest, but that he has
done acts which prove him unworthy the confidence of the people, incapable of
executing the duties of his high station, and unfit for the important office to
which the people have elected him -- the motives and intent of the Traverser,
not of the President is the subject to be enquired into by you.

Now we will consider this libel as published by the defendant, and observe
what were his motives. You will find the Traverser speaking of the President in
the following words: "Even those who doubted his capacity, thought well of his
intentions." This the Traverser might suppose would be considered as a
compliment as to the intentions of the President, but I have no doubt that it
was meant to carry a sting with it which should be felt; for it was in
substance saying of the President, "you may have good intentions, but I doubt
your capacity." ( This is the first time the public have been informed, that it
is a crime to doubt the capacity of a President. Is it not a good reason for
refusing to vote for a man that you doubt his capacity for the Office? I voted
for the Electoral Ticket friendly to Mr. Jefferson at the last Election,
because I doubted Mr. Adam's capacity to fill the office he now holds: I did
not then doubt his intentions. I hope I shall have an opportunity of voting
again, and the same reason that decided me before, will go far to decide my
vote again.
)

He then goes on to say, "Nor were we yet saddled with the expense of a
permanent navy, nor threatened under his (the President's auspices) with the
existence of a standing army. Our credit was not yet reduced so low as to
borrow money at eight per cent. in time of peace." Now Gentlemen, if these
things were true, can any one doubt what effect they would have on the public
mind? If the people believed those things what would be the consequence. --
What, the President of the United States saddle us with a permanent navy,
encourage a standing army, and borrow money at a large premium? And are we told
too that this is in time of peace? if you believe this to be true, what opinion
can you, Gentlemen, form of the President? One observation must strike you,
viz. That these charges are made not only against the President, but against
yourselves who elect the House of Representatives, for these acts cannot be
done without first having been approved of by Congress. ( If Judge Chase had
read as he ought to have done the Act of Congress relating to the Loan, he
would have found that the rate of Interest was left to the Executiv^, and that
no subsequent approbation was made necessary.
) Can a navy be built, can an army be raised, or money borrowed, without the
consent of Congress?

The President is further charged for that "the unnecessary violence of his
official expressions might justly have provoked a war." This is a very serious
charge indeed -- wha^, the President by unnecessary violence plunge this
country into a war! and that a just war? It cannot be -- I say Gentlemen again,
if you believe this, what opinion can you form of the President? Certainly the
worst you can form: You would certainly consider him totally unfit for the high
station, which he has so honorably filled and with such benefit to his
country. ( I ask again, is it criminal for me to differ in opinion from Judge
Chase, and to think Mr. Adams unfit for the high station he fills? What becomes
of the very foundation of our elective rights, if we are liable to punishment
for considering a chief Magistrate unfit for his situation? how many people in
this country are there, who cannot help thinking thus of Mr. Adams? I sincerely
believe a large majority. He may be a very good man and a very sensible man,
and yet not fit for his situation.
)

The Traverser states that under the auspices of the President "our credit is
so low that we are obliged to borrow money at eight per cent. in time of
peace." I cannot suppress my feelings at this gross attack upon the President
-- Can this be true? Can you believe it? Are we now in time of peace? Is there
no war? No hostilities with France? Has she not captured our vessels and
plundered us of our property to the amount of millions? Has not the intercourse
been prohibited with her? Have we not armed our vessels to defend ourselves,
and have we not captured several of her vessels of war? Although no formal
declaration of war has been made, is it not notorious that actual hostilities
have taken place? And is this then a time of peace? The very expense incurred,
which rendered a loan necessary was in consequence of the conduct of France.
The Traverser therefore has published an untruth, knowing it to be an untruth.

The other part of the publication is much more offensive: I do not allude to
his assertions relating to the embassies to Prussia, Russia and the Sublime
Port. They are matters of little consequence, and therefore I shall pass over
them. The part to which I allude is that where the traverser charges the
President with having influenced the judiciary department. I know of no charge
which can be more injurious to the President than that of an attempt to
influence a court of judicature: the judicature of the country is of the
greatest consequence to the liberties and existence of a nation. If your
constitution was destroyed, so long as the judiciary department remained free
and uncontrouled, the liberties of the people would not be endangered. ( So,
provided our Judges are upright, the Liberties of the People would not be
endangered though our L^gislatures were abolished, and we had a heriditary Tyrant
on the Throne!
) Suffer your courts of judicature to be destroyed -- there is an end to your
liberties. The traverser says that this interference was a stretch of authority
that the monarch of Great Britain would have shrunk from; an interference
without precedent, against law and against mercy. Is not this an attack, and a
most serious attack on the character of the President?

The traverser goes on thus -- This melancholy case of Jonathan Robbins, a
native citizen of America, forcibly impressed by the British, and delivered
with the advice of Mr. Adams to the mock trial of a British court martial, had
not yet astonished the republican citizens of this free country! A case too
little known, but of which the people ought to b^ fully apprized before the
election, and they SHALL be. Now gentlemen, there are circumstances in this
publication which greatly aggravate the offense -- The traverser does not only
tell you that the President interfered to influence a court of justice without
precedent against law and against mercy; but that he so interfered in order to
deliver up a native American citizen to be executed by a British court martial
under a mock trial, against law and against mercy. Another circumstance is
adduced to complete the picture -- He tells you that this Robbins was not only
an American, but a native American, forcibly impressed by the British; and yet
that the President of the United States, without precedent, against law and
against mercy, interfered with a court of justice, and ordered this native
American to be delivered up to a mock trial by a British court martial. I can
scarcely conceive a charge can be made against the President of so much
consequence, or of a more heinous nature. But, says Mr. Cooper, he has done it:
I will show you the case in which he has done it -- It is the case of Jonathan
Robbins. It appears then that this is a charge on the President, not only false
and scandalous, but evidently made with intent to injure his character and the
manner in which it is made is well calculated to operate on the passions of
Americans, and I fear such has been the effect. If this charge were true, there
is not a man amongst you but would hate the President; I am sure I should hate
him myself if I had thought he had done this. Upon the purity and independence
of the judges depends the existence of your government and the preservation of
your liberties. They should be under no influence -- they are only accountable
to God and their own consciences -- your present judges are in that situation.

There is a little circumstance which the attorney general in his observations
to you omitted to state, ( In England the Judge is considered not as the
accuser but rather as the advocate for a defendant on a prosecution; even where
he has counsel. -- But I never knew him supply the omissions of an Attorney
General, and argue the cause against a prisoner, and dwell upon every minute
circumstance of aggravation.
) but which I think it right to recall to your recollection, as it appears with
what design the traverser made this publication. In this allusion to Jonathan
Robbins he expressly tells you this is a case too little known, but of which
the people ought to be fully apprized before the election, and they shall be.
Here then the evident design of the traverser was, to arouse the people against
the President so as to influence their minds against him on the next election.
I think it right to explain this to you, because it proves, that the traverser
was actuated by improper motives to make this charge against the President. ( I
never knew before that it was criminal to discuss the political conduct of a
public character to influence the public either for or against such public
character. Would it be criminal to write a panegyric on Mr. Adams against the
next election? or must every man be indicted who does not speak or write in his
praise if at all? I DID mean to influence the election as far as I could* I DID
mean, without imputing improper motives to Mr. Adams, to state it as my opinion
that he was comparitively unfit for his situation. I PRINT THIS TRIAL NOW, not
merely to vindicate my own character, but to open the eyes of the public to the
tendency of measures countenanced by Mr. Adams, and to the strange doctrines
advanced by his adherents, so that the people may be informed against the next
election. And I solemnly call upon them to judge whether Trials of this kind do
not disgrace the administration of Mr. Adams; and tend materially to abridge
the freedom of the press, by punishing those who utter what they
conscientiously believe to be true.
) -- It is a very heavy charge, and made with intent to bring the President
into contempt and disrepute, and excite against him the hatred of the people of
the United States.

The traverser has read in evidence a report made by the President to the house
of representatives and a letter written by the secretary of state to show that
the president had advised and directed this Robbins to be given up; but
subsequent facts could not excuse the traverser for what he had written before.
( I appeal to the legal public whether this be law: whether the issue being
TRUE or not TRUE, any competent evidence to prove the truth, does not go to
issue.
)

Now, gentlemen, with regard to this delivery of Jonathan Robbins, I am clearly
of opinion that the President could not refuse to deliver him up. This same
Jonathan Robbins, whose real name appears to have been Nash, ( How does the
Judge know this? is there any thing like proof of this in the President's
Message? Is the bare assertion of Mr Pickering at second, third, or fourth
hand, conclusive evidence? or is this taken as a matter of notoriety?
Throughout the whole of Mr Rawle's reply, and the Judge's charge, a number of
political and other facts are taken for granted upon the ground of notoriety,
of which not a particle the of evidence appeared on the trial.
) was charged with murder committed on board the Hermione British ship of war.
This Nash being discovered in America, the British minister made a requisition
to the President that he should be delivered up. Then we must enquire whether
the President was obliged to give him up? By the 27th article of the treaty
with Great Britain, it is stipulated, that either of the contracting parties
will deliver up to justice all persons who being charged with murder or forgery
committed within the jurisdiction of either, shall seek an asylum within any of
the countries of the other, provided this shall be done only on such evidence
of criminality as according to the laws of the place where the fugitive or
person so charged shall be found, would justify his apprehension and commitment
for trial, if the offense had been there committed. If the President therefore,
by this treaty was bound to give this Nash up to justice he was so bound by
law; for the treaty is the law of the land: if so, the charge of interference
to influence the decisions of a court of justice, is without foundation: the
reason why this article was inserted in the treaty is evident -- Murder is a
crime against the laws of God and man, and ought never to be committed with
impunity. Forgery is an offense affecting all commercial countries, and should
never go unpunished; and therefore every government, especially a commercial
one, acts wisely in delivering fugitives guilty of such crimes to justice. Nash
was charged with having committed murder on board a British ship of war: now a
dispute has arisen whether murder ( I shall take an opportunity presently of
recalling to the Judge's recollection what he ought to have stated to the jury,
that the charge was piracy as well as murder.
) committed on board such a ship of war was committed within the jurisdiction
of Great Britain, I have no doubt as to the point. -- All vessels, whether
public or private, are part of the territory and within the jurisdiction of the
nation to which they belong. This is according to the law of nations. -- All
nations have this jurisdiction, and the reason is obvious, for every country
carrying on commerce is answerable to other nations for the conduct of their
subjects on the ocean. Were it not so, crimes committed on board vessels of war
would go unpunished; for no other country can claim jurisdiction. This person
then was charged with murder committed on board a British ship of war. I say it
was committed within the jurisdiction of Great Britain. By the constitution
(since the treaty is the law of the land) America was bound to give him up: but
who is the person to deliver up a fugitive according to that article in the
treaty? The president was the only person to take the proper steps and to take
cognizance of the business -- He represents the United States in their concerns
with foreign powers: this affair could not be tried before a court of law -- No
court of justice here has jurisdiction over the crime of murder committed on
board a British ship of war. Now, as a requisition was made to the President on
the part of the British government to deliver this man up, it became necessary
to know whether there was sufficient evidence of his criminality pursuant to
the treaty. -- The judge of the court of Carolina was therefore called upon to
inquire into the evidence of his criminality: he was the instrument made use of
by the President to ascertain that fact: ( Is this true? D^d the President in
the first instance direct Judge Be to ascertain that fact? But Judge Chase
perhaps means this constructively: but is this true? For was it deemed his duty
by Judge Be, or was it required by the President that the fact thus
ascertained should be transmitted? No: the application of Mr. Li^^^n suggested
the conduct of the President.
) his delivery was the necessary act of the President which he was by the
treaty and the law of the land bound to perform; and had he not done so, we
should have heard louder complaints from that party who are incessantly
opposing and calumniating the government, that the President had grossly
neglected his duty by not carrying a solemn treaty into effect. Was this then
an interference on the part of the President with the judiciary without
precedent, against law and against mercy; for doing an act which he was bound
by the law of the land to carry into effect and over which a court of justice
had no jurisdiction? ( Yet the Supreme Court seems to have thought otherwise in
the United States, us. Judge Laurence.
) Surely not; neither has it merited to be treated in the manner in which the
traverser has done in his publication -- A defense of greater novelty I never
heard before.

Take this publication in all its parts, and it is the boldest attempt I have
known to poison the minds of the people. He asserts that Mr. Adams has
countenanced a Navy, that he has brought forward measures for raising a
standing army in the country. -- The traverser is certainly a scholar, and has
shown himself a man of learning, and has read much on the subject of armies.
But to assert, as he has done, that we have a standing army in this country,
betrays the most egregious ignorance, or the most wilful intentions to deceive
the public. ( I shall consider th^se assertions presently.
) We have two descriptions of armies in this country -- we have an army which
is generally called the Western army, enlisted for five years only -- can this
be a standing army? Who raises them? Congress. Who pays them? The people. We
have also another army, called the provisional army which is enlisted during
the existence of the war with France -- neither of these can with any propriety
be called a standing army -- In fact we cannot have a standing army in this
country, the Constitution having expressly declared that no appropriation shall
be made for the support of an army longer than two years -- Therefore as
Congress may appropriate money for the support of the army annually and are
obliged to do it only for two years, there can be no standing army in this
country until the Constitution is first destroyed.

There is no subject on which the people of America feel more alarm* than the
establishment of a standing army. Once persuade them that the government is
attempting to promote such a measure, and you destroy their confidence in the
government. Therefore to say, that under the auspices of the President, we were
saddled with a standing army, was directly calculated to bring him into
contempt with the people, and excite their hatred against him.

It is too much to press this point on the Traverser. But he deserves it. This
publication is evidently intented to mislead the ignorant, and inflame their
minds against the President, and to influence their votes on the next election.

The Traverser says, he has proved that the President has advocated a standing
army -- how has he proved it? There is no standing army; I have before stated
the army is only raised for five years, and during the existing differences --
He tells you, Mr. Adams is a friend to the establishment of a navy -- I wonder
who is not a friend to a navy which is to protect the commerce and power of
this country.

The Traverser has, to prove these points, read to you many extracts from the
addresses and answers to the President. He has selected a number of passages
which he asserts, prove the approbation of the President to the creation of a
navy, and forming a standing army. But we are to recollect gentlemen, that when
in consequence of the unjust proceeding of France, the great mass of the people
thought proper to address the President, expressing in those addresses
sentiments of attachment and confidence in the President, and their
determination to refill the oppression of the French government: the President
replied to them in answers which generally were the echo of their sentiments,
and in fact his expressions were as general as the nature of the addresses
would permit -- Therefore the Traverser ought to have blamed the addressers,
and not the President. The Marine Society of Boston, as old seamen, address the
President in favor of a navy, the President in reply thinks a navy is the
proper defense of the country.

I believe, gentlemen, in the first part of my charge I made remarks on the
assertions of the Traverser, that the President had borrowed momey at 8 per
cent. in time of peace. Therefore it will not be necessary to enlarge on that
point.

You will please to notice, gentlemen, that the Traverser in his defense must
prove every charge he has made to be true; he must prove it to the marrow. If
he asserts three things, and proves but one, he fails -- If he proves but two,
he fails in his defense, for he must prove the whole of his assertions to be
true. If he were to prove that the President had done every thing charged
against him in the first paragraph of the publication -- though he should prove
to your satisfaction, that the President had interfered to influence the
decisions of a court of justice, that he had delivered up Jonathan Robbins
without precedent, against law and against mercy, this would not be sufficient,
unless he proved at the same time, that Jonathan Robbins was a native American,
and had been forcibly impressed, and compelled to serve on board a British ship
of war. -- If he fails therefore, gentlemen, in this proof, you must then
consider w^ether his intention in making these charges against the President
were malicious or not -- It is not necessary for me to go more minutely into an
investigation of the defense. You must judge for yourselves -- you must find
the publication, and judge of the intent with which that publication was made,
whether it was malice or not? If you believe that he has published it without
malice or an intent to defame the President of the United States, you must
acquit him -- If he has proved the truth of the facts asserted by him you must
find him Not Guilty.


After the jury had returned with a verdict of GUILTY: --

Judge Chase. Mr. Cooper, as the jury have found you guilty we wish to hear any
circumstances you have to offer in point of the mitigation of the fine the
court may think proper to impose on you, and also in extenuation of your
punishment. We should therefore wish to know your situation in life in regard
to your circumstances -- It will be proper for you to consider of this: as you
are under recognizance, you will attend the court some time the latter end of
the week -- (The court appointed Wednesday.)


Proceedings on Wednesday, April 30, 1800.
Judge Chase. Mr. Cooper, have you any thing to offer to the court previous to
passing sentence.


Mr. Cooper. The court have desired me to offer any thing relating to my
circumstances in mitigation of the fine, or any observation that occurs to me
in extenuation of the offense. I have thought it my duty (not for the purpose
of deprecating any punishment which the court may deem it proper to inflict,
but) to prevent any accidental or apparent harshness of punishment on part of
the court, for want of that information which it is in my power to give. For
this reason therefore, and that the court may not be misled, I think it right
to say that my property in this country is moderate. That some resources I had
in England, commercial failures there, have lately cut off: that I depend
principally on my practice: that practice imprisonment will annihilate. Be it
so. I have been accustomed to make sacrifices to opinion, and I can make this.
As to circumstances in extenuation, not being conscious that I have set down
ought in malice, I have nothing to extenuate.


Judge Chase. I have heard what you have to say. I am sorry you did not think
proper to make an affidavit in regard to your circumstances, you are a perfect
stranger to the court, to me at least. I do not know you personally -- I know
nothing of you more than having lately heard your name mentioned in some
publication. -- Every person knows the political disputes which have existed
amongst us. It is notorious that there are two parties in the country; you have
stated this yourself. -- You have taken one side -- we do not pretend to say
that you have not a right to express your sentiments, only taking care not to
injure the characters of those to whom you are opposed.

Your circumstances ought to have been disclosed on affidavit that the court
might have judged as to the amount of the offense; -- nor did we want to hurt
you, by this open disclosure.


Mr. Cooper. I have nothing to disclose that I am ashamed of.


Judge Chase. If we were to indulge our own ideas, there is room to suspect
that in cases of this kind, where one party is against the government,
gentlemen who write for that party would be indemnified against any pecuniary
loss; and that the party should pay any fine which might be imposed on the
person convicted. You must know, I suppose, before you made any publication of
this kind, whether you were to be supported by a party or not, and whether you
would not be indemnified against any pecuniary loss -- if the fine were only to
fall on yourself, I would consider your circumstances, but if I could believe
you were supported by a party inimical to the government, and that they were to
pay the fine, not you, I would go to the utmost extent of the power of the
court. I understand you have a family, but you have not thought proper to state
that to the court. From what I can gather from you, it appears, that you depend
on your profession for support -- we do not wish to impose so rigorous a fine
as to be beyond a persons abilities to support, but the government must be
secured against these malicious attacks. You say that you are not conscious of
having acted from malicious motives. It may be so; saying so, we must believe
you -- but the jury have found otherwise: you are a gentleman of the
profession, of such capacity and knowledge, as to have it more in your power to
mislead the ignorant. I do not want to oppress, but I will restrain, as far as
I can all such licentious attacks on the government of the country.


Mr. Cooper. I have been asked by the court whether in case of a fine being
imposed upon me, I shall be supported by a party -- Sir I solemnly aver that
throughout my life, here and elsewhere, among all the political questions in
which I have been concerned, I have never so far demeaned myself as to be a
party writer. I never was in the pay, or under the support of any party --
there is no party in this or any other country, that can offer me a temptation
to prostitute my pen. -- If there are any persons here who are acquainted with
what I have published, they must feel and be satisfied that I have had higher
and better motives, than a party could suggest. I have written to the best of
my ability, what I have seriously thought would conduce to the general good of
mankind. The exertions of my talents such as they are, have been unbought, and
so they shall continue -- they have indeed been paid for, but they have been
paid for by myself, and by myself only, and sometimes dearly. The public is my
debtor, and what I have paid or suffered for them, if my duty should again call
upon me to write or to act, I shall again most readily submit to. I do not
pretend to have no party opinions, to have no predilection for particular
desciptions of men or of measures; but I do not act upon minor considerations:
I belong here as in my former country to the great party of mankind. With
regard to any offers which may have been made to me to enable me to discharge
the fine which may be imposed, I will state heartily to the court what has
passed, for I wish not to conceal the truth: I have had no previous
communication or promise whatever, I have since had no specific promises of
money or any thing else. I wrote from my own suggestions. But many of my
friends have in the expectation of a verdict against me, come forward with
general offers of pecuniary assistance: these offers I have hitherto neither
accepted nor rejected. If the court should impose a fine beyond my ability to
pay, I shall accept them without hesitation, but if the fine be within my
circumstances to discharge. I shall pay it myself: But the insinuations of the
court are ill founded, and if you sir, from misapprehension, or misinformation
have been tempted to make them, your mistake should be corrected.


Judge Peter's. I think we have nothing to do with parties -- we are only to
consider the subject before us -- I wish you had thought proper to make an
affidavit of your property -- I have nothing to do, sitting here, to enquire
whether a party in whose favor you may be, or you, are to pay the fine. I
shall only consider your circumstances, and impose a fine which I think
adequate; we ought to avoid any oppression. It appears that you depend chiefly
upon your profession for support. Imprisonment for any time would tend to
increase the fine, as your family would be deprived of your professional
abilities to maintain them.


Judge Chase. We will take time to consider this. Mr. Cooper you may attend
here again.


Thursday. Mr. Cooper attended and the court sentenced him to pay a fine of
four hundred dollars: to be imprisoned for six months, and at the end of that
period to find surety for his good behavior, himself in a thousand, and two
sureties in five hundred dollars each.

APPENDIX, No. I.
List of the Grand Jury:
Joseph Coperthwaite, foreman Israel Whelen Wm. Turnbull Andrew Tybout Peter
Brown John Lardner Daniel Smith James Craig Philip Wager Robert Smith James
Crawford Joseph Ball James Read William Montgomery Jonathan Jones Peter Wikoff
William Warner Benjamin Bartholomew David Denny William Hall Casper W. Morris.
APPENDIX. No. II.
Extracts from a Plan for the general arrangement of the Miliiia of the United
States, made by H. Knox, Secretary for the Department of War, and approved by
General Washington date 18 th. January 1790.
The introduction 6th. page. It is the intention of the present attempt to
suggest the most efficient system of defense which may be compatible with the
interests of a free people etc.

The modern practice in Europe with respect to the employment of standing
armies, has created such a mass of opinion in their favor, that even
philosophers and the advocates of liberty have frequently confessed their use
and necessity in certain cases.

But whoever seriously and heartily estimates the power of discipline and the
tendency of military habits, will be constrained to confess, that whatever may
be the efficacy of a standing army in war, it cannot in peace be considered as
friendly to the rights of human nature, etc. But any argument on this head may
be considered as unnecessary to the enlightened Citizens of the United States.

A small corpse of well disciplined and well informed Artilerists and Engineers,
and a legion for the protection of the frontiers and the magazines and
arsenals, are all the military establishment which may be required for the
present use of the United States. -- The privates of the Corpse to be enlisted
for a certain period, and after the expiration of which to return to the mass
of the people.

Page 7. An energetic national militia is to be regarded as the capital
security of a free republic; and not a standing army, forming a distinct class
in the community.

It is the introduction and diffusion of vice and corruption of manners into
the mass of the people, that renders a standing army necessary. -- It is when
public spirit is despised, and avarice, indolence and effeminacy of manners
predominate, and prevent the establishment of institutions which would elevate
the minds of the youth in the paths of virtue and honor, that a standing army
is formed and rivetted for ever, etc.

If it should be decided to reject a standing army for the military branch of
the government, as possessing too fierce an aspect, and being hostile to the
principles of liberty, it will follow that a well-constituted militia ought to
be established, ando.

Such were the sentiments of General Washington's Secretary at war. -- Let us
now turn to the opinions of Mr. Adam's Secretary at war.

I have already noticed the report of the Secretary at war, of December 24th.
1798, and the force therein mentioned, of 50,000 men.

In his report transmitted by the President to Congress 13th. January 1800,
there is an elaborate plan for a military Academy: he states the expense of the
two regiments of artillerists and engineers, as they now stand on the
establishment. (page 23) -- He submits the preceding plan as essential to the
improvement of our military establishment. (page 24) -- He considers the
volunteer associations as a reserve body to reinforce our regular army -- He
recommends enlistments for 5 years in future, if it should be deemed expedient
to keep up a peace establishment more extended than before (page 27) -- He
states in page 35 the positions of the existing regular force, and speaks of
the four regiments of Infantry and the two companies of Cavalry on the
permanent establishment.

His letter (13th. February 1800) to the chairman of the Committee of Congress
on so much of the speech of the President as relate to a a system of national
defense, is a labored exposition of the inutility and inefficacy of a militia,
and the absurdity of relying on this means of defense. -- In the very outset he
declares That it is not conceived the United States will ever be disposed to
place their reliance for defense against a foreign invading enemy on militia
alone, but that they will at all times maintain a body of regular troops
commensurate with their ability to maintain them. Page 5 and 6 of that letter
are occupied in arguments against the malitia system* the whole letter is a
recommendation of a permanent establishment of regular troops. -- The reports
are recommended to the serious considerations of Congress by President Adams;
and the letter to the Chairman, is a comment on that part of the President's
speech which gave rise to the Committee.

From these extracts the public must draw their own conclusions. -- Had I
produced all the evidence in my power on the various charges in the indictment,
the day would hardly have sufficed for the defense; and the patience and
attention of the Court the Jury, the auditors and myself, would have been
exhausted long before the close.

The troops on the permanent establishment or what Judge Chase would call the
five year army are now enlisted for five years from the date of their enlistment

APPENDIX No. III.
Extracts from Addresses to the President and answers thereto during the summer
of 1798.
Answer to the addresses of Dedham and other towns county of Norfolk,
Massachusetts. Patriotic addresses, p. 79, Fenno's Gazette, August 9, 1790.

That we have thought too well of France, and France too meanly of us, I have
been an eye and ear witness for twenty years. **** For delaying counsels the
constitution has not made me responsible, but while I am entrusted with my
present powers, and bound by my present obligations, you shall see no more
delusive negociations. In my opinion, as well as yours, there is no alternative
between war, and submission to the executive of France.

Answer to the address of the Boston Marine society. Pat. Add. p. 69.

The French revolution has ever been incomprehensible to me. The substance of
all I can understand of it is, that one of the pillars of the ancient monarchy,
that is the army, has fallen upon the other two, the nobility and clergy, and
broken them both down; the building has fallen of course, and this pillar is
now the whole edifice. The military support has swallowed that of Adam and all
the rest. If the example should be followed through Europe, when the officers
of the armies begin to quarrel with one another, five hundred years more of
Baron's wars may succeed. If the French therefore will become the enemies of
all mankind by forcing all nations to follow their example, in the subversion
of all the political, religious and social institutions, which time, experience
and freedom, have sanctioned, they ought to be opposed by every country that
has any pretensions to principle, spirit and patriotism.

Address of the Inhabitants of Sunbury and Northumberland -- Pat. Add. 229,
Fenno -- May 30, 1798.

We see her in fact as a Mount Aetna casting from her principles which have a
tendency to consume religion, virtue and liberty. Her complaints of the treaty
made between Great Britain and this country we consider as the wicked pretense
for plunder and piracy. Answer -- I wish it were in my power to soften your
picture of those who injure and insult us.

In the answer to the address of the students of Dickinson College, pat. add.
240, Fenno, June 30, 1798. It is a question whether even an equitable treaty,
under such circumstances of indecency, insolence and tyranny, ought ever to be
ratified by any nation.

Answer to the address of the officers of the Militia of Newcastle county. --
There is too much reason to believe that an unbounded ambition for universal
empire, and an insatiable avarice of money united with the delirium of victory
and a sanguine confidence that they are at least for a time the masters of the
world, have dictated their insufferable arrogance, trampling alike on their own
constitution and the rights of their people, on the law of nations and on the
faith of treaties.

Answer to the address of Harrison county, Virg^nia, pat. add. p. 316 -- It is
impossible to be at peace with fraud and violence, with despotism, anarchy and
impiety. A purchased peace would continue no longer than you continued to pay;
and the FIELD of BATTLE at once is preferable to a course of perpetual and
unlimitted contribution.

The following passage is so liable to be construed as a confession of Mr.
Adams's leaning toward the British, that it is impossible it should not have
given offense to the power with whom we are now negociating:

Answer to the address from Concord in Massachusetts, pat. add. 51, Fenno,
August 16, 1798. As I have ever wished to avoid as far as necessity and
prudence would admit, every concealment from my fellow-citizens of my real
sentiments in matters of importance, I will venture to ask you whether it is
consistent with the peace we have made, the friendship we have stipulated, or
even with civility to express a marked resentment to a foreign power
(Great Britain) who is at war with another, whose ill will we experience every
day, and who will very probably, in a few weeks, be acknowledged an enemy in
the sense of the law of nations: a power too which invariably acknowledged us
to be a nation for 15 years; a power that has never had the insolence to reject
your ambassadors; a power that at present convoys your trade and their own at
the same time.

I shall close this collection with the President's famous description of
republican government. He had already told the Boston Marine Society that the
French revolution had ever been incomprehensible to him.

Address of the Artillery, Cavalry, Infantry and others, inhabitants of
Rutland, in Vermont, Fenno, July 3, 1798. But when she denounced her God, and
paid a mock of adoration to a harlot; when she murdered or banished without
cause or without trial her best citizens; when instead of using her arms in her
own defense, she invaded, conquered and pillaged weak and divided states around
her, our charity was lost in the enormity of her crimes, and sober men presaged
to us that a nation disregarding all ties of religion and morality, and the
observance of its own constitution and laws, would etc. etc. etc.

Answer. The words republican government which never have been and never can be
generally disgraced in the minds of men without danger of universal despotism
have imposed on many who had very imperfect ideas under them: as there are none
in our language more indeterminate, they may be interpreted to mean any thing.
A republican government for 30 millions of people must be very well digested,
or it wl be more arbitary and tyrannical than despotism itself. The monarchy of
France was freedom in comparison with anarchy. The public must judge how far
these specimens of irritating language are defensible. Might they not as well
have been avoided? Is it from such expressions that Mr. Adams can claim to be
re elected to the Presidency of a republican government?

APPENDIX No. IV.
I do not know of any legal proof that Fenno's paper is under the control of
the cabinet here, or that Cobbett was paid by the British Minister. Mr.
Talleyrand however is not the only person who has made a similar accusation as
to these papers. On the 29th of March 1798 Mr. Giles, in Congress, said,
Gentlemen talked of newspapers, he would say a word on that subject: there are
two papers in this city which not only breathe defensive but offensive war of
the worst kind. One of these papers he believed was particularly countenanced
by the governmenr. The other was printed by infamous scoundrel, a British
subject, a paper which he was sorry to find much countenanced. This paper not
only breathes war, but exterminating war. And this paper issuing from a British
press, spreads its baneful influence through the country- He proclaimed this
fact, and he should think himself a traitor to his country if he did not
proclaim it. This extract is to be found in Porcupine's Gazette of April 3,
1798, and in Fenno's Gazette of March 31 1798, without remark or contradiction
in either.

The preliminary question to which I alluded, when I moved for a Subpoena for
the President, was the authority of Fenno's Gazette, which I wanted to quote;
and I wished for the testimony of the President to that point, that I might
bring the evidence of that paper still more completely within the case of Rex
us. Holt, 5 T. Rep. 442. The President however escaped the train of questions
which this subject would have brought on.

The pamphlet alluded to by Mr. Talleyrand, seems to have been that scurrilous
production of Cobbett Le Gros Mousquiton Diplomatique, or the Diplomatic
Blunderbuss: a satire on Mr. Adet, the then French minister to the United
States. The advertisement of his pamphlet with still more insulting language,
in Brown's Philadelphia Gazette of Nov. 26 1796, is now before me.

APPENDIX, No. V.
In the True American of April 14 1800, Mr.Gallatin, whose caution as well as
acuteness is sufficiently well known to the public, is stated to have expressed
himself to this purpose:

The Danbury certificates so much relied on amounted only to negative proof
which was no proof whatever; and in opposition, if not to these certificates,
at least to the inferences drawn from them, he would say that he had
information, from authority sufficient to have convinced him and sufficient to
justify his repeating it on this floor, that there had been a family, by the
name of Robbins, living either in the town of Danbury or in its immediate
neighborhood, although they had removed many years ago to another state; that
the man calling himself Jonathan Robbins, if he did really belong to that
family, should have supposed the place of his birth to be Danbury, although it
might be the next town to it, that he should have made the mistake in his
relation to a "place which he had left in his infancy, could by no means
invalidate his testimony. On the other hand, if the man who had been delivered
up did not belong to that family, if he was not Robbins, but Nash the Irishman,
how bad it happened that he should so strangely have guessed at the place where
the family whose name he had assumed had resided perhaps more than twenty years
before? He, the supposed Nash, in the first place obtains a notarial protection
dated at New York in 1795, by the name of and signed Jonathan Robbins, stating
him to be a native of Connecticut, but without specifying the town. In 1799 in
open court before Judge Be, his, the supposed Nash's hand writing appears
similar to the signature of Robbins affixed to the notarial protection; he at
the same time, by his affidavit, designates the town of Connecticut, where he
pretends to have been born; and although that town was not designated in the
protection he must be supposed to have obtained fraudulently, yet he divines
either the identical town where a Robbins family had formerly resided, or one
adjoining to it."

This led me to make further enquiry, and I had reason to believe that Mr. J.
Davenport was capable of giving information respecting the uncertain limits of
the town of Danbury at the time when Robbins might be presumed to have lived
there, and even that such a family did formerly live in the town or the
neighborhood. I find on subsequent enquiry that Col. Lion has not conversed
directly with the brother of Jonathan Robbins, but that his neighbor Dr. Shaw
has conversed with a man of the name of Robbins, who declared himself to have
lived formerly near Danbury, who had a brother named Jonathan, whom he
understood went to sea.

It is a very singular fact, that an illiterate Irishman should be so well able
to conceal the tone and dialect of his country, as to pass for a moment for a
Connecticut man? And yet while the cause was pending before Judge Be, the
prima facie evidence was, that he was an American. The brogue has never yet
been urged in proof.

I take this opportunity of mentioning that the other members of the House of
Representatives were called, in expectation that it would be necessary for me,
(as Mr. Gales the shorthand writer is in North Carolina) to authenticate
certain declarations and expressions in the Congressional Register which I had
marked for use, and to give information on some other points which I fully
intended to have brought forward. But I soon found it impossible with prudence
or effect, to take such wide ground. I thank the Gentlemen for their
attendance.

APPENDIX No. VI.
To show that Dr. Priestley had a right to make use of the freedom with Mr.
Adams which has given rise to this trial, I quote the following extracts from
the letters of Mr. Adams to Dr. Priestly. I think this necessary in vindication
of the character of Dr. Priestly himself, and it is evident there is nothing in
these extracts but what will do honor to both.

The people themselves we see are capable of perfecting a Priestly, as another
people formerly persecuted a Socrates.

Letter of Feb. 19 1792. By a compliment which I hold very precious in your
familiar letters to the inhabitants of Birmingham, I am emboldened to hope you
will not be displeased to receive another copy of my Defense especially as that
which was presented to you formerly has probably had the honor of sharing the
fate of your library. Col. Smith will take one from New York, and present it to
you, with my sincere veneration.

ibid. Although it would give me great pleasure to see you in America, yet I
cannot but think your removal would be a great loss to the political and
literary world.

May 12, 1793. But if any arrangements of the post office, or other provision
occurs to you, I beg you would mention it to me, for as I consider mankind in
general under obligations to Dr. Priestly, I shall as one of them think it my
duty to do whatever may be in my power to contribute to his convenience in life
or his comfort in this country.

Nov. 21, 1794. TO JUDGE CHASE.
SIR
I address you, on the subject of my trial, because the Doctrines and
assertions I object to, were particularly delivered by you. And though judge
Peter's sat upon the Bench, you were the presiding judge and prominent person in
delivering the opinions that were given.

I hope this appeal to the public on the points whreon we differ, will not be
deemed improper. Lord Mansfield submitted to have his Doctrines attacked and
scrutinized By Andrew Stuart in the Angleasea cause, and in the Douglas cause,
By Mr. Fearne in the case of Perrin and Blake.
and you may be as liable to err as he was. Indeed notwithstanding the sarcasms
thrown out against my professional talents (with what propriety we shall soon
see) they can hardly be called in question for differing in opinion from judge
Chase or judge Peter's, who not only differ from each other but from themselves.
You Sir, are averse to considering the common law as part of the law of the
United States; Whoever will take the truble of perusing that fine specimen of
unanswerable reasoning by Mr. Maddison, The Proceedings of the Virginia
Assembly on the answers of sundry States, etc. (Printed by Carey, Philadelphia)
will be satisfied that the question about the common law forming a part of the
law of the United States, is settled as far as sound argument can settle it.
judge Peter's admits it -- you incline to issue but not to enforce, subpoenas
to members of the Legislature; judge Peter's is against issuing a process he
cannot enforce -- you, think it right not only to take for granted the
existence of political parties, but through my fine, to tax the one in favor of
the other; judge Peter's more wisely, does not presume to know any thing but
what passes in Court, or to care whether I pay a fine with the Money in my
pocket, or with the Money I may borrow -- Both of ye in my case, (like the
Senate in Duane's) determined a new point without condescending to hear
argument upon it: You did the same afterward in the case of Fries, by
pre-determining with the deliberation of a written opinion, the legal question
of treason; and yet the next day your recalled you papers, withdrew your
refusal to hear counsel on the point, and pressed them against your own solemn
decision, to tread without fear, the forbidden ground. After differences of
opinion so repeated and so recent -- after conduct so wavering and indecisive,
I may safely venture to assert that your insinuations respecting my legal
capacity may be controverted without presumption. While I am in court, I know
it is my duty, and I feel it my inclination to submit with deference to the ex
Cathedra decisions you are authorized to pronounce; but that deference to the
constitutional expounders of the laws, does not deprive me of the right to call
up in self defense their erroneous opinions before the more solemn tribunal of
the Public.

I shall now proceed to the points of difference between us.

I. I claimed a right to the attendance of the President under process of the
court.

When an opinion is once settled by the deliberate decision of a court, I think
the Judges are right not to permit counsel to travel over beaten ground, or to
re-urge the arguments and objections that have been already maturely considered
and settled: it was for this reason I declined making any objection to the
constitutionality of the sedition law, though I had no doubt of the validity of
that objection. But I appeal to common sense and to professional experience,
whether it is either proper or usual for a court to decide a new and a doubtful
point, without hearing argument, when requested by a party concerned? Whether
the decision of the court was right or not, your refusal to hear me on the
subject, cannot be defended. Patience is required in a judge at all times,
particularly on the decision of new cases, particularly toward a defendant on
an indictment, and particularly when he pleads for himself. All these
considerations should have induced you to have listened to the following
observations that then occurred to me.

Your objection was, that being an indictment for a false and malicious libel
against the President, he could not be called upon to give testimony at all:
for it was improper to subject him to questions that might make him accuse
himself of mal-administration.

I reply first, that the President is not the prosecutor here. That there is no
ground for considering him as a legal party to this indictment, and it might be
brought without his consent. It is not the United States on the prosecution of
the President against Thomas Cooper, but the United States on the prosecution
of the Attorney General ex officio, against Thomas Cooper. Not being a party
therefore, he might be examined.

I say secondly, that it is still further evident that he is not legally a
party, for I could not demand, on such an indictment, to have a prosecutor
indorsed.

I say thirdly, that ex-officio informations may lie, where the Attorney
General has a right to call upon the person injured to support the prosecution
by giving testimony on behalf of the United States: and farther that
prosecutors or indictments are liable to be cross-examined by a defendant,
whenever they are called as evidences, (as they very commonly are) in support
of their own prosecution. So that the objections of your honor would avail in
a considerable degree against common and known practice: but as I doubt whether
they could be cross-examined out of the examination in chief, I do not rest on
this argument.

Fourthly, the questions put, need not have been such as would induce any legal
crimination by the answers. For instance, suppose I had asked the President,
did you direct the present prosecution? did Mr. Stoddart consult you on his
report respecting the Navy? Was you privy to and did you approve of Colonel
Mc'Henry's reports on the army? Did Mr. Liston or any person on the part of
Great Britain, apply to you under the Treaty for the delivery of the Hermione
sailors, tried before Judge Chase in the Jerseys? was there any communication
between you and Judge Be, previous to Mr. Listons letter? Were you apprised of
the case of the United States us. Judge Lawrence? Surely the answers to those
and many other questions relevant to the issue that might be framed, need not
have included any legal crimination. For that is the point: a man is not
relieved from a question because it may tend to show that he has been mistaken
or faulty; if the answer does not subject him to legal reproof, the question
may be put.

Fifthly, I think I had a clear right to his evidence on a preliminary and
collateral question; for instance, as we have no Gazette as yet printed by
Royal authority in this country, I wanted to show that the President had
countenanced and given authenticity to Fenno's Gazette. I wanted to bring my
evidence completely within Rex v Holt. The President I believe could have
enabled me to do this, and surely such questions as this point would have
required, could not be objected to as within the reason of your decision.

Sixthly, Nor did your own ideas on the light in which the President was to be
considered seem quite clear: This rejecttion of his testimony evidently goes on
the supposition that he would have appeared too much in the character of a
prosecutor, and yet you decided that I was mistaken in considering him in that
light. But your honor mistook me: I knew that he was not the legal, but I had
a right to look upon him as the actual prosecutor.

I know that men of eminence at the bar think you were wrong in deciding the
point against me; but it may admit of doubt, for the case is new, and no
analogous case can occur under Fox's Libel Bill.

But can it admit of doubt whether you ought to have heard arguments on so new
a point?

II. You denied that I had any right to copies of official documents. -- You
said you knew of no law that would entitle me to them.

Be good enough Judge Chase to read the following extracts from the act of
Congress entitled An act to provide for the safe keeping of the acts, records,
and seals of the United States and for other purposes.

Approved September 15th. 1789.

Sect. 5 The said Secretary (of State) shall cause a seal of office to be made
for the said department (of State) of such device as the President of the
United States shall approve; and all copies of records and papers in the said
office, authenticated under the said seal shall be evidence equally as the
original record or paper. The next section prescribes the fees to be paid by
persons requiring copies, viz. 10 cents per 100 words, and 25 cents for the
seal.

I take the liberty of referring you next to the case of Rex us. Holt. 5 T. R.
442. so often quoted, wherein Lord Kenyon declares That the Gazette is evidence
of many acts of state, cannot be doubted.***** These are acts done by and to
the King in his regal character: they are the addresses of different bodies of
subjects going to offer their loyalty at the foot of the throne and received by
the King in his public capacity. -- They then become acts of State, and of such
acts announced to the public in the gazette, the gazette is evidence in courts
of justice.

Hence I had a right to demand copies of these as PUBLIC PAPERS.

Take the trouble of reading the following determination of Dr. James Marriot
in the case of the Ship Columbus. -- Collect. Jurid. page 68. On the opening of
this cause it was suggested by the counsel for Mr. Le Mesurier, that frequent
applications had been made by him to Government for a copy of the order of
counsel. -- Now if such an order had existed and had been produced it would
have prevented this flood of litigation. Mr. Le Mesurier would not have heard
so many brilliant arguments either for or against himself, nor the court have
had the fatigue of watching them with extraordinary attention. -- In any cause,
where the crown is a party, it is to be observed, that the Crown can no more
withhold evidence of documents in its possession than a private person. -- If
the court thinks proper to order the production of any public instrument, that
order must be obeyed. -- It wants no Insignia of authority derived from the
Crown. -- The order will enforce itself. -- For if a party suing refuses to
produce a necessary document, what follows? He shall take nothing by his
petition.

All this was before me on the table; the reference marked. -- Why did I not
quote it? Because I should have been again liable to the charge of impropriety
and indecency and perhaps with additional reproach, for again venturing to
doubt your honors decision -- We are now before the public -- let them judge
whether you or I more deserve the professional sarcasms you thought fit to aim
at me.

III. The documents I read seemed permitted on the part of your honors rather
as a matter of indulgence than of right. I was without counsel, and you were
graciously pleased to permit me to say and to quote many things that a
professional advocate would have been restrained from. The chief evidence I
wanted was Fenno's paper; in which all my quotations were marked; though I used
the selection of addresses for temporary convenience.

Now I say, I was not obliged to your honors for the permission to read
Fenno's paper -- For 1st, I contend still that on a political trial that
evidence to which the public constantly resorts is prima facie evidence to go
to a jury. 2dly, Fenno's Gazette approaches so near to the case of a Royal
Gazette that it is hardly distinguishable. It is a paper approbatory of the
measures of government. Fenno is printer to the senate; and had I not been
restrained from examining the President, I think I could have proved that Fenno
was his printer too. But 4thly, it was the best evidence the nature of the
circumstances would admit, for the higher grades of evidence were refused me by
your honors decision, and by the illiberal conduct of Mr. Adams. If I was
interdicted from procuring better, this became the best.

IV. You denied the President's message to be evidence, because I had it not by
me at the time I wrote. -- I think this objection is founded on a mistake of
the issue, which was, true or not true generally; without reference to time.
But having dwelt on this before I shall not repeat my arguments here.

V. My allegation that the notoriety of political fact, was a proper
circumstance to be judged of by the jury, seemed evidently by your manner, to
be permitted out of indulgence and compassion, while on my part I submitted to
what passed, out of deference to the high character with which you were
clothed; but a man must be very ill read in the trials for sedition, and must
very carelessly have attended to Mr. Rawle's speech and your charge, not to be
convinced that notoriety of political fact must sometimes be taken for granted:
how far it ought to avail, is circumstanse to the jury. If on trial where
character can be given in evidence -- if on trials as in England on
prescriptive road-causes -- if on trials respecting marriage, common reputation
may be stated as evidence, how much more proper is it on the general facts of
public politics. The hardship and absurdity of insisting on strict legal
evidence in such a case, is in my opinion too glaring to be enlarged upon.

VI. You object to charging the navy on the President, and yet you must have
known, that the measure was grounded on the President's speeches and on Mr.
Stoddard's report. Qui facit per alium facit per se. That it is a permanent
establishment appears from the purchase of woods and islands for the use of the
navy. See the reports and acts of Congress relative to the navy. But if it met
with no more than his sanction, my position was true, independent of the proof
I adduced.

VII. I must join issue with you on the subject of the army, though I much
dislike the harsh terms wherein you have expressed the alternative. I think you
are wrong; for, 1st, a standing army, as I have before stated, is a body of
troops existing in permanent discipline in contradistinction to the periodical
discipline of militia forces. The term is English, used in this sense by every
author who has written on the subject in that country, and particularly in the
legislative debates and the lords' protests.

2dly, The appropriations for the standing army in that country as well as the
mutiny bill, are annual, as appears by the annual "Distribution of Grants,"
presented to the house of commons of Great Britain.

3dly, The soldiery there are enlisted for life, although the appropriations
are annual. Here they are enlisted on the PERMANENT ESTABLISHMENT (M'Henry's
Rep. 13th Jan. 1800, p. 35) for five years. No man is enlisted for 1, 2, 3 or 4
years -- hence there is a regular succession and supply kept up. So are the
instructions of enlistment.

4thly, The Terms made use of for that army in the reports of colonel M'Henry,
and in the act of congress entitled, "An an act to ascertain and fix the
Military establishment of the United States," are establishment, permanent
establishment, to keep up by enlistments, etc. You ought to have known this.
The five-year army is not a five-year army, but a permanent army, where every
soldier enlisted, is enlisted for the term of five years from the date of his
enlistment.

VIII. I cannot account for your mode of arguing the case of JONATHAN ROBBINS,
but whoever attended the trial will be able to account why I did not examine
you on the business of the Hermione seamen indicted for piracy before you in
Jersey. How happens it in the first place that you so strangely omitted to
notice the prominent charge of Piracy? A charge that came before yourself in
the case of the other seamen of the Hermione* a charge that came before Judge
Be in Robbins's case, that was specifically recognized by the President and by
Mr. Pickering in the message noticed by myself, and which you must know gave
indisputable jurisdiction to the circuit court. Surely you ought to have known,
and ought not to have omitted this strong point.

A pirate is described as Hestis humani Generis. Moll. l. 1. c. 4. 1. -- He is
not an offender against a particular country, but against all countries, and
therefore all countries have jurisdiction. This doctrine is recognized in the
following cases of English law: The king of England has not only an empire and
sovereignty over the British seas for the punishment of piracy; but in
concurrence with other Princes and States, an undoubted jurisdiction and power
in the most remote parts of the world. If any person therefore, native or
foreigner, Christian or infidel, Turk or pagan, with whose country we are in
amity, trade or correspondence, shall be robbed or spoiled in the narrow or
other seas, whether the Mediterranean, Atlantic, Southern or any blanches
thereof either in this or the other side of the line, it is piracy within the
limits and cognizance of the admiralty sessions. Sir Chapter Hodge's charge. Old
Bailey 8. w. 3. Hawk. pl. c. 152, of Dublin ed. 1788.

"The Captain of a French merchantman, having put into a port in Ireland, was
accused by his crew of robberies on the seas, and fled. His ship and goods were
considered as having belonged to pirates. The French consuls presented
memorials requiring the cause to be remanded to the natural judge, as was
pretended, in France. But the king and his counsel finally adjudged that he was
sufficiently founded in point of jurisdiction, to confiscate the ship and
goods, and to try capitally the captain himself, had he been in hold; the
matter of Renvoy being a thing quite disused among princes; and as every man by
the usage of our European nations is justiciable in the place where the crime
is committed, so are pirates, being out of the protection of all laws and
privileges, and to be tried in what part soever they are taken. 2. Wooddeson,
428. Sr. Leol. Jenk. Rep. 714.

The jurisdiction having thus attached to the Circuit court, and having been
acted upon, ought not to have been surrendered at the advice or request of any
man whatever.

Had the crime been murder alone, as your charge implies, I incline to think
your doctrine would have been well founded. But you know, or ought to know,
that where an inferior crime flows from a superior, the former is merged in the
latter. Thus, Trespass is merged in Felony, Assault and Battery, in Riot. In
the first section of Molloy's chapter on piracy, he describes a pirate as a sea
thief: hostis humani generis, who, to enrich himself, either by surprise or
open force, sets upon merchants and others trading by sea, ever spoiling their
lading, if they can by any means get the mastery, sometimes bereaving them of
their lives, and sinking their ships **** against these, any prince has power
to make war, though they be not subject to his government. Molloy L. 1. c. 4.
1. Grot. de Jur. Belli. L. 2. c. 20. 40.

Hence it appears, that the court had jurisdiction: that the court acted upon
it: that the court instead of deciding upon argument, adopted the opinion of
the executive on two judicial questions: that the court listened to and acted
upon the advice and request of the executive in a case within judicial
authority.

Again. Why was it that you did not notice the very strong case of the United
States and Judge Lawrence? If it did not apply, why not sayh so? If it did, why
not allow its proper force? Why give room to suppose it was too strong to be
controverted?

IX. I complain of improper conduct in your summing up against me: I say
(submitting to public opinion) that it is not a part of a judge's duty to argue
a cause against a defendant on a penal prosecution -- to notice the omission of
an Attorney General -- to dwell upon circumstances of aggravation -- to omit
strong points of the defense, or to let the jury perceive a bias in the mind of
the court. I say this is notoriously against the practice of the English Bench
at least. It might have been pleasing to Mr. Pickering on your right hand, to
Messrs. Read, Harper, etc. on your left, to Mr. Tracy behind you, to Messrs.
Shaw, Stoddart and Mc'Henry in front of you, but I think, the public will not
regard it with the same encomiastic placidity.

X. And that I may not omit any of the points of difference between us, I shall
state that, though your objection to the generality of my affidavit, was perhaps
in strictness of law defensible, yet it was not conformable to the practice I
have witnessed in the courts here: where a party is not entitled according to
the rules off practice, to put off a cause, and where an inconvenience will
arise to his opponent from deferring it, or where there is ground to suspect
intentional delay, there the courts always require a special affidavit, going
to the points that the absent witnesses are required to prove; but where no
affectation of delay is imputable, and where a party has not claimed the cause
to be deferred before, a general affidavit is not usually objected to.

I had a right from the common indulgence, to have put off my trial till next
term, and therefore was completely within the equity of what I understood to
be, the rule of practice here: but I shall not deny your right to insist as you
did, though it was certainty stretching the law to the utmost. In the case of
the King v. Tandy and Morris, Feb. 12, 1799, in the King's Bench of Ireland,
"the defendants were again brought up," and their counsel moved to postpone the
trial till next term, stating the absence of several material witnesses at
Hamburgh. Though in this case it should appear that the prisoners were brought
up at the second term, which I was not, though the affidavit did not state that
the witnesses had been sought for or served with process, which mine did;
although there was reasonable doubt whether they could be procured at all -- a
doubt which did not exist in my case; though the offense there, was much higher
than the charge against me, yet the attorney general objecting to the legal
sufficiency of the affidavit, allowed the trial to be put off on that ground.
This case is reported by Brown, Phil. Gaz. April 21, 1800.


Your charge of indecency for presuming to offer arguments against the decision
of the court, prevented me from using at that time the authorities in my power.
But you have now an opportunity if you please, of descending into the arena of
the public, a mark of attention on my part that you owe to the situation you
fill. You have thrown out the challenge of professional imputation and it is
accepted.

THOMAS COOPER.
Prison of Philadelphia, May 1, 1800.

ERRATUM.
In the title page this trial is said to be printed for the author: this is a
mistake: it is not printed for me. T. C.


