A SERMON, OCCASIONED BY THE DEATH OF GENESIS GEORGE WASHINGTON, LATE PRESIDENT OF
THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA: DELIVERED AT LEBANON, IN THE TOWN OF CANAAN,
FEBRUARY 22 d, 1800.

BY SILAS CHURCHILL, A. M. PASTOR OF THE FIRST PRESBYTERIAN CHURCH IN CANAAN.

ALBANY: PRINTED BY BARBER AND SOUTHWICK, FAUST's Statue, State-Street. M,DCCC.

LEBANON. -- A. D. 5800. UNITY LODGE, OPENED IN DUE FORM.
Resolved unanimously, That Brother Elisha Gilbert, Brother John Butler, and
Brother Josiah Patterson be, and they are hereby appointed a committee to
return the thanks of this Lodge to the Rev. Brother SILAS CHURCHILL, for the
Sermon delivered before said Lodge, and a very crowded audience of the citizens
of this and the adjacent towns, on the 22d day of February last at Lebanon; and
request a copy thereof to be printed.

Extract from the minutes, JOSIAH PATTERSON, jun. Sec.

THIS Discourse being published at the request and expense of the Officers and
Brethren of UNITY LODGE; to them it is respectfully inscribed, with grateful
acknowledgements for the favorable expression of their approbation.

BY THE AUTHOR.

A SERMON, etc.
II. SAMUEL, III. 28. KNOW YE NOT THAT THERE IS A PRINCE AND A GREAT MAN FALLEN
THIS DAY IN ISRAEL!


WHY, my brethren, are we assembled together? Why do I see your countenances
sad, and your garb the garb of mourning? Why are our fellow-citizens throughout
the United States, assembled in their various towns, this day? Yea, why are the
free born sons of America, from New Hampshire to Georgia, this day in mourning?
Ah! why? Is our country invaded by a hostile foe, threatening immediate
destruction? No. Does famine prevail, and excite the people to supplicate the
favor of God? No. Does the pestilence walk through our streets and cause groan
to answer groan, and spread desolation through all our towns? No. The reason is
this, A great man has fallen in America. Your beloved WASHINGTON is no more.
Yes: WASHINGTON, the great, the wise, the humane, the father of his country and
the benefactor of man, has fallen into the icy arms of death. This, you are
sensible, is the cause which has assembled us together: This is the reason why
all United America this day mourns.

KNOW YE NOT THERE IS A GREAT MAN FALLEN IN ISRAEL!

WASHINGTON was truly great. When difficulties arose between America and her
mother country, our situation seemed pitiable. Our country was invaded by a
nation accustomed to war, a nation furnished with able generals and a well
disciplined army, a nation powerful in arms. But we were in an infant state,
unprepared and comparatively weak. Our resources were small and our citizens
were unlearned in the art of war. Considering, however, that our liberty and
property were at stake, the free born sons of America awoke: They left the plow
for the sword: They left their houses, their families, their wives and cildren
in the hands of providence, and hastened away to face the enemy.

THOUGH, perhaps, we wanted not for lovers of our country and men of courage;
yet we wanted experienced commanders, and discipline in our troops. Why were we
not overcome? The Lord was on our side. Soon we were provided with able
generals and disciplined soldiers. Under the good providence of God, our
strength increased, and our little band became of some consequence.

EARLY in the war the name of WASHINGTON resounded. The greatness of his mind
began to shine. His wisdom, prudence and valor became conspicuous. Soon he was
raised to the supreme command of our armies. He was the very man we wanted: the
very man that providence designed for signal service to his country. He
accepted the post assigned him, and was unwearied in his attention to his army.
Far from ostentatiou^ or haughtiness, he was plain and condescending in his
deportment. They who were under his command were used with that lenity and
humanity as convinced them that their General was their friend. How beloved was
he by his soldiers! Were he in danger a thousand swords would leap from their
scabbards to defend their beloved chief.

HIS prudence directed him when to avoid the enemy; he had wisdom to contrive
his operations in the field, in the best manner; and his courage never failed
him in executing his plans, when the good of his country called. He was neither
rash nor cowardly. Always calm, steady and resolute, he carried his points,
with unexpected success. His army, knowing his wisdom, prudence and courage,
were willing to follow him wherever he led.

SUCH was the power of the enemy, and such were the disadvantages under which
we labored, that our army had to encounter many discouragements, and to pass
through many adverse scenes. But the greatness of WASHINGTON's mind was able to
overcome discouragements. If the army began to despond, the presence of
WASHINGTON inspired every soul with animation. If obstacles presented, and
instilled faintness into their minds, their WASHINGTON was at their head, and
by his example and direction taught them to surmount the obstacles. In adverse
scenes he was like the rock in the ocean, unmoved by dashing waves. His mind
was too great to despair. He knew how to bear adversity. Neither did prosperity
intoxicate his mind so as to tempt him to lay aside his wonted circumspection.
In prosperity and adversity he was the same, calm, firm, resolute and vigilant.
He continued to act the part of wisdom and courage till at length, with the aid
of his brave soldiers and fellow-citizens, together with the assistance of a
foreign ally, he gained the final victory: a victory, humbling indeed to the
enemy: a victory which brought freedom and independence to our country. Hail!
auspicious day! a day when liberty was ensured to brave Americans.

O America, long may thou retain that independence for which thy sons have
bravely fought. And long may thou remember him who headed thine armies to
the field of battle, and led them forth to victory: Yes; long may thou
remember the name of WASHINGTON.

PEACE being happily settled, WASHINGTON, unambitious, did not attempt to lord
it over his brethren; but modestly retired to live the life of a private
citizen.

HIS country, however, did not long suffer him to taste the sweets of retired
life. -- When they who were chosen to frame a new and energetic constitution
for their country, were assembled. WASHINGTON was among them, and was the man
to preside over their deliberations. After an energetic though liberal
constitution was framed and adopted, a man was wanted to hold the executive
power. Americans, though by this time considerably numerous, and scattered over a
vast tract of country; yet all with one voice exclaim WASHINGTON, none but
WASHINGTON! The American Hero again obeyed his country's call and was invested
with the office of president of United America. This office he executed with
wisdom and firmness, and to the general acceptance of his countrymen. He was
not influened by fear or flattery, to loose sight of his duty to his country.
When the term for which he was chosen expired, his country repeated the call,
and he again obeyed his country's voice. -- At length he resolved again to
retire to the life of a private citizen. Not long, however, had he thus lived
till difficulties arose, and it was thought necessary to raise new troops, and
put the country in posture of defense. But who should be the man to take the
charge of our troops? Who, but WASHINGTON? The brave Veteran again was called,
and he even again accepted. He was consequently invested with the office of
Lieut. General of the armies of United America: and this was the last office he
sustained in the service of his country.

FROM the manner in which he fulfilled the duties of his several stations,
WASHINGTON's greatness appeared. --

HE was great in abilities.

No doubt, the God of nature endowed him with great native strength and
penetration of mind. Considering the multiplicity of business which devolved
upon his hands, and the active service of his country, in which he was
continually kept, his acquired abilities were also great, greater, perhaps,
than would have been the acquirements of almost any other man under like
embarrassments. In his writings his acquired abilities shine with luster. His
compositions have been generally acknowledged to contain ideas which are noble
and just. His style was elegant, unaffected, concise and comprehensive. He
easily conveyed his ideas in language which was directly to the point, without
ostentation and circumlocution. When we view him in the field or the cabinet,
in war or in peace, or in whatever station he held, we must be convinced that
he was a man great in abilities.

WASHINGTON was great in integrity. This was manifest through the whole of his
life. Never have we heard of a treacherous act which he has performed to his
country. Great indeed and almost unlimited was the confidence which was placed
in him; and he did not abuse the confidence. When we consider his great
foresight and his unbounded influence in the army, together with the confidence
placed in him by the government, we may well suppose that if he had undertaken
to betray his country, incalculable would have been our misfortunes. If
WASHINGTON had been a traitor, where had been our liberty, our lives and
property? But far be it from us to suppose that ever a treacherous idea entered
his mind. When others proved traitors, he was the steadfast pillar not to be
shaken. His integrity* was so undisputed that it has become proverbial not only
in America, but Europe and the nations of the world.

WASHINGTON was a great lover of his country. Who will dispute this, when his
whole life declared it? From his youth to his death was he not in the service
of his country? Was he not faithful in this service? Was he not exceedingly
active, firm and resolute in his country's cause? Has he not ever sacrificed
his private ease to the public welfare? Did he ever refuse when his country
called? No dangers, no risk of reputation, no domestic enjoyments, could keep
him from boldly stepping forth to serve the public. We have no reason to doubt
but that the love of his country reigned in his heart, and the public good
fired his soul to action.

WASHINGTON manifested a sense of the divine existence and of God's Government
over nations and individuals -- a sense of human dependence and men's
obligations to acknowledge God's hand in all their concerns -- a sense of the
importance of the Christian religion, in order for nations to be prospered and
individuals to be happy.

WASHINGTON was a man of morality. We never heard of him practicing that
profaneness too common in the army. We never heard of him from the gaming
table. We never heard of him engorging the intoxicating draught. No. He was a
man of temperance -- a man of exemplary deportment -- a man of morality. This
was his general character. I know not that his morality was ever questioned.

HE was a man of dignity. Though he was not haughty and ostentation; yet he
maintained his dignity. He was modest and condescending, but far from all
meanness. I know not that an unmanly act ever stained his character.

HE was a man of perseverance. Whatever he undertook, he was accustomed to
accomplish. Cold, hunger, thirst, fatigue, difficulties, or dangers, did not
easily break him off from pursuing his plans to effect.

HE was a man great in the esteem and affection of his countrymen. As he loved
his country, so his country loved him in return. His countrymen were not blind
to his merits: They knew -- they esteemed -- they felt his worth. They looked
to him as their deliverer -- they loved him as their friend. That he shared
largely in the esteem and affection of his country, is proved by the
transactions of this day. Look around on this assembly. Is not this numerous
assembly a witness that WASHINGTON was beloved. Look further: Look to the towns
around us, where the people are this day assembled. Yea, cast your eyes over
the whole of these United States. See the citizens from north to south,
assembled in various places. For what purpose is this, but to testify their
esteem -- their affection for their friend, and to mourn for the loss of their
WASHINGTON.

THUS I have mentioned some traits of the character of him whose loss we mourn,
not because they were unknown, but to remind you that he was great.

BUT as great as he was, he was but a man. He was but a frail, mortal man like
others. Know ye not that a great man is fallen in Israel? A great man is fallen
in America. Yes: the wise, the brave, the beloved WASHINGTON, has fallen a prey
to death. He who remained unhurt in the field of battle, where the blood of the
slain ran around -- he who stood unmoved at the lightening of the spear and the
cannon's roar -- he is now no more -- no more in this world. No more can we
receive his aid and hear his councils. He shall return no more to his house,
neither shall his place know him any more. His vigorous arm has lost its
strength: his robust constitution could not stand before the king of terrors.
His eyes are for ever closed, his mouth is sealed in solemn silence, and his
once active limbs, now remain without life or motion. Before his death, much
reliance, under God, was placed upon his wisdom and experience, in case our
country should again be involved in war. But our expectations of his
assistance, are suddenly vanished. No more is he to marshall our troops and
lead our armies to victory. The mighty conqueror is conquered by the
all-conquering power of death.

DESCEND, my countrymen, to the lonely tomb -- Open the door, harshly grating
on its hinges, look around the solemn apartment, there you will find your
friend -- your benefactor -- your father -- your WASHINGTON. There he lies to
moulder to his primeval dust.

OH! How is the mighty fallen, and the man of war perished!

BUT is there nothing left of WASHINGTON, but lifeless clay? There is more
indeed. He lives in the affectionate remembrance of a grateful people, and his
name will be handed down, with applause, to generations yet unborn. Many of his
writings, which contain his parental advice to his country, are yet preserved.
Long may they be preserved and strictly regarded.

YEA, more; his soul -- his noble part, still lives -- This has entered another
world to exist forever, and we humbly hope has joined the happy choir above in
ascribing rapturous praise to the Power Divine.

-- O WASHINGTON! --
"Although in solemn silence laid,
"Among the pale and sleeping dead,
"Where neither breeze nor genial ray
"Pervades the cold encircling clay:
"Yet -- thy name shall sweetly sound,
"While yonder circling sun goes round,
"Each generous eye its tribute give --
"And though thou art dead, thy fame shall live."
How ought we, my hearers, to improve the death of this great man, whose loss
we mourn. It is important that we not only show our respect for the deceased by
our public assembly, but that each of us be improved by the providence of God.

1stly. Let the death of WASHINGTON remind us that it is God who gives and
takes away blessings. All our favors are derived from him who is the giver of
every good and perfect gift. It is true that he whose death we mourn has been a
blessing to America; yet we ought to adore the giver and not the gift. The Lord
was the giver, the man the gift. Let us look to the giver and acknowledge the
good providence of God in bestowing upon us the able General -- the wise
Statesman -- the great Patriot. God raised him up as an instrument in his hand
to perform what he performed. He raised him up for important purposes to his
country and to mankind. These purposes are answered. Therefore let us bless the
Lord that he raised up WASHINGTON for our country's good. Bless the Lord that
he protected the man in all dangers of an eventful war -- that he enabled him
to serve his country with wisdom and fidelity. Be thankful that the Governor
of the world continued him so long an eminent blessing to America and to
mankind. Instead of giving too much glory to the man, give the glory to God. --
From God he received his talents: To God we owe the praise. When he had done
the work which God assigned him, and arrived to the bounds which God had set to
his life, he was taken away. The Lord had nothing more for him to do, and
therefore continued him no longer in the world. As it is God who has taken him
from us, let us seriously consider the hand of God. Infinite wisdom directs the
wheels of providence. God is actuated by goodness in every providence.
Therefore it is altogether for the best that WASHINGTON is dead. -- As God is
most wise and good, so it is reasonable that men be submissive to his will and
rejoice that he reigns. Had we been to choose concerning our deceased friend,
we should have wished his continuance in the world; but for some reason his
continuance was not for the best. Let us realize the hand of God in this
instance of mortality, and be ready to say, The Lord gave and the Lord has
taken away, and blessed be the name of the Lord.

2dly. LET the death of WASHINGTON teach us humility. God's providence is just.
We are a sinful people. We deserve the heavy judgments of God. -- Great are our
national privileges, and we have deserved that they should be taken from us. --
God would be just if he should take from us our wise men and leave us to loose
our liberties and privileges. Let us see our ill-desert, acknowledge our
wanderings from God, and humble ourselves under the mighty hand of the Lord. --

3dly. LET the death of WASHINGTON remind us that all must die. Death is the
appointment of heaven. It is appointed unto all men once to die. Job knew that
the grave is the house appointed for all the living.

MAN is of a frail and dying nature: He is not calculated to remain long in the
present state. The period will soon come when The keepers of the house shall
tremble, and the strong men shall bow themselves, and the grinders cease
because they are few, and those that look out of the window be darkened -- the
period when The dust shall return to the earth as it was, and the spirit shall
return to God who gave it.

MEN die to make room for others. So it is with all things: They move in
succession. The beasts of the field, the fouls of the air and the fish of the
sea, leave the world and are followed by others of their kind. So it is in the
vegetable world. The old tree falls and is succeeded by new ones. In autumn the
forest is despoiled of its foliage; the spring returns, and the forest is again
clothed in green.

That all must die, we may know by observation. How many thousands have lived
to former days? Though once busy on this stage of action, they are now laid in
mouldering dust. Where are the mighty Generals, the admired Heroes and the
Legislators of ancient times? Though they were accounted as Gods; yet they have
died like men, and lie on a level with others. How many since our day have left
the shores of time! How often are we called to attend the funerals of our
friends and aquaintance, and to lay them in the narrow house? One falls on our
right and another on our left, and are committed to their native dust.

A MAN's riches cannot bribe the king of terrors, nor can his poverty plead in
his behalf. The rich man who was clothed in purple and fine linen, and fared
sumptuously every day, died and was buried. The beggar who lay at his gate full
of sores, fell a prey to death.

A MAN's friends cannot extend the bounds of life. No man can redeem himself or
his brother. The dying look to their friends, and affecting is the scene, their
friends are unable to relieve.

PHYSICIANS are called around the bed of death, but death baffles their skill.
They are made use of as instruments to preserve life until men arrive to the
bounds which God has set, then all their means are in vain.

A MAN's usefulness saves him not. There are many men who by their councils,
their exertions and examples are of great service to the world. But even these
must be called from their usefulness.

A MAN may live long compared with the lives of some others: he may have an
excellent good constitution, enjoy healthful days, and, more than others, be a
stranger to pain and sickness: he may enjoy many friends and be loved and
caressed by them. He may add house to house and possess fields without number
-- may become exceedingly rich. He may have great honor and applause. He may
rise from a low state to great dignity and honors: like the son of the
Blacksmith who in the reign of Henry VIII. stood next to the throne in temporal
glory. --

HE may become a great Lawgiver, such as was Moses of Israel, the Assyrian
Ninus, the Sesostris of Egypt, the Cyrus of Persia, the Alexander of Greece,
the Caesar of Rome, the Conde of France, the Charles of Sweden, the Peter of
Russia, and the WASHINGTON of America. A man may be invested with pomp and
surrounded with the guards of royalty: his pomp may dazzle and his power may
awe mankind. But after all he must submit to the great traveller, death.
Behold, says the Psalmist, thou have made my days as an hand's breadth, and
mine age is as nothing before thee: Verily man at his best state is altogether
vanity.

IF a good and robust constitution -- if great abilities, inviolable integrity
and strict morality -- if strong love to one's country and eminent usefulness
-- if great esteem and applause -- if wisdom and prudence in the field and
cabinet -- if able physicians -- if many friends and the sincere affection of
one's countrymen -- if any one of these or if all of them could save from
death, WASHINGTON had been spared: For these, no doubt, he possessed. Who then
can hope to be exempted? None -- none indeed.

"SHOULD we, as one expresses, carry our thoughts hence to the sepulchers of
the great, or to some humble burying ground," we might see that death conquers
all. "There lie in promiscuous ruin, the rich and the poor; the base and the
brave; the honorable and the despised. There sleep the infant and the man of
days; blooming youth and decayed age. -- There rests deformity unmolested:
There moulders beauty unnoticed. There find a place proud monarchs who have
changed the splendours of a palace for the humble lodging of the grave. There
too are found the less noisy but more useful individuals of mankind, the
friends, and benefactors of the world. Those sages, who expelled ignorance from
wretched mortals, those benefactors, who relieved their wants, there mingle
with the vulgar throng. There lies the philosopher, whose mind had traversed
nature; there sleeps the man of taste, whose imagination had given birth to new
worlds of beauty; there rests the friend to humanity, whose heart never failed
to sympathize with the child of sorrow. Even the real Christian whose bosom
once glowed with the sacred flame of piety, whose life was a transcript of his
savior's character, slumbers in that gloomy repository. At the call of death,
the merchant quits his favorite schemes; and the patriot his exertions for the
public good. He whose thoughts are wholly taken up with some lucrative or
honorable employment, finds no respite. The friend to human kind, the patriot
on whom the welfare of his country depends, obtains no release. -- While his
bosom swells with the pleasure of diffusing happiness among his fellow men;
while his mind is big with projects for advancing their felicity, the awful
summons arrives, and puts a period to his exertions."

IN these United States, how many, even the last year, have fallen a prey to
death! Not only many citizens of the common rank; but more than usual of rulers
and superiors have bid us a long farewell. By accounts which have been
received, it appears that the following are some of the number:

THEIR EXCELLENCIES,

John Henry, Governor of Maryland.

Patrick Henry, Governor of Virginia.

Increase Sumner, Governor of Massachusetts.

Genesis Mifflin, late Governor of Pennsylvania.

TOGETHER WITH,

Col. George Nicholas, United States attorney general for Kentuckey.

Judge Iredel, an associate judge.

Judge Paca, district judge of Maryland.

Judge Tazewell, Senator in Congress from Virginia.

Col. Fitzgerald, an aid-de-camp to Genesis Washington during the war.

And General WASHINGTON, to complete the mournful list.

THUS, not only a great man, but numbers of our superior men have fallen, in
the course of a year past.

O DEATH, though mighty conqueror, the world must now bow before thee.

THIS discourse will be closed with several addresses. As an oration was
delivered immediately after this discourse, and as the Orator had prepared his
addresses to particular classes of persons; so these addresses were omitted in
the delivery of the sermon.


LET the Masonic brethren now be addressed.

Worthy Friends,
YOU are sensible that WASHINGTON was a masonic brother. And as he sustained an
eminent office in the lodge, so it is evident that masonry received no small
share of his attention. Is masonry then "frivolous?" Was WASHINGTON a man of
dignity every where else, and a child in the lodge? Is masonry calculated to
make men thirst for licentious liberty and disorganization? Has not WASHINGTON
spent his life in the support of order and good government? Has he not
manifested his regard to the Christian religion and morality? Would he approve
and support the masonic institution in case it were inconsistent with good
government, order, religion and morality? No -- the character of WASHINGTON was
uniform and consistent. But you already know the nature of masonry. It is such
as WASHINGTON was not ashamed to approve. But no more will he meet with his
brethren in this world -- no more will he support them -- no more will he give
them his wise instructions and his parental advice -- no more will he assist in
raising the fallen, and no more will his noble soul aid his brethren in
alleviating the distresses of the unfortunate. For he has bid adieu to the
society of mortals.

No doubt you feel the loss: for in his death you have lost a great benefactor,
a noble friend, and a worthy brother. Since he is gone, let us remember that it
is the Lord's doing and acquiesce in the bereaving providence. Since he has
traveled through the journey of life, to return no more, let it be remembered
that we also are traveling to that country from whose bourne no traveller
returns. Soon the thread of our life will be severed by the scythe of time.
Soon the sands of our glass will be run out, and we must follow the deceased
brother to the grave, where all are level.

SUFFER me then to urge you to live as travelers to another world. Entertain
supreme affection to the Great I Am: reverence the name of Jehovah: trust in
the Lord; and travel by the unerring light of God's holy word. If you do this,
you will be safely conducted through the wilderness of this world -- your feet
will be guided in the path of holiness and peace. If you do this, you will hold
the balance of justice in equal poize, walk by the plumb line of uprightness,
be restrained within the compass of duty, square your actions by the rules of
equity, and bring forth the fruits of Christian benevolence. Cultivate a spirit
of friendship and humanity, after the example of that sincere friend and humane
brother whose death you mourn. After his example also be lovers of your
country, supporters of its constitution, engaged in favor of order and good
government, and never wearied in promoting the public weal.

LET your lives, as individuals, exemplify the christian character. Build on
the holy scriptures, Jesus Christ being the chief corner stone. The stone which
the builders rejected has become the head stone of the corner. Recollect that
the all-seeing eye of him who built all things, pervades the universe, and that
all are accountable to him. Recollect that though the body must return to dust;
yet the soul will rise from the lifeless corse to exist forever. May the Lord
guide you in the way of piety, so that when you leave the society of mortals,
you may be found well qualified through the redeemer, and be admitted, by the
almighty Architect, into the happy society of glorified immortals*

IN the next place, let me address those who are invested with civil authority.

Honored Sirs,
As WASHINGTON was once eminent in the civil department, so you may well feel
his loss. No more will our civil affairs be directed by him. But let it be
remembered that our civil affairs are in the hands of God, and he is able to
assist others to serve their country with fidelity in the civil office. Much of
our country's welfare, depends, under God, upon the civil authority. Unless the
civil authority be faithful to their trust and vigilant in seeing that the laws
are obeyed, our laws will be, in a great measure, in vain -- our liberty will
be abused and degenerated into sad licentiousness -- yea our religion will
mourn and vice will triumph. If therefore our laws be worthy of notice -- if
our rights and liberties be worth preserving, and if religion be of any
importance in regard to our country's welfare or to our eternal peace, much
depends on the civil authority. It is through the good providence of God that
we have gained our liberties: this has been done, however, with arduous
struggles and at the expense of the blood of many a brave American. We have now
order, peace and good laws established -- yea, we enjoy our religion unmolested
-- we may set under our own vines and fig trees without any to make us afraid.
Is it not important then for us to hold our liberty precious, to obey our laws
and revere our religion? Without religion there can be no good civil government
-- without the form of religion none will long remain.

To you, my fathers, we look as guardians of our rights, defenders of our laws,
and supporters of our religion. Though I pretend not to much knowledge in civil
affairs, and though I would not presume to direct you in your office; yet,
permit me humbly to suggest the importance that our laws be duly observed
respecting morality and the Christian sabbath. I need not enlarge on the
importance of morality and the sabbath: you feel their importance. They are
important if we look to the good of our government, the good of our nation, the
good of ourselves, or the good of our children. And who shall watch over us and
punish the immoral pest of society and the disturbing sabbath breaker, if not
our civil magistrates? The civil magistrate acts for God and is accountable to
him. The powers that are, are ordained of God. Good Rulers are not a terror to
good works but to evil. How important is it then that the civil magistrate be
firm and steadfast in the discharge of his trust. WASHINGTON was unshaken, when
executing the laws of his country. Long may we have magistrates wise and firm
like WASHINGTON. Long may we have them, who shall be a terror to evil doers,
and a praise to them who do well. Long may we have them, who shall hold sacred
our rights and liberties -- our laws and our religion. Long may we have them in
office, who love our country like WASHINGTON, who are fearers of God, and
faithful in the discharge of their duty.

MY fathers, may the Lord be with you, and sanctify to you the death of him
whose loss you mourn; may God grant you wisdom and assistance in your important
station, and long continue you rich blessings to your fellow-citizens and
promoters of your country's welfare.

AN address will next be made to those who sustain military offices.

Respected Gentlemen --
No man in America nor perhaps in the world has been as famous as WASHINGTON
for his military talents. During the greatest part of our revolutionary war, he
held the first military office, and executed it in such a masterly manner as to
gain the applause of his country, and the wonder of the world. Such was his
wisdom as to baffle the skill and the art of the enemy who were commanded by
the wisest and most experienced generals, of whom England had to boast. Such
was his bravery in the field, as caused proud Britons to flee before him. Such
was his authority, that his inferior officers and soldiers obeyed him with
promptitude, and such was his mildness and condescension that they loved and
revered him. So irreproachable was his character as a general, that I know not
that even his most inveterate enemies dared to utter a syllable derogatory to
his military character. He silenced the voice of envy and struck dumb the
tongue of calumny. How did you rejoice -- how did his soldiers rejoice -- how
did all America rejoice, when the brave Veteran accepted his last appointment
to take the charge of our new raised troops. But Oh! sad reverse! He has
resigned his commission. No more do you look to him as your leader. He has
passed the vale, whence there is no returning. In him you have lost your
military chief -- your wonderful hero. -- In his death the soldiers have lost
their military father, their friend and general. Should America, perchance, be
again involved in war, and should any of you be called to the field of battle,
would you not wish to see your WASHINGTON at your head? But you will see him
not. No more will the enemy fear him -- no more will you follow him to face the
enemy. More then is to be done by his successors. Let me exhort you to follow
the example of WASHINGTON in your military office. If ever you should be called
to defend your country, think how he would have conducted and do likewise. If
you have wisdom like him your arrangements will be good and probably succeed.
If you have dignity and authority like him, your soldiers will respect and obey
you. If you have humanity and lenity like him, they will love you as their
friend. If you have prudence like him the enemy will scarcely gain an
advantage. If you have bravery like him, you may expect a glorious victory. --
But may God avert the calamity of war from our country: may he forbid that you
should ever have occasion to enter the field of battle. May you never have
occasion to go through the dangers, through which WASHINGTON has gone. -- should,
however, the din of war be heard in our land, and should the good of your
country call you to battle, shrink not from the undertaking. Rally round your
country's standard, haste away to meet the enemy and bravely defend your rights
and liberties, your lives and property, your wives and children. Let the love
of liberty, the love of your country, the love of your families, fire your
souls to action. Remember WASHINGTON: What he did was honorable.

LOOK to the God of war, make your peace with him, engage him on your side, and
you will have nothing to fear. If God be for us, who can be against us? May the
Lord give you his blessing: may he continue peace in our land and prosperity in
our dwellings, so that you may long taste the sweets of retired life, and through
life enjoy domestic happiness; may God enable you to fight the good fight of
faith, war the Christian warfare with success, and when time is no more bestow
upon you a crown of joy as the reward of spiritual victory.

ALL that remains, is to address the citizens in general, of this numerous
assembly.

MY Fellow-Citizens and Countrymen,
WASHINGTON was once a private citizen. Yea, he rejoiced in being a citizen of
the free and independent states of America. Whenever his country would give
consent, he retired to the life of a private citizen. In this character he did
honor to his country. -- As a citizen he was obedient to the laws of our land
and a supporter of the government under which we live. In private life, he was
attentive to husbandry and domestic concerns: He was tender and affectionate to
his family, kind and obliging to his friends and forgiving to his enemies.

BUT America no more calls him her citizen. He has become the citizen of
another country. As his death is our loss as citizens, so we may with propriety
notice the mournful event. It is important that we also be suitably improved by
it.

LET us heartily attend to WASHINGTON's instructions and regard his councils,
for he was our friend. Let us pray the Father of mercies, that his successors
in office may be enabled to serve their country with that wisdom and fidelity
as he has done. Our public affairs are in the hands of God, and it is
important that we supplicate his favor to our national concerns. And let us
pay a strict regard to the laws of the land in which we live. Let every soul be
subject to the higher powers: for there is no power but of God: the powers that
be, are ordained of God.

BY this instance of mortality, which has called us together, let us be
reminded of the vanity of all things below the sun. -- Nothing on earth is
permanent: One generation goes, and another comes. Be reminded of the
insufficiency of all things here below, to make us truly happy. Since this
world is vanity, Set your affections on things above, not on things on the
earth. Of what value now is this world to WASHINGTON. None indeed. "How loved,
how valued once, avails him not." Let us then lay up treasure in heaven, where
is genuine happiness and durable joy.

SINCE WASHINGTON is dead, let us reflect on our own mortality. Death knocks
equally at the doors of palaces and cottages. Others die around us: Soon it
will be our turn. Yes, each of us in this assembly must soon lie in solemn
silence beneath the dust. --

In respect to us,
"Soon some aquaintance, mournfully will say,
"Here sleeps my friend, once active, young and gay,
"Now cold in death; beneath the dust he lies,
"Silent his voice, forever closed his eyes;
"The immortal part, has on swift pinions flown,
"To take its sentence, in the world unknown."
Our time is short. Day after day and year after year, roll almost
imperceptibly away, and carry us onward to the close of life. If we live even
to old age, we shall find the time to be short. While time is passing it is apt
to seem long: hours often hang heavily upon us, and we drag the tedious load of
life. But time when past appears short indeed. When an old man looks back on
his past life, it appears like a dream, or in the expressive language of
inspiration, Like the morning cloud and the early dew which soon passes away.
-- What are sixty or eighty years, when compared with the lives of the
Patriarchs, who lived eight or nine hundred years? -- What are they, when
compared with the time elapsed since the days of Adam, which is about six
thousand years? Or what are these sixty or eighty years, when compared with
eternity! Eternity, vast boundless eternity, will never end. Oh! let us realize
the shortness of our time!

IF the lives of the old be short, how much shorter still are the lives of many
others! It is computed by some, that one third of the human race die under the
age of one year, and nearly one half under the age of five years. Many are cut
off in the vigor of life and in the bloom of youth. -- How few -- how very few
live till old age! The frailty of human nature is proved by daily experience.

IT appears that WASHINGTON, a few days before his death, was robust and
healthy; but how soon is he laid pale and lifeless! Oh! how precarious are all
things here below! Why -- why will we not realize the uncertainty of our lives?

Is our time short, and are our lives uncertain? then let us not mispend our
time. Why should we trifle it away? Why should we not think of our danger
before death stares us in the face? Why will we sail quietly down the rapid
stream of life till we be unexpectedly launched forth into the boundless ocean
of eternity?

Is WASHINGTON no more? then let us be excited to prepare to die. Preparation
for death is the great end of life. Death is the object which we should keep in
our view. -- God's warnings to us are many and various. His word and providence
are solemn warnings. By the frequent deaths of our neighbors, friends and
aquaintance -- by the deaths of our rulers -- yea, by the sudden death of our
WASHINGTON, God speaks in expressive language, Be ye also ready. O my
countrymen, let us watch and pray for we know not what hour our Lord does come.
One thing is needful. Religion is, of all things else, most necessary. Let us
choose this good part which shall never be taken from us.

AFTER death comes the judgment. Yes; the day is coming, when the sound of the
last trump, shall vibrate through the universe -- the day, when the dead shall
be raised and the living be changed -- the day, when we shall behold the great
funeral of nature, the earth dissolving and the elements melting with fervent
heat -- the great day, when we shall arise to the bar of God. Then may we be
found among the friends of Jesus, receive the approbation of our Judge, and
through the Redeemer, be welcomed to blisful seats of never -- never ending joy.

FINIS.

