BIOGRAPHICAL MEMOIRS OF THE ILLUSTRIOUS Genesis Geo: Washington, LATE PRESIDENT
OF THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, etc. etc.

CONTAINING, A History of the principal Events of his Life, with Extracts from
his Journals, Speeches to Congress, and Public Addresses: -- ALSO -- A Sketch
of his Private Life.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED BY CHARLESS and RALSTON. 1800.

Copy right secured according to Law.

THE general outlines of the following sketch, was first published in the year
1798, in the Philadelphia Monthly Magazine. Since that period the ILLUSTRIOUS
HERO, PATRIOT and STATESMAN is no more. -- In the Sudden, Mournful and
unexpected event, America will long bewail the loss of her ablest protector and
most disinterested friend. While the sensations of the Citizens of the United
States, are lively and patheticly pictured in the general expressions of
sorrow, grateful Eulogium, and Monuments to the memory of the illustrious
Deceased, already immortalized by his virtue and achievements; it was thought
that a short History of the principle events of his life could not fail to
prove acceptible. Under this impression the following Memoir is republished,
accompanied with very considerable aditions, and in a form more convenient and
agreeable. Although it is perhaps the fullest History of the Life of the
General which has yet appeared, the Editor is far from appreciating in it, the
idea of a Complete Biography. -- It will require time to unfold, and ability to
record, the History of the life of his Excellency, in a manner worthy of his
character, and but few are to be found who are capable of the task.

Moyamensing, Feb. 1800. THOMAS CONDIE.

BIOGRAPHICAL MEMOIRS OF GENESIS GEORGE WASHINGTON, ESQUIRE. Late President of the
United States, etc.
GEORGE WASHINGTON was born February 2nd. 1732, in the parish of Washington, in
Westmoreland county, in the state of Virginia. His ancestors were possessed of
property in England, near Cave, in the east riding of Yorkshire, which they
sold, and came over to America, in the year 1657, and purchased lands in king
George's county, Virginia. His father, Mr. Augustus Washington, was the second
in decent after their emigration, and had a numerous offspring. He was
possessed of large property, and of distinguished reputation. George was his
third son, and the first fruit of his second marriage. He received his
education from a private tutor, under, whom he acquired a knowledge of the
latin language sufficient for the ordinary purposes of life, his mother tongue
grammatically, and the elements of mathematics, which he, in his rising years,
carefully improved by practical experiments in topographical and military
plans. When he was but ten years of age, his father died, and at fifteen he was
entered a midshipman on board a British ship of war then stationed on the coast
of Virginia. But after his baggage had been packed up for embarkation, the plan
was abandoned in obedience to the calls of maternal affection. For several
years after he quitted his tutor, the learning he had acquired was much
improved by a disposition to study, and he particularly applied himself to the
practical parts of surveying, a knowledge of which was then, as it is now, very
important and necessary to men of landed property in every part of the American
continent. His merits in this branch of knowledge, occasioned him being
nominated Surveyor to a certain district in Virginia, an appointment rather
^^editable than lucrative; but which afforded him advantageous opportunities,
particularly an acquaintance with the country, the properties of lands, and the
situations and direction of creeks and rivers, and it enabled him to make a
choice of some valuable tracts of land for subsequent purchase.

After his father died, the charge of the family devolved on his eldest
brother, a young man of the most promising talents; who, at that time, was a
captain under admiral Vernon, in the colonial troops, employed in the
expedition against Carthagena; upon his return, having come into the possession
of his patrimonial estates, in honor of his admiral, from whom he had received
many civilities he named his new mansion Mount-Vernon. He was afterward made
adjutant-general of the militia of Virginia, but did not long survive, and on
his demise (notwithstanding there were heirs of an elder branch, who possess a
large share of the patrimony) the eldest son by the second marriage, inherited
the part upon which that sent now stands, and a considerable landed property
attached to it.

At the death of his brother, the vacant office of adjutant-general, was, in
consequence of the increased population and extensive limits of the colony,
divided into three districts, and the future Hero of America, before he was
twenty years of age, began his military career, by an appointment to the tank
of major in that department.

In 1753, an event occurred, which called his abilities into more active public
notice. The jealousies of the French and English governments were at their
height. Encroachments were reported to have been made by the former from their
settlements in Canada, on the frontier territories of the British colonies,
along the rivers Ohio and de Boeuf, -- Orders were received from England, by
the governor and council of Virginia, to repel by force these encroachments; in
consequence of which, lieutenant governor Dinwiddie dispatched young major
Washington, with plenary powers to ascertain the facts, treat with the Indians,
and warn the French to de^^t from the inroads they were making, in direct
violation of the treaties then subsisting between the two crowns. This mission
he performed with singular industry, intelligence and address.

The appointment of major Washington was deemed a circumstance somewhat
extraordinary at that period; it was said that a youth unacquainted with the
enlarged commerce of the world, unexperienced in political concerns, appeared
to be unfit to be employed to conduct a negotiation, wherein subjects of the
greatest importance were involved: It was very true that the subjects were
important, for they shortly after became the origin of a war between the two
nations, which raged for many years, and extended throughout every part of the
globe, and which ended in the final expulsion of the French from the continent.

But those who had formed such superfical notions of the major were in the end
deceived by the success and abilities manifested through the whole transaction.
This having been the first effort of that career which has terminated with so
much splendour in history, and honor and happiness to himself and his country.
It will be pleasing to peruse his journal, given in as a report of his
proceedings to governor Dinwiddie of Virginia, on that occasion; it is highly
illustrative of that activity and penetration which have signalized his
character -- On a more extensive theater, at a subsequent period, we shall give
it to our readers from an authentic source.

Major GEORGE WASHINGTON's JOURNAL, Sent by the Hon. Robert Dinwiddle, Esquire. his
Majesty's lieutenant governor, and commander in chief of Virginia, to the
commandant of the French forces on the Ohio.
WEDNESDAY, October 31st, 1753.

I was commissioned and appointed by the Hon. Robert Dinwiddie, Esquire. governor,
etc. of Virginia, to visit and deliver a letter to the commandant of the French
forces on the Ohio, and set out on the intended journey the same day: The next,
I arrived at Fredericksburg, and engaged Mr. Jacob Vanbraam, to be my French
interpreter; and proceeded with him to Alexandria, where we provided
necessaries. From thence we went to Winchester, and got baggage, horses, etc.
and from thence we pursued the new road to Wills Creek, where we arrived the
14th of November.

Here I engaged Mr Gist to pilot us out, and also hired four others as
servitors. Barnaby Currin and John Mac Quire, Indian traders, Henry Steward,
and William Jenkins; and in company with those persons left the inhabitants the
next day.

The excessive rains and vast quantity of snow which had fallen, prevented our
reaching Mr. Frazier's, an Indian trader at the mouth of Turtle Creek, on
Monongahela river, till Thursday the 22d. We were informed here, that expresses
had been sent a few days before to the traders down the river, to acquaint them
with the French genere^^ death, and the return of the major (...) of the French
army into winter quarters. The waters were quite impassable, without swimming
our horses; which obliged us to get the loan of a canoe from Frazier, and to
send Barnaby Currin, and Henry Stewart, down the Monongahela, with our baggage,
to meet us at the forks of the Ohio, about ten miles, there to cross the
Aligany The Ohio and Alligany are the same river.
.

As I got down before the canoe, I spent some time in viewing the rivers, and
the land in the Fork, which I think extremely well situated for a fort, as it
has the absolute command of both rivers. The land at the point is 20 or 25 feet
above the common surface of the water; and a considerable bottom of flat
well-timbered land all around it, very convenient for building: The rivers are
each a quarter of a mile, or more a cross, and run here very near at right
angles: Aligany bearing N. E. and Monongahela S. E. The former of these two is
a very rapid and swift running water; the other deep and still, without any
perceptible fall.

About two miles from this on the South East side of the river, at the place
where the Ohio company intended to erect a fort, lives Shingiss, King of the
Delawares: We called upon him to invite him to council at the Loggs Town.

As I had taken a good deal of notice yesterday of the situation at the Forks,
my curiosity led me to examine this more particularly, and I think it greatly
inferior, either for defense or advantages; especially the latter: For a fort
at the Forks would be equally well situated on the Ohio, and have the entire
command of the Monongahela; which runs up to our settlements, and is extremely
well designed for water carriage, as it is of a deep still nature. Besides a
fort at the Fork might be built at much lefs expense than at the other place.

Nature has well contrived this lower place for water defense; but the hill
whereon it must stand being about a quarter of a mile in length, and then
descending gradually on the land side, will render it difficult and very
expensive, to make a sufficient fortification there. The whole flat upon the
hill must be taken in, the side next the descent made extremely high, or else
the hill itself cut away: Otherwise, the enemy may raise batteries within that
distance without being exposed to a single shot from the fort.

Shingiss attended us to the Loggs Town, where we arrived between sun setting
and dark, the 25th day after I left Williamsburg. We traveled over some
extreme good and bad land, to get to this place.

As soon as I came into town, I went to Monakatoocha (as the half king was out
at his hunting cabin on little Beaver Creek, about 15 miles off) and informed
him by John Davison my Indian interpreter, that I was sent a messenger to the
French general; and was ordered to call upon the sachems of the six nations, to
acquaint them with it. I gave him a string of wampum, A kind of Indian Money;
also given as a present or mark of friendship.
and a twist of tobacco, and desired him to send for the half king; which he
promised to do by a runner in the morning, and for other sachems. I invited him
and the other great men present, to my tent, where they stayed about an hour
and returned.

According to the best observations I could make, Mr. Giff's new settlement
(which we passed by) bears about W. N. W. 70 miles, from Wills Creek,
Shanapins, or the Forks N. by W. or N. N. W. about 50 miles from that: and from
thence to the Loggs Town, the course is nearly west about 18 or 20 miles: So
that the whole distance, as we went and computed it, is at least 135 or 140
miles from our back inhabitants.

25th. Came to town four of ten Frenchmen who had deserted from a company at
the Kuskuskas, which lies at the mouth of this river. I got the following
account from them. They were sent from New-Orleans with 100 men, and 8 canoe
loads of provisions to this place; where they expected to have met the same
number of men, from the forts on this side of Lake Erie, to convoy them and the
stores up, who were not arrived when they run off.

I enquired into the situation of the French, on the Missisippi, their number,
and what forts they had built. They informed me, that there were four small
forts between New-Orleans and the Black Islands, garrisoned with about 30 or 40
men, and a few small pieces in each: That at New Orleans, which is near the
mouth of the Missisippi, there are 35 companies, of 40 men cach, with a pretty
strong fort mounting 8 carriage guns; and at the Black Islands there are
several companies and a fort with 6 guns. The Black Islands are about 130
leagues above the mouth of the Ohio, which is about 350 above New-Orleans. They
also acquainted me, that there was a small pallisadoed fort on the Ohio, at the
mouth of the Obaish, about 60 leagues from the Missisippi. The Obaish Or
Wabash, written by the French, Quabach.
heads near the west end of Lake Erie, and affords the communication between
the French on Missisippi and those on the Lakes. These deserters came up from
the lower Shannoah Town with one Brown, an Indian trader, and were going to
Philadelphia.

About 3 o'clock this evening the half king came to town. I went up and invited
him with Davison, privately, to my tent; and desired him to relate some of the
particulars of his journey to the French commandant, and reception there. Also
to give me an account of the ways and distance. He told me that the nearest and
levellest way was now impasasable, by reason of many large meiry savannas; that
we must be obliged to go by Venango, and should not get to the near fort under
five or fix nights sleep, good traveling. When he went to the fort, he said he
was received in a very stern manner by the late commander; who asked him very
abruptly, what he had came about, and to declare his business: which he said he
did in the following speech: --

"Fathers, I am come to tell you your own speeches; what your own mouths have
declared. Fathers, you, in former days, set a silver basin before us, wherein
there was the leg of a beaver, and desired all the nations to come and eat of
it; to eat in peace and plenty, and not to be churlish to one another: And that
if any such person should be sound to be a disturber, I here lay down by the
edge of the dish a rod, which you must scourge them with; and if I your father,
should get foolish in my old days, I desire you may use it upon me as well as
others.

"Now, fathers, it is you who are the disturbers in this land, by coming and
building your towns; and taking it away unknown to us, and by force.

"Fathers, we kindled a fire a long time ago, at a place called Montreal, where
we desired you to stay, and not to come and intrude upon our land. I now desire
you may dispatch to that place; for be it known to you, fathers, that this is
our land, and not yours.

"Fathers, I desire you may hear me in civilness; it not, we must handle that
rod which was laid down for the use of the obstrepetons. If you had come in a
peaceable manner, like our brothers the English, we should not have been
against your trading with us, as they do: But to come, Fathers, and build
houses upon our land, and to take it by force, is what we cannot submit to.

"Fathers, both you and the English are white, we live in a country between;
therefore, the land belongs to neither one nor the other: But the great Being
above allowed it to be a place of residence for us; so fathers I desire you to
withdraw, as I have done our brothers the English: For I will keep you at
armslength. I lay this down as a trial for both, to see which will have the
greatest regard to it, and that side we will stand by, and make equal sharers
with us. Our brothers the English have heard this, and I come now to tell it to
you; for I am not afraid to discharge you off this land."

This he said was the substance of what he spoke to the general, who made this
reply.

"Now, my child, I have heard your speech: You spoke first, but its my time to
speak now. Where is my wampum that you took away, with the marks of towns in
it? This wampum I do not know, which you have discharged me off the land with:
But you need not put yourself to the trouble of speaking, for I will not hear
you. I am not afraid of flies, or musquitoes, for Indians are such as those. I
tell you, down that river I will go, and build upon it, according to my
command. If the river was blocked up, I have forces sufficient to burst it
open, and tread under my feet all that stand in opposition, together with their
alliances; for my force is as the sand upon the seashore: Therefore, here is
vour wampum, I fling it at you. Child you talk foolish; you say this land
belongs to you, but there is not the black of my nail yours. I saw that land
sooner than you did, before the Shannoahs and you were at war: Lead was the man
who went down and took possession of that river: It is my land, and I will have
it, let who will stand up for or say against it. I Will buy and sell with the
English (mockingly.) If people will be ruled by me, they may expect kindness,
but not else."

The hal^ king told me he had enquired of the general after two Englishmen who
were made prisoners, and received this answer: -- "Child, you think it a very
great hardship that I made prisoners of those two people at Venango. Don't
concern yourself with it: We took and carried them to Canada, to get
intelligence of what the English were doing in Virginia"

He informed me that they had built two forts, one on Lake Erie, and another on
French Creek, near a small lake about f^^teen miles asunder, and a large
waggo^-road between: They are both built after the same model, but different in
size; that on the lake the largest. He gave me a plan of them, of his own
drawing.

The Indians enquired very particular after their brothers in Carolina jail.

They also asked what fort of a boy it was who was taken from the South Branch;
for they were told by some Indians, that a party of French Indians had carried
a white boy by Kuskuskas Town, toward the lakes.

November 26, 1753, we met in council, at the Long House, at about 9 o'clock,
where I spoke to them as follows: --

"Brothers, I have called you together in council, by order of your brother,
the governor of Virginia, to acquaint you, that I am sent, with all possible
dispatch, to visit, and deliver a letter to the French commandant, of very
great importance to your brothers the English; and I dare say to you, their
friends and allies.

"I was desired, brothers, by your brother, the governor, to call upon you, the
sachems of the nations, t^^^^orm you of it, and to ask your advice and
assitance to proceed the nearest and best road to the French. You see brothers,
I have gotten thus far on my journey

"His honor likewise desired me to apply to you for some of your young men, to
conduct and provide provisions for us on our way; and be a safeguard against
those French Indians who have taken up the hatchet against us. I have spoke
this particularly to you, brothers, because his honor, our governor, treats
you as good friends and allies; and holds you in great esteem. To confirm what
I have said, I give this string of wampum."

After they had considered for some time on the above discourse, the half-king
got up and spoke: -- "Now my brother, in regard to what my brother the governor
had desired me, I return you this answer.

"I rely upon you as a brother ought to do, as you say we are brothers and one
people. We shall put heart in hand, and speak to our fathers the French
concerning the speech they made to me: and you may depend that we will
endeavor to be your guard.

"Brother, as you have asked my advice, I hope you will be ruled by it, and
stay till I can provide a company to go with you. The French speech belt is not
here. I have it to go for to my hunting cabin: likewise the people whom I have
ordered in are not yet come, nor cannot till the third night from this; till
which time, brother, I must beg you to stay.

"I intend to send the guard of Mingos, Shannoahs, and Delawares, that our
brothers may see the love and loyalty we bear them."

As I had orders to make all possible dispatch, and waiting here was very
contrary to my inclination, I thanked him in the most suitable manner I could;
and told him that my business required the greatest expedition, and would not
admit of delay. He was not well pleased that I should offer to go before the
time he had appointed, and told me that he could not consent to our going
without a g^ard, for fear some accident should befall us, and draw a reflection
upon him. Besides, says he, this is a matter of no small moment, and must not
be entered into without due consideration: for now I intend to deliver up the
French speech belt, and make the Shannoahs and Delawares do the same. And
accordingly he gave orders to king Shingiss, who was present, to attend on
Wednesday night with the wampum, and two men of their nation, to be in rea^ness
to set out with us the next morning. As I sound It was impossible to get off
without affronting them in the most egregious manner, I consented to stay.

I gave them back a string of wampum, which I met with at Mr. Frazier's, and
which they sent with a speech to his honor the governor, to inform him, that
three nations of French Indians, viz Chippoways, Ottoways, and Orundaks; had
taken up the hatchet against the English; and desired them to repeat it over
again: but this they postponed doing till they met in full council with the
Shannoah and Delaware chiefs.

27th. Runners were dispatched very early for the Shannoah chiefs. The
half-king set out himself to fetch the French speech belt from his hunting
cabin.

28th. He returned this evening, and came with Mon^katoocha, and two other
sachems, to my tent; and begged (as they had complied with his honor the
governor's request, in providing men, etc.) to know on what business we were
going to the French? This was a question I all along expected, and had provided
as satisfactory answers to, as I could, which allayed their curiosity a little.

Mon^katoocha informed me, that an Indian from Venango brought news, a few days
ago, that the French had called all the Mingos, Delawares, etc. together at
that place; and told them that they intended to have been down the river this
fall, but the waters were growing cold, and the winter advancing, which obliged
them to go into quarters; but that they might assuredly expect them in the
spring, with a far greater number; and desired that they might be quite
passive, and not to intermeddle, unless they had a mind to draw all their force
upon them: for that they expected to sight the English three years (as they
supposed there would be some attempts made to stop them) in which time they
should conquer: but that if they should prove equally strong, they and the
English, would join to cut them all off, and divide the land between them: that
though they had lost their general, and some sew of their soldiers, yet there
were men enough to reinforce them, and make them masters of the Ohio.

This speech, he said, was delivered to them by one captain Joncaire, their
interpreter in chief, living at Venango, and a man of note in the army.

29th. The half king and Monokatoocha came very early and begged me to stay one
day more; for netwithstanding they had used all the diligence in their power,
the Shannoah chiefs had not brought the wampum they ^r^^red, but would
certainly be in this night; if not, they would delay me no longer, but would
send it after us as soon as they arrived. When I found them so pressing in
their request, and knew that the returning of wampum was the abolishing of
agreements, and giving this up, was shaking off all dependence upon the French.
I consented to stay, as I believed an offense offered at this crisis, might be
attended with greater ill consequence than another day's delay. They also
informed me that Shingiss could not get in his men; and was prevented from
coming himself by his wife's sickness, (I believe, by fear of the French) but
that the wampum of that nation was lodged with Kustaloga one of their chiefs at
Venango.

In the evening, late, they came again and acquainted me that the Shannoahs
were not yet arrived, but that it should not retard the prosecution of our
journey. He delivered in my hearing, the speeches that were to be made to the
French by Jeskakake, one of their old chiefs which was giving up the belt the
late commandant had asked for, and repeating near the same speech he himself
had done before.

He also delivered a string of wampum to this chief who was sent by king
Shingiss, to be given to Kustaloga, with orders to repair to the French, and
deliver up the wampum.

He likewise gave a very large string of black and white wampum which was to be
sent up immediately to the six nations, if the French refused to qu^t the land
at this warning; which was the third and last time, and was the right of this
Jeskakake to deliver.

30th. Last night the great men assembled at their council house, to consult
further about this jonrney, and who were to go: the result of which was, that
only three of their chiefs, with one of their best hunters, should be our
convoy. The reason they gave for not sending more, after what had been proposed
at council the 26th, was, that a greater number might give the French
suspicions of some bad design, and cause them to be treated rudely: but I
rather think they could not get their hunters in.

We set out about 9 o'clock with the half king, Jeskakake, White Thunder, and
the Hunter; and traveled on the road to the Venango, where we arrived the 4th
of December, without any thing remarkable happening, but a continued series of
bad weather.

This is an old Indian town, situated at the mouth of French Creek on Ohio; and
lies near N. about sixty miles from the Loggs town, but more than seventy the
way we were obliged to go.

We found the French colors hoisted at a house from which they had driven Mr.
John Frazier, an English subject. I immediately repaired to it, to know where
the commander resided. There were three officers, one of whom, captain
Joncaire, informed me, that he had the command of the Ohio: but that there was
a general officer at the near fort, where he advised me to apply for an answer.
He invited us to sup with them; and treated us with the greatest complaisance.

The wine, as they dozed themselves pretty plentifully with it, soon banished
the restraint which at first appeared in their conversation; and gave a license
to their tongues to reveal their sentiments more freely.

They told me, that it was their absolute design to take possession of the
Ohio, and by G -- d they would do it: for that although they were sensible the
English could raise two men for their one; yet they knew, their motions were
too slow and dilatory to prevent any undertaking of theirs. They pretend to
have an undoubted right to the river from a discovery made by one La Solle
sixty years ago; and the rise of this expedi^ion is, to prevent our settling on
the river or waters of it, as they had heard of some families moving out in
order thereto. From the best intelligence I could^get, there have been 1500 men
on this sido Ontario Lake; but upon the death of the general, all were recalled
to about six or seven hundred, who were left to garrison four forts, one
hundred and fifty or thereabouts in each. The tirst of them is on French Creek,
near a small Lake, about sixty miles from Venango, near N. N. W. The next lies
on Lake Erie, where the greater part of their stores are kept, about fifteen
miles from the other. From this it is one hundred and twenty miles to the
carrying place, at the falls of Lake Erie, where there is a small fort; which
they lodge their goods at, in bringing them from Montreal, the place whence all
their stores come from. The next fort lies about twenty miles from this, on
Ontario Lake. Between this fort and Montreal there are three others, the first
of which is nearly opposite to the English fort Oswego. From the fort on Lake
Erie to Montreal is about six hundred miles, which they say requires no more,
if good weather, than four week's voyage, if they go in barks or large vessels,
so that they may cross the lake: but if they come in can^es it will require
five or six weeks, for they are obliged to keep under the shore.

5th. Rained excessively all day, which prevented our traveling. Captain
Joncaire sent for the half king, as he had but just heard that he came with me:
he affected to be much concerned that I did not make free to bring them in
before. I excused it in the best manner I was capable, and told him, I did not
think their company agreeable, as I had heard him say a good deal in dispraise
of Indians in general. But another motive prevented me from bringing them into
his company: I knew he was interpreter, and a person of very great influence
among the Indians, and had lately used all possible means to draw them over to
their interest; therefore I was desirous of giving no opportunity that could be
avoided.

When they came in, there was great pleasure expressed at seeing them. He
wondered how they could be so near without coming to visit him; made several
trising presents; and applied liqour so fast, that they were soon rendered
incapable of the business they came about, notwithstanding the caution which
was given.

6th. The half king came to my tent, quite sober, and insisted very much that I
should stay and hear what he had to say to the French. I fain would have
prevented his speaking any thing, till he came to the commandant; but could not
prevail. He told me, that at this place a council fire was kindled, where all
their business with those people was to be transacted: and that the management
of the Indian affairs was left solely to monsieur Joncaire. As I was desirous
of knowing the issue of this, I agreed to stay: but sent our horses a little
ways up French Greck, to rast over and encamp; which I knew would make it near
night.

About ten o'clock they met in council. The king spoke much the same as he had
before done to the general; and offered the French speech belt which had before
been demanded with the marks of four towns on it, which monsieur Joncaire
refused to receive; but desired him to carry it to the fort to the commander.

7th. Monsieur La Force, commissary of the French stores, and three other
soldiers, came over to accompany us up. We sound it extremely difficult to get
the Indians off today, as every stratagem had been used to prevent their going
up with me. I had last night left John Davison (the Indian interpreter) whom I
had brought with me from town, and strictly charged him not to be out of their
company, as I could not get them over to my tent: for they had some business
with Kustaloga, chiefly to know the reason why he did not deliver up the French
belt which he had in keeping: but I was obliged to send Mr. Gist over today to
fetch them; which he did with great persuasion.

At twelve o'clock we set out for the fort, and were prevented from arriving
there till the 11th, by excessive rains, snows, and bad traveling, through
many mires and swamps. These we were obliged to pass, to avoid crossing the
creek, which was impossible either by fording or rafting, the water was so high
and rapid.

We passed over much good land since we left Venango, and through several
extensive and very rich meadows; one of which, I believe, was near four miles
in length, and considerably wide in some places.

12th. I prepared early to wait upon the commander, and was received and
conducted to him by the second ossicer in command. I acquainted him with my
business, and ossered my commission and letter: both of which he desired me to
keep till the arrival of monsieur Raparti, captain, at the next fort, who was
sent for, and expected every hour.

This commander is a knight of the military order of St. Lewis, and named
Legardeur de St. Piere. He is an elderly gentleman, and has much the air of a
soldier. He was sent over to take the command, immediately upon the death of
the late general, and arrived here but about seven days before me.

At two o'clock the gentleman who was sent for arrived, when I offered the
letter, etc. again; which they received, adjourned into a private apartment for
the captain to translate, who understood a little English. After he had done
it, the commander desired I would walk in, and bring my interpreter to peruse
and correct it; which I did.

13th. The chief ossicers retired, to hold a council of war; which gave me an
opportunity of taking the dimensions of the fort, and making what observations
I could.

It is situated on the south, or west fork of French creek, near the water; and
is almost surrounded by the creek, and a small branch of it which forms a kind
of island. Four houses compose the sides. The bastions are made of piles driven
into the ground, standing more than twelve feet above it, and sharp at the top;
with port holes cut for cannon and loop holes for the small arms to mounted in
each bastion; and one piece of four pounds before the gate. In the bastions are
a guard house, chapel, doctor's lodging, and the commander's private store;
round which are laid platforms for the cannon and men to stand on. There are
several barracks without the fort for the soldiers' dwelling; covered, some
with bark, and some with boards, made chiefly of logs. There are also several
other houses, such as stables, smith's shop, etc.

I could get no certain account of the number of men here; but according to the
be judgment I could form, there are an hundred exclusive of ossicers, of which
there are many. I also gave orders to the people who were with me, to take an
exact account of the canoes which were hauled up to convey their sorces down in
the spring. This they did, and told fifty of birch bark, and one hundred and
seventy of pine; besides many others which were blocked out, in readiness to
make.

14th. As the snow increased very fast, and our horses daily became weaker, I
sent them off unloaded; under the care of Barnaby Currin, and two others, to
make all convenient dispatch to Venango, and there wait our arrival, if there
was a prospect of the river's freezing; if not, then to continue down to
Shannapin's town, at the forks of the Ohio, and there to wait till we came to
cross Aligany; intending myself to go down by water, as I had the offer of a
canoe or two.

As I found many plots concerted to retard the Indians' businefs, and prevent
their returning with me; I endeavored all that lay in my power to frustrate
their schemes and hurry them on to execute their intended design. They
accordingly pressed for admittance this evening, which at length was granted
them, privately, with the commander and one or two other officers. The half
king told me, that he offered the wampum to the commander, who evaded taking
it, and made many fair promises of love and friendship; said he wanted to live
in peace, and trade amicably with them, as a proof of which he would send some
goods immediately down to the Loggs town for them. But I rather think the
design of that is, to bring away all our straggling traders they meet with, as
I privately understood they intended to carry an officer, etc. with them. And
what rather confirms this opinion, I was enquiring of the commander, by what
authority he had made prisoners of several of cur English subjects. He told me
that the country belonging to them; no Englishman had a right to trade upon
those waters; and that he had orders to make every one prisoner who attempted
it on the Ohio, or the waters of it.

I enquired of captain Riparti about the boy who was carried by this place, as
it was done while the command devolved on him between the death of the late
general, and the arrival of the present. He acknowledged that a boy had been
carried past; and that the Indians had two or three white men's scalps, (I was
told by some of the Indians at Venango eight) but pretended to have forgotten
the name of the place which the boy came from, and all the particularfacts,
though he had questioned him for some hours, as they were carrying him past. I
likewise enquired what they had done with John Trotter and James Mac Clocklin,
two Pennsylvania traders, whom they had taken, with all their goods. They told
me, that they had been sent to Canada, but were now returned home.

This evening I received an answer to his honor the governor's letter from the
commandant.

15th. The commandant ordered a plentiful store of liquor, provision, etc. to
be put on board our canoe; and appeared to be extremely complaisant, though he
was exerting every artifice which he could invent to set our own Indians at
varience with us, to prevent their going until alter our departure. Presents,
rewards, and every thing which could be suggested by him or his officers. I
can3: say that ever in my life I suffered so much anxiety as I did in this
affair: I saw that every stratagem which the most sruitful brain could invent,
was practiced, to win the half king to their interest; and that leaving him
here was giving them the opportunity they aimed at. I went to the half king and
press'^ him in the strongest terms to go: he told me the commandant would not
discharge him till the morning. I then went to the commandant, and desired him
to do their business; and complained of ill treatment: For keeping them, as
they were part of my company, was detaining me. This he promised not to do, but
to forward my journey as much as he could. He protested he did not keep them,
but was ignorant of the cause of their stay; though I soon found it out: -- He
had promised them a present of guns, etc. if they would wait till the morning.
As I was very much pressed by the Indians to wait this day for them, I
consented, on a promise, that nothing should hinder them in the morning.

16th. The Erench were not slack in their inventions to keep the Indians this
day also: But as they were obligated according to promise, to give the present,
they then endeavored to try the power of l^quor; which I doubt not would have
prevailed at any other time than this: but I urged and insisted with the king
so closely upon his word, that he refrained, and set off with us as he had
engaged.

We had a tedious and very satiguing passage down the creek. Several times we
ha^ like to have been staved against the rocks; and many times were obliged all
hands to get out and remain in the water half an hour (...) more, getting over
the shoals. At one pla^^ the ice had lodged and made it impassable (...) water:
therefore we were obliged to (...) out canoe across a n^ck of land, a quarter
(...) a mile over. We did not reach V^nang^s (...) the 2nd, where we met with
our horses.

This creek is extremely crooked, I da^^ say the distance between the fort and
Venan go cannot be less than 130 miles to follow the meanders.

2nd. When I got things ready to set of I ^ent for the hal^ king, to know
whether (...) intended to go with us, or by water. He told me that White
Thunder had hurt himself much, and was sick and unable to walk; therefore he
was obliged to carry him down in a canoe. As I sound he intended to stay here a
day or two and knew that Monsieur Joncaire would employ every scheme to set him
against the English as he had besore done; I told him I hoped he would be
guarded against his flattery, and let no fine speeches influence him in their
favor. He desired I might not be concerned, for he knew the French too well,
for any thing to engage him in their behalf; and that though he could not go
down with us, he yet would endeavor to meet at the sorks with Joseph Campbell,
to deliver a speech for me to carry to his honor the Governor. He told me he
would order the young hunter to attend us, and get provision, etc. if wanted.

Our horses were now so weak and feeble, and the baggage so heavy (as we were
obliged to provide all the necessa^ies which the journey would require) that we
doubted much their performing it: Therefore myself and others (except the
drivers who were obliged to ride) gave up our horses for packs, to assist along
with the bag^age. I put myself in an Indian walking dress, and continued with
them three days, till I found there was no probability of their getting home in
any reasonable sonable time. The horses grew less able to travel every day; the
cold increased very fast; and the roads were becoming much worst by a deep
snow, continually freezing: Therefore, as I was uneasy to get back, to make
report of my proceedings to his Honor the Governor, I determined to prosecute
m^ journey the nearest way through the woods on foot.

Accordingly I left Mr. Vanbraam in cha^^ of our baggage; with money and
direction^ to provide necessaries from place to place for themselves and
horses, and to make the m^^ convenient dispatch in traveling.

I took my necessary papers; pulled off m^ clothes; and tied myself up in a
ma^d coat. Then with gun in hand, and pack i^ my back, in which were my paper,
and previsions, I set out with Mr. Gist, fitted in the same manner, on
Wednesday the 26th. The day following, just after we had passed^ place called
the Murdering Town, (when we intended to quit the path, and steer acro^^ the
country for Shannapins Town) we tell (...) with a party of French Indians, who
(...) laid in wait for us. One of them fired at (...) Gist or me, not 15 steps
off, but fortuna^^ missed. We took this fellow into custody, and kept him until
about 9 o'clock at night: Then let him go, and walked all the remaining part of
the night without making any stop; that we might get the start, so far, as to
be out of the reach of their pursuit next day, since we were well assured they
would sollow our track as soon as it was light. The next day we continued
traveling till quite dark, and got to the river about two miles above
Shannapins. We expected to have found the river frozen, but it was not, only
about 50 yards from each shore: The ice I suppose had broken up above, for it
was driving in vast quantities.

There was no way for getting over but on a rast: which we set about, but with
one poor hatcher, and finished just after sun setting. This was a whole days
work: We next got it launched, and went on board of it: Then set off. But
before we were half way over, we were jammed in the ice, in such a manner that
we expected every moment our raft to sink, and ourselves to perish. I put out
my setting pole to stop the rast, that the ice might pass by; when the rapidity
of the stream threw it with so much violenc^ against the pole, that it jirked
me out into ten feet water: But I fortunately saved myself by catching hold of
one of the raft logs. Notwithstanding withstanding all our efforts, we could
not get to either shore; but were obliged, as we were near an isl nd, to quit
out raft and make to it.

The cold was so extremely severe, that Mr. Gist had all his fingers, and some
of his toes frozen; and the water was shut up so hard, that we found no
difficulty in getting off the island, on the ice, in the morning; and went to
Mr. F^azier's. We met here with twenty warriors who were going to the southward
to war: But coming to a place upon the head of the great Kunnaway, where they
found seven people killed and scalped (all but one woman with very light hair)
they turned about and ran back for fear the inhabitants should rise and take
them as the authors of the murder. They report that the bodies were lying about
the house, and some of them much torn and eaten by hogs: By the marks which
were left, they say they were French Indians of the Ottoway nation, etc. who
did it.

As we intended to take horses here, and it required some time to find them, I
went up about three miles to the mouth of the Yaughyaugh gane to visit Queen
Alliquippa, who had expreded great co^^^rn that we passed her in going to the
sort. I made hear a presont of a coat and a bottle of rum, which latter was
thought much the best present of the two.

Tuesday the Is It day of January, we left Mr. Frazier's house, and arrived at
Mr. Gist's at Monongahela the 2d, where I bought a horse, saddle, etc. The 6th
we met 17 horses loaded with materials and stores for a fort at the forks of
Ohio, and the day after some familtes going out to settle: This day we arrived
at Wills Creck, after as fatiguing a journey as it is possible to conceive,
rendered so by excessive bad weather. From the first day of December to the
15th, there was but one day in which it did not rain or snow incessantly; and
throughout the whole journey we met with nothing but one continued series of
cold wet weather, which occasioned very uncomfortable lodgings; especially
after we had quitted our tent, which was some screen from the inclemency of it.

On the 11th I got to Belvoir; where I stopped one day to take necessary rest;
and then set out, and arrived in Williamsburg the 16th; when I waited on his
honor the governor with the letter I had brought from the French commandant;
and to give an account of the success of my proceedings. This I beg leave to do
by oftering the foregoing narrative, as it contains the most remarkable
occurrences which happened in my journey.

I hope what has been said will be sufficient to make your honor satisfied
with my conduct; for that was my aim in undertaking the journey, and chief
study throughout the prosecution of it.

With the hope of doing it, I, with infinite pleasure, subscribe myself,

Your Honor's most obedient, And very humble servant, G. WASHINGTON.

On his return from this perilous embassy, with monsieur de St. Piere's answer,
and his good success in the Indian negociations Maj. Washington was
complimented with the thanks and approbation of his country. His Journal does
great credit to his industry, attention, and judgment; and it has since proved
of infinite service to those who have been doomed to traverse the same
inhospitable tracts.

Governor Dinwiddie's letter to the French commandant and M. de St. Piere's
answer were both published in the newspapers in London. The French commandants
answer, only stated that he was on French ground, and by the order of his
general to whom he was going to dispatch the governor's letter.

In 1754, the designs of the French becoming more manifest, and their movements
more daring, orders were issued by administration for the colonies to arm and
unite in one confederacy. The assembly of Virginia took the lead, by voting a
sum of money for the public service, and raising a regiment for the protection
of the frontiers of the colony. Of this corpse, Mr. Fry, one of the professors
of the college was appointed Colonel, and Major Washington received the
commission of Lieutenant Colonel. Hut Colonel Fry died without ever having
joined; and of course lest his regiment to the second in command. Colonel
Washington began his march on the 2d. of April, from Alexandria, having under
his command one hundred and fifty men. His orders were to march toward the
Ohio, there to a^^^^t captain Trent to build sorts, and defend the possessions
of his majesty against the attempts and hostilities of the French. During his
march he was joined by a small detachment under command of captain Stephens,
and when he had proceeded as far as Wills-Creck, he received intelligence that
captain Trent had been obliged to surrender the fort which he had erected
between the Ohio and French creek, to a body of about eight hundred French,
commanded by captain Contrecoeur; whereupon, Colonel Washington deeming it
impracticable to march toward the fort without Fussi^ient force, thought it
most prudent to proceed to open roads so as to pre-occupy the advantageous post
at the consluence of the Allegheny and Monongahela rivers, which in his
preceding Journal he recommends for 01 that purpose. He was to have been joined
by a detachment of independent regulars from the southern colonies, together
with some companies of Provincials from North Carolina and Maryland. But
perceiving the necessity of expedition, and without waiting for their arrival,
he commenced his march before they arrived; but, notwithstanding his
precipitated advance, the French had already taken possession and erected a
fortification, which they named fort Du Quesne, in honor of the marquis du
Quesne, the French governor of Canada.

Colonel Washington accordingly proceeded on his march from Wills-Creek;
bravely encountering all the obslecles and difficulties of an impervious
wilderness, crossing mires, savannas and rivers. His men were some time, forced
to ford rivers so deep as to take them up to the armpits; when he had
proceeded as far as Turkyfoot, he received inforination that a party of French
commanded by M. de Jumonville, were concealed within a short distance of his
camp; whereupon, he secured his wagons and put himself in the best means of
defense he was capable of, until he had learned the strength of the enemy, and
the place where they were.

Having received from the Indians the necessary information, on the night of
the 27th May, he set out with his men (except about forty, which was left to
guard his ammunition, etc.) and a party of Indians, which the half king sent to
his assistance, under a heavy rain, and a night dark as pitch, they traveled
along a path scarcely broad enough for one man; they were sometimes fifteen or
twenty minutes out of the path before they could come to it again, and so dark,
that they would often strike one against another; all night they continued
their ront, and in the morning about sunrise, formed themselves for an
engagement, marching one after another in the Indian manner, the enemy did not
discover them until they were close upon them, when Colonel Washington's
company sired, and was supported by Mr. Wager's; these two companies received
the whole sire of the French, which lasted a quarter of an hour before the
enemy was routed out. M. de Jumonville and nine others were killed, one
wounded, and twenty one made prisoners. Among the prisoners was the celebrated
woodsman, monsieur de la Force, commissary of the French stores, and two other
officers. Only one of the whole party escaped. A Canadian, named Monceau, whose
report of the action was such, as to impress upon the minds of the French, a
belief that Colonel Washington's conduct was highly treacherous and
dishonorable. The French account of this engagement is contained in a letter
from M. de Contrecoeur to the marquis du Quesne, dated Fort du Quesne, May 23d.
1754. It states that M. de Jumonville set out with a small escort, charged with
a written summons, in form of a letter, directed to the first English officer
he should meet on the lands claimed by the French king, summoning him to
withdraw his troops in peace from said territory, otherwise that they would
repel force to force, desiring the English officer to return his answer by M.
de Jumonville and to treat that officer with that distinction and respect which
he deserved, that the deputy set out, and next morning found himself surrounded
by a number of English and Indians, that the English quicky fired two vollies,
which killed some soldiers, that M. Jumonville made a sign that he had a letter
from his commander, whereupon the fire ceased, and the English surrounded the
French officer, in order to hear it, that as he was reading the summons a
second time, he was killed by a musket shot in the head, and, that, had it not
been for the Indians, who rushed in between the French and the English, the
former would have been all asladinated; that the Indians did not fire upon the
French. This report was made the most of by the French, who impressed it upon
the minds of the surrounding Indians, as a most shocking and base murder,
perpetrated by the express command of Colonel Washington. But the following
extract from Colonel Washington's Journal, of his proceedings given in to
Governor Dinwiddie, places it in a quite different point of view, he states,
via, "We were advanced pretty near to them as we thought, when they discovered
us; whereupon, I ordered my company to fire, mine was supported by Mr. Wager's,
and my company and his, received the whole fire or the French, during the
greatest part of the action, which only lasted a quarter of an hour, before the
enemy was routed.

"We killed Mr. de Jumonville, the commander of that Party, as also nine
others; we wounded one, and made twenty-one prisoners, among whom were M. la
Force, M. Drouillon, and two Cadets. The Indians scalped the dead, and took
away most part of their arms, after which we marched on with the prisoners and
the guard, to the Indian camp, where again I held a council with the Half-King;
and there informed him that, the governor was desirous to see him, and was
waiting for him at Winchester; he answered, that, he could not go just then, as
his people were in too eminent a danger from the French, whom they had fallen
upon; that he must send messenges to all the allied nations, in order to invite
them to take up the Hatchet. He sent a young Delaware Indian to the Delaware
Nation, and gave him also a French Scalp to carry to them. This young man
desired to have a part of the presents which were allotted for them, but that
the remaining part might be kept for another opportunity: He said he would go
to his own family, and to several others, and would wait on them at Mr. Gist's,
where he desired men and horses should be sent ready to bring them up to our
camp. After this I marched on with the prisoners; They informed me that they
had been font with a summons to order me to depart. A plausible pretense to
discover our camp, and to obtain the knowledge of our forces and our situation!
It was so clear that they were come to reconnoitre what we were, that I admired
at their assurance, when they told me they were come as an Embassy; for their
instructions mentioned that they should get what knowledge they could of the
roads, rivers, and of all the country as far as Potowmack: And instead of
c^^^ng as an Ambassador, publicly, and in an open manner, they came secretly,
and sought after the most hidden retreats, more like deserters than
ambassadors; in such retreats they encamped, and remained hid whole days
together, and that, no more than five miles from us: from thence they sent
spies to reconnoitre our camp; after this was done, they went back two miles,
from whence the sent the two messengers spoken of in the instruction, to
acquaint M. de Contrecoeur of the place we were at, and of our disposition,
that he might send his detatchments to enforce the summons, as soon as i should
be given.

"Besides, an embaslador has princely attendants; whereas this was only a
simple petty French officer; an ambassador has no need of spies, his character
being always sacred: And seeing their intention was so good, why did they tarry
two days, at five miles distance from us, without acquainting me with the
summons, or, at least, with some, thing that related to the embasly? That alone
would be sufficient to raise the greatest suspicions, we ought to do them the
justice to say, that, as they wanted to hide themselves, they could not pick
out better places than they had done.

"The summons was so insolent, and savoured the gasconade so much, that if it
had been brought openly by two men, it would have been an immediate indulgence,
to have suffered them to return.

"It was the opinien of the half king in this case, that their intentions were
evil, and that it was a pure pretense; that they never intended to come tous
but as onenies; and if we had been such fools as to let them go, they would
never help us any more to take other Frenchmen.

"They say they called to us as soon as they had discovered us, which is an
absolute falsehood, for, I was then marching at the head of the company going
toward them, and can positively affirm, that, when they first saw us, they ran
to their arms, without calling; as I must have heard them, had they so done."

From the French prisoners, Colonel Washington had intelligence, that the
French forces on the Ohio consisted of upwards of one thousand regulars, and
some hundreds of Indians. Upon this intelligence, and considering his little
army which was somewhat reduced, and entirely insufficient to act offensive
against the French and Indians, he fell back to a place known by the
appellation of the Great Meadows, for the sake of forage and supplies. Here he
built a temporary stockade, merely to cover his stores; it was from its fate
called Fort Necessity. Colonel Washington was too sendi le of the advantages of
Fort du Quesne, to abandon the idea of taking it. Ever since he lest
Wills-creek, he had been indefatigable in his exertions to form the regiment,
open roads, and gain the Indians over to the side of the English, as also to
watch the operations of the French, and gain a knowledge of their sorts,
situation, and forces, even as far as the lakes. He had wrote to the Governors
of Pennsylvania and Maryland, requesting their aid in the augmentation of his
army. He remained at Fort Necessity for the arrival of some expected succor
from New York and Penasylvania, and remained un molested, until the July
sollowing, when his small sorce, even after it was joined by captain M'Kay's
regulars did not amount to four hundred effectives, was attacked by an army of
French and Indians, computed to have been sixteen hundred strong, under the
command of the Sieur de Villiers, the brother of M. de Jumonville. The chief
intention of this campaign, the French officer acknowledged, was to revenge the
assassination of his brother, and to hinder any establishments on the lands
claimed by the king of France.

The Virginians sustained the attack of the enemy's whole force for several
hours, and laid near two hundred of them dead in the field, when the French
commander, discouraged by such determined resolution, proposed the less
dangerous method of dislodging his enemy by a parley, which ended in a
capitulation. It was stipulated, that Colonel Washington should march away with
all the honors of war, and be allewed to carry off all his military stores,
essects and baggage. This capitulation was violated from the ungovernable
disposition of the Indians, whom the French commander could not restrain from
plundering the provinclas on the outset of their march, and from making a
considerable slaughter of men, cattle and horses. After this disaster the
remains of the Virginia regiment returned to Alexandria to be recruitedand
furnish with necessary supplies: During this period, the French redoubled their
activity and deligence on the Ohio, and in other places, and Virginia who
determined to send out a larger force, in the spring following, erected the
forts Cumberland and London, and formed a camp at Wills-creek, in order to
annoy the enemy on the Ohio. In these several services (particularly in the
construction of forts) Colonel Washington was principally employed.

In 1755, the British government sent to this county, General braddock, who was
appointed to the command of all the troops and forces which were, or that
should be raised in, or sent to, North America; he landed at Williamsburg,
Virginia, in February, with two veteran regiments from Ireland, but sent his
men up the Potomack to Alexandria, there to encamp until he was joined with the
independent and provincial corpse of America; with this army he was to penetrate
through the country to fort Da Quesne (now fort Pit) by the rout of
Wills-creek to repel the French from the confines of the British settlements,
and as no person was was better acquainted with the frontier country than
Coloned Washington, and no one in the colony enjoyed so well established a
military character, he was judged to be highly serviceable to General Braddock,
but from a royal arrangement of rank, by which "no officer who did not
immediately derive his commission from the king, could command one who did."
Colonel Washington cheerfully relinquished his regiment and went as a^ extra
aid de camp into the family of General Braddock. In this capacity, at the
battle of the Monongahela, on the oath of July, 1755, he attended that General,
whose life was gallantly sacraficed in attempting to extricate his troops from
the fatal ambuscade into which him over-weaning confidence had conducted them.
Braddock had several horses shot under him, before he feli himself; and there
was not as officer, whose duty obliged him to be on horseback that day,
excepting Colonel Washington, who was not either killed or wounded. This
circumstance enabled him to display greater abilities in covering the retreat
and saving the wreck of the army, than he could otherwise have done. As soon as
he had secured their passage over the ford of the Monongahela, and found they
were not pursued he hasted to concert measures for their further security with
Colonel Dunbar, who had remained with the second division and heavy baggage at
some distance in the rear. To effect this he traveled with two guides, all
night, through an almost impervious wilderness, not withstanding the fatigues
he had undergone in the day, and although he had so imperfectly recovered from
sickness, that he was obliged in the morning to be supported with cushions on
his horse. The public accounts in Britain and America were not parsimonious of
applause for the essential service he had rendered on so trying an occasion.

Not long after this time, the regulation of rank, which had been so injurious
to the colonial officers, was changed to their satisfaction, in consequence of
the discontent of the officers, and the remonstrance of Colonel Washington; and
the supreme power of Virginia, impressed with a due sense of his merits, gave
him, in a new and extenfive commission, the command of all the troops raised
and to be raised in that colony.

It would not comport with the intended brevity of this sketch, to mention in
detail the plans he suggested or the system he pursued for desending the
frontiers, until the year 1758, when he commanded the van brigade of General
Forbe's army in the capture of Fort Du Quesne. A similar reason will preclude
the recital of the personal hazards and achievements which happened in the
course of his service. The tranquillity on the frontiers of the middle colonies
having been restored by the success of this campaign, and the health of Colonel
Washington having become extrentely debilitated by an inveterate pulmonary
complaint, in 1759 he resigned his military appointment. Authentie documents
are not wanting to show the tender regret which the Virginia line expressed at
parting with their commander, and the affectionate regard which he entertained
for them.

Shortly after Colonel Washington's resignation, his health was gradually
re-established and he, married Mrs. Custis General and Mrs. Washington were
both born in the same year.
, an amiable young widow, said to have possessed a fortune of twenty thousand
pounds starling (about 88,900 dollars) in her own right, besides her dower in
one of the principal eslates in Virginia. With this lady Colonel Washington
settled as a planter and farmer on his estate in Fairfax county, Virginia.

After some years he gave up planting tobacco, and went altogether into the
farming business. He has raised seven thousand bushels of wheat, and ten
thousand of Indian corn in one year. Although he has confined his own
cultivation to this domestic tract of about mine thousand acres, yet he
possesses excellent lands, in large quantities, in several other counties. His
judgment in the quality of soils, his command of money to avail himself of
purchases, and his occasional employment in early lise as a surveyor, gave him
opportunities of making advantageous locations; many of which are much improved.

Aster he lest the army, until the year 1774, he thus cultivated the arts of
peace. He was constantly a member of assembly, a magistrate of his county and a
judge of the court, At this period he was appointed by the assembly of
Virginia, in conformity with the universal wish of the people, to be one of
their four delegates at the first General Congress of delegates from all the
provinces, which net at Philadelphia on the 26th of October, 1774, and
consilted of fisty-one members. It was with no small reluctance that he engaged
again in the active scenes of life; and we incerely believe that no motives but
such as spring from the most disinterested patriotism, sold have prevailed
upon him to relinquish the most resined domestic pleasure, which it was ever in
his power to command, and the great delight he took in farming and the
improvement of his estate.

He was also appointed delegate to the Congress which assembled in 1775, in
which in was at length determined, after every step t^ wards an accommodation
had failed, and every petition from America had been rejected, ^^ repel by
force the invasion from Great Britain the eyes of the whole Continent were
imme^^ diately turned upon Mr. Washington. With one common voice he was called
forth to the defense of his country; and it is, perhaps his peculiar glory,
that there was not a single inhabitant of these states, except himself, wh^^
did not approve the choice, and place the firmest confidence in his integrity
and abilities.

He arrived at Cambridge in New England in July, 1775, and there took the
suprent command of the army of the United colonies. Previous to this period,
hostilities ha^ actually commenced. On the 19th of April 1775, blood was first
shed at the battle ^^ Concord; and on the 16th of June following the memorable
battle of Breed's hill, commonly called Bunker's-hill was fought.

General Washington was received at the camp with that heart felt exultation,
which superior merit alone can inspire, after having, in his progress through
the several states, received every mark of affection and esteem, which they
conceived were due to the man, whom the whole continent looked up to for safety
and freedom.

The following address was presented to him on his accepting the supreme
command of the army, by the Provincial Congress of New York, viz.

ADDRESS, Presented to his excellency General Washington, by the provincial
Congress of New York.
May it please your excellency.
At a time when the most loyal of his majesty's subjects, from a regard to the
laws and constitution, by which he sits on thethrone, feel themselves reduced
to the unhappy necessity of taking up arms, to defend their dearest rights and
privileges -- while we deplore the calamities of this divided empire, we
rejoice in the appointment of a gentleman, from whose abilities and virtue we
are taught to expect both security and peace.

Confiding in you, sir, and in the worthy generals immediately under your
command, we have the most flattering hopes of success in the glorious struggle
for American liberty, and the fullest assurances, that, whenever this important
contest shall be decided, by that fondest wish of each American soul, an
accommodation with our mother country, you will cheerfully resign the important
deposit committed into your hands, and reassume the character of our worthiest
citizen.

By order, P. V. B. LIVINGSTON, president.
New York, June 26th, 1775.
GENERAL WASHINGTON'S ANSWER.
Gentlemen,
At the same time that with you I deplore the unhappy necessity of such an
appointment, as that with which I am now honored, I cannot but feel sentiments
of the highest gratitude, for this affecting instance of distinction and regard.

May your warmest wishes be realized in the success of America, at this
important and interesting period; and be assured that every exertion of my
worthy colleagues and myself, will be equally extended to the re-establishment
of peace and harmony, between the mother country and these colonies; as to the
fatal but necessary operations of war, when we assumed the soldier, we did not
lay aside the citizen; and we shall most sincerely rejoice with you in that
happy hour, when the establishment of American liberty, or the most firm and
solid foundations, shall enable us to return to our private stations, in the
bosom of a free, peaceful and happy country.

G. WASHINGTON.

His conduct as a general and commander in chief is well known. He underwent
many hardships, dangers and difficulties and con ducted his military operations
with much skill and ability.

It would not comport with the intended brevity of the present memoirs, for us
to particularize, all his transactions in the course of the revolutionary war,
the impression which they made, is yet fresh in the mind of every citizen, they
are also so intimately connected with the American revolution, a history of
which will perhaps soon be presented to the public, from the modest pen of the
hero himself, We learn that General Washington has lest, in his legacy to Judge
Washington, a History of the American Revolution, written by himself,
accompanied with all the important documents.
which will, no doubt, place the whole in a more eminent point of view than has
heretosore appeared.

But it is hoped, posterity will be taught, in what manner he transformed an
undisciplined body of peasantry into a regular army of soldiers. Commentaries
on his campaigns would undoubtedly be highly interesting and instructive to
future generations. The conduct of his first campaign, in March, 1776, in
compelling the British troops to abandon Boston, by a bloodless victory, will
merit a minute narration. But a volume would scarcely contain the
mortifications he experienced, and the hazards to which he was exposed in the
years 1776 and 1777, in contending against the prowess of Britain, with an
inadequate force. Her armies were far superior to his in number, well organized
and disciplined, inured to a camp life, commanded by officers well experienced
in military tacticks, and aided by powerful fleets, while his was composed of
raw and undisciplined peasants, "just dragged from the tender scenes of
domestic life -- unaccustomed to the din of arms -- totally unacquainted with
every kind of military skill," -- unsed to the subordination so essentially
requisite in an army, and often in want of arms, ammunition, clothes, and even
food; often exposed to the inclemency of the weather, in the most vigorous
seasons, without tents or even a blanket, and discouraged by the want of
regular pay. These circumstances fully account for the unsuccessful issue of
his first campaigns.

The battle of Long Island was fought in August, 1776; his army were driven
from their posts by the British; above two thousand Americans fell on the
field, and about half that number were taken prisoners. Fort Washington on
York-Island, surrendered soon after, with two thousand prisoners: Desertion and
sickness added to his misfortunes. His army, which, at the time Lord How
landed on Long Island, amounted to twenty-five thousand men, was now reduced to
about one eighth part of the number.

The approach of winter happily checked the progress of the enemy. General
Washington's perseverance and intrepidity, improved this circumstance into
important advantages. At Trenton, on the morning of the twenty-sixth of
December, he surprised a body of the enemy's troops, who, finding themselyes
surrounded, without further resistance, agreed to lay down their arms. --
Twenty-five ossicers, and nearly one thousand soldiers were made prisoners;
while the American army had only four or five men wounded.

On the third of January following, at Princeton, he made another successful
attempt, there he took three hundred prisoners. These enterprises cheered the
drooping spirits of his men, and again added reputation to the American arms.
He afterward retired to Morristown, and remained during the winter, with an
inferior force, but with superior skill, checking the enemy from any further
encroachments in that part of the country. We shall not enter into a minute
description of the various battles and skirmishes, in which he was personally
engaged during the campa^gn of 1777. At the battle of Brandywine, he made a
gallant resistance, but was at last forced to quit his ground with the loss of
about twelve hundred men killed, wounded, or taken prisoners. At Germantown he
was repulsed with the loss of six hundred killed or wounded, and about four
hundred prisoners. He afterward retired to winter quarters at Valley Forge.
His army was at this time in a most miserable condition, marching, without
stockings or shoes, over the frozen ground, their feet were so gashed, that
their steps were marked with blood: Some hundreds of them were without
blankets; and in this condition they were in the middle of winter, to sit down
in a forest, and build buts for a shelter. The destitute situation of the
American army at ^^ times, was certainly a means of procrastinating the war;
ostentimes it was upon the eve of dissolution, even mutinies have been the
consequence, while want of success, prevented many of the soldiers from
continuing longer than the period of their short enl^^^ments, and caused
frequent desertion. Indeed, nothing but the good destiny and consummate
prudence of the commander in chief, prevented want of success from producing
want of confidence on the part of the public; for want of success is apt to
lead to the adoption of pernicious counsels, through the levity of the people
or the ambition of their demagogues. In the three succeeding years, the germ of
discipline unfolded; and the resources of America having been called into
cooperation with the land and naval armies of France, produced the glorious
conclusion of the campaign in 1781. On the nineteenth of October that year, the
army under command of General Washington, forced that of the enemy, the under
command of Lord Cornwallis, t^^ make a final surrender; his land forces were
made prisoners of war to congrefs; and the naval forces were given up to
France. From this time, the gloom began to disappear from our political
horizon, and the affairs of the union proceeded in a meliorating train, unti^ a
peace was most ably negociated by our a^ bassadors in Europe, in 1783, by which
thirteen of the American colonies were established as sovereign and independent
states.

General Washington having never been is Europe, he could not possibly have
se^^ much military service when the armies (...) Britain were sent to subdue
America; y^^ still, for a variety of reasons, he was by much the most proper
man on this continent, and probably any where else, to be placed at the head of
an American Army. The very high estimation he stood in for integrity and
honor, his engaging in the cause of his country from sentiment and a
conviction of her wrongs, his moderation in politics, his extensive property,
and his approved abilities as a commander, were motives which necessarily
obliged the choice of America to fall upon him.

That nature had given him extraordinary military talents, will hardly be
controverted by his most bitter enemies; and having been early actuated with a
warm passion to serve his country in the military line, he has greatly improved
them by unwearied industry, and a close application to the best writers upon
tacticks, and by a more than common method and exactness; and, in reality, when
it comes to be considered, that at first he only headed a body of men entirely
unacquainted with military discipline or operations, somewhat ungovernable in
temper, and who at best could only be styled an alert and good militia, acting
under very short enlistments, unclothed, unaccoutred, and at all times very ill
supplied with ammunition and artillery; and that with such an army he withstood
the ravages and progress of nearly forty thousand veteran troops, plentifully
provided with every necessary article, commanded by the bravest officers in
Europe, and supported by a very powerful navy which effectually prevented all
movements by water; when, we say, all this comes to be impartially considered,
we think we may venture to pronounce, that General Washington will be regarded
by mankind as one of the greatest military ornaments of the present age, and
that his name will command the veneration of the latest posterity.

No person, but those who had an opportunity of viewing the continental army,
can form any adequate idea of its imperfect state when General Washington first
assumed the command, nor was it without the most unwearied application and
perseverance, which few men but him, could have undergone, that be was able to
establish that discipline which ultimately aided his success. From the period
he first assumed the command, mutil the final dissolution of the army, his care
and anxiety for them continued. The army he considered his family; and aster
the embarassments of the day, after the toil and satigues of a battle, we sind
him stealing a portion of the time alloted for rest, devising means the most
salutary, for their amelioration, at all times characterized with that economy
and frugality which the national resources required.

The following extracts from his official letters to congress on this subject,
are worthy of perusal; they do ample justice to his feelings, and must make a
lasting impression in the hearts of his fellow soldiers, viz.

Extract from a letter from General Washington the honorable Congress, dated
Cambridge, September 21, 1775.
"IT gives me great pain to be obliged to solicit the attention of the
honorable Congress to the state of this army, in terms which imply the
slightest apprehension of being neglected But my situation is inexpressibly
distressing, to see the winter fast approaching upon a naked army; the time of
their service within a few weeks of expiring; and no provision yet made for
such important events. Added to these the military chest is totally exhausted:
the pay master has not a single dollar in hand: the commissary general assures
me he has strained his credit, for the subsistence of the army, to the utmost.
The quarter-master-general is precisely in the same situation; and the greater
part of the troops are in a state not far from mutiny, upon the deduction from
their stated allowance. I know not to whom I am to impute this failure: but I
am of opinion, if the evil is no immediately remedied, and more punctually
observed in future, the army must absolutely break up. I hoped I had so fully
expressed myself on this subject, (both by letter, and to those members of the
congr^ss who honored the camp with a visit) that no disappoin^ment could
possibly happen: I therefore hourly expected advice from the play master that he
had received a freth supply, in addition to the hundred and seventy-two
thousand dollars delivered him in August; and thought myself warranted to
assure the public creditors that in a sew days they should be satisfied. But
the delay has brought matters to such a crisis, as adr^its of no f^rther
uncertain expectation. I have therefore sent off this express, with orders to
make all possible dispatch. It is my most earnest request that he may be
r^^^rned with all possible expedition, unless the honorable Congress have
already forwarded what is so indispensibly necessary."

I have the honor to be, and. G. W.
Camp

LETTER From General Washington to the President of Congress.
New York, July 25, 1776. SIR
"DISAGREEABLE as it is to me and unpleasing as it may be to Congress to
multiply officers, I find myself under the unavoidable necessity of asking an
increase of my aides-de-camp. The augmentation of my command, -- the increase
of my correspondance, -- the orders to give, -- the instructions to draw, --
cut out more business than I am able to execute in time with propriety. The
business of so many different departments centering with me, and by me to be
handed on to Congress for their information, -- added to the intercourse I am
obliged to keep up with the adjacent States, -- and incidental occurrences, --
all of which require confidential and not hack writers to execute, -- renders
it impossible, in the present state of things, for my fam to discharge the
several duties expected of me, with that precision and dispatch that I could
with. What will it be then, when we come into a more active scene, and I am
calied upon from twenty difterent places perhaps at the same instant?

"Congress will do me the justice to believe (I hope) that it is not my
inclination or wish to run the contincut to any unnecessary expense; and those
who better know me will not suspect that show and parade can have any influence
on my mind in this instance. A conviction of the necessity of it, for the
regular discharge of the trust reposed in me, is the governing motive for the
application; and, as such, is submitted to congress by,

Sir, Your most obedient, etc. G. W."


Extract of a letter from General Washington, to the President of Congress.
New York, Sept. 2, 1776. SIR.
"AS my intelligence of late has been rather unfavorable, and would be received
with anxiety and concern; peculiarly happy should I osteem myself, were it in
my power at this time, to transmit such information to congress as would be
more pleasing and agreeable to their wishes: -- but, unfortunately for me, --
unfortunately for them, -- it is not.

"Our situation is truly distressing. The check our detachment sustained on the
twenty-seventh ultimo, has dispirited t^^ great a proportion of our troops, and
filled their minds with apprehension and despair. The militia, instead of
calling forth their utmost efforts to a brave and manly opposition in order to
repair our losses, are dismayed, untractable, and impatient to return. Great
numbers of them have gone off, -- in some instances, almost by whole regiments,
by half ones, and by companies at a time. This circumstance, of itself,
independent of others, when fronted by a well-appointed enemy superior in
number to our whole collected force, would be sufficiently disagreeable: but,
when their example has infected another part of the army, -- when their want of
discipline, and refusal of almost every kind of restraint and government, have
produced a like conduct but too common to the whole, and an entire disregard of
that order and subordination necessary to the well-doing of an army, and which
had been inculcated before, as well as the nature of our military establishment
would admit of, -- our condition is still more alarming: and with the deepest
concern I am obliged to confess my want of confidence in the generality of the
troops.

"All these circumstances fully confirm the opinion I ever entertained, and
which I more than once in my letters took the liberty of mentioning to
congress, that no dependence could be put in a militia, or other troops than
those enlisted and embodied for a longer period than our regulations heretofore
have prescribed. I am persuaded, and as fully convinced as I am of any one fact
that has happened, that our liberties must of necessity be greatly hazarded if
not entirely lost, if their defense is left to any but a permanent standing
army, -- I mean, one to exist during the war. Nor would the expense, incient to
the support of such a body of troops as would be competent to almost every
exigency, far exceed that which is daily incurred by calling in succor, and
new enlistments, which, when effected, are not attended with any good
consequences. Meo who have been free, and subject to no control, cannot been
free, and subject to no control, cannot be reduced to order in an instant: and
the privileges and exemptions they clain and will have, influence the conduct
of others; and the aid derived from them is nearly counterbalanced by the
disorder, irregularity and consusion they occasion.

"I cannot find that the bounty of ten dollars is likely to produce the desired
effect, When men can get double that sum to engage for a month or two in the
militia, and that militia frequently called out, it is hardly to be expected.
The addition of land might have a considerable insluence on a permanent
enlistment."


LETTER, From General Washington to the President of Congress.
Col. Morris's on the Heights of Haerlem, Sept. 24, 1776. SIR,
"FROM the hours allotted to sleep, I will borrow a few moments to convey my
thoughts on sundry important matters to congress. I shall offer them with the
sincerity which ought to characterise a man of candor, and with the freedom
which may be used in giving useful information, without incurring the
imputation of presumption.

"We are now, as it were, upon the eve of another dissolution of our army. The
remembrance of the difficulties which happened upon the occasion last year, the
consequences which might have followed the change if proper advantages had been
taken by the enemy, added to a knowledge of the present temper and situation of
the troops, reflect but a gloomy prospect upon the appearances of things now,
and fatisfy me beyond the possibility of d^ubt, that, unless some speedy and
effectual measures are adopted by congress, our cause will be lost.

"It is in vain to expect that any or more than a trifling part of this army
will again engage in the service on the encouragement offered by congress, When
men find that their townsmen and companions are receiving twenty, thirty, and
more doliars, for a few months' service (which is truly the case, it cannot be
expected, without using compulsion; and to force them into the ser^^^ce would
answer no valuable purpose. When men are irritated, and the passions inslamed,
they fly hastily and cheerfully to a^ms; but after the first emotions are over
* * *, a soldier, reasoned with upon the goodness of the cause he is engaged
in, and the inestimable rights he is contending for, hears you with patience,
and acknowledges the truth of your observations, but adds, that it is of no
more importance to him than others. The officer makes you the same reply, with
this further remark, that his pay will not support him, and he cannot ruin
himself and tamily to serve his country, when every member of the community is
equally interested and benefined by his labors. * * *

"It becomes evidently clear then, that, as this contest is not likely to be
the work of a day, -- as the war must be carried on systematically, -- and to
do it you must have good officers, -- there are, in my judgment, no other
possible means to obtain them but by establishing your army upon a permanent
footing, and giving your ossicers good pay. This will induce gentlemen and men
of character to engage: and, till the bulk of your officers are composed of
such persons as are actuated by principles of honor and a spirit of enterprise,
you have little to expect from them. They ought to have such allowances as will
enable them to live like and support the characters of gentlemen. * * *
Besides, something is due to the man who puts his life in [ your] hands,
hazards his health, and forsakes the sweets of domestic enjoyment. Why a
captain in the continental service thould receive no more than five th^ilings
currency per day for performing the same duties that an officer of the same
rank in the British service receives ten ^hillings ste^ling for, I never could
concerve, especially when the latter is provided with every nece^^a^y he
requires upon the best terms, and the former can scarce procure them at any
rate. There is nothing that gives a m^n consequence and renders him fit for
comm^nd, like a support that renders him independent of every body but the
state he serves.

"With respect to the men, nothing but a good bounty can obtain them upon a
permanent ^ft^blishment; and for no shorter time than the continuance of the
war, ought they to be engaged; as facts incontestibly prove that the difficulty
and cost of enlistments incr^^se with time. When the army was first (...) at
Cambridge, I am persuaded that the men might have been got, without a b^^unty,
for the war. After this they began to see that the contest was not likely to
end so speedily as was imagined, and to feel their consequence by remarking,
that, to get in the militia in the course of the last year, many towns were
induced to give them a bounty

"Foresecing the evils resuiting from this, and the destructive consequences
which unavoidably would follow short en^^^ments, I took the liberty in a long
letter (date not now recollected, as my letter book is not bear) to recommend
the e^listments for and during the war, assigning such reasons for it as
experience has since convinced me were well founded. At that time, twenty
dollars would, I am per^^^ded, have engaged the men for this term. But it will
not do to look book: and if the present opportunity is sipped, I am persuaded
that twelve months more will m^rease our difficulties fourfold. I shall
therefore take the freedom of giving it as my opinion, that a good bounty be
immediately oftered, anded by the proffer of at least a hunched or a hunadred
and fifty acres of land, and a suit of clo^^es and blanket to each
non-commissioned officer and seldier; as I have good authority for saying,
that, however high the men's pay may appear, it is barely sufficient, in the
present scarcity and dearness of all kinds of goods, to keep them in clothes,
much less aftord support to their families.

"If this oncoura^ement then is given to the men, and such pay allowed the
officers as will induce gentlement of character and liberal sentiments to
engage, and proper care and precation used in the nomination (having more
regard to the characters of persons than the number of men they can enlist,) we
thould in a little time have an army able to cope with any that can be opposed
to it, as there are excellent materials to form one out of. But while the only
merit an officer possosses is his ability to raise men, while those men
consider and treat him as an equal, and (in the character of an officer) regard
him no more than a broomssick, being mixed together as one common herd, no
order nor discipline can prevail; nor will the officer ever meet with that
respect which is essentially necessary to due subordination.

"To place any dependence upon militis, is assuredly resting upon a broken
staff, -- men just dragged from the tender scenes of domestic life, --
unaccustomed to the din of arms, -- totally unacquainted with every kind of
military skill; which being followed by a want of confidence in themselves,
when opposed to troops regularly trained, disciplined, and appointed, superior
in knowledge, and superior in arms, makes them timid and ready to fly from
their own shadows. Besides, the sudden change in their manner of living
(particularly in the lodging) brings on sickness (...) many, impatience in all,
and such an unconquerable desire of returning to their respective homes, that
it not only produces shameful and scandalous desertions among themselves, but
infuses the like spirit into others.

"Again; men accustomed to unbounded freedom and no control, cannot brook the
restraint which is indispensably necessary to the good order and government of
an army; without which, licentiousness and every kind of disorder triumphantly
reign. To bring men to a proper degree of subordination is not the work of a
day, a month, or even a year: and unhappily for us and the cause we are engaged
in, the little discipline I have been laboring to establish in the army under
my immediate command, is in a manner done away, by having such a mixture of
troops as have been called together within these few months.

"Relaxed and unfit as our rules and regulations of war are for the government
of an army, the militia (those properly so called; for of these we have two
sorts, the six-months-men, and those sent in as a temporary aid) do not think
themselves subject to them, and therefore take liberties which the soldier is
punished for. This creates jealousy: jealousy begets dissatisfactions; and
these by degrees ripen into mutiny, keeping the whole army in a confused and
disordered state, -- rendering the time of those who wish to see regularity and
good order prevail, more unhappy than words can describe. Besides this, such
repeated changes ta^^e place, that all arrangement is set at naught, and the
constant fluctuation of things deranges every plan as fast as adopted.

"These, sir, congress may be assured, are but a small part of the
inconveniences which might be enumerated, and attributed to militia: but there
is one that merits particular attention, and that is the expense. (...) Certai^
I am, that it would be cheaper to keep si^^ or an hundred thousand in constant
pay than to depend upon half the number, and supply the other half occasionally
by militia. The time the latter are in pay before and after they are in camp,
aslembling and marching, -- the waste of ammunition, the consumption of stores,
which, in spite of every resolution or requisition of congress, they must be
furnished with, or sent home, -- added to other incidental expenses consequent
upon their coming and conduct in camp, surpasses all idea and destroys every
kind of regularity and economy which you could establish among fixed and
settled troops, and will, in my opinion, prove (if the scheme is adhered to)
the ruin of our cause.

"The jealousies of a standing army, and the evils to be apprehended from one,
are ^^mote, and, in my judgment, situated and circumstanced as we are, not at
all to be dreaded: but the consequence of wanting one, according to my ideas
formed from the present view of things, is certain and inevitable ruin. For, if
I was called upon to declare upon oath, whether the militia have been most
serviceable or hurtful upon the whole, I should subscribe to the latter. I do
not mean by this, however, to arraign the conduct of congress: in so doing, I
should equally condemn my own measures, if I did not my judgment: but
experience, which is the best criterion to work by, so fully, clearly and
decifively reprobates the practice of trusting to militia, that no man who
regards order, regularity and economy, or who has any regard to his own honor,
character, or peace of mind, will risk them upon this issue.***

"An army formed of good officers, moves like clock-work: but there is no
situation on earth less enviable nor more distressing than that person's who is
at the head of troops who are regardless of order and discipline, and who are
unprovided with almost every necessary. In a word, the difficulties which have
forever surrounded me since I have been in the service, and kept my mind
constantly upon the stretch, -- the wounds which my feelings (as an officer)
have received by a thousand things which have happened contrary to my
expectation and wishes, *** -- added to a consciousness of my inability to
govern an army composed of such discordant parts, and under such a variety of
intricate and perplexing circumstances, -- induce not only a belief, but a
thorough conviction in my mind, that it will be impossible (unless there is a
thorought chan^ in our military system) for me to conduct ma^ters in such a
manner as to give satisfaction to the public, which is all the recompense I aim
at, or ever wished for.

"Before I conclude, I must apologize (...) the liberties taken in this letter,
and for the blots and scratchings therein, not having time to give it more
correctly. With tru^^ I can add, that, with every sentiment of (...) spect and
esteem, I am yours and the congress most obedient, etc.

G. W.


LETTER, From General Washington to the Commi^^^ of Congress, on a visit to the
Camp.
Camp at the Clove July 19, 1777 GENTLEMEN,
"THE little notice I had of your coming to the army, and the shortness of yo^
stay in camp, will more than probably occasion the omission of many matters
which (...) right ought to be laid before you; and the interruption which my
thoughts constan^^ meet by a variety of occurrences, must (...) logize for the
crude and indigested manner (...) which they are offered.

"The completion of the continental regiments is a matter of such infinite
importance, that I think no means should be left unessayed to accomplish it.
Draughting, where the powers of government are adequate, would be the speediest
and most effectual: but if it should be thought unadviseable to attempt this
mode, -- next to it I would recommend that the business of recruiting should be
taken entirely out of the hands of the officers of the army, and that each
State should appoint some person of known activity (one for instance, who has
been a good undersheriff) in each county or township, not only to recruit, but
to apprehend deserters: these persons to be liberally rewarded for each
recruit, and deserter whom they shall deliver, at stated periods and places, to
officers appointed to receive, discipline, and march them to the army, -- none
of these recruiters to have the smallest power to act out of their own
districts, but to be absolutely fixed to them.

"A mode of this kind would, in my humble opinion, be less burden some to the
public than the present, -- prevent the idle habits which recruiting officers
contract, not only injurious to themselves, but to others, -- the most
effectual means which can be devised or the recovery of deserters, -- the
surest way of keeping your regiments of equal strength, and of making the duty
more equal in the detail of it: in a word, many valuable advantages would
result from it, whilst I can suggest but one reason against it, -- and that,
(fully satisfied I am) when weighed in the scale of interest, will not operate,
-- I mean, the keeping so many officers in camp, who might be spared from the
duties of the field till the regiments are stronger than at present. The
sixteen additional regiments labor under such disadvantages in some states, as
to render the interposition of congress, in some shape or other, indispensably
necessary.

"With respect to food, considering we are in such an extensive and abundant
country, no army was ever worse supplied than ours, with many essential
articles of it. Our soldiers, the greatest part of last campaign and the whole
of this, have scarcely tasted any kind of vegetables, -- had but little salt;
-- and vinegar, which would have been a tolerable substitute for vegetables,
they have been in a great measure strangers to. Neither have they been provided
with proper drink: beer or cider seldom comes within the verge of the camp, and
rum in much too small quantities. Thus, to devouring large quantities of animal
food, untempered by vegetables or vinegar, or by any kind of drink but water,
-- and eating indifferent bread, (but for this last, a remedy is provided) --
are to be ascribed the many putrid diseases incident to the army, and the
lamentable mortality that attended us last campaign. If these evils can be
remedied, the expense and trouble ought not to be obstacles. Though some kinds
of vegetables are not to be had, others are, which, together with sour krout
and vinegar, might easily be had, if proper persons acquainted with the
business were employed therein.

"Soap is another article in great demand, the continental allowance is too
small: and, dear as every necessary of life is now got, a soldier's pay will
not enable him to purchase; by which means his consequent dirtiness adds not a
little to the diseases of the army.

"I have no reason to accuse the clothier-general of inattention to his
department; and therefore, as his supplies are incompetent to the wants of the
army. I am to suppose his resources are unequal. Ought not each state then to
be called upon to draw such supplies from the country manufactories, as can be
afforded? particularly of shoes, stockings, shirts and blankets, -- articles
indispensably necessary and of which scarce too many can be provided: -- in the
mean while every provision to be making, for clothing the troops uniformly and
warm in the winter. It is a maxim which needs no illustration, that nothing can
be of more importance in an army, than the clothing and feeding it well. On
these the health, comfort and spirits of the soldiers essentially depend; and
it is a melancholy fact, that the American army are miserably defective in both
these respects. The distress most of them are in for want of clothing is
painful to humanity, dispiriting to themselves, and discouraging to every
officer. It makes every pretention to the preservation of cleanliness
impossible, exposes them to a variety of disorders, and abates or destroys that
military pride without which nothing can be expected from any army,

"The consequence of giving rank indiscriminately is much to be dreaded: great
dissatisfaction has already arisen on account, of bestowing this on officers in
the civil departments of the army, on the inserior staff, waggon-master, etc.
who, by custom, propriety, and every other motive, are excluded from it in all
well-regulated armies. The too great liberality practiced in this respect will
destroy the pride of rank where it ought to exist, and will not only render it
cheap, but contemptible. It is the policy of all armies to make it valued and
respected, as a stimulus to emulation, and an incitement to bold and gallant
undertakings: it must be very unadviseable therefore, in our infant state of
war, to adopt novel customs to bring it it into discredit -- which must and
will be the consequence of making it too common, besides the disgust it creates
in others.

"An auditor of accounts, to be constantly with the army, is absolutely
requisite. It is absolutely impossible for me, crowded as I am with other
business, to examine and adjust the numerous complex accounts of the army with
that correctness the public have a right to expect, before warrants pass for
payment; and, without doing it, great impositions may follow. The provision for
making regimental pay-masters regulate all regimental accounts is altogether
incompetent to the end proposed from it: for these men being appointed
generally agreeable to the recommen lation of the field officers of the
regiments they belong to -- associating constantly with the officers of their
corpse, and in a great measure under their control -- cannot be considered as
sufficiently uninfluenced; nor are auditors at a distance from the army (...)
much use, as it would require a delay not admissable, to send accounts to them
to audit before they were passed and paid in consequence of warrants from the
commander in chief of the army.

"A good geographer, to survey the ro^^^ and take sketches of the country where
the army is to act, would be extremely useful, and might be attended with
exceeding valuable consequences. He might with propriety have the chief
direction of the guides, and must have a head to procure, govern, and pay them.
If such a person should be appoved of, I would beg leave to recommend Mr.
Robert Erskine, who is thoroughly skilled in this business, has already
assisted us in making maps of the country, and has (as I am informed) uniformly
supported the character of a fast friend to America.

"A small traveling press, to follow headquarters, would be productive of many
eminent advantages. I would enable us to give speedy and exact information of
any military transactions that take place, with proper comments upon them, and
thereby frustrate the pernicious tendency of fal^^^^od and misrepresentation,
which in my opinion, of whatever complexion they may be, are, in the main,
detrimental to our cause. If the people had a channel of intelligence, that,
from its usual authenticity, they could look up to with confidence, they might
often be preserved from that despondency which they are apt to fall into from
the exaggerated pictures our enemies and their emissaries among us commonly
draw of any misfortunes we meet with, -- and from that diffidence of truths
favorable to us, which they must naturally feel from the frequent deception
they are exposed to, by the extravagant colorings our friends often give to
our successes. It would also be very useful to dispatch business in camp, being
the most expeditious means of taking copies of orders or other matters that
require to be dispersed, and would save a good deal in returns and other papers
we are often obliged to get printed in Philadelphia. An ingenious man, to
accompany this press, and be employed wholly in writing for it, might render it
singularly beneficial.

"I am exceedingly embarrassed how to dispose of the French officers in
general, but more especially the artillery officers, who are come out under the
sanction of a compact. I can think of no other way than that of forming a
separate corpse of them, and draughting men from the whole line to compose that
corpse: but even this will be attended with many disagreable effects; among
others this is not the least, that officers will think themselves much injured
to have the men they have had the trouble of raising, taken from them and given
to others. There is something in this which is discouraging, and breaks the
spirit of a good officer, who prides himself in having a full and complete
corpse.

"A doubt has arisen, whether a person who belongs to any of the United States
of America, and who owed allegiance to any of the said states, -- that went to
the enemy sometime past, and since that time has been lurking about any of the
fortifications, or about any of the encampments of the armies of the United
States, plundering and driving off cattle to the enemy, recruiting for them, or
committing any other atrocious crime or who is appointed an officer in the
enemy's army, -- can be tried by a general court martial, under the resolution
of congress of the twenty-first of August, 1776, and punished as a spy.

I have the honor to be, etc. G. W.


Correspondence between GENERAL WASHINGTON and GENERAL GAGE, respecting the bad
treatment of prisoners,
Letter from his excellency General Washington to General Gage.
Head Quarters, Cambridge Aug. 11, 1775. SIR,
"I understand that the officers, engaged in the cause of liberty and their
country, who by the fourtune of war, have fallen into your hands, have been
thrown indiscriminately into a common jail, appropriated for felons -- that no
consideration has been had for those of the most respectable rank, when
languishing with wounds and sickness -- that some of them have been even
amputated in this unworthy situation.

"Let your opinion, sir, of the principle which actuates them, be what it may,
they suppose they act from the noblest of all principles, a love of freedom and
their country. But political opinions, I conceive, are foreign to this point,
The obligations arising from the right of humanity and claims of rank, are
universally binding and extensive, except in case of retaliation. These I
should have hoped, would have dictated a more tender treatment of those
individuals, whom chance or war had put in your power. Nor can I forbear
suggesting its fatal tendency to widen that unhappy breach, which you, and
those ministers under whom you act, have repeatedly declared you wish to
seeforever closed.

"My duty now makes it necessary to sp. prise you, that for the future, I shall
regular my conduct toward those gentlemen of your army, who are, or may be in
our possession, exactly by the rule you shall observe toward those of ours who
may be in your custody.

"If severity and hardship mark the line of your conduct (painful as it may be
to me) your prisoners will feel its effects; but I kindness and humanity are
shown to ours, I shall, with pleasure, consider those in our hands, only as
unfortunate, and they shall receive from me that treatment to which the
unfortunate are ever entitled.

"I beg to be favored with an answer as soon as possible, and am, sir,

Your very humble servant, G. WASHINGTON.

His excellency General GAGE.
ANSWER.
Boston, August 13, 1775. SIR,
"TO the glory of civilized nations, humanity and war have been compatible; and
compassion to the subdued is become almost a general system.

"Britons, ever pre-eminent in mercy; have outgone common examples, and
overlooked the criminal in the captive. Upon these principles, your prisoners,
whose lives, by the laws of the land, are destined to the cord, have hitherto
been treated with care and kindness, and more comfortably lodged, than the
king's troops, in the hospitals; indiscriminately, it is true, for I
acknowledge no rank that is not derived from the king.

"My intelligence from your army would justify severe recrimination, I
understand there are some of the king's faithful subjects, taken some time
since by the rebels, laboring like negro slaves, to gain their daily
subsistence, or reduced to the wretched alternative, to perish by famine, or
take arms against their king and country. Those, who have made the treatment of
the prisoners in my hands, or of your other friends in Boston, a pretense for
such measures, found barbarity upon salshood.

"I would willingly hope, sir, that the sentiments of liberality, which I have
always believed you to possess, will be exerted to correct their misdoings. Be
temperate in political disquisitions, give free operation to truth, and punish
those who deceive and misrepresent; and not only the effects, but the causes of
this unhappy conflict will soon be removed.

"Should those, under whose usurped authority you act, control such a
disposition, and dare to call severity retaliation, to God, who knows all
hearts, be the appeal for the dreadful consequences. I trust, that British
soldiers, asserting the rights of the state, the laws of the land, the being of
the constitution, will meet all events with becoming fortitude. They will court
victory with the spirit their cause inspires, and from the same motive will
sind the patience of martyrs under misfortune.

"Till I read your insinuations in regard to ministers, I conceived that I had
acted under the king; whose wishes it is true, as well as those of his
ministers, and of every honest man, have been to see this unhappy breach
forever closed; but unfortunately for both countries, those, who have long
since projected the present crisis, and influence the councils of America, have
views very distant from accommodation. I am, sir,

Your most obedient humble servant, THOMAS GAGE.

George Washington, Esquire.
REPLY.
Head Quarters, Cambridge. August 19, 1775. SIR.
"I addressed you on the 11th instant in terms which gave the fairest scope for
the exercise of that humanity and politeness, which were supposed to form a
part of your character. I remonstrated with you on the unworthy treatment snewn
to the officers and citizens of America, whom the fortune of war, chance, or a
mistaken confidence, had thrown into your hands.

"Whether British or American mercy, fortitude, and patience, are most
pre-eminent, -- whether our virtuous citizens, whom the hand of tyranny has
forced into arms, to defend their wives, heir children, and their property, or
the mercenary instruments of lawless domination, avarice and revenge, best
deserve the appellation of rebels, and the punishment of that cord, which your
affected clemency has forborne to inflict -- whether the authority under which I
act, is usurped, or sounded on the genuine principles of liberty, were
altogether foreign to the subject. I purposely avoided all political
disquisition, nor shall I now avail myself of those advantages, which the
sacred cause of my country, of liberty, and human nature, give me over you;
much less shall I stoop to retort any invective. But the intelligence, you say
you have received from our army, requires a reply. I have taken time, sir, to
make a strict enquiry, and find that it has not the least foundation in truth.
Not only your officers and soldiers have been treated with a tenderness due to
fellow-citizens and brethren, but even those execrable paracides, whose
councils and aid have deluged their country with blood, have been protected
from the fury of a justly enraged people. Far from compelling or permitting
their assistance, I am embarrassed with the numbers who crowd to our camp,
animated with the purest principles of virtue and love of their country. You
advise me to give free operation to truth; to punish misrepresentation and
falsehood. If experience stamps value upon counsel, yours must have a weight
which few can claim. You best can tell, how far the convulsion, which has
brought such ruin on both countries, and shaken the mighty empire of Britain to
its foundation, may be traced to these malignant causes.

"You affect, sir, to despise all rank, not derived from the same source with
your own. I cannot conceive one more honorable, than that which flows from the
uncorrupted choice of a brave and free people, the purest source and original
fountain of all power. -- Far from making it a plea for cruelty, a mind of true
magnanimity and enlarged ideas, would comprehend and respect it.

"What may have been the ministerial views which have precipitated the present
crisis, Lexington, Concord, and Charlestown, can best declare. May that God, to
whom you then appealed, judge between America and you. Under his providence,
those who influence the councils of America, and all the other inhabitants of
the united colonies, at the hazard of their lives, are determined to hand down
to posterity, those just and invaluable privileges which they received from
their ancestors.

"I shall now, sir, close my correspondence with you, perhaps for ever. If your
officers, our prisoners, receive a treatment from me, different from what I
wished to show them, they and you will remember the occasion of it.

I am, sir, Your very humble servant, G. WASHINGTON.

General Gage.
The preceding letters, will ever convey to the world, a sufficient testimony
of the attention and care, which, at all times, General Washington extended to
the soldiers under his command. The whole of his official letters, are
uniformly characterized with those tender and sympathetic pictures, which the
appearance of real want in others impress on a lively and feeling mind, and
which was the best calculated to rouse in the minds of congress, a sense of the
sufferings of those who were sacrificing their ease, and risking their lives to
establish the independence of their country -- observe the extreme modesty
which he assumes, when he requests for himself, even an cid de camp, which the
multiplicity of his cares rendered essential, contrast it with that freedom
with which he delivers his opinion on other subjects which regard the comfort
of his fellow soldiers only -- and with the manly language in which he
addresses General Gage, for his ill treatment to those whom the misfortunes of
war placed in his power -- Then we behold the citizen -- the General.

To those ungrateful few, who, stimulated by malice, have heretofore endeavored
to sully his honor and military reputation, and to impress upon the public
mind, the ungenerous idea, that he was instrumental to the shedding of innocent
bload, and infli^ing wanton cruelty upon the prisoners of the enemy, we
recommend a perusal of his letters to congress upon that subject, there they
will sind him combating the idea with the language of reason, and censuring the
inhumane practice. The (...) of the American war, have uniformly represented
the case of Major Andre, as an (...) inhuman murder, on the part of American.
On this occasion General Washington sac^^^^ed his own feelings, to the
"necessities of inexorable justice." The sentence was pronounced with much
hesitation, and at its execution he was seen to shed tears. -- Nor is it
necessary for us to remind them of his fortitude to withstand the threats, or
virtue to scorn the bribes, of the emmisaries of the British Cabinet, for one
uniform principle of prudence and wisdom seems to have regulated every
transaction of his life.

When General Washington received the joyful intelligence of peace, he
expressed himself to the army who had accompanied him through the dangers,
to^^s and difficulties of this glorious struggle in the following address,

ORDERS, Issued by General Washington, to the army.
Headquarters, April 18, 1783.
THE Commander in Chief orders the cessation of hostilities between the United
States of America and the King of Great Britain, to be publicly proclaimed
tomorrow at twelve o'clock, at the new building: and that the proclaimation
which will be communicated herewith be read tomorrow evening at the head of
every regiment and corpse of the army; after which the chaplains, with the
several brigades will render thanks to the Almighty God for all his mercies,
particularly for his overruling the wrath of man to his own glory, and causing
the rage of war to cease among the nations.

"Although the proclamation before alluded to extends only to the prohibition
of hostilities, and not to the annunciation of a general peace, yet it must
afford the most rational and sincere satisfaction to every benevolent mind, as
it puts a period to a long and doubtful contest, stops the effusion of human
blood, opens the prospect to a more splendid scene, and, like another morning
star, promises the approach of brighter day than has hitherto illuminated the
Westen hemisphere. On such a happy day, which is the harbinger of peace, a day
which completes the eighth year of the war, it would be ingratitude not to
rejoice; it would be insensibility not to participate in the general felicity.

"The Commander in chief, far from endeavoring to stifle the felings of joy in
his own bosom, offers his most cordial congratulations on the occasion to all
the ossicers of every denomination; to all the troops of the United States in
general; and in particular to those gallant and persevering men who had
resolved to defend the rights of their invaded country, so long as the war
should continue. For these are the man who ought to be considered as the pride
and boast of the American army; and who crowned with well earned laurels, may
soon withdraw from the field of glory to the more tranquil walks of civil life.
While the Commander in Chief recollects the almost, infinite variety of scenes
through which we have past, with a mixture of pleasure, astonishment, and
gratitude; while he contemplates the prespects before us with rapture, he
cannot help wishing that all the brave men, of whatever condition they may be,
who have shared the toils and dangers of effecting this glorious revolution; of
rescuing millions from the hand of oppression, and of laying the foundation of
a great empire, might be impressed with a proper idea of the dignified part
they have been called to act, under the smiles of Providence, on the stage of
human affairs; for happy, thrice happy! shall they be pronounced hereafter, who
have contributed any thing, who have performed the meanest office in erecting
this stupendous FABRIC OF FREEDOM AND EMPIRE on the broad basis of
independency; who have assisted in protecting the rights of human nature, and
established an asylum for the poor and oppressed of all nations and religions.
-- The glorious task for which we first flew to arms being accomplished -- the
liberties of our country being fully acknowledged and firmly secured by the
smiles of Heaven on the purity of our cause, and the honest exertions of a
feeble people, determined to be free, against a powerful nation, disposed to
oppress them; and the character of those who have persevered through every
extretnity of hardship, suffering, and danger, being immortalized by the
illustrious appellation of the patriot army; nothing now remains but for the
actors of this mighty scene to preserve a perfect unvarying consistency of
character through the very last act, to close the drama with applause; and to
retire from the military theater with the same approbation of angels and men
which have crowned all their former virtuous actions. For this purpose no
disorder or licentiousness must be tolerated. -- Every considerate and well
disposed soldier must remember it will be absolutely necessary to wait with
patience until peace shall be declared, or congress shall be enabled to take
proper measures for the security of the public stores, etc. As soon as these
arrangements shall be made, the General is confident, there will be no delay in
discharging, with every mark of distinction and honor, all the men in^isted for
the war, who will then have faithfully performed their engagements with the
public. The General has already interested himself in their behalf, and he
thinks he need not repeat the assurance of his diposition to be useful to them
on the present, and every other proper occasion. In the mean time, he is
determined that no military neglects or excesses shall go unpunished while he
retains the command of the army.

"The Adjutant-General will have such working parties detached, to assist in
making the preparations for a ge^^^al rejoicing, as the chief Engineer with the
army shall call for; and the Quarter-Master-General will, without delay,
procure such a number of discharges charges to be printed as will be sufficient
for all the men in^isted for the war -- he will please to apply to
headquarters for the form -- An extra ration of liquor to be issued to every
man tomorrow to drink, "Perpetual Peace and Happiness to the United States of
America."

The following resolutions were passed by Congress, on the 7th of August, 1783,
viz.

BY THE UNITED STATES, IN CONGRESS ASSEMBLED.
" Resolved unanimously, Ten States being present: "THAT an Equestrian Statue
of General Washington be erected at the place where the residence of Congress
shall be established: " Resolved, That the statue be of bronze, the General to
be represented in a Roman dress, holding a truncheon in his right hand, and his
head inci^^l^d in a laurel wreath: the statue to be supported by a marble
pedestal, on which are to be represented, in basso relievo, the following
principal events of the war, in which General Washington commanded in person,
viz. The Evacuation of Beston -- The Capture of the Hessians at Trenton -- The
Battle of Princeton -- The action of Monmouth -- and the surrender of York. On
the upper part of the front of the pedestal to be engraved as follows: "The
United States in Congress assembled, ordered this statue to be erected in the
year of our Lord, 1783, in honor of George Washington, the illustrious
commander in chief of the armies of the United States of America, during the
war, which vindicated and secured their liberty, sovereignty and independence."

" Resolved, That a statue conformable to the above plan, be executed by the
best (...) in Europe, under the superintendence of the Minister of the United
States at the Court of Versailles, and that money to defray the expense of the
same, be furnished from the Treasury of the United States.

" Resolved, That the Secretary of Congress transmit to the Minister of the
United States at the Court of Ver^ailles, the best resemblance of General
Washington that can be procured for the purpose of having the above statue
erected, together with the si^^est description of the events which are to be
the subject of the basso relievo."

On the 26th of August 1783, General Washington, at the request of congress,
proceeded to Princetown where the congress was then sitting, and being
introduced by two members, the President addressed him as follows, viz.

SIR,
"CONGRESS feel particular pleasure in seeing your Excellency, and in
congratulating you on the success of a war in which you have acted so
conspicuous a part: "It has been the singular happiness of the United States,
that during a war so long, so dangerous and so important, Providence has been
graciously pleased to preserve the life of a general, who has merited and
possessed the uninterrupted confidence and affection of his fellow-citizens. In
other nations many have performed services for which they have deserved and
received the thanks of the public; but to you, sir, peculiar praise is due,
your services have been essential in acquiring and establishing the freedom and
independence of your country; they deserve the grateful acknowledgements of a
free and independent nation: those acknowledgements congress have the
satisfaction of expressing to your Excellency.

"Hostilities have now ceased, but your country still needs your services; she
wishes to avail herself on your talents in forming the a^^^^gements which will
be necessary for her in the time of peace; for this reason your attendance at
Congress has been requested. A Committee is appointed to confer with your
Excellency and to receive your assistiance in preparing and adjusting plans
relative to those important objects."

To which his Excellency made the following REPLY.

Mr. President,
I AM too sensible of the honorable reception I have now experienced, not to
be penetrated with the deepest feelings of gratitude.

"Notwithstanding Congress appear to estimate the value of my life beyond any
services I have been able to render the United States, yet I must be permitted
to consider the wisdom and unanimity of our national councils, the firmness of
our citizens, and the patience and bravery of our troops, which have produced
so happy a termination of the war, as the most conspicuous effect of the Divine
interposition and the surest presage of our future happiness.

"Highly gratified by the favorable sentiments which Congress are pleased to
express of my past conduct, and amply rewarded by the confidence and affection
of my fellow-citizens, citizens, I cannot hesitate to contribute my best
endeavors toward the establishment of the national security in whatever
manner the sovereign power may think proper to direct, until the ratification
of the defiritive treaty of peace, or the final evacuation of our country by
the British forces; after either of which events, I shall ask permission to
retire to the peacesul shade of private life.

"Perhaps, Sir, no occasion may offer more suitable than the present to express
my humble thanks to God, and my grateful acknowledgments to my country, for the
great and uniform support I have received in every vicissitude of fortune, and
for the many distinguished honors which Congress have been pleased to confer
upon me in the course of the war."

After the final conclusion of the peace in 1783, a proclamation was issued by
Congress, October 18th, directing the discharge of the army -- whereupon
General Washington, before he resigned his important charge, delivered the
following elegant and pathetic farewell address, to the officers and soldiers,
under his command, viz.

General Washington's farewell orders to the armies of the United States.
Rocky-Hill, near Princeton, November 2, 1783.
The United States in congress assembled, after giving the most honorable
testimony to the federal armies, and presenting them with the thanks of their
country, for their long, eminent, and faithful services -- having thought
proper, by their proclamation, bearing date the 18th of October last, to
discharge such part of the troops as were engaged for the war, and to permit
the officers on furlough to retire from service, from and after tomorrow,
which proclamation having been communicated in the public papers for the
information and government of all concerned; it only remains for the commander
in chief to address himself once more, and that for the last time, to the
armies of the United States (however widely dispersed the individuals who
composed them may be) and to bid them an affectionate -- a long farewell.

But before the commander in chief takes his final leave of those he holds most
dear, he wishes to indulge himself a few moments in calling to mind a slight
review of the past -- he will then take the liberty of exploring, with his
military friends, their future prospects, of advising the general line of
conduct which, in his opinion, ought to be pursued; and he will conclude the
address, by expressing the obligations he feels himself under for the spirited
and able assistance he has experienced from thern, in the performance of an
arduous office.

A contemplation of the complete attainment, at a period earlier than could
have been expected, of the object for which we contended, against so formidable
a power, cannot but inspire us with astonishment and gratitude. The
difadvantageous circumstances on our part, under which the war was undertaken,
can never be forgotten. The singular interpositions of providence in our feeble
condition, were such as could scarcely escape the attention of the most
unobserving; while the unparalled perseverance of the armies of the United
States, through almost every posfible suffering and discouragement, for the
space of eight long years, was little short of a standing miracle.

It is not the meaning, nor within the compass of this address, to detail the
hardships peculiarly incident to our service, or to describe the distresses,
which, in several insyances, have resulted from the extremes of hunger and
nakedness, combined with the rigors of an inclement season; nor is it necessary
to dwell on the dark side of our past affairs. Every American officer and
soldier must now console himself for any unpleasant circumstances which may
have occurred by the recollection of the uncommon scenes in which he has been
called to act no inglorious part, and the astonishing events of which he has
been a witness; events which have seldom, if ever before taken place on the
stage of human action, nor can they probably ever happen again. For who has
before seen a disciplined army formed at once from such raw materials? Who that
was not a witness, could imagine, that the most violent local prejudices would
cease so soon, and that men who came from the different parts of the continent,
strongly disposed, by the habits of education, to despise and quarrel with each
other, would instantly become but one patriotic band of brothers? or who that
was not on the spot, can trace the steps, by which such a wondcrful revolution
has been effected, and such a glorious period put to all our warlike toils?

It is universally acknowledged tha^ the enlarged prospects of happiness,
opened by the consirmation of our independence and soverei^^^ty, (...) exceed
the power of deseription: and shall not the brave men who have contributed so
essentially to these inestimable acquisitions, retiring victorious from the
field of war to the sield of agriculture, participate in all the blessings
which have been obtained? In such a republic, who will exclude them from the
rights of citizens, and the fruits of their labors? In such a country, so
happily circumstanced, the pursuits of commerce and the cultivation of the soil
will unsold to industry the certain road to competence. To those hardy
soldiers, who are actuaredby the spirit of adventure, the sisheries will afford
ample and profitable employment; and the extensive and fertile regions of the
west will yield a most happy asylum to those, who, fond of domestic enjoyment,
are seeking for personal independence. Nor is it pos^^^^ to conceive that any
one of the United States will prefor a national bankruptcy, and a dissolution
of the union, to a complance with the requisitions of congress and the payment
of its just debts -- so that the ossicers and soldiers may expect confiderable
assistance, in recommencing their civil occupations, from the sums due to them
from the public, which must and will most inevitably be paid.

In order to effect this desirable purpose, and to remove the prejudices which
may have taken possession of the minds of any of the good people of the states,
it is earnestly recommended to all the troops, that, with strong attachment to
the union, they should carry with them into (...) seciety the most conciliating
dirpositions; and that they should prove themselves not less virtuous and
usesul as citizens, than they have been persevering and victorious as soldiers.
What though there should be some envious individuals, who are unwilling to pay
the debt the public has contracted, or to yield the tribute due to merit, yet
let such unworthy treatment produce no invective, or any instance of
intemperate conduct -- let in be remembered, that the unbiassed voice of the
free citizens of the United S^^tes has promised the just reward, and given the
merited applause; let it be known and remembered, that the reputation of the
federal armies is established beyond the reach of malevolence, and let a
consciousness of their achievements and fame still incite the men who composed
them, to honorable actions, under the persuasion, that the private virtues of
economy, prudence, and industry, will not be less amiable in civil life, than
the more splendid qualities of valor, perseverance and enterprise, were in the
field. Every one may rest assured that much, very much of the future happiness
of the officers and men, will depend upon the wise and manly conduct which
shall be adopted by them, when they are mingled with the great body of the
community. And although the general has so frequently given it as his opinion,
in the most public and explic manner, that unless the principles of the federal
government were properly supported, and the powers of the union increased, the
honor, dignity, and justice of the nation would be lost for ever: yet he
cannot help repeating on this occafion so interesting a sentiment, and leaving
it as his last injunction to every ossicer and soldier, who may view the
subject in the same serious point of light, to add his best endeavors, to
those of his worthy fellow citizens, toward effecting these great and valuable
purposes, on which our very existence as a nation so materially depends.

The commander in chief conceives little is now wanting to enable the solddier
to change his military character into that of the citizen, but that steady and
decent tenor of behavour, which has generally distinguished, not only the army
under his immediate command, but the different detachments and separate armies,
through the course of the war. From their good sense and prudence he
anticipates the happiest consequences -- and while he congratulates them on the
glorious occasion which renders their services in the field no longer
n^^essary, he wishes to express the strong obligations he feels himself under.
for the assistance he has received from every class, ^^din e^^ery instance. He
presents his thanks in the most serious and affectionate manner to the general
officers, as well for their counsel on many interesting occasions, as for their
ardour in promoting the success of the plans he had adopted; to the commandants
of regiments and corpse, and to the other officers, for their great zeal and
attention in carrying his orders promptly into execution; to the staff, for
their alacrity and exactness in performing the duties of their several
departments; and to the non-commissioned offices and private soldiers, for
their extraordinary patience in suffering as well as their invincible fortitude
in action to the various branches of the army, the general takes this last and
solemn opportunity of professing his inviolable attachment and friendship. He
wishes more than bare professions were in his power, that he was really able to
be useful to them all in future life. He flatters himself, however, they will
do him the justice to believe, that whatever could with propriety be attempted
by him, has been done. And being now to conclude these his last public orders,
to take his ultimate leave, in a short time of the military character -- and to
bid a final adieu to the armies he has so long had the honor to command -- he
can only again offer, in their behalf, his recommendations to their grateful
country, and his prayers to the God of armies. May ample justice be done them
here, and may the choicest of heaven's favors, both here and hereafter, attend
those, who under the divine auspices have secured innumerable blessings for
others! With these wishes, and this benediction, the commander in chief is
about to retire from service. The curtain of separation will soon be drawn --
and the military scene to him will be closed for ever.

E. Hand, adj. genesis

To the preceding address the officers of the part of the army remaining on the
banks of the Hudson, returned a suitable answer; they thank^d the commander in
chief for the communication of his affectionate assurances of his inviolable
^^^^^nment and friendship; they assared his Excellency that although as yet his
endeavors to ensure to the armies the just reward of their services, had
failed of success, they were convinced that it had arisen from causes which it
was not in his power to control, and thould the contemplated measure never be
attained, that their patriotism should still remain unthaken: they were happy
in the opportunity of congratulating his Excellency on the certain conclusion
of the Desinitive Treaty of Peace, assuring him that, relieved at last from
long suspense, their warm^st with was to return to the bosom of their country,
to resume the character of citizens; and that it should be their highest
ambition to become useful ones. To his Excellency, they were convinced that
this great event must be peculiarly pleasing; because, while at the head of the
armies, urged by patriotic virtues and magnanimity, he persevered, under the
pressure of every possible difficulty and discouragement, in the pursuit of the
great objects of the war -- the freedom and safety of his country; -- his heart
panted for the tranquil enjoyments of peace. They concluded with sincere
prayers to God, long to bestow happiness to their commander, and that when he
quits the stage of human life, he may receive from the UNERRING JUDGE, the
rewards of valor exerted to save the oppressed, of patriotism and
disinterested virtue.

On the 25th of November, 1783, New York was evacuated by the British army;
same day the American troops marched in and took possession of the city, after
which General Washington and the governor made their public entry. The
arrangement and whole conduct of the march, with the tranquillity which
succeeded it through the day and night, was admirable! and the grateful
citizens, feeling the most affectionate impressions from the elegant and
efficient disposition which prevailed through the whole event, on their
returning from exile, addressed his Excellency the commander in-chief in behalf
of themselves and their suffering brethren, looking up to him with unusual joy,
they welcomed him to the city, long torn from the^ by the hand of oppression,
but which by his wisdom, under the guidance of Providence, had again been
rendered the seat of pence and freedom, they assured him that they should
preserve to the last, their gratitude for his services and veneration for his
character, and required him "to accept of their sincere and earnest wi^hes,
that he may long enjoy that calm domestic felicity, which he had so generously
sacrificed; that the cries of injured liberty may never more interrupt his
repose; and that his happiness may be equal to his virtues."

Previous to General Washington's leaving New York, on the 6th of December, the
principal officers of the army then in the city, assembled at Frances' ^avern,
to take a final leave of their illustrious and much loved commander. The
passions of human nature were never more tenderly agitated than in this
interesting scene. His Excellency having silled a glass of wine, thus addressed
his brave fellow soldiers: -- "With a heart full of love and gra^^^de I now
take leave of you: I most d^^^tly wish that your latter days may be prosperous
and happy, as your former ones have been glorious and bonourable."

These words produced extreme sensibility on both sides, they were answered by
warm expressions, and servent wishes, from the gentlemen of the army, whose
truly pathetic seelings it is not in our power to convey to the reader. Soon
after this scene was closed the Governor, the council and citizens of the first
distinction waited on the General, and in terms the most affectionate, took
their leave -- The corpse of Light Insantry was drawn up in a line, and the
Commander in Chief passed through them, on his way to White Hall where he
embarked in his barge for Powles Hook from whence he proceeded to Philadelphia,
where he made a short s^ay. Here he delivered to the Comptroller of the public
Treasury an account of the expenditure of all the public money which he had
received duling the war, by which it appeared, that the who'e sum which had
gone through his hands only amounted to fourteen thousand four hundred and
seventy-nine pounds, eighteen shillings and nine-pence sterling, about
sixty-four thousand three hundred and fifty dollars, nearly one handred and
fifty dollars per week.

From Philadelphia he proceeded to Annapolis where the Congress was then
sitting, and having obtained leave, he terminated his military career, and
resigued his commission on the 23d of December, upon this occasion he delivered
the following short and pathetic address, viz.

General Washington's Address to Congress, on the resignation of bis Commission.
Mr. President,
"THE great events, on which my resignation depended, having at length taken
place, I have now the honor of offering my sincere congratulations to congress,
and of presenting myself before them to surrender into their hands the trust
committed to me, and to claim the indulgence of retiring from the service of my
country.

"Happy in the confirmation of our independence and sovereignty, and pleased
with the opportunity afforded the United States of becoming a respectable
nation -- I resign, with satisfaction, the appointment I accepted with
dissidence, a diffidence in my abilities to accomplice so arduous a task,
which, however, was superceded by a confidence in the rectitude of our cause,
the support of the supreme power of the union, and the patronage of Heaven.

"The successful termination of the war has verified the most sanguine
expectations: and my gratitude for the in^erpontion of Providence, and the
assistance I have received from my countrymen, increases with every review of
the momentous contest.

"While I repeat my obligations to the army in general, I should do injustice
to my own fcelings not to acknowledge, in this place, the peculiar services and
distinguished merits of the gentlemen who have been attached to my person
during the war. It was impossible the choice of confidential officers to
compose my family, should be more for^^^^ (...) permit me, sir, to recommend in
particular those who have continued (...) the service to the present (...) as
worthy the favorable notice and patronage of congress.

"I consider it as an indispensable duty to close this last solemn act of my
official life, by commending the interests of our dearest country to the
protection of Almighty God, and those who have the superintendence of them to
his holy keeping.

"Having now finished the work assigned me, I retire from the great theater of
action; and bidding an affectionate farewell to this august body, under whose
orders I have so long acted, I here offer my commission, and take my leave of
all the employments of public life.

G. WASHINGTON.
City of Annapolis, Dec. 23, 1783.
Answer of Congress,
SIR,
"THE United States in congress assembled, receive, with emotions too affecting
for utterance, the solemn resignation of the authorities under which you have
led their troops with success, through a perilous and doubtful war.

"Called upon by your country to defend its invaded rights, you accepted the
sacred charge before it had sor^ned alliances, and whilst it was without funds
or a government to support you.

"You have conducted the great military contest with wisdom and fortitude,
invariably regarding the rights of the civil power, through all disasters and
changes; you have, by the love and confidence of your fellow-citizens, enabled
them to display their martial genius, and transmit their fame to posterity; you
have persevered, till these United States, aided by a magnanimous king and
nation, have been enabled under a just Providence, to close the war in freedom,
safety and independence; on which happy event, we sincerely join you in
congratulations.

"Having defended the standard of liberty in this new world -- having taught a
lesson useful to those who inflict, and to those who feel oppression -- you
retire from the great theater of action, with the blessings of your
fellow-citizens; but the glory of your virtues will not terminate with your
military command: it will continue to animate remotest ages. We feel, with you,
our obligations to the army in general, and will particularly charge ourselves
with the interests of those confidential officers, who have attenden your
person to this affecting moment.

"We join you in commending the interests of our dearest country to the
protection of Almighty God, beseeching him to dispose the hearts and minds of
its citizens to improve the opportunity afforded them of becoming a happy and
respectable nation; and for you, we address to him our carnest prayers, that a
life so beloved may be fostered with all his care; that your days may be happy
as they have been illustrions; and that he will finally give you that reward
which this world cannot give."

With these becoming sentiments, General Wathington retired from the toils of
war (...) enjoy in private the rural pleasures of Mount Vernon, carrying with
him the thanks and blessings of a grateful people, emulating the example of the
virtuous Roman General, Cincinnatus
who, victorious, left the tented field, covered with honor, and withdrew from
public life.

No person, who had not the advantage of being picsent when he received the
intelligence of peace, and who did not accompany him to his domestic
retirement, can describe the relief which that joyful event brought to his
laboring mind, or the supreme satisfaction with which he withdrew to private
life. From his triumphal entry into New York, upon the evacuation of that city
by the British army, to his arrival at Mount Vernon, after the resignation of
his commission to Congress, festive crowds impeded his passage through all the
populous towns, the devotion of a whole people pursued him with pravers to
Heaven for blessings on his head, while their gratitude sought the most
expressive language of manisesting itself to him, as their cournon father and
benefactor. When he became a private citizen he had the unusual felicity to
find that his native state was among the most zealous in doing justice to his
merits; and that stronger demonstrations of affecti^nate esteem (it possible)
were given by the citizens of his neighborhood, than by any other description
of men on the continent As he always refused to accept of any pecuniary
compensation for his public services, or provision for the augmented expenses
which he must have shcurred in consequence of his public employment, no salary
was ever annexed by congress to his important command, and he only drew weekly
for the expenses of his public table and other necessary demands, although
proposals have been made in the most delicate manner, particularly by the
states of Virginia and Pennsylvania. His conduct in this particular is noble
and magnanimous, and exhibits to the world an undeniable evidence of self
disinterestedness, of the purity of his his motives and integrity of his heart.
His answer to the Governor of Virginia declining the acceptance of a present
from that state, is, so characteristic of his whole public conduct, that we are
induced to give it in his own words, and we are convinced it will prove
acceptable to his admirers.

LETTER, From his excellency General Washington, to the Governor of Virginia,
declining the acceptance of fifty shares in the companies for opening the
navigation of James and Patomac rivers, which had been vested in him by act of
the legislature of that commonwealth, as a small acknowledgement of his merits
and services.
"Your excellency having been pleased to transmit me a copy of the act
appropriating to my benefit, certain shares in the companies for opening the
navigation of James and Patomac rivers. I take the liberty of returning to the
assembly, through your hands, the profound and grateful acknowledgements,
inspired by so signal a mark of their benesicent intenrions toward me. I beg
you, sir, to ass-ure them, that I am filled on this occasion, with every
sentiment which can flow from a heart, warm with love for my country --
sensible to every token of its approbation and affection, and solicitous to
testify, in every instance, a respectful submission to its wishes. With these
sentiments in my bosom, I need not dwell on the anxiety I feel, in being
obliged in this instance to decline a favor, which is rendered no less
flattering by the manner in which it is conveyed, than it is affectionate in
itself. In explaining this obligation. I pass over a comparison of my
endeavors in the public service, with the many honorable testimonies of
approbation, which have already so far over-rated and over-paid them --
reciting one consideration only, which supercedes the necessity of recurring to
every other. When I was first called to the station with which I was honored
during the late conslict for our liberties; to the diffidence which I had so
many reasons to feel in accepting it, I thought it my duty to join A FIRM
RESOLUTION TO SHUT MY HAND AGAINST EVERY PECUNIARY RECOMPENSE. To this
resolution I have inviolably adhered; and from this resolution (if I had the
inclination,) I do not consider myself at liberty to depart. Whilst I repeat,
therefore, my fervent acknowledgments to the legislature for their very kind
sentiments and intentions in my favor, and at the same time beg them to be
persuaded that a remembrance of this singular proof of their goodness toward
me, will never cease to cherish returns of the warmest affection and gratitude;
I must pray that their act, so far as it has for its object my personal
emolument, may not have its effect. But if it should please the general
astembly to permit me to turn the destination of the fund vested in me, from my
private emolument to objects of a public nature, it will be my study, in
selecting these, to prove the sincerity of my gratitude, by preferring such as
may appear most subservient to the enlightened and patriotic views of the
legislature. I am, etc.

GEORGE WASHINGTON.


Upon this request, the legislature of Virginia, repealed so much of the act
referred to as related to the vesting the abovementioned shares in General
Washington and heirs, and enacted that the shares and profits accruing
therefrom, should stand appropriated to such objects of a public nature as his
Excellency should direct and appoint. Sometime afterward, General Washington
applied these shares of the canal company to the erection and establishment of
two seminaries of learning in Virginia, which were accomplished under his
immediate direction.

General Washington having retired from all public employment, now assumed the
character of a private gentleman, he employed himself in improving his farms
and plantation, and in cultivating the arts of peace. -- But in this retreat of
happiness and rural simplicity he was not sussered long to remain, it was too
soon for the father of America to leave his insant care, his well tried virtues
were generally and justly known to his fellowcitizens, and their confidence in
his judgment, experience and disinterested patriotism, was universal even to
enthusiasm. Four years had not expired from the period at which he resigned his
military command, when the voice of his country again called him to its service
-- in the year 1787, he was elected a delegate to the federal convention which
met at Philadelphia to form the new constitution, and was chosen president
thereof. Whatever difference of sentiment there might have been amongst the
citizens with regard to the principle, structure, or adoption of the new
constitution, there appeared but one sentiment as to the man who should sit at
the helm of its administration. General Washington, after the adoption of the
federal constitution, was, on the 6th of April, 1789, unanimously elected
President of the United States -- whereupon the citizens testified with
becoming joy, their confidence and approbation at his appointment to the office
of chief magistrate, and innumerable addresses reiterated his praise from every
part of the union.

His triumphal entry into Philadelphia on his way to New York, the seat of
government, to assume the duties of his important office, merit a minute
description, Early on the morning of the 20th of April, his Excellency Thomas
Mifflin, Esquire. governor of the state, the Hon. Richard Peter's, Esquire. speaker of
the legislature of the state, the old city troop of horse, and another troop
from the city commanded by captain Bingham, waited the arrival of their beloved
Washington, at the line between the states of Pennsylvania and Delaware, to
which place they had proceeded on the evening before.

After paying him the tribute of military honor due to his rank and exalted
character, by proper salutes and otherwise, they escorted him into Chester,
where they breakfasted, and rested a couple of hours.

This great and worthy man, finding he could not posiibly elude the parade
which necessarily must attend manifestations of joy and affection, when
displayed by a grateful people, to their patriot benefactor, ordered his
carriages into the rear of the whole line, and mounted an elegant horse,
accompanied by the venerable patriot Charles Thomson, Esquire. and his former
aid-de-camp, the celebrated Colonel Humphries; both of whom were also on
horseback.

On their way to the city, they were joined by detachments from the Chester and
Philadelphia troops of horse, and also by a number of respectable citizens, at
whose head was the worthy citizen and soldier, his Excellency Arthur St. Clair,
Esquire. governor of the Western Territory. Thus they proceeded to Gray's ferry, on
Schuylkill; observing the strictest order and regularity during the march. But
here such a scene presented itself, that even the pencil of a Raphael could not
delineate.

The bridge was highly decorated with laurel and other evergreens, by Mr. Gray,
the ingenious Mr. Peale, and others, and in such a style as to display uncommon
taste in these gentlemen. At each end there were erected magnificent arches,
composed of lanrel, emblematical of the ancient triumphal arches, used by the
Romans, and on each side of the bridge, a laurel shrubbery, which seemed to
challenge even nature herself, for simplicity, ease and elegance. And as our
beloved WASHINGTON passed the bridge, a lad, beautifully ornamented with sprigs
of laurel, assisted by certain machinery, let drop, above the hero's head,
unperceived by him, a civic crown of laurel. There was also a very elegant
display of variegated flags on each side of the bridge, as well as other
places, which alternately caught the eye, and filled the spectator's soul with
admiration and delight.

But who can describe the heartfelt congratulations of more than twenty
thousand free citizens, who lined every fence, field, and avenue between the
bridge and city? The aged sire, the venerable matron, the blooming virgin, and
the ruddy youth, were all emulous in their plaudits -- nay the lisping infant
did not withhold its innocent smile of praise and approbation.

In short, all classes and descriptions of citizens discovered (and they felt
what they discovered) the most undisguised attachment and unbounded zeal for
their dear chief, and I may add, under God, the Savior of their country. Not
all the pomp of majesty, not even imperial dignity itself, surrounded with its
usual splendour and magnificence, could equal this interesting scene.

On approaching near the city, our illustrious chief was highly gratified with
a further military display of intantry, and artillery, who joined in the
procession, and thousands of freemon, whose hearts burned with patriotic fire,
also fell into the ranks, almost every square they marched, until the column
swelled beyond credibility itself, and having conducted the man of their hearts
to the city tavern, he was introduced to a very grand and plentiful banquet,
which was prepared for him by the citizens. At dinner, thirteen patriotic
toasts were drank. The pleasures and testivity of the day being over, they were
succeeded by a handsome display of fireworks in the evening; this may give a
faint idea of this glorious procession, and of the universal joy which inspired
every heart upon this in teresting, this important occasion.

Having arrived at the seat of government he delivered the following inaugural
address to both houses of Congress, viz.

Inaugural Address of the President of the United States to both bouses of
Congress.
Gentlemen,
"Among the vicissitudes incident to life, no event could have filled me with
greater anxieties, than that, of which the notification was transmitted by your
order, and received on the fourteenth day of the present month: on the one
hand, I was summoned by my country, whose voice I can never hear but with
veneration and love, from a retreat which I had chosen with the fondest
predeliction, and, in my flattering hopes, with an immutable decision, as the
asylum of my declining years: a retreat which was rendered every day more
necessary, as well as more dear to me, by the addition of habit to inclination,
and of frequent interruptions in health, to the gradual waste committed on it
by time. On the other hand, the magnitude and difficulty of the trust, to which
the voice of my country called me, being sufficient to awaken in the wisest and
most experienced of her citizens, a distrustful scrutiny into his
qualifications, could not but overwhelm with despondence, one, who, inheriting
inferior endowments from nature, and unpractised in the duties of civil
administration, ought to be peculiarly conscious of his own desiciencies. In
this conflict of emotions, all I dare aver, is, that it has been my faithful
study to collect my duty from a just appreciation of every circumstance, by
which it might be affected. All I dare hope, is, that if, in executing this
task, I have been too much swayed by a grateful remembrance of former
instances, or by an affectionate sensibility to this transcendent proof of the
confidence of my fellow-citizens -- and have thence too little consulted my
incapacity as well as disinclination for the weighty and untried cares before
me -- my error will be palliated by the motives which mislead me, and its
consequences be judged by my country, with some share of the partiality in
which they originated.

"Such being the impressions under which I have, in obedience to the public
summons, repaired to the present station -- it would be peculiarly improper to
omit in the first official act, my fervent supplications to that Almighty Being
who rules over the universe, who precides in the councils of nations, -- and
whose providential aids can supply every human defect, that his benediction may
consecrate to the liberties and happiness of the people of the United States, a
government instituted by themselves for these essential purposes: and may
enable every instrument, employed in its administration, to execute with
success the functions allotted to his charge. In tendering this homage to the
great Author of every public and private good, I assure myself that it
expresses your sentiments not less than my own, nor those of my fellow-citizens
at large, less than either. No people can be bound to acknowledge and adore the
invisible hand, which conducts the affairs of men, more than the people of the
United States. Every step, by which they have advanced to the character of an
independent nation, seems to have been distinguished by some tokens of
providential agency. And in the important revolution just accomplished in the
system of their United government, the tranquil deliberations and voluntary
consent of so many distinct communities, from which the event has resulted,
cannot be compared with the means by which most governments have been
established, without some return of pious gratitude, along with an humble
anticipation of the future blessings which the past seem to presage. These
reflections, arising out of the present crisis, have forced themselves too
strongly on my mind to be suppressed. You will join with me, I trust, in
thinking, that there are none under the influence of which, the proceedings of
a new and free government can more auspiciously commence.

"By the article establishing the executive department, it is made the duty of
the president "to recommend to your consideration such measures as he shall
judge necessary and expedient." The circumstances under which I now meet you,
will acquit me from entering into that subject, farther than to refer to the
great constitutional charter under which you are assembled; and which, in
defining your powers, designates the objects to which your attention is to be
given. It will be more consistent with those circumstances, and far more
congenial with the feelings which actuate me, to substitute in place of a
recommendation of particular measures, the tribute that is due to the talents,
the rectitude, and the patriotism which adorn the characters selected to devise
and to adopt them. In these honorable qualifications. I behold the surest
pledges, that as, on one side, no local prejudices or attachments -- no
separate views -- nor party animosities, will misdirect the comprehensive and
equal eye which ought to watch over this great assemblage of communities and
interests; so, on another, that the foundations of our national policy will be
laid in the pure and immutable principles of private morality; and the
pre-eminence of free government, be exemplified by all the attributes which can
win the affections of its citizens, and command the respect of the world I
dwell on this prospect with every satisfaction which an ardent love for my
country can inspire: since there is no truth more thoroughly established, than
that there exists in the economy and course of nature, an indissoluble union
between virtue and happiness, between duty and advantage, between the genuine
maxims of an honest and magnanimous policy, and the solid rewards of public
prosperity and felicity: since we ought to be no less persuaded, that the
propitious smiles of heaven can never be expected on a nation that disregards
the eternal rules of order and right, which heaven itself has ordained: and
since the preservation of the sacred fire of liberty, and the destiny of the
republican model of government, are justly considered as deeply, perhaps as
finally staked, on the experiment entrusted to the hands of the American people.

"Besides the ordinary objects submitted to your care, it will remain with your
judgment to decide, how far an exercise of the occasional power delegated by
the fifth article of the constitution is rendered expedient at the present
juncture, by the nature of objections which have been urged against the system,
or by the degree of inquietude which has given birth to them. Instead of
undertaking particular recommendations on this subject, in which I could be
guided by no lights derived from official opportunities, I shall again give way
to my entire confiderce in your discernment and pursuit of the public good: for
I assure myself that whilst you carefully avoid every alteration which might
endanger the benefits of an united and effective government, or which ought to
await the future lessons of experience; a reverence for the characteristic
rights of freemen, and a regard for the public harmony, will sufficiently
influence your deliberations on the question, how far the former can be more
impregnably fortified, or the latter be safely and advantageously promoted.

"To the preceding observations, I have one to add, which will be most properly
addressed to the house of representatives. It concerns myself, and therefore
will be as brief as possible. when I was first honored with a call into the
service of my country, then on the eve of an arduous struggle for in liberties,
the light in which I contemplated my duty, required that I should renounce
every pecuniary comperisation. From this resolution I have in no instance
departed. And being still under the impressions which produced it, I must
decline, as inapplicable to myself, any share in the personal emoluments, which
may be indispensably included in a permanent provision for the executive
department; and must accordingly pray that the pecuniary estimates for the
station in which I am placed, may, during my continuance in it, be limited to
such actual expenditures as the public good may be thought to require.

Having thus imparted to you my sentiments, as they have been awakened by the
occasion which brings us together, I shall take my present leave; but not
without resorting once more to the benign Parent of the human race, in humble
supplication, that since he has been pleased to favor the American people, with
opportunities for deliberating in perfect ^anquility, and dispositions for
deciding with unparalled unanimity on a form of government, for the security of
their union, and the advancement of their happiness; so his divine blessing may
be equally conspicuous in the enlarged views, the temperate consultations, and
the wise measures on which the success of this government must depend.

G. WASHINGTON.

The first session of congress, under the new constitution, continued their
sittings from the 4th of March until the 29th of September, their attention was
chiefly directed toward the establishment of various regulations for the
restoration of the public credit of the United States, and other objects of
political economy. During the period of the session, the President resided at
New York, sanctioning the proceedings of the legislature, and otherwise
organizing the federal government. Shortly after the riting of congress, he
made (...) tour to the states of Connecticut, Massachusetts, setts, and N.
Hampshire, attended by Messrs. Lear and Jackson, his secretaries. In every part
of the country through which he passed, the citizens embraced the opportunity
of personally testifying their esteem and respect of the man of their choice,
in whose character, whatever is great and good -- whatever dignifies and adorns
human nature, are so happily united. All that a grateful people could pay, was
paid, whenever he approached a town or village, the roads were lined with
citizens to hail him welcome, -- the military escorted him from place to place.
Particularly to relate all the grateful testimonials which were paid him during
this visit, is impossible from their number. If our limits would permit, a
description of the manner in which he was received at Boston would be
particularly interesting; nor can we specify the numerous congratulatory
addresses which were presented him. But no particular circumstance gave him
more pleasure, during his whole tour, than the plain and hearty manner in which
Mr. Northey, the chairman of the selectmen at Salem received him. This
gentleman is of the society of Friends, and when the President was presented to
the selectmen, Mr. Northey being covered, took him by the hand and said,
"Friend Washington, we are glad to see thee, and in behalf of the inhabitants,
bid thee a hearty welcome to Salem."

On his arrival at Newburyport, the following incident occurred, a poor old
soldier, naned Cotton, who was with him in the memorable battle on the Ohio,
when Braddock was defeated, requested, and was admitted into the room where the
President was, -- on the soldier's asking " how Major Washington lid?" the
President immediately recollected his person, and rising from his chair, took
him by the hand, and tenderly enquired into the scenes of his life, and present
circumstances, "I thank God," answered the soldier, "that I have an opportunity
of seeing my old commander once more, I have seen him in adverfity, and now
seeing him in glory, I can go home and die contented." The next morning, he
came again to take leave of the President, who gave him a guinea, which he
accepted he said, "merely as a token in remembrance of his commander," and
which he wore pendent on his bosom, declaring that nothing earthly should
separate it from him.

While General Washington was President of the United States, the following
circumstance, which does honor to his humanity occurred. One Reuben Rouzy, of
Virginia, owed him about a thousand pounds; one of the President's agents
brought a suit for the money, judgment was obtained, and execution issued
against the body of the defendant, who was taken to goal. He had a considerable
landed property, but this kind of property, cannot be sold in Virginia for
debts, unless at the discretion of the person. He had a large family, and
preserred lying in goal to selling his land, for the sake of his children. --
Some of his acquaintance hinted to him, that probably General Washington did
not know any thing of the proceeding, and it might be well to send him a
petition, with a statement of the circumstances. He did so, and the very next
post from Philadelphia, after his petition arrived, brought him a releasement,
with a severe reprimand on the agent for acting in such a cruel manner without
consent. Poor Rouzy was, in consequence, restored to his family and happiness,
who never laid down their heads at night, without offering their prayers to
Heaven for our much beloved WASHINGTON.

On the 4th of January 1790, congress held their second session at New York.
The President opened it with a speech, he congratulated them on the savorable
prospects which the public affairs then assumed; the accestion of the state of
North Carolina to the Union, the rising credit and respectability of the
country, and the concord, peace and plenty with which they were blessed: he
directed their attention toward the making provision for the common defense,
assuring them that "to be prepared for war, is one of the most effectual means
of preseving peace, and that a free people ought not only to be armed but
disciplined;" he recommended the protection of the Western and Southern
frontiers against the depredations of the hostile Indians; the establishment of
intercourse with other nations; the framing of an uniform law for the
naturalization of foreigners; the importance of uniformity in the currency,
weights, and measures throughout the Union; the advancement of agriculture,
commerce, and manufactures; the encouragement of exertions of skill, and
genius, and to facilitate the intercourse between the distant parts of the
country, by a due attention to the post-ostice and post-roads. He particularly
recommended the promotion of science and literature, as the surest basis of
public happiness, and best means of securing a free constitution, by teaching
the people to know and to value their rights, to discern and provide against
innovations of them, to distinguish between oppression and the necessary
exercise of lawful authority, to descriminate the spirit of liberty from that
of licentiousness, cherrishing the first, avoiding the last, and uniting a
speedy but temperate vigilance against encroachments, with an inviolable
respect to the laws. He informed them that he had directed the papers and
estimates to be laid before them, which were necessary to convey to them, that
information of the state of the Union, which it was his duty to afford. He
concluded by assuring them, that "He should derive great satisfaction, from a
cooperation with them, in the pleasing, though arduous task, of ins^ring to
their fellow-citizens the blessings which they have a right to expect from a
free, efficient government."

This session continued their sittings until the 12th of August following; in
that month the President negotiated a treaty of Peace and friendship between
the United States and the Creek nation of Indians; the ceremony took place at
New York, on the 30th of September. The same year General Harmar, with 320
United States troops and 1, 133 militia, gave battle to the Miami Indians, by
whom he was defeated with the loss of 183 men killed, and 31 wounded; about 100
or upwards of the Indians were killed. The Miami village containing about 100
Log houses or wigwams, with 20,000 bushels of corn, was destroyed.

The third session of Congress met on the 6th of December 1790, and rose on the
3d of March following; their deliberations were chiefly directed toward the
regulation of commerce, further improvement of the judicial system, and making
provision for the appointment of consuls in foreign countries. The state of
Kentucky was admitted into the Union as a distinct state, and a loan was
negociated with the states of Holland.

The Indian war continued on the frontier of the states. During the summer of
1791, General Scott surprised the Wabash towns, he killed about thirty Indians,
took fisty prisoners and brought with him two hundred horses loaded with peltry
and other articles of plunder, with the loss of three men only. The attention
of the President during the period of this Congress, was chiefly directed
toward the adoption of measures for the protection of the froutiers, and
establishment of commerce.

On the 24th of October 1791, the second Congress commenced their first
session, the President as usual opened the session by a speech to both houses,
he began by remarking the abundance of the preceding harvest, the progressive
state of agriculture, manufactures, commerce and navigation, and the general
and happy effects which had been produced by the revival of public and private
confidence, to which the laws of the United States had so eminently
contributed. He mentioned the plan laid down for conciliating the friendship of
the Indians; the basis of which was a strict adherence to the dictates of
justice and humanity. The act for laying a duty on distilled spirits, had been,
he said, attended with some difficulty, from the want of experience in the
Federal government, to make the proper arrangements, and, in some parts of the
union, there had been a misconception of its provisions; but he entertained no
doubt that the discontent produced from it would be removed by a proper
explanation of the law. The President next observed, that, agreeable to several
acts on that subject, a district of ten miles square, for the permanent seat of
the government of the United States, had been fixed upon, and announced by
proclamation; that the district comprehended lands on both sides of the
Patowmac, and the towns of Alexandria and Georgetown; that a city had
accordingly been laid out, and that there was every reason to expect a due
progress in the buildings. He also informed the two houses that a census of the
inhabitants of the United States, had been almost completed, and afforded the
pleasing assurance that the present population bordered upon four millions of
persons, that a further loan of two millions and an half of florins had been
completed in Holland upon terms similar to the last, and that another loan for
six millions of florins had been set on foot. He concluded by recommending to
their particular attention, the supporting of the militia on an effective plan;
the administration of the post office, the extention and improvement of the
post roads, the necessity for a public mint, an uniformity of weights and
measures, and a provision for the sale of the vacant lands of the United States.

This session continued their deliberations, until the 8th of May, 1792, when
they adjourned till the first Monday of November following. During their
session and adjournment, there was no remarkable or important event, a series
of massacres, were, as formerly committed on the frontiers, the hopes expressed
by the President, of being able to accommodate the disputes with the Indians,
did not prove successful. On the 4th of November, 1791, the United States army
under the command of General St. Clair was attacked by surprise, within fifteen
miles of the Miami village; the contest lasted for four hours, when the Indians
became victorious, the retreat of the Americans was accomplished with the loss
of forty-six officers, six hundred privates, eight pieces of artillery and
their whole baggage. In this battle, it is said, that twelve hundred Canadians
fought under the disguise of Indians. The attention of the Executive during
this period, was also engaged in devising modes to reconcile the citizens in
some districts of the union to the law, enacted for the purpose of collecting a
certain duty o^ spirits, distilled within the United States, in ^ome of the
provinces, particularly the weste^n parts of Pennsylvania, where a regular and
formidable opposition began to manifest itself, in consequence of which, the
special interposition of the President was deemed advisable. He issued a
proclamation, recommending a compliance with the laws, and warning the citizens
against all unlawful proceedings and combinations, having a tendency to
obstruct the same.

The second Congress met again in November 1792. The President opened the
session with a speech, the greatest part of which respected the unfortunate
endeavors to terminate the Indian hostilities. He informed Congress of the
opposition which had been manifested to the excise law, and recommended a
revision of the judiciary system. He further observed, that three loans had
been negociated for the use of the United States, one at Antwerp, and two at
Amsterdam, each for three millions of florins, on very reasonable terms, which
afforded a pleasing evidence of the increasing credit of the new government. On
the 2d of March 1793, this session adjourned.

Heretofore the prosperity of the United States met with little or no
interruption, except from the hostility of the Indians. The attention of the
executive was chiefly directed to the establishment of those measures which the
organization of the infant republic rendered necessary. The extension of
commerce and the disputes of the European powers, rendered it necessary for the
United States to send and receive, ministers and agents, for the better
regulation of affairs.

This necessary measure created troubles and perplexities hitherto unknown to
the executive of the United States. On the 8th of April, 1793 Citizen Genet
arrived at Charleston, as minister plenipotentiary from the executive of France
to the President of the United States. On the 2^d of the same month the
President issued a proclamation enjoining the citizens of the United States to
a strict neutrality, in the contest between the maritime powers, and
threatening prosecution to all who should infringe the same. The public
approbation of this wise measure, for the preservation of the public
tranquillity, was manifested in numerous addresses to the President, thanking
him In warm terms for his attention to the interest of the citizens -- many
however were offended at the measure, as they conceived that it implied a
deficiency of respect and gratitude to the republic of France, to whom the
United States were highly indebted for their independence. Genet arrived in
Philadelphia, the seat of government, on the 17th of May. The conduct of this
minister is perhaps unexampled in diplomatic history. It was not until the
publication of the proclamation of the President enjoining neutrality, that the
government first heard of his arrival, and even then, they were only informed
through the medium of the newspapers, about a fortnight after his arrival;
instead of presenting his credentials to the President, he began to assume a
conduct, imprudent and unbecoming, he undertook to authorize the fitting out of
armed vessels, he enlisted citizens and others, and gave commissions to cruise
and commit hostilities against the vessels of England and other nations at war
with France, but who were at the same time at peace with the United States.
These vessels had actually taken prizes, brought them into American ports,
where the consuls of France held courts of admiralty, tried, condemned, and
authorized their sale as legal prizes. These proceedings, in opposition to the
peace of the United States, were instantly complained of by Mr. Hammond the
British Minister -- Thus were the seeds of future controversy planted. The
government of the United States interfered, and in some cases overruled the
proceedings of both the British and French as illegal, remonstrances were
exhibited to the President from both sides, which created a series of
diplomatic correspondence. A new source of discontent on the part of the French
now arose, Genet demanded with some abruptness, money from the Treasury of the
United States in part payment of their debt to France with which the American
government found it inconvenient to comply. This state of diplomatic hostility
could not be expected to hold out long without coming to a crisis. Accordingly
on the 16th of August the President ordered Mr. Jesterson the secretary of
state to address a letter to Mr. Morris the American Ambassador in France,
soliciting the republic to recall their Minister. In the mean time Citizen
Duplaine, Vice consul for the republic of France, in the port of Boston, having
committed sundry encroachments on the laws of the United States, the President
in consequence thereof, suspended his powers.

The term for which General Washington was elected President having expired, he
was again re-elected to the same office. On the 2d of December, 1793, the third
congress commenced their first session. The President, in his speech to both
houses expressed a respectful sense of the confidence that he enjoyed, in being
again called, by the suffrage of his fellow-citizens, to the office of chief
magistrate. He recited the measures which he had adopted to avoid a rupture
with any of the powers at war, and to insure to the citizens of the United
States, the rights of neutrality. He further recommended to congress, the
necessity of placing the country in a state of defense; that while the United
States fulfilled their duties to the rest of the world, they may likewise exact
the fulfillment of the like duties toward them. He informed them of the means
which had been pursued for conciliating the dispositions of the Indians, and
recommended to congress to make provision for the establishment of commerce
with the Indian nations, as the best means of securing their interest, and
rendering their tranquillity permanent; he concluded by recommending a repeal of
the tax on the transportation of public prints, as they contained the best
means of informing the minds, and securing the affections of their
constituents; -- he afterward, by a special message, informed the house of
representatives, "that although the government of the French nation, had
generally manifested a friendly disposition to the U. States, yet the person
unfortunately appointed their minister plenipotentiary, had breathed nothing of
the friendly disposition of the nation which sent him; his proceedings had
uniformly tended "to involve us in war abroad, and discord and anarchy at
home." He hoped that the French government would not long suffer the United
States to remain exposed to the action of a person, who had so little respected
the mutual dispositions of the two countries. Soon after this period, this
minister was recalled, his conduct having been unequivocally disapproved of.
About this period the commerce of the United States, began to suffer greatly,
from the depredations of the British, under pretense of their being loaded with
French property -- it also suffered from the piracy of privateers, who, for the
most part disclaiming justice altogether, seized both vessels and cargo, and
disposed of the same for their own use; a considerable number of American
vessels were likewise captured in the Western Ocean by the Algerine corsairs.
These subjects were assumed by congress, and many modes were proposed for the
purpose of putting a stop to the unwarrantable excesses. A bill was passed, to
provide a naval armament against the Algerines. On the 25th of March, a motion
was made in the house of representatives, assented to by the senate, and signed
by the President, laying an embargo for 30 days on all vessels bound to foreign
ports, this embargo was afterward continued until the 25th of May. The
President was empowered to raise an additional corpse of artillery-men for the
purpose of garrisoning the fortifications for the defense of the seacoasts; he
was also authorized to call on the executives of the different states, to take
effectual measures for organizing eighty thousand effective militia.

On the 19th of May, intelligence was received from the territory N. W. of the
river Ohio, stating the hardships which the citizens of that territory
sustained from the hostile disposition of the Cherobee Indians; the massacre of
two hundred people, and the loss of two thousand horses, formed a part of the
list of their disasters. On the 20th of May the President, by a message,
informed the house of representatives, that there had been some danger of
hostilities against the territories of Spain, in the neighborhood of the
United States, that the governor of Kentucky had indicated, that he would make
no exertions to prevent the expulsion of the Spaniards from the banks of the
Mississippi, as he had found them a perfidious and worthless people, constantly
exciting the Indians to murder the settlers in that quarter.

During this session of congress, many important laws were enacted. The act
assigning to the Marquis de la Fayette, the sum of 24,424 dollars, for his
services during the war, being the pay of a major general; and the act
forbidding American citizens or foreigners residing in the United States, under
severe penalties, from being concerned in the slave trade, does great honor to
the legislature. On the 9th of June, 1794 this session adjourned.

In 1794, during the recess of congress, the attention of the President of the
United States, was called to suppress an insurrection, which began to assume a
very formidable aspect. It was confined to the western parts of the state of
Pennsylvania. The outlines of it are as follows, viz. During the year 1790, the
congress of the United States found it necessary "t lay and collect excises."
This mode of taxation, discordant to the genius of the citizens, in many parts
of the Union, met with considerable opposition, which however, was gradually
banished by reason and patriotism, excepting in the four western counties of
Pennsylvania, where a prejudice still remained, and produced symtoms of not and
violence. The disaffection was at first vented in general complaints -- certain
associations were formed to prevent the operation of the laws, and the excise
officers received some marks of contempt and rudeness. These associations held
public meetings, and published their resolutions. -- Besides the excise law,
they censured several other acts of the federal government, as the exorbitant
salaries of office, the institution of a national bank, the interest of the
public debt etc.

On the 6th of September, 1791, the collector of the revenue for that district,
was seized by a party, armed and in disguise; they tarred and feathered him,
cut off his hair and committed other acts of violence, legal process was
therefore issued against the offenders; but the insurgents prevented the
marshall from serving them, they fired upon him, arrested, and for sometime
detained him as a ^ prisoner, a number of similar outrages were committed. The
President, the ever watchful guardian of the constitution, beheld with sorrow,
these excesses, he sought and weighed what was best to be done in this
momentous crisis, he beheld the judiciary stripped of its capacity to enforce
the laws, and crimes, which reached to the very existence of social order,
perpetrated without control; the friends of government insulted, and that
constitution violated, which he had made a sacred vow to protect; -- he beheld
with abhorrence the idea, of "arraying citizen against citizen," until every
lenient measure should be exhausted. He issued proclamations exhorting the
rioters to desist from such disorderly proceedings, he recommended obedience to
the laws, he appointed commissioners to repair to the scene of insurrection,
authorized them to confer with the insurgents, to state to them his sensations,
to assure them that it was his earnest with to avoid a resort to coercion, he
even offered them pardon, on (...) it (...) receiving satisfactory assurance of
obedience to the laws.

These lenient measures did not produce (...) good effects that should have
been expe^^^^. The President therefore deemed it prudent (...) resort to
military force. -- Fiste^^ thousand militia were put in motion, their number
intimidated the insurgents (...) thus the insurrection was quelled without the
effusion of blood some of the ringleaders were apprehended and brought to trial
-- one of them was found guilty of high treason and condemned to suffer, but
was pardoned by the President. -- Indeed, the same goodness of ^ispontion (...)
ted the President from the beginning to (...) termination of this licentious
invasion of the laws, notwithstanding there are in the United States, certain
discontented, invidious individuals, who wish to stigmatize-every act of the
Executive with opprobium.

In November, 1794, the third congre^ held their second session, at
Philadelphia. -- The President began his speech with a history of the
opposition which had been manifested to the constitution and laws of the United
States and of the means which he had pursued to suppress it, the alacrity which
the militia, and others who volunteered their service displayed, exhibited, he
said, "to the highest advantage, the value of republican ^^ernment; to behold
the most and ^east ^^lthy of our citizens, standing in the same (...) as
private soldiers, pre-eminently (...) by being the army of the constitution;
undeterred by a march of three hundred miles, over rugged mountains, by (...)
approach of an inclement season, or by any other discouragement." He
recommended to congress to re-imburse the officers of government and other
citizens, who had (...) losses, for their generous exertions for up holding the
constitution and laws, "the amount," he said, "would not be great; and on
^^ture emergencies, the government would be imply repaid by the influence of an
example, (...) ^e who incurs a loss in its defense shall and a recompense in
its liberality." The intelligence from the army of General Wayne, acting
against the hostile Indians N. W. of the Ohio, he said, afforded a happy
presage to the military operations, that they had damped the ardour and
obstinacy of the savages. -- Yet, although the power of the United States to
punish them, could not be questioned, that he was not unwilling to cement a
lasting peace, upon terms of equity and good neighborhood, -- he recommended
the adoption of ^ definitive plan for the redemption of the public debt, and in
subsequent communications tions, he transmitted to them, certain papers
relative to the intercourse of the United States with foreign nations, -- they
announced to congress and to the world, his unremitting exertions to cultivate
peace with all the world, to observe treaties with good faith, to check
deviations from the line of impartiality, and to explain and correct what was
misapprehended o^ appeared injurious.

Ever since the formal ratification of the treaties of peace between the United
States and Great Britain, numerous causes of complaint has existed on the part
of both comtries respecting its fulfillment. The history of the nature,
progress, and final termination of these disputes, will form a very interesting
part in the history of the political and diplomatic character of President
Washington, -- but the bounds which we have assigned to the present sketch,
prevents us from entering fully upon the subject: the ground of complaint on
both sides, was disputed in 1792, in a correspondence, between Mr. Jesserson,
secretary of state, and Mr. Hammond, the envoy of Britain, in their letters,
the reciproc^l complaints are stated with cando^, p^rl^icuity, and
completeness: to support their respective at ^^^^nts, they bring forward on
each side, a large body of illustrations and authorities, which are highly
interesting. This correspondence was published by congress in 1794. The
arguments of Mr. Jesserson appeared to have contained unanswerable weight, as
no reply or explanation were ever made to them, although requested by him --
Affairs remained in this state of suspense until June 1793, when the British,
in consequence of their hostilities with France, issued orders to the
commanders of their vessels, to stop all neutral vessels carrying provisions to
any port in that republic; ships attempting to enter any French port, blockaded
by the English, were to be condemned, both vessel and cargo, whatever it may
consist of: the order contained a limited exception in favor of Denmark and
Sweden, but in the execution of it, the rights of America were entirely
disregarded. This matter produced a diplomatic discussion between the ministers
of the two countries, both at London and Philadelphia: their correspondence
produced a mutual with on both sides to establish a treaty of commerce, and a
friendly adjustment of all complaints. The President of the United States,
accordingly nominated Mr. John Jay, chief judge of the United States, as an
Envoy extraordinary to the court of London. After a short passage, Mr. Jay
arrived in London, where he met with a polite reception, and negociated the
Treaty of Peac^, Commerce and Navigation, which at present exists between the
two countries.

The Treaty arrived in Philadelphia in March 1795, it was shortly after
submit^ed to the Senate for their consent, they retu^ned it to the President on
the 24th of June, and advised the condi^ional ratification thereof. About the
30th of the same month it was submitted to the public through the medium of the
newspapers. It now became the general topic of conversation, it was placed
(...) all the different points of view of which it was susceptible, and in many
of which i^ could not admit.

It met with great opposition, addresses and resolutions were received from all
the con^ mercial towns of the union; some advising in ratification, others
disapproving of it in tote. This opposition was viewed by the President in a
very serious light, he reconsidered the subject and weighed all the arguments
which had been advanced against it; his own opinion was not in favor of it,
but he did not wish to differ from the Senate, and thought that it would be
better to ratify it in the manner they had advised; to this measure he was also
induced, as Mr. Jay had asserted "that no better terms could possibly be
obtained; and that obstinacy in rejecting the ^^^lement, might be serious." The
President therefore assented and ratifications (...) exchanged, with the
suspension of the most ^^i^ctionable article.

This transaction is perhaps the most unfor^^ate that occurred to his ^^^^^ency
during ^e whole period of (...) Presidency. Those apposed to the t^^a^y did not
sail to load him with reproach, no stone was left unturned that could impress
upon the minds of the citizens goss falsehoods -- such as, that the treaty
^^^tained no reciprocal advantages, that the ^^nefits were all on the side of
Britain, that their rights were not only neg^c^^^, but ab^^utely sold, that it
was made (...) the design of oppressing the French, and contrary to ^^ry
principle of gratitude and ^^und po^^cy. The ^^st session of the fourth
Congress (...) Philadelphia, in December, 1795. The ^^sident in a speech
^^^^med them that ne^^c^ations were on foor for the adju^tment of ^^irs with
the hostile Indians, and also with the Dey and Regency of Algiers, that he had
received assurances of a spee^^y and fati^factory conclution of the
negociations with Spain, that with the advice of the Se^a^e he had ratified a
treaty with Britain, upon a condition which excepts part of one article. He
recommended a review of the military establishment and to make provision for
garrisoning and securing the western posts which were to be delivered up by the
British. He informed them that a state of the finance and appropriations
necessary for the ensuing year would be laid before them, as also statements
relative to the mint, progress in providing materials for building frigates,
state of fortifications, and military magazines, etc. He concluded with a
recommendation of temperate discussion and mutual forbearance in subjects where
a difference of opinion may be apt to arise.

A warm and lengthy discussion took place in the House of Representatives
relative to the British treaty. Bo^^ ^^^les of the question were ably
supported, few subjects had eve^ come before the House, upon which so many
members delivered their sentiments. On the 24th of March, 1796, they came to a
resolution, requesting the President to lay before, the House, a copy of the
instructions to Mr. Jay, together with his correspondence a^^ other documents
relative to that treaty. To which request, the President gave a positive
refusal, he assured the H^n^e, that he had always endeavored to harmonize with
the other branches of the government, and that he had never withheld any
information which the constitution enjoined him to give. But that the nature of
foreign negociations required caution and secrecy, that all the papers relative
thereto had been laid before the Senate, that the Constitution empowered him to
make treaties with the consent of that body, but that it would establish a
dangerous precedent to admit a right in the House of Representatives to demand
and have all papers respecting negociations with foreign powers, after the
treaties were finally concluded and ratified, and the assent of that house not
necessary to their validity.

We d^em it unnecessary to enter into a history of the differences with the
Republic of France, as they are not yet terminated, and are so recent as to be
generally remembered, suffice it to observe, that during the whole period in
which General Washington sat at the helm of public affairs, his whole conduct
has uni^ormly exhibited moderation and prudence, magnanimity and firmness,
wisdom and virtue.

The period of General Washington's second election to the office of Chief
Magistrate being nearly expired, he put on a determined resolution to retire
from the public, and enjoy his declining vears in private life. Upon this
momentous occasion -- resigning a charge which he at first accepted through his
enthusiasm for the principles of rational liberty, he was impressed with the
purest wishes for the suture happiness of that republic, which he had devoted
the early, the mature, and a portion of his declining years to establish. And
as a testimony of pure regard, he published the following masterly address to
his fellow citizens.

ADDRESS. Of his Excellency GEORGE WASHINGTON, Esquire. President of the United
States, announcing his intention of retiring from all public employment.
TO THE PEOPLE OF THE UNITED STATES. Friends and Fellow-Citizens,
THE period of a new election of a citizen to administer the executive
government of the United States, being not far distant, and the time actually
arrived, when your thoughts must be employed in designating the person, who is
to be clothed with that important trust, it appears to me proper, esp^^^^^ly as
it may conduce to a more d^stinct^ ex^ression of the public voice, (...) I
should now apprise you of the ^eso^ution I have former, to decline being
considered among the number of those out of whom a choice is to be ma^^.

I beg you, at the same time to do me the justice to be assured, that this
resolution has not been taken without a strict regard to all the considerations
apperta^^ing to the relation, which binds a dutiful citizen to his country; and
that, in withdrawing the tender of service which silence in my situation might
imply, I am influenced by no diminution of zeal for your future interest; no
deficiency of grateful respect for your past kindness; but am supported by a
full conviction that the step is compatible with both.

The acceptance of, and continuan^^ hitherto in the office to which your
suffrages have twice called me, have been an uniform sacrifice of inclinati^^
to the opi^^^^ of (...) and to a deference for (...) to be your (...) I
con^^^^try ^oped, that it wo^l^ have (...) ea^^^^^ in my power, consistently
with motives, which I (...) not at^^^berty (...) di^^egard, to return to that
retire^^ (...) from which I had been rel^ctantly draw^. The strength of my
^^clination to this, previous to the l^st election, had even led to the
p^^paration of an address to declare it to you; but mature reflection on the
the^ perplexed and critical posture of our a^^ fairs with foreign nations, and
the unanimous advice of persons enti^led to my confidence, impelled me to
abandon the idea.

I rejoice, that the sta^e of your concerns, external as well as internal, no
longer renders the pursuit of inclination in^^mpatible with the sentiment of
duty (...) or propriety; and am persuaded, whatever pa^^^ality may be retained
for my services, that in the present circumstances of our country, you will not
disapprove my determination to retire.

The impressions with which I first undertook the arduous trust, were explained
on the proper occasion. In the discharge of this trust, I will only say, that I
have with good intentions, contributed toward the organization and
administration of the government, the best exertions of which a very fallible
judgment was capable. Not unconscious, in the outset, of the inferiority of my
qualifications, experience in my own eyes, perhaps still more in the eyes of
others, has strengthened the motives to diffidence of myself; and every day the
increasing weight of years admonishes me more and more, that the shade of
retirement is as necessary to me, as it will be welcome. Satisfied that if any
circumstance have given peculiar value to my services, they were temporary, I
have the consolation to believe, that while choice and prudence invite me to
quit the political scene, patriotism does not forbid it.

In looking forward to the moment, which is intended to terminate the career of
my public life, my feelings do not permit me to suspend the deep acknowledgment
of that debt of gratitude which I owe to my beloved country, for the many
honors it has conferred upon me; still more for the steadfast considence with
which is has supported (...); and for the opportunies I have thence enjoyed of
^^^nifesting my inviolable attachment, by services faithful and persevering,
though in usefulness unequal to my zeal. If benefits have refulted to our country
from these services, let it always be remembered to your praise, and as an
instructive example in our annals, that under circumstances in which the
passions, agitated in every ^^^ection, were liable to mistead, amidst
appearances sometimes dubious, -- vicissitudes of fortune often discouraging,
-- in situations in which not unfrequently want of success has countenanced the
spirit of critici^^^-^^e constancy of your support (...) the essential prop of
the efforts, and a (...) of the plans by which they (...) ^^^ected.

-- Profoundly penetrated (...) this idea, if shall carry (...) with me to
(...) grave, as a strong incitement to unceasing vows, That heaven may continue
to you the ^hoi^^st t^^ens of its benificence -- That your union and brotherly
affection may ^^e perpetu^l -- that the free constitution, which is the work of
your hands, may be sacredly maintained; that its admi^^istration in every
department may be ^^amped with wisdom and virtue -- That, in fine, the
happiness, of the people of these states, under the auspices of liberty, may be
made complete, by so careful a preservation, and so prudent a use of mis
blessing, as will acquire to them the glory of recommending it to applause, the
affection and adoption of every nation which is yet a stranger to it.

Here, perhaps, I ought to stop. But a solicitude for your welfare, which
cannot end but with my life, and the approhension of danger, natural to that
solicitude, urge me on an occasion li^^ the present, to offer to your so^e^^
contemplations, and to recommend to your frequent review, some ^entiments,
which are the result of much reflection of no inconsiderable observation, and
which appear to ^^e all important to (...) permanency of your felicity as a
people. These will be offered to you with the more freedom, as you can only
see^^ them the dismterested warnings o^ parting friend, who can possibily (...)
no personal motive to bias his cou^^^. Nor can I forget, as an encouragente
(...) to it, your indulgent reception of m^ sentiments on a former and not
dissimila^^ occasion.

Interwoven as is the love of liberty with every ligament of your hearts, no
recommendation of mine is necessary to fortify or coufirm the attachment.

The unity of government which con^^utes you one people, (...) now ^ar to you.
It is justly so; for it is ^^^ain pillar in the edisice of your real
^lependence, the support of (...) tran^^lity at home, your peace abroad; (...)
your safety, of your prosperity; of (...) very liberty which you so highly
(...). But as it is easy to foresee, that (...) different causes and from
different ^^rters, much (...) will be taken, any artifices employed to weaken
in (...) minds the conviction of this truth; ^is is the point in your political
for^^^ against which the batteries of in^^al, and external enemies will be
(...) constantly and actively (though (...) covertly and insidiously) directed,
(...) of infinite moment, that you should ^^perly estimate the immense value of
^^r national union, to your collective (...) individual happiness; that you
^^^ould cherish a cordial habitual and im^^veable attachment to it; accustorn^^
yourselves to think and speak of it as of the Palladi^^n of (...) safety and
prosperity; watching for (...) preservation with jealo^^ (...) discountenancing
whatever may ^^^gest even a susp^^ion that it can in an (...) be abandone^^ and
^^^^gnan^^^ (...) ning upon the first (...) attempt (...) country from the
(...) the sacred^ties which (...) the various parts.

For this you have every in du^ or sympa^^y and interest. ^itizens^^y birth or
choice, of a common coun^^^, that country has a right to concent^^^^ your
affections. The name of American, which belongs to you, in your ^^tional
capacity, must always exa^^ (...) just pride of patriotism, more than (...)
appellation derived from local discriminations. With slight shades of
difference, you have the same ^eligion, manners, habits and political
principles. You have in a common cause fought and triumhed together: the
Independ^^ce and Liberty you possess are the work of joint councils, and joint
efforts, of common dangers, sufferings and successes.

But these considerations, however powerfully they address themselves to your
sensibility, are greatly outweighed by those which apply more immediately to
your interest. Here every portion of our country finds the most commanding
motives for carefully guarding and preserving the union of the whole.

The North, in an unrestrained intercourse with the South, protected by the
equal laws of a common government, finds in the productions of the latter,
great additional resources of maritime and commercial enterprise and precious
materials of manufacturing industry. The South in the same intercourse,
benefitting by the agency of the North, sees its agriculture grow, and its
commerce expand. Turning partly into its own channels the seamen of the North,
it finds us particular navigation invigorated; -- and while it contributes in
different ways, to nourish and increase the general mass of the national
navigation, it looks forward to the protection of a maritime strength to which
inself is unequally adapted. -- The East, in a like intercourse with the West,
already finds, and in the progressive improvement of interior communications,
by land and water, will more and more find a valuable vent for the commodities
which it brings from abroad, or manufactures at home. -- The West derives from
the East, supplies requisite to its growth and comfort -- and what is perhaps
of still greater consequence, it must of necessity owe the secure enjoyment of
indispensable outlets for its own productions to the weight, influence, and the
future maritime strength of the Atlantic side of the Union, directed by an
indissoluble community of interest as one nation. -- Any other ten^re by which
the West ^an hold this essential advantage, whether derived from its own
separate strength, or from an apostate and unnatural connection with any
foreign power, must be intrinsically precarious.

While then every part of our country thus feels an immediate and particular
interest in Union, all the parts combined cannot fail to sind in the united
mass of means and efforts greater strength, greater resource, proportionably
greater security from external danger, a less frequent interruption of their
peace by foreign nations; -- and what is of inestimable value! they must derive
from Union an exemption from those broils and wars between themselves, which so
frequently asslict neighboring countries, not tied together by the same
government; which their own rivalships alone would be sussicient to produce,
but which opposite foreign alliances, attachments and intrigues would stimulate
and embitter. -- Hence like wise they will avoid the necessity of those
overgrown military establishments, which under any form of government are
inauspicious to liberty, and which are to be regarded as particularly hostile
to Republican Liberty; in this sense, it is that your Union ought to be
considered as a main prop of your liberty, and that the love of the one ought
to endear to you the preservation of the other.

These considerations speak a persuasive language to every reflecting and
virtuous mind, and exhibit the continuance of the Union as a primary object of
patriotic desire. -- Is there a doubt whether a common government can embrace
so large a ^phere? -- Let experience solve it. To listen to mere speculation in
such a case were criminal. We are authorized to hope that a proper organization
of the whole, with the auxiliary agency of governments for the respective
sub-divisions, with afford a happy issue to the experiment. It Is well worth a
fair and full experiment. With such powerful and obvious motives to Union,
affecting all parts of our country, while experience shall not have
demonstrated its impracticability, there will always be reason to distrust the
patriotisin of those, who, in any quarter, may endeavor to weaken its bands.

In contemplating the causes which may disturb our Union, it occurs as matter
of serious concern, that any ground should have been furnished for
characterising parties by Geographical discriminations -- "Northern and
Southern -- Atlantic and Western;" whence designing men may endeavor to excite
a belief, that there is a real difference of local interests and views. One of
the expedients of party to acquire influence, within particular districts, is
to misrepresent the opinions and aims of other districts, You cannot shield
yourselves too much against the jealousies and heart-burnings which spring from
these misrepresentations: they tend to render alien to each other, those who
ought to be bound together by fraternal affection. The inhabitants of our
western country have lately had an useful lesson on this head: they have seen,
in the negotiation by the executive, and in the unanimous ratification by the
senate, of the treaty with Spain, and in the universal satisfaction at that
event, throughout the United States, a decisive proof how unfounded were the
suspicions propagated among them of the policy in the General Government and in
the Atlantic states unfriendly to their interests in regard of the MISSISIPPI:
they have been witnesses to the formation of two treaties, that with Great
Britain and that with Spain, which secure to them every thing they could
desire, in respect to our foreign relations, toward consirming their
prosperity. Will it not be their wisdom to rely for the preservation of these
advantages on the UNION by which they were procured? Will they not henceforth
be deaf to those advisers, if such there are, who would sever them from their
brethren and connect them with aliens?

To the efficacy and permanency of your union, a government for the whole is
indispensable. -- No alliances, however strict, between the parts, can be an
adequate substitute; they must inevitably experience the infractions and
interruptions which all alliances in all times have experienced. Sensible of
this momentous truth, you have improved upon your first essay, by the adoption
of a Constitution of Government better calculated than your former for an
intimate union, and for the efficacious management of your common concerns.
This government, the offspring of our own choice, uninfluenced and unawed,
adopted upon full investigation and mature deliberation, completely free in its
principles, in the distribution of its powers, uniting security with energy,
and containing within itself a provision for its own amenment, has a just claim
to your con^dence and your support. Respect for its authority, compliance with
its laws, acquiescence in its measures, are duties enjoined by the fundamental
maxims of true Liberty. The basis of our political system is the right of the
people to make and to alter their Constitution of Government -- But, the
Constitution which at any time exists, till changed by an explicit and
authentic act of the whole people, is sacredly obligatory upon all. The very
idea of the power and the right of the people to establish government
presupposes the duty of every individual to obey the established government.

All obstructions to the execution of the laws, all combinations and
associations, under whatever plausible character, with real design to direct,
control, counteract, or awe the regular deliberations and action of the
constitute^ authorities are destructive of this fundamen^al principe, and of
satal tendency. They serve to organize faction, to give it an artificial and
extraordinary force -- to put in the place of the delegated will of the nation,
the will of a party, often a small but artful and enterprizing minority of the
community; and according to the alternate triumphs of different parties, to
make the public administration the mirror of the ill concerted and incongruous
projects of faction, rather than the organ of consistent and wholesome plans
digested by common councils, and modified by mutual interests.

However combinations or associations of the above description may now and then
answer popular ends, they are likely in the course of time and things to become
po^^^t engines, by which cunning, ambitious, and unprincipled men will be (...)
subvert the power of the people, (...) ^us^rp for themselves the rein^ (...)
government; destroying afterw^^^^ the very engines which have listed ^^^m to
unjust dominion.

Toward the ^reservation of your Government, and the permanency of your
present happy state, it is requisite, not only that you steadily discountenance
irregular oppositions to its acknowledged authority, but also that you resist
with care the spirit of innovation upon its principles however specious the
pretexts. -- One method of assault may be to effect in the forms of the
Constitution alterations which will impair the energy of the system, and thus
to undermine what cannot be directly overthrown. In all the changes to which
you may be invited, remember that time and habit are at least as necessary to
fix the true character of Governments, as of other human institutions -- that
experience is the surest standard, by which to test the real tendency of the
existing constitution of a country -- that facility in changes upon the credit
of mere hypothesis and opinion, and remember, especially, that for the
efficient management of your common interest, in a country so extensive as
ours, a government of as much vigor as is consistent with the perfect security
of liberty, is indispensable. Liberty itself will find in such a government,
with powers properly distributed and adjusted, its surest guardian. It is
indeed little else than a name, where the government is too feeble to withstand
the enterprises of faction, to confine each member of the society within the
limits prescribed by the laws, and so maintam all in the secure and tranquil
enjoyment of the rights of person and property.

I have al^^^y intimated to you, the danger of parties in the state, with
particular reference to the founding of them on geographical discriminations.
Let me now take a more comprehensive view, and warn you in the most solemn
manner against the baneful effects of the spirit of party, generally.

This spirit, unfortunately, is inseparable from our nature, having its root in
the strongest passions of the human mind. It exists under disserent shapes in
all governments more or less stifled, controuled, or repressed; but in those of
the popular form, it is seen in its greatest rankness, and is truly then worst
enemy.

The alternate domination of one faction over another, sharpened by the spirit
of revenge, natural to party dissension, which in different ages and countries
has perpetrated the most horrid enormities, is itself a frightful despotism. --
But this leads at length to a more formal and permanent despotism. The
disorders and miseries, which generally result, g^a^u^lly incline the minds of
men to f^ck se^urity and repose in the absolute power of an individual: and
sooner or later the chief of some prevailing faction more able or more
fortunate than his competitors, turns this disposition to the purposes of his
own el^vation, on the ruins of public liberty.

Without looking forward to an extremity of this kind (which nevertheless ought
not to be entirely out of sight) the common and continual mischiefs of the
spirit of party are sufficient to make it the interest and duty of a wise
people to discourage and restrain it.

It serves always to distract the public counsels, and enfeeble the public
administration. It agitates the community with ill-founded jealousies and false
alarms; kindles the animosity of one part against another, foments occasionally
riot and insurrection. It opens the door to foreign influence and corruption,
which find a facilitated access to the government itself through the channels
of party passions. Thus the policy and the will of one country are subjected to
the policy and will of another.

There is an opinion that parties (...) free countries are useful checks upon
the administration of the government, and serve to keep alive the spirit of
liberty. This, within certain limits, is probably true; and in governments of a
monarchical cast, patriotism may look with indulgence, if not with favor upon
the spirit of party. But in those of the popular character, in governments
purely elective, it is a spirit not to be encouraged. From their natural
tendency, it is certain there will always be enough of that spirit for every
salutary purpose. And there being constant danger of excess, the effort ought
to be, by force of public opinion, to mitigate and assuage it. A fire not to be
quenched; it demands an uniform vigilance to prevent its bursting into a flame,
lest, instead of warming, it should consume.

It is important likewise, that the habits of thinking in a free country should
inspire caution, in those entrusted with its administration, to confine
themselves within their respective constitutional spheres, avoiding in the
exercise of their powers of one department to encroach upon another. The spirit
of encroachment tends to consolidate the powers of all the departments in one,
and thus to create, whatever the form of government, a real despotism. A just
esrimate of that love of power, and proneness to abuse it, which predominates
in the human heart, is sufficient to satisfy us of the truth of this position.
The necessity of recip^ocal checks in the exercise of political power, by
dividing and distributing it into different depositories, and constituting each
the guardian of the public weal against invasions by the others, has been
evinced by experiments ancient and modern: some of them in our country and
under our own eyes. To preserve them must be as necessary as to institute them.
If, in the opinion of the people, the distribution or modification of the
constitutional powers be in any particular wrong, let it be corrected by an
amendment in a way which the constitution designates. But let there be no
change by usurpation; for though this, in one instance, may be the instrument
of good, it is the customary weapon by which free governments are destroyed.
The precedent ^^ust always greatly overbalance in permanent evil, any partial
or transient benesit which the use can at any time yield.

Of all the dispositions and habits which lead to political prosperity,
Religion and Morality are indispensable supports -- In vain would that man
claim the tribute of patriotism, who should labor to subvert these great
pillars of human happiness, these sirmest props of the duties of men and
citizens. The mere politician, equally with the pious man, ought to respect and
to cherish them. A volume could not trace all their connections with private
and public felicity. Let it simply be asked where is the security for property,
for reputation, for life, if the sense of religious obligation desert the
oaths, which are the instruments of investigation in courts of justice? And let
us with caution indulge the supposition, that morality can be maintained
without religion. Whatever may be conceded to the influence of refined
education on minds of peculiar structure; reason and experience both forbid us
to expect that national morality can prevail in exclusion of religious
principle.

'^is substantially true, that virtue or morality is a necessary spring of
popular government. The rule indeed extends with more or less force to every
species of free government. Who that is a sincere friend to it, can look with
indifference upon attempts to shake the foundation of the fabric?

Promote, then, as an object of primary importance, institutions for the
general diffusion of knowledge. In proportion as the structure of a government
gives force to public opinion it is essential that public opinion should be
enlightened.

As a very important source of strength and security, cherish public credit.
One method of preserving it, is to use it as sparingly as possible; avoiding
the occasions of expense by cultivating peace: but remembering also, that
timely disbursements to prepare for danger, frequently prevent much greater
disbutsements to repel it; avoiding likewise the accumulation of debt, not only
by shunning occasions of expense, but by vigorous exertions in time of peace to
discharge the debts which unavoidable wars may have occasioned, not
ungenerously throwing upon posterity the burden which we ourselves ought to
bear. The execution of these maxims belongs to your representatives; but it is
necessary that public opinion should cooperate.

To facilitate to them the performance of their duty, it is essential that you
should practically bear in mind, that toward the payment of debts there must
be revenue: that to have revenue, there must be taxes; that no taxes can be
devised that are not more or less inconvenient and unplcasant; that the
intrinsic embarrassment inseparable from the selection of the proper objects,
(which is always a choice of difficulties) ought to be a decisive motive for
candid construction of the conduct of the government in making it, and for the
spirit of acquiescence in the measures for obtaining revenue, which the public
exigencies may at any time dictate.

Observe good faith and justice toward all nations: cultivate peace and
harmony with all: religion and morality enjoin this conduct; and can it be,
that good policy does not equally enjoin it? It will be worthy of a free,
enlightened, and, at no distant period, a great nation, to give to mankind the
magnanimous and too novel example of a people always guided by an exalted
justice and benevolence. Who can doubt, that in the course of time and things,
the fruits of such a plan would richly repay any temporary advantages which
might be lost by a steady adherence to it? -- Can it be that Providence has not
connected the permanent felicity of a nation with its virtue? The experiment at
least, is recommended by every sentiment which ennobles human nature. -- Alas!
is it rendered impossible by i^ vices!

In the execution of such a plan, nothing is more essential than that
permanent, inveterate antipathies against particular nations, and passionate
attachments for others, should be excluded; and that in the place of them, just
and amicable feelings toward all should be cultivated. The nation which
indulges toward another an habitual hatred, or an habitual fondness, is in
some degree a slave. It is a slave to its animosity or its affection, either of
which is sufficient to lead it astray from its duty and its interest. Antipathy
in one nation against another, disposes each more readily to offer insult and
injury, to lay hold of slight causes of umbrage, and to be haughty and
untractable, when accidental or trifling occasions of dispute occur.

Hence, frequent collisions, obstinate, envenomed and bloody contests. -- The
nation, prompted by ill will and resentment, sometimes impels to war the
government, contrary to the best calculations of policy. The government
sometimes participates in the national propensity, and adopts, through passion,
what reason would reject; at other times it makes the animosity of the nation
subservient to projects of hostility, instigated by pride, ambition, and other
sinister and pernicious motives. The peace often, sometimes perhaps the liberty
of nations, has been the victim.

So likewise, a passionate attachment of one nation for another, produces a
variety of evils. Sympathy for the favorite nation, facilitating the illusion
of an imaginary common interest, in cases where no real common interest exists,
and infusing into one the enmities of the other, betrays the former into a
participation in the quarrels and wars of the latter, without adequate
inducement or justification. It leads also to concessions to the favorite
nation of privileges denied to others, which is apt doubly to injure the nation
making the concessions; by unnecessarily parting with what ought to have been
retained; and by exciting jealousy, ill will, and a disposition to retaliate,
in the parties from whom equal privileges are withheld: And it gives to
ambitious, corrupted or deluded citizens (who devote themselves to the
favorite nation) facility to betray or sacrifice the interests of their own
country, without odium, sometimes even with popularity; gilding with the
appearances of a virtuous sense of obligation, a commendable deference for
public opinion, or a laudable zeal for public good, the base or foolish
compliances of ambition, corruption or infatuation.

As avenues to foreign influence in innumerable ways, such attachments are
particularly alarming to the enlightened and independent patriot. How many
opportunities do they afford to tamper with domestic factions, to practice the
arts of seduction, to mislead public opinion, to influence or awe the public
councils! Such an attachment of a small or weak, toward a great and powerful
nation, dooms the former to be the satellite of the other.

Against the insidious wiles of foreign influence (I conjure you to believe me,
fellow citizens) the jealousy of a free people ought to be constantly awake,
since history and experience prove, that foreign influence is one of the most
baneful foes of republican government. But that jealousy to be useful must be
impartial; else it becomes the instrument of the very influence to be avoided,
instead of a defense against it. Excessive partiality for one foreign nation,
and excessive dislike of another, cause those whom they actuate to see the
danger only on one side, and serve to veil and even to second the arts of
influence on the other. Real patriots, who may resist the intrigues of the
favorite, are liable to become suspected and odious; while its tools and dupes
usurp the applause and confidence of the people to surrender their interests.

The great rule of conduct (...) us, in regard to foreign nations, is in
extending our commercial relations, to have with them as little political
connection as possible. So far as we have already formed engagements, let them
be fulfilled with perfect good faith. -- Here let us stop.

Europe has a set of primary interests, which to us have none, or a very remote
relation. Hence she must be engaged in frequent controversies, the causes of
which are essentially foreign to our concerns. Hence, therefore, it must be
unwise in us to implicate ourselves, by artificial ties, in the ordinary
vicissitudes of her politics, or the ordinary combinations or collisions of her
friendships, or enmities.

Our detached and distant situation invites and enables us to pursue a
different course. If we remain one people, under an efficient government, the
period is not far off, when we may defy material injury from external
annoyance: when we may take such an attitude as will cause the neutrality, we
may at any time resolve upon, to be scrupulously respected; when belligerant
nations, under the impossibility of making acquisitions upon us, will not
lightly hazard the giving us provocation; when we may choose peace or war, as
our interest, guided by justice, shall counsel.

Why forego the advantages of so peculiar a situation? Why quit ou^ own to
stand upon foreign ground? Why, by interweaving our destiny with that of any
part of Europe, entangle our peace and prosperity in the toils of European
ambition, rivalship, interest, humor or caprice?

It Is our true policy to steer clear of permanent alliances, with any portion
of the foreign world; so far, I mean, as we are now at liberty to do it: for
let me not be understood as capable of patronizing infidelity to existing
engagements. I hold the maxim no less applicable to public than private
affairs, that honesty is always the best policy. I repeat it, therefore, let
those engagements be observed in their genuine sense. But in my opinion, it is
unnecessary and would be unwise to extend them.

Taking care always to keep ourselves, by suitable establishments, on a
respectable defensive posture, we may safely trust to temporary alliances for
extraordinary emergencies.

Harmony and liberal intercourse with all nations, are recommended by policy,
humanity and interest. But even our commercial policy should hold an equal and
impartial hand; neither seeking nor granting exclusive favors or preferences;
consulting the natural course of things; diffusing and diversifying by gentle
means the streams of commerce, but forcing nothing, eftablishing, with powers
so disposed, in order to give trade a stable course, to define the rights of
our merchants, and to enable the government to support them; conventional rules
of intercourse, the best that present circumstances and mutual opinion will
permit, but temporary, and liable to be from time to time abandoned or varied,
as experience and circumstances shall dictate; constantly keeping in view, that
it is folly in one nation to look for disinterested favors from another; that
it must pay with a portion of its independence for whatever it may accept under
that character; that by such acceptance it may place itself in the condition of
having given equivalents for nominal favors, and yet of being reproached with
ingratitude for not giving more. There can be no greater error than to expect,
or calculate upon real favors from nation to nation. It Is an illusion which
experience must cure, which a just pride ought to discard.

In offering to you, my countrymen, these counsels of an old and affectionate
friend, I dare not hope they will make the strong and lasting impression I
could wish; that they will control the usual current of the passions, or
prevent our nation from running the course which has hitherto marked the
destiny of nations: But if I may even flatter myself, that they may be
productive of some partial benefit, some occasional good; that they may now and
then recur to, to moderate the fury of party spirit, to warn against the
mischiefs of foreign intrigue, to guard against the impostures of pretended
patriotism; this hope will be a full recompense for the solicitude of your
welsare, by which they have been dictated.

How far in the discharge of my official duties, I have been guided by the
principles that they have been delineated, the public records and other
evidences of my conduct must witness to you and to the world. To myself, the
assurance of my own conscience is, that I have at least believed myself to be
guided by them.

In relation to the still subsisting war in Europe, my proclamation of the 22d
of April, 1793, is the index to my plan. Sanctioned by your approving voice and
by that of you Representatives in both Houses of Congress, the spirit of that
measure has continually governed me; uninfluenced by any attempts to deter or
divert me from it.

After deliberate examination, with the aid of the best lights I could obtain,
I was well satisfied that our country, under all the circumstances of the case,
had a right to take, and was bound in duty and interest, to take a neutral
position. Having taken it, I determined, as far as should depend upon me, to
maintain it, with moderation, perseverance and firmness.

The considerations which respect the right to hold this conduct, it is not
necessary on this occasion to detail. I will only observe, that according to my
understanding of the matter, that right, so far from being denied by any of the
belligerant powers, has been virtually admitted by all.

The duty of holding a neutral conduct may be inferred, without any thing more,
from the obligations which justice and humanity impose on every nation, in
cases in which it is free to act, to maintain inviolate the relations of peace
and amity toward other nations.

The inducements of interest for observing that conduct will best be referred
to your own reflections and experience. With me, a predominant motive has been
to endeavor to gain time to our country to se^tle and mature its yet recent
institutions, and to progress without interruption, to that degree of strength
and consistency, which is necessary to give it, humanly speaking, the command
of its own fortunes.

Though in reviewing the incidents of my administration, I am unconscious of
intentional error: I am, nevertheless, too sensible of my defects not to think
it probable that I may have committed many errors. Whatever they may be, I
fervently beseech the Almighty to avert or mitigate the evils to which they may
tend. I shall also carry with me che hope that my country will never cease to
view them with indulgence; and that after forty-five years of my life dedicated
to us service, with an upright zeal, the faults of incompetent abilities will
be consigned to oblivion, as myself must soon be to the mansions of rest.

Relying on its kindness in this, as in other things, and actuated by that
fervent love toward it, which is so natural to a man, who views in it the
natural soil of himself and his progenitors for several generations; I
anticipate with pleasing expectation that retreat, in which I promise myself to
realize, with out alloy, the sweet enjoyment of partaking, in the midst of my
fellow citizens, the benign influence of good laws under a free government --
the ever favorite object of my heart, and the happy reward, as I trust, of our
mutual cares, labors and dangers.

G. WASHINGTON.
United States, 17th September, 1796.
On the 7th of December, 1796, President Washington delivered his last speech
to the representatives of the people at the opening of the second session of
the fourth Congress, we regret that our contracted limits will not permit of
inserting it verbatim. In this address he communicates information respecting
the measures taken for carrying into effect treaties with the Indian nations,
Great Britain, Spa^^, and Algiers. He likewise informs, that measures are in
operatian for effecting treatics with the Regencies of Tunis and Tripoli. He
wishes the United States to lock to the means, and to set about the gradual
creation of a ^^vy; so that a suture war of Europe may not find our commerce in
the same unprotected state in which it was found by the present.

He then proceeds to recommend the establithment of certain branches of
manufacture on public account; particularly those which are of a nature
essential to the furnishing and equipping of the public sorce in time of war.

He judiciously, recommends the in^^^^tion of a Board of Agriculture, con^^^^d
o^ proper characters, charged with (...) and diffusing information, an^ (...),
by premiums and ^mall pecuniary aids, to encourag^ and assist a spirit of
discovery and impr^^^^ment, Experience has p^^ved this to be a cheap instrument
of immense national benefit. He then recalis the attention of Congress, to a
subject, he had before proposed to their consideration, the expediency of
establishing a national university, and also a military a^ademy. He points out
as monves to the institution of a national universits, the a^^^^lation of the
principles, opnions, and manners of our countrymen, by the common education of
a portion of our youth from every quarter, and remarks that the more
homogencous our citizens can be made in these particulars, the greater will be
our prospect of permanent union: and that a primary object should be the
education of our youth in the science of GOVERNMENT. In a republic, what
species of knowledge can be equally important? and what duty can be more
pressing on its Legislature, than to patronize a plan for communicating it to
those who are to be the future guardians of the liberties of the country?

The institution of a military academy, he also observes, is recommended by
cogent reasons. However pacific, says he, the general policy of a nation may
be, it ought never to be without an adequate stock of military knowledge, for
emergencies.

The following important paragraph is verbatim, "The compensations to the
officers of the United States, in various instance, and in none more than in
respect to the most important stations, appear to call for legislative
revision. The consequences of a defective provision are of serious import to
the government. If private wealth is to supply the defect of public
contribution, it will greatly contract the sphere, within which the selection
of character for office is to be made, and will proportionably diminish the
probability of a choice of men able, as well as upright. Besides, that it would
be repugnant to the vital principles of our government, virtually to exclude
from public trusts, talents and virtue, unless accompanied by wealth".

The President then expresses his regret at the unpleasant circumstances which
have occurred relative to the French republic; his ardent wish being to
maintain cordial harmony, as far as is consistent with the rights and honor of
our country.

The House of Representatives he informed, that the revenues of the United
States continue in a state of progressive improvement: and are invited to take
such further measures as will ascertain, to our country, the speedy
extinguishment of the public debt.

He then concluded his address to both houses of congress, in the following
words, "My solicitude to see the militia of the United States placed on an
efficient establishment, has been so often and so ardently expressed, that I
shall but barely recall the subject to your view, on the present occasion; at
the same time, I shall submit to your enquiry, whether our harbors are yet
sufficiently secured".

"The situation in which I now stand, for the last time, in the midst of the
representatives of the people of the United States, naturally recalls the
period, when the administration of the present form of government commenced;
and I cannot omit the occasion to congratulate you, and my country, on the
success of the experiment; nor to repeat my fervent prayer to the Supreme Ruler
of the Universte, and Sovereign Arbi^^r of Nations, that his providential care,
may still be extended to the United States; -- that the virtue and happiness of
(...) may be preserved (...) that the (...) which they have (...) for the
pro^^^tion of their liberties (...) ^erpetual.

On (...) the 4th of March 1797, John (...), Esquire. who was elec^^^ the succ^ssor
of President Washington, at^^nded the S^n^te and Representatives of the United
States, and took his oath of office, according to the directions of the
constitution. The ceremony afforded a spectacle of high satisfaction and
delight to enery genuine republican. To behold a fellow-citizen, raised by the
voice of the people, to be the first magistrate of a free nation, and to behold
at the same time George Washington, who lately filled the pre^^^^tial chair,
attending the inauguration of his successor in office, as a private citi^^n,
beautifully exemplisying the sublime simplicity and excellence of republican
government.

The last official act of President Washington, is a letter to the Secretary of
State, dated March 3, 1797. It respects certain forged letters, which were
published in the years 1777 and 1796, and obtruded on the public as his. They
were published at the two most critical periods of his life, with the view of
striking at the integrity of his motives, of wounding his character, and of
deceiving the people. At the conclusion, therefore of his public employments,
he deemed it a duty which he owed to himself, to his country, and to truth, to
detail the circumstances, and solemnly to declare, that the letters (the dates
of which he recites) are a base forgery, were never written by him, and that he
never saw or heard of them, until they appeared in print. During the period in
which he held the supreme command of the army, and his civil administration,
the purity of his own mind prevented him from contradicting the falsehood by any
public declaration, but upon his retiring to private life, and not knowing how
soon a more serious event might take place, he made this public declaration,
and requested that it might be deposited in the office of the department of
state, as a testimony of the truth to the present generation and to posterity.

On the and of March, 1797, General Washington took farewell of all public
employment, and lost Philadelphia for his esmte at Mount Vernon; in every town
through which he passed on his way, he received the grateful and affectionate
addresses, which were, so justly due to his merits from an etlightened and
grateful people.

Having thus amply deseribed the august Washington in his, public character and
official capacity, suffer, ^s for a moment to follow him in private, and take a
view of him in the character of a plain citi^^n in his rural residence at Mount
Vernon.

The virt^ous simplicity which distinguished the pri^^^^ life of General
Washington, tho'less known than the dazzling splendour of his military
activements, is not less edisying in example, or worthy the attention of his
countrymen. The conspicuous character he has acted on the theater of human
affair, the uniform dignity with which he sustained his part amidst difficuties
of the most discour aging nature, and the glory of having arrived through them
at the hour of triumph, have made many official and literary persons, on both
sides of the ocean, ambitious of a correspondence with him. These
correspondencies unavoidably engrossed a great, portion of his time; and the
communications contained in them, comb^^ed with the numerous periodical
publications and newspapers which he perused, rendered him as it were, the
focus of political intelligence for the new world. Nor were his conversations
with well informed men less conducive to bring him acquainted with the various
events which happened in the different countries of the globe. Every foreigner
of distinction who traveled in America made it a point to visit him. Members
of Congress and other dignified personages did not pass his house without
calling to pay their respects. As another source of information it may be
mentioned, that many literary productions were sent to him annually by their
authors in Europe; and that there is scarcely one work written in America on
any art, science, or subject, which did not seek his protection, or which was
not offered to him as a token of gratitude. Mechanical inventions were
frequently submitted to him for his approbation, and natural curiosities
presented to him for his investigation. But the multiplicity of epistolary
applications, often on the remains of some business which happened when he was
in office, sometimes on subjects foreign to his situation, frivolous in their
nature, and intended merely to gratify the vanity of the writers by drawing
answers from him, were truly distressing and almost incredible. His benignity
in answering, perhaps increased the number. Did he not husband every moment to
the best advantage, it would not have been in his power to notice the vast
variety of subjects that claimed his attention.

In his manner of living he was extremely regular, temperate and industrious.
He rose winter and summer at the dawn of day, generally read or wrote sometime
before breakfast: breakfasted about seven o'clock on Indian hoe-cake and tea,
and often rode immediately to his different farms, and remained with his
laborers till a little after two o'clock, when he returned; at three he dined,
commonly on a single dish, and drank from half a pint to a pint of Madeira
wine, this, with one small dish of tea which he took half an hour before the
setting of the sun, constituted his whole sustenance till the next day. His
table, however, was always furnished with elegance and exuberance, but was void
of pomp: and whether he had company or not, he remained an hour at table in
familiar conversation. -- His temper was of a serious cast, and his countenance
carried the impression of thoughtfulness; yet he perfectly relished a pleasant
story, an unaffected sally of wit, or a burlesque description. After dinner he
applied himself to business and about nine retired to rest; but when he had
company he politely attended upon them till they wished to withdraw. --
Agriculture was his favorite employment, he made observations on the pro^uce
of lands, and endeavored to throw new light upon the business of the farmer;
linen and woolen clothes were manufactured under his roof, and order and
economy were established in all his departments both within and without doors.
-- Mrs. Washington presided over the whole, and united to the qualities of an
excellent farmer's wife, that simple dignity which ought to characterise a
woman whose husband has acted so distinguished a part on the public theater. --
Such is the history of the private life of this great character.

In 1798, the unparalleled treatment which the American ministers received at
Paris from the republic of France, left little ground to hope for any amicable
accommodation with that republic, in consequence of which, the military forces
of the United States were greatly augmented, and the President, with the advice
of the Senate, appointed George Washington, Lieutenant General and commander in
chief of all the armies raised or to be raised by the United States, this wise
02 and judicious appointment was attended with the happiest effect, the virtue
of a general so well experienced in war, established the national dignity and
independence, and inspired the citizens with enthusiasm. On receiving the
appointment, the General expressed a wish that it had fallen upon a man less
advanced in years, and better qualified to encounter the vicissitudes of war,
he recurred to his determination of closing his life in retirement and peace,
but the conduct of the directory of France toward our country, he said
"excited in his breast corresponding sentiments with the rest of his
countrymen," in consequence of which, he accepted the appointment with this
reserve, that, "he should not be called into the field, until the army was in a
situation to require his presence, or it became indispensable by the urgency of
circumstances," he informed the President, "he could not accept of any
emolument annexed to the appointment, before entering into a situation to incur
expense."

He held this command, and contributed his advice and assistance toward the
arrangement and organization of the army until the 14th of December, 1799, when
it pleased Divine Providence to remove him from this life -- he was in his 68th
year, and in the enjoyment of perfect health, the disorder of which he died was
an inflamatory sore throat, which proceeded from a slight cold.

"On Friday, the 13th, he rode out to one of his plantations, and was much wet
by the rain, on returning He was taken with the croup that night; but from
humanity to his servants and tenderness to his physician, very unfortunately
declined sending for medical aid, until daylight on Saturday morning.

"Before Dr. Craik arrived at Mount Vernon, the General had been bled by one of
his overseers. The doctor repeated the same immediately; to whom the General
observed, "he had sent for him too late;" and seemed to have a presentiment of
his dissolution, Doctors Dick and Brown also attended.

"As his respiration became difficult, he said calmly, " doctors, I die hard"
But notwithstanding the excrutiating agonies of his violent disease, he
tranquilly asked several questions during the evening. About fifteen minutes
before he died (which was between 11 and 12 o'clock, on Saturday night, the
14th of December) he said to Doctor Craik " doctor, what is the clock? how long
am I to continue in this situation?" The doctor answered, "Not long sir?" He
then rejoined with the firmest countenance imaginable, " I 02 have no fear,
doctor, to die."

Mrs. Washington was at the bed side with his family, and a number of domestics
in the room. He would not wound their sensibility by taking a formal leave of
any one. -- At last his breathing grew shorter, -- be closed his eyes and mouth
with his own hands, and expired! -- Thus did the last moments of this venerable
man correspond with the whole tenor of his well spent life. He died with
perfect resignation to the will of Heaven, and in full possession of his
reason, not a groan or complaint escaped him!

His body was entombed, with solemn honors and funeral pomp, in the family
vault, upon the estate of Mount Vernon, attended by the clergy, military,
masonic brethren, and a numerous concourse of citizens.

The melancholy intelligence of the death of General Washington, was every
where received throughout the United States, with sensations of sorrow and
regret; the houses of Congress for a period adjourned; they condoled with the
President of the United States, on the loss our country had sustained in the
death of her worthiest citizen, they went into mourning, and requested the
President to issue his proclamation, recommending the citizens throughout the
Union, to wear black crape on the lest arm for thirty days; all the state
assemblies followed the example: orders were issued from the war office, navy
department, etc. requesting the officers to wear crape on the left arm for six
months, and the vossels of the navy to put on mourning for one week, by wearing
their colors half mast high

Orders were issued by the direction of the President of the United States,
announcing to the army the death of its beloved chief, and requested the
military honors therein, specifying to be paid at the several stations of the
army.

The Senate and House of Representatives of the United States, enacted "that a
marble monument be erected in the capitol in the city of Washington, to the
memory of Genesis Washington; and that his family be requested to permit his body
to be deposited under it -- and that the monument be so designed as to
commemorate the great military and political events of his life. That there be
a funeral procession, and a public oration delivered on the occasion. To the
above resolution Mrs. Washington assented, sacrifing her private wishes and
individual feelings to the public will. The public procession took place in
Philadelphia on thursday December the 26th, the ceremony was judiciously
conducted; perhaps there never was a greater display of public mourning,
solemnity and respect, exhibited in the western hemisphere; the arrangements
united every description of public and private character, civil and military;
the funeral service, adapted with great felicity to the occasion, was
pronounced by Bishop White, the deceased being of the episcopal church, after
which, General Lee, who was appointed by Congress for that purpose, delivered
the funeral oration -- we shall (...) attempt a report of this admirable
eulogium, of which the public are already possessed, convinced that it would
suffer by the attempt.

Having pursued this distinguished man throughout his public life and in his
private retreat, it only now remains that we describe his person, which bears a
very great analogy to the qualifications of his mind.

General Washington was a tall well made man, rather large boned, and had a
tolerable genteel address: his features were manly and bold, his eyes of a
bluish cast and very lively; his hair a deep brown, his face rather long and
marked with the small pox; his complexion sun burnt and without much color,
and his countenance sensible, composed, and thoughtful; there was a remarkable
air of dignity about him, with a striking degree of gracefulness: He had an
excellent understanding without much quickness; was strictly just, vigilant,
and generous; an affectionate husband, a faithful friend, a father to the
deserving; gentle in his manners, in temper rather reserved; a total stranger
to religious prejudices, which have so often excited Christians of one
denomination to cut the throats of those of another; in his morals
irreproachable; he was never known to exceed the bounds of the most rigid
temperance: in a word, all his friends and acquaintance universally allow that
no man ever united in his own person, a more perfect alliance of the virtues of
a philosopher with the talents of a statesman and a general. Condour,
sincerity, affability and simplicity seem to have been the striking features of
his character. The best portraits ever taken of him, are those painted by the
ingenious Mr. Stewart of Germantown, and the best engraving is the large
mezotinto done by Mr. Savage of Philadelphia.

Such is the life and character of the man to whom America entrusted her
important cause, and she has had every reason to be satisfied with her choice;
and most ungrateful would she be to the Great Disposer of human events, were
she not to render him unremitting thanks for having provided her with such a
citizen at such a crisis.

Most nations have been favored with some patriotic deliverer -- The
Israelites had their Moses; Rome had her Camillus; Greece her Leonidas; Sweden
her Gustavus; and England her Hampdens, her Russels, and her Sydneys -- but
these illustrious heroes, though successful in preserving and defending, did not,
like Washington, form or establish empires, which will, in all probability, be
the refuge or asylum of virtue, banished from Europe by luxury and corruption.

ABSTRACT Of the LAST WILL and TESTAMENT of GENESIS GEO: WASHINGTON.
I GEORGE WASHINGTON, citizen of the U. States, do declare this my last Will
and Testament, revoking all others, -- first, All my debts are to be punctually
and speedily paid, and the legacies herein bequeathed, are to be discharged in
the manner directed.

Item. To my dearly beloved wife Martha Washington, I bequeath my whole estate
real and personal, during her life, except such parts thereof as are hereafter
otherwise disposed of. -- My improved lot in Alexandria, I give to her and her
heirs forever, as also my household and kitchen furniture, with the liquors and
groceries, which may be on hand at the time of my decease.

Item. Upon the decease of my wife, I defire, that all the slaves which I hold
of my own right, shall receive their freedom; but the aged and infirm, who are
unable to support themselves, shall be comfortably clothed and fed by my heirs
while they live, and such of the children as have no parents, or whose parents
are unable or unwilling to provide for them, shall be bound by the court until
they arrive at the age of 25 years, upon conditions that they shall be taught
to read, write, and be brought up to some useful occupation; I expressly forbid
the sale, or transportation out of the state, of any of them, on any pretense
whatsoever; and I do solemnly enjoin my executors to see this clause respecting
slaves religiously fulfilled. -- To my Mullatto man, William, I give immediate
freedom, and an annuity of 30 dollars during his life, or if he chooses to
remain in the situation he now is, he shall be allowed the clothes and victuals
he has been accustomed to receive, and the above 30 dollars beside, "and this I
give him as a testimony of my sense of his attachment to me, and for his
faithful services during the revolutionary war.

Item. To the Trustees of the Academy of Alexandria, I bequeath 4000 dollars,
or, in other words, twenty of my shares in the bank of Alexandria, toward the
support of a free school, for the education of orphans and poor children; the
interest or dividend only, to be applied -- this is in lieu of an annuity of
L50, which I have for some years past, paid toward the support of this
institution.

Item. The fifty shares in the Potomac Canal company, which I accepted of upon
particular terms, See page 132.
from the legislature of Virginia, as a recompense for my services during the
revolutionary war, and for having suggested the advantages which the community
would derive from an extension of inland navigation under legislative
patronage, I bequeath in perpetuity toward the endowment of a National
University, to be established within the limits of the District of Columbia,
under the auspices of the general government; and until such seminary is
established, the profits arising from these shares, shall be laid out in the
purchase of stock in the bank of Columbia, or some other bank, until a sum
adequate to the object be obtained.

Item. My hundred shares in the James River company, I have given, and now
confirm, in perpetuity to the use of Liberty Hall Academy, Virginia.

Item. I forever release the estate, etc. of my deceased brother Samuel
Washington, from the payment of the money (upwards of L1000) which is due to me
for lands which I sold to Philip Pendleton, who assigned the same to my
brother, who by agreement was to pay me: -- And wherereas two sons of my said
brother Samuel, named Geo: S. Washington, and Lawrence A. Washington, came
under my protection, and occasioned advances on my part for their education at
college, etc. for board, clothing, and other incidental expenses, to the
amount of near 5000 dols, which it may be inconvenient for them, or the estate
to refund, for which reasons I do hereby acquit them and the estate from the
payment thereof.

Item. The balance due me from the estate of Bartholomew Dandridge, deceased
(my wife's brother) amounting, in 1795, to L425, I release and acquit, and the
33 negroes, formerly belonging to said estate, but who were sold on execution,
and purchased on my account, and by me, suffered to remain in possession of
Mary his widow, together with their increase, shall continue in her possession
during her life, without any compensation; but at her death, all who are aged
40 years, or upwards, shall receive their freedom, all under that age, and
upwards of 16, shall serve seven years longer, and then be free, and all under
16 years shall serve until they are 25 years, and then be free.

Item. Charles Carter, who married my niece Betty Lewis, shall receive from my
executors, a sufficient title to the lots in Fredericksburgh, which he had of
me.

Item. To my nephew, Wm. A. Washington, I bequeath lot No. 265 in the town of
Manchester, my tenth of certain lots in the city and vicinity of Richmond, as
also lot No. 139 in the town of Edinburgh, Virginia.

Item. To my nepnew Bushrod Washington, I give and bequeath all the papers in
my possession, which relate to my civil and military administration of the
affairs of this country -- I leave to him also, such of my private papers as
are worth preserving; and at the decease of my wise, and before, if she is not
inclined to retain them, I give and bequeath my library of books and pamphlets
of every kind.

Item. Having sold certain lands which I possessed in Pennsylvania, and
New York, my share in Great Dismal Swamp, and a tract in the county of
Gloucester, withholding the titles until the consideration money should be
paid, also, having leased and conditionally sold, all my lands on the Great
Kanhawa, and a tract upon Difficult Run, whenever these contracts are
fulfilled, the money shall be vested in Bank stock, the interest whereof I give
to my wife during her life, but the stock itself shall be subject to the
distribution hereafter willed.

Item. To the Earl of Buchan I re-commit "the box made of the oak that
sheltered the great Sir William Wallace after the battle of Falkirk" --
presented to me by his lordship, in terms too flattering for me to repeat, with
a request "to pass it, on the event of my decease, to the man in my country,
who should appear to merit it best, upon the same conditions that have induced
^im to send it to me." Whether easy or nor to select the man who might comport
with his lordship's opinion in this respect, is not for me to say; but
conceiving that no disposition of this valuable curiosity can be more eligible
than the re-commitment of it to his own cabinet, agreeably to the original
design of the Goldsmith's company of Edinburgh, who presented it to him, and,
at his request, consented that it should be transferred to me -- I bequeath the
same to his lordship; and, in case of his decease, to his heir, with my
grateful thanks for the distinguished honor of presenting it to me, and more
especially for the favorable sentiments with which he accompanied it.

Item, To my brother, Charles Washington, I bequeath the gold Leaded cane left
me by Dr. Franklin in his will. To the acquaintances and friends of my juvenile
years, Laurence Washington, and Robert Washington, of Chotanck, I give my other
two gold headed canes, having my arms engraved on them; and to each (as they
will be useful where they live) I leave one of the spy-glasses, which
constituted port of my equipage during the late war. To my compatriot in arms
and old and intimate friend, Dr. Craik, I give my bureau (or as the cabinet
makers call it, tambour secretary) and the circular chair, an appendage to my
study. To Dr. David Stuart I give my large shaving and dressing table, and my
telescope. To the Rev. now Bryan Lord Fairfax, I give a bible in three large
folio volumes, with notes, presented to me by the Rt. Rev. Thomas Wilson,
Bishop of Sodor and Man. To Genesis de la Fayette I give a pair of finely wrought
steel pistols, taken from the enemy during the revolutionary war. To my
sisters-in-law, Hannah Washington and Mildred Washington -- to my friends
Elenor Stuart, Hannah Washington of Fairfield, and Elizabeth Washington of
Hayfield, I give, each, a mourning ring, of the value of one hundred dollars.
These bequests are not made for the intrinsic value of them, but as mementos of
my esteem and regard. To Tobias Lear I give the use of the farm which he now
holds free from rent during his life. To Sally B. Haynie (a distant relation of
mine) I give and bequeath three hundred dollars. To Sarah Green, daughter of
the deceased Thomas Bishop, and to Ann Walker, daughter of John Alton, also
deceased, I give each one hundred dollars, in consideration of the attachment
of their fathers to me; each of whom having lived nearly forty years in my
family. To each of my nephews, Wm. A. Washington, Geo: Lewis, Geo: S.
Washington, Bushrod Washington 02 and Sam. Washington, I give one of the swords
or cutteaux of which I may die possessed: and they are to choose in the order
they are named. These swords are accompanied with an injunction not to unsheath
them for the purpose of shedding blood, except it be for self defense, or in
defense of their country and its rights; and in the latter case, to keep them
unsheathed, and prefer falling with them in their hands to the relinquishment
thereof.

Item. To my nephew Bushrod Washington, and his heirs, I bequeath all that part
of Mount Vernon, included within the following limits [ here the criginal will
describes the boundaries] containing upwards of 4000 acres, with the mansion
house, and all other improvements: secondly, To Geo: F. Washington, and
Lawrence A. Washington, and their heirs, to be equally divided between them, I
give my estate of Little Hunting Creek, lying on the Potomac, containing 2027
acres, with all the improvements thereon: thirdly, I bequeath to Laurence Lewis
and his wife, and their heirs, all the residue of Mount Vernon, containing
about 2000 acres, together with the mill, distillery, and other improvements:
fourthly, I bequeath to Geo: Washington Park Custis, the grandson of my wife,
my tract on four mile run, containing 1200 acres, and my entire square, No. 21
in the city of Washington.

[The residue of his estate real and personal, the General requests to be sold
by his executors to the best advantage, and the moneys arrising therefrom to be
divided into twenty-three equal parts which he bequeaths equally, to his own
and to his wife's relations, specifying ^eir names.]

The ^mily Vault at Mount Vernon, requiring repairs, and being improperly
situated, I desire that a new one of brick, and upon a larger scale, may be
built on the ground which is marked out -- in which my remains, with those of
my deceased relations (now in the old vault) and such others of my family as
may choose to be entombed there, may be deposited. And it is my express desire,
that my corpse may be interred in a private manner, without parade or funeral
oration.

Lastly, I constitute and appoint my dearly beloved wife Martha Washington, my
nephews Wm. Augustine Washington, Bushrod Washington, Geo: S. Washington,
Samuel Washington, and Laurence Lewis, and my ward, Geo: Washington P. Custis,
(when he shall have arrived at the age of 20 years) executrix and executors of
this WILL and TESTAMENT.

[The original will is of the General's own hand writing, his name is
subscribed to every page of it, he consulted no professional character in the
construction of it, and he accompanies every item. with remarks and
explanations of the meaning and design of them. it is dated July 9th, 1799, and
24th year of the independence of the U. States of America. Annexed to the will
is a schedule of the property directed to be sol^ with a moderate valuation of
their worth of which the following is an abstract, viz.

acres. dollars. Lands in Virginia, 21,230 worth 222,320 Do. Gr. Kanhawa,
13,341 -- 200,000 Do. Maryland, 1,119 -- 9,829 Do. Pennsylvania, 234 -- 1,404
Do. N. York, about, 1,000 -- 6,000 Do. N. W. Territory, 3,051 -- 15,251 Do.
Kentucky, 5,000 -- 10,000 Lots and houses in the city of Washington, 19,132 Do.
in Alexandria, 4,000 Do. in Winchester, 400 Do. in Bath, 800 United States
Stock, 6,246 Potomac Company, 24 Shares, 10,666 506,047

dollars. brought forward, 506,047 James River Company, 5 Shares, 500 Bank of
Columbia, 170 Shares, 6,800 Bank of Alexandria, 5 Shares, 1,000 Live Stock,
15,653 Dollars 530,000

Moun^^^^ ^^^non we understand may be valued (...) of dollars.]

FINIS.

