AN ANSWER TO ALEXANDER HAMILTON's LETTER, CONCERNING THE PUBLIC CONDUCT AND
CHARACTER OF JOHN ADAMS, Esquire. PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES.

By A CITIZEN OF NEW YORK.

NEW YORK: Printed by P. R. JOHNSON and J. STRYKER, At the Literary Printing
Office, No. 29 Gold-street.

1800. [Copy-Right secured.]

AN ANSWER, etc.
SIR,
THE time in which we live, is distinguished by great and extraordinary events;
it is an age of intrigue and dissimulation, of folly and jealousy, of
revolutions and convulsions. All the passions of the human heart are in a
ferment, and every rational being from the throne to the cottage is agitated by
the picturesque circumstances of the day. Although removed upwards of three
thousand miles from the sanguinary theater of Europe, our public and private
Councils are influenced, biassed and sometimes deranged by foreign intrigue,
domestic ambition, and impassioned factions. The sword of the Revolution is
scarcely returned to its scabbard, and the sacred wounds of our patriots are
still open and bleeding. Yet plans are organized, at this early hour, to blast
the prosperity, and undermine the liberties of our country. By pecuniary
doceurs, emigration and flatteries, the cause of monarchy has taken root in the
hearts of the ignorant and the unwary. But there is an enlightened spirit in
our country to resist its progress. 1776 is not yet forgotten, and silent
millions are in readiness to sacrifice their lives on the altar of public
liberty; they have sworn to support the Constitution of their choice, and to
preserve it inviolable from the machinations of ambition, and the sport of
arbitrary power. We are not yet ripe enough for unconditional submition.
Liberty is not yet despoiled of her charms, nor slavery deprived of it horrors,
and the yeomanry are not yet prepared to render up homage, and feed on a scanty
pittance in misery and in tears. Until you can corrupt the moral features of
man, he regards his liberty as the inseparable companion of his life.

You have vainly endeavored to repel the charge of monarchism which has a
thousand times been reiterated from Newhampshire to Georgia. Although the
Anglo-European feels himself at home in your society, experience affords a
lesson of caution to the genuine American. The proceedings of the General
Convention bear witness against you, establish beyond controversy, your
attatchment to arbitrary government, and the information of the Attorney
General of Maryland, marks you out as the daring enemy of republicanism. In
this ever memorable disgrace Morris took a part, under the disappointed
expectation of basking and fattening in the sunshine of courtly favor. When
all your schemes proved abortive: When you found it impossible to raise a
Guelph to the throne, did you not assert that the Constitution would answer
your purpose, as it opened a latitude for the encroachments of arbitray power?
Whilst Secretary of the Treasury, was it not your earnest endeavor to
assimilate our government to that of Great Britain? She offered you a system of
Finance that has drawn tears from miserable millions, and you servilely adopted
it. The evil consequences of this adoption, are not yet fully felt, although it
has filled this infant republic with stock-jobbers, speculators, and
peculators. Although it has robbed the hoary soldier of his labors, and left
him to wander with his family and his wounds on an unfeeling world, whilst the
friends of Moloch and of George are seated in triumph, and environed with
wealth. But this is not the only evidence that justifies the opinion of the
President. Whoever has analized your character, and drawn aside the veil of
dissimulation, must feel an irresistible conviction that nature has made
ambition the principle lever of all your actions. What a painful mortification
to be excluded from the Councils of your country! Cannot we here draw forth the
motives that originated your illiberal attack on the character of the
President, who had too much judgment and independence to submit to the leading
strings of the ex-Secretary? Here was disappointed ambition; here was abundant
reason to libel Mr. Adams, and injure the cause of his party; here is a clue to
that mysterious character, whose power, if equal to his will, would bestride
the world.

The first prominent charge against Mr Adams, is, his inability to administer
the government; that he has an imagination "sublimated and eccentric" that his
judgment is defective, and that he is incapable of a steady adherence to any
systematic plan of conduct. How is this established? You have understood, but
cannot vouch for its authenticity, that Mr. Adams was the friend and advocate
of annual enlistments, and argued the propriety of changing the commander in
chief every year. On evidence so slender, no man should be convicted, if,
however, they really were his sentiments, they demonstate a prudent jealousy so
essentially necessary in revolutionary times; he saw in the history of other
ages and nations, the destructive evils that had resulted from the unlimited
and unconditional grant of power. A standing soldery will become attatched to
their chief, and an ambitious chief, when a favorable opportunity occurs, will
strike at the vitals of his country, and riot on the grave of public happiness.
The days of Caesar with their tragical features are still fresh in our
memories, they will plead to the latest ages, the folly and impolicy of a
permanent military, and a permanent leader. It is further urged, that our
country was deficient in characters qualified to command, and that Washington
was alone capable of uniting the interests of the country, and combining
together a naked, ill-fed, and undisciplined soldiery. This suggestion is
palpably false, and unworthy of a serious refutation. I feel a veneration for
Washington, and emotions of gratitude for his disinterested exertions which no
tongue can adequately express. But at the time of his appointment to the chief
command, his principles and military virtues were little known. A circumstance
that justified the want of too implicit confidence on the part of Mr. Adams.

Your observations relative to a certain private journal of Mr. Adams, are
surpassingly trivial and low, they demonstrate the imbecility of your cause,
and point out the base malignity of your heart. The incident with madam
Vergennes, on which you have commented as if it was a matter of moment, is not
susceptible of the turn you have given it, without a gross and violent
distortion of common sense. You, perhaps might have succeeded better on that
occasion, if any thing more had been necessary than a pecuniary gratification.

The letter of Mr. Adams to Tench Coxe, which has given rise to so many
illiberal comments, was evidently written in some jocular moment. The style is
simple, unaffected, and seemingly as if not intended, announces some very
important truths and well authenticated facts. The circumstance of the
Pinckney's having been school fellows of the Marquis of Carmarthan, is not of
so very trifling and indifferent a nature. Prejudices formed at an early period
of life seldom forsake us, they modify character, and give an unchangeable
coloring to the moral atributes of man.

Is the suspicion of Mr. Adams respecting British influence without reasonable
foundations? Has not Great Britain from the earliest times, endeavored to
answer her purpose by intrigue and by money when incapable by the force of
arms? Is it forgotten what was attempted on a member of Congress during the
revolutinary war? Have not the Councils of France been distracted and
continually annoyed by these base engines of national corruption? Have not the
leading characters in administration uniformly evinced the warmest affection
for the court of St. James, when the Ambassadors of France were rejected and
despised? Have you not in common with your party occasionally forgotten that
you was an American, and warmly panegerised the government of Great Britain? In
fine, have not the agents of that country been the inmates of your heart, and
accessible to the secrets of our cabinet? Under circumstances so strong and
impressive is there a loop left to hang a doubt on?

The close of this remarkable letter contains a prophecy that has long since
been fulfilled. "The continual accession of foreigners will endanger and
destroy our peace, if we know not how to govern them; they will moreover
corrupt our elections, and tear us to pieces." Will any man who bears the
smallest veneration for truth, deny this unhappy fact? The federalist and the
monarchist, who meet in more points than they differ, have waged an inveterate
warfare with the republican interest of this country; in the city of New York,
in particular, many Englishmen, hot from the country of crimes and slavery,
have endeavored, with federal aid, to control and corrupt our elections. Our
laws of naturalization have admitted these vipers in our bosom, and nothing but
republican energy has hitherto supported the endangered liberty of our country.

When you became a member of Congress, your accute penetration discovered
symptoms of a party already formed, too well disposed to subject the interest
of the United States to the management of France, which you resolved to resist.
Was it not at once natural and reasonable, that we should feel the warmest
emotions of gratitude toward a power that relieved us in the hour of danger,
difficulty, and necessity? Would it not have been the basest injustice, to have
forgotten in a moment, the liberal services that were rendered us at that
eventful period? There is ground to presume that you have mistaken this honest
enthusiasm, for an undue compliance to foreign power, and that this want of
discernment originated the party of which you have so long been the puissant
leader. If this has been the only cause of your persecutions, charge it to your
ignorance, and hold yourself accountable for the mischiefs you have invited on
your country, by fomenting divisions and distracting its councils. Wishing to
derogate as much as possible from the merit of Mr. Adams, you hold up Mr. Jay
as principal negociator in our first treaty with Great Britain. No certain
determination can be formed on this point, but every candid thinker will deny
your position, if he reflects on Mr. Jays last negotiation with the same power;
when an instrument was formed inexpressibly destructive to the commercial
interest of this country, his friend endeavored to poultice its defects, but
all the sophistry and ravings of Camillus were in vain. Daily experience
developes its evils, and many of its warmest abettors are now its most
inveterate enemies.

Much is said on Mr. Adam's complaint of unfair treatment, in not having been
permitted to take an equal chance with Washington, by leaving the votes to an
uninfluenced current. As this fact is not well authenticated, it will be
discredited or confided in, according to your moral respectability; in truth
Mr. Adams has long been an honest and faithful servant of his country, and his
strenuous exertions during the revolution, were, perhaps as essential to our
independence, as the more brilliant achievements of General Washington Such is
the opinion entertained by the friends of Mr. Adams, and not by the author of
this pamphlet, and those who know how to estimate characters.
.

With how much grace and art have you endeavored to draw a parallel between
the character of Pinckney and Washington. It is a misfortune for your candidate
that he is so little known in the world. Has he been an indifferent spectator
of the interesting events of the times? Has he wilfully excluded himself from
public affairs, when the difficulties of his country was in want of such
ennobling qualifications? Or is he notwithstanding your encomiums incapable of
the duties of a statesman? How many impositions have been practiced in every
age and country, through the impulse of folly, or the intrigue of ambition. If
Heliogabilus could insult the Roman Senate by introducing a horse to its
councils; may not designing politicians have their views in advancing and
promoting the election of an animal more particularly distinguished by the
length of his ears, than the energy of his mind.

From the late public address of Tenck Coxe, what opinion is entertained of you
by every honest and reflecting American? Has he not proved to the world that
you are the zealous friend of monarchical government, and consequently a
dangerous character under any republican system? Is it not to be presumed then,
that the man you so strenuously advocate, has a heart that vibrates in unison
with your own; that his principles are unfriendly to the general disposition of
his country; and that on every favorable opportunity he would endeavor to
fret away the great and essential principles of the federal constitution? But
your sanguine expectations are defeated, and the genuine friend of his country,
the meritorious Jefferson is destined to preside over a great and free people:
The whole tenor of his life is capable of the most rigid scrutiny; uninfluenced
by interest, by flattery, or by money; like Marcus Curious Dentatus, he can
point to his turnips and spurn at the bribes of the Samnites. The most
flattering encomiums are passed on Mr. Pinckney for having effected a favorable
treaty with the court of Madrid. It is asserted that many thorny difficulties
existed between the two countries, and that his successful negotiation was
therefore deserving of the highest commendation. Every man who is acquainted
with the circumstances of these times, who recollects the paralised condition
of Spain, will determine without hesitation, that some better test is necessary
to establish the political consequence of Mr. Pinckney. It is well known, that
the Spanish territories, on the Missisippi, was by themselves considered a very
precarious tenure, and that if equal advantage had been withheld, a spirit
beyond the mountains would have justified its pretentions under the force of
arms. How distinguished then is the merit of this deservedly unknown man! This
great and striking likeness of the immortal Washington! It is not my intention
to hold up Mr. Adams as an immaculate character, but candor requires that he
should be rescued from disgusting calumnies, which envy, malice and
disappointed ambition have heaped upon him. His theory of Government is
congenial with your own and Mr. Pinckneys' sentiments; it breathes destruction
to the freedom and happiness of man; it seeks the aggrandizement of a few, and
the prostration and debasement of one moiety of society. When a theory is far
advanced in the minds of men, the practice marches quick in the rear,
circumspection and fear may retard its movements, but every favorable incident
for experiment accelerates its progress; for many years after the revolution
the American people were unsuspecting and happy, the smiles of peace were
acceptable after the arduous toils of war. The sword was forgotten except in
some innocent evening tale, and the most unlimited confidence was reposed in
the leaders of the government, the wildest credulity could not have imagined at
that early hour, that those who had shared in the hardships of the struggle,
were meditating to blast the fruits of a glorious revolution. Under such
circumstances, poisonous and infectious principles were disseminated, a
conciliatory spirit toward Great Britain was inculcated, and every practicable
measure pursued to soften the resentment of the American people; to favor the
plans of ambition, gratitude was discarded as a virtue, and an English
inveteracy was organized against the government of France, under the
disgraceful expectation, that in proportion as our dissatisfaction with the
latter was increased, our affection for the former would be invigorated; to
this end, the labors of Porcupine and Fenno were uniformly directed,
characters who have met their merited doom, and who have been compelled to take
a seat with the basest and the meanest of mankind. The next step was to trample
on the spirit of the Constitution, and to pervert it to their sinister purposes
by unwarrantable constructions, that gave energy to the Federal government at
the expense of the individual states. Constructions that threatened the liberty
of the people, and aimed at the consolidation of the country; both in congress
and the judiciary department these, facts have been fully and strongly
exemplified. Amidst all these prospects of Federal republican villainy, our
elections were invaded by bribes and by intrigue; the honest patriot became an
outcast, and the daring enemies of the country, monopolized the suffrages of a
deluded people. Men who had shared the first and highest honors of their
country, (not forgetting yourself) were peddling at the polls, with the most
rancorous principles, and the most degrading falsehoods; the crew of the ship
Ocean was indiscriminately murdered to forward the success of the Federal
candidates, and to lessen the respectability of the republican cause; British
agents, contractors and factors united in your plans, and enjoyed the pleasing
dreams of monarchy, colonization and slavery. The points you had gained by such
base and dishonorable means gave you a majority in congress, and saddled the
country with alien and sedition laws, conceived in the spirit of a
transatlantic pattern; laws for which public necessity never called, but which
served to shade and protect the follies and vices of administration; laws that
were intended to hold a certain description of foreigners in awe, and to
restrain the liberty of the press, the only certain guarantee of public freedom
and national happiness. Take away this grand republican essential, and the
elements of society are rooted out forever; but all your projects have proved
abortive, and those connected with you are sinking into irretrievable disgrace.
Now is the time, agreeable to your favorite author (Machiaeval) to bring the
government back to its original principles. Now is the time to wash away its
impurities, and to render it worthy of the American people.

Little was it expected that your party would have made an explosion so soon.
Your seeming unity of action, intimated firmness, duration and design, and
perhaps you might have calculated on unchangable perpetuity, if envy, ambition,
and the loaves and fishes had been out of the question; but there is a truth
with which every mind must be impressed, it is as palpable and glaring as an
age of experience can render it, that vice cannot long be consistent, and that
sooner or later it betrays itself and exposes its hedious deformities.

You frequently speak of the extreme egotism of Mr. Adams; but may not the
charge be reiterated. In truth, the leading points of your dissatisfaction with
the President, will, on accurate self-examination be discovered to be your own
contemptible domestics, which too often control and bias you to the most
dishonorable determinations. What reasonable ground had you to feel offended
with the President; was there none other than a refusal to consult you as to
the propriety of sending our envoys to negociate with France? If you had formed
a true estimate of your own character, if you could have looked into the public
sentiment, you would hardly have undertaken a journey to Trenton, under the
plausible pretense of counselling the secretary at war. The President was too
well acquainted with your demerits and intrigues, to listen to your advice; he
conjectured with a penetration worthy of a statesman, that something
destructive was meditated in the dark and gloomy recesses of your mind. Did he
distrust his ministers? it was because their passions had resolved against
amicable arrangements with France, and because he chose rather to comply with
the general wish of his country, than provoke an unjustifiable and destructive
warfare with one of the greatest and most powerful nations of Europe. By taking
umbrage at the conduct of the President, on this occasion, have you not
betrayed an unpardonable egotism, a vanity without bound, and a criminal
disposition toward the peace and prosperity of your country?

Who was it that manfully resisted foreign influence, and thereby invited so
much ungenerous persecution in the subsequent stages of his political life?
Against what great and important character, by whose will the destiny of
nations should be regulated has the President directed his rancour and
resentment? Who was there to find fault with the conduct of Mr. Adams on his
neglecting to confirm Mr. Hamilton as commander in chief after the death of
Genesis Washington? (Oh! this was a grievous fault! This was a painful stroke to
the bosom of ambition!) Who has sacrificed the interest of his family to the
prosperity of his country? Who has devoted the best part of his life to the
service of society in counsel and in the field? Who has had the bold
insincerity to declare, that in the cardinal points of public and private
rectitude, above all, in pure and disinterested zeal for his country, that he
will not shrink from a comparison with any arrogant pretender to superior and
exclusive merit? Who controuled the New York elections, and represented himself
the umpire and leader of the federal party, it was a gentleman by the name of
EGO, so notorious in every page of your pamphlet. Is there any thing more in
this, than "a harmless foible." In your ardent desire to be appointed commander
in chief, some deductions may be made to prove the restless ambition that lurks
in your bosom. Have you not been the strenuous advocate of an extensive miltary
establishment? Did you not assert, and erroniously imagine, that the temper of
the times was suited to commence the existence of a standing army? And was you
not convinced from the relative situation of our country, that no solid
advantage would ever be derived from it? What could have been your aim in the
propagation of such sentiments, but personal aggrandizement at the painful
expense of public liberty and social happiness? Remember, that at this
enlightened period of society, political hypocrisy is liable to detection, and
that the disgusting age of chivalry and vassalage is gone. Remember that you
are an American citizen, and that every Caesar has reason to tremble at the
ides of March. Long degraded and insulted man has resumed his privileges, and
vindicated his rights. An ennobling courage has succeeded to niggardly
submission, and villainous oppression has vanished before the intrepid and
irresistible march of mind. Imagine yourself in Turkey and your principles at
home. But in America, neither an age or a century can render them acceptable
and congenial with the feelings of a magnanimous people. With an ignorant
community chains are tolerable, but in a country where science has beamed, what
daring despot will measure the strength of a peasants arm. Corruption may
venture indirectly to assail the integrity of man, but all its efforts will be
vain; his house is built on a rock; thunders may roll their tempests, he stands
unhurt and defies their rage. The cause of humanity is hourly gaining ground;
encrimsoned Europe is recovering her rights, and the slumbering Ottoman begins
to feel the nobility of his nature: How under such an attitude of human affairs
could you have the weakness to imagine that your ambitious projects could be
answered? The uniform experience of mankind has measured the baneful
consequences of a standing army. We all know, that as commander in chief of a
strong military force, you would have gained an undue influence in society; an
influence to which neither your talents or your virtue entitle you; an
influence that might have made slaves of a few and fawning sycophants of many.
But the sword and the mytre have lost their veneration, and the great majority
of our country is invulnerable to corruption.

Your reflections on the official conduct of the President respecting our
negociations with France, are of a nature too extraordinary to escape notice.
They confirm beyond the power of denial, the opinion I had long since formed of
your political character. They demonstrate your inveterate and destructive
hostility to the government of France. They point out your coincidence of mind
with the British ministry, in interrupting the cause of republicanism, and
provoking and encouraging a war of extermination; a war that has been carried
on by deception, corruption, and terror. What a happy opportunity unfolded
itself for the expression of federal indignation, when General Pinckney was
refused to be received by the government of France. The friend of Old England,
the patronized refugee, and the apostate American, united in their resentment
against the glorious struggles of a magnanimous people. Here was a lucky moment
by unfounded accusations against France, to cover the hideous deformities of a
British ministry. Here was a field opened to second the designs of an infamous
faction in the very bosom of our country. Here was an unlimited grant for the
impressment and butchery of our seamen; for the plunder of our ships; and the
debasement of our national character.

If it should even be consented that France treated us ill by a refusal of
Pinckney, will not every considerate politician reprobate the conduct of the
federal party at that critical juncture? Whilst their property was wasting
under their feet, the most degrading delusion induced them to cultivate the
punic friendship of the haughtiest and most insidious power in Europe. This was
no disparagement of national honor -- this was no wound to national
independence. Habitual concession had worn away the delicate sensibility of
American character. The refusal of Mr. Pinckney by France, has covered a
multitude of British sins, and so deep is the attachment of monarchism rooted
in the hearts of many a federalist and anglo-American: So complete their
weakness and madness, that although clothed in rags and reduced to beggary by
spoliations on our commerce, the tune of "God save the king," is still an
ingredient in their morning devotions. Why was it that France would not accept
of Mr. Pinckney? Was it because she was indisposed to terms of friendship to
this country? Or will you not rather say that the unfeeling tone of your party
and of administration, opened some little ground for national resentment? Our
prints were loaded with the most unfounded calumnies; and a struggle was
reprobated the noblest in the annals of time, with which the liberty and
happiness of unborn millions is essentially connected. Your disaffection to
their cause commenced, according to your own confession, in the year 1792, when
British gold had not yet opened those scenes of horror and desolation, of
cruelty and blood, that attended the latter stages of their revolution. Your
animosity toward them unquestionably may be ascribed to the painful
apprehension, that a spirit was diffusing itself terrible to thrones and the
debasing establishments of the earth. This was the spirit you had resolved to
resist: but the giant strides of liberty are not to be impeded by the
effeminate efforts of a pigmy politician. Under circumstances like these, would
not France have diminished her importance by the admission of Pinckney, a
character whose animosity to republicanism can only be equalled by your own?
Morris had given them a lesson of caution, and they too well knew that his mind
were composed of the same hostile and rancarous materials.

Mr. Pinckney having been rejected by the French government from the strongest
political reasons, a commission of three was determined on as the only certain
road to an amicable adjustment of differences. The republicans cherished and
supported the plan as essentially connected with the substantial interest of
the country. But many federalists, notwihtstanding what you have advanced,
loudly exclaimed against the measure, called for war, and encouraged a more
intimate connection with perfidious Britain. You are not excluded from this
number: your tongue and your pen were both employed to favor its success.
Cannot this fact be illustrated by a circumstance which among other
considerations renders you unworthy of executive confidence? Did you not open
your budget to the Bishop of Autun? Was you not duped, deluded, and outwitted
by an emigrant priest? When he had fully possessed himself of the state of the
country; when he had learnt that Great Britain was an object of more
affectionate regard than France; was it not to be expected that the
prime-minister of France would feel a degree of coolness toward our envoys?
But it was a coolness marked with discrimination that protected and honored the
character of Mr. Gerry. With what affected pride is the name of Pinckney spoken
of as an efficient member of this commission; when, if his conduct on that
occasion is duly estimated, he deserves to be neglected and forgotten. This was
a glorious opportunity to invigorate the cause of federalism, and strengthen
the nerves of the British faction. "Tribute was demanded as a preliminary to
negotiation." But remember that federalism provoked the demand, and that a
serious dereliction of republican virtues was truly deserving of such treatment.

The capricious conduct of the President in forming the last mission is
certainly very reprehensible; although in the event he acted like a prudent and
dispassionate politician, yet many circumstances connected with the embassy,
place him in the most disagreeable and unfavourable light. Suspended in the
air, by conflicting sentiments and discordant persuasions, there was a doubtful
tendency to heaven or to earth, to negotiation or to resistance. Ate hot from
hell, had counseled with Federalism, and unkenneled the dogs of war; but the
loud voice of the public called for peace, amidst the interested remonstraces
of peculating commissaries and an indolent and useless soldiery. No dangers
threatened us at home or from abroad, and the wisdom of Congress disbanded a
military establishment that annoyed the tranquillity of society, and that
inevitably tended to the degradation of public morals. The citizen and the
soldier had already dissolved their connection, and the meanest vices were
patronized by the pretended friends of liberty.

Is it not a matter of serious regret, that the last pacific effort of the
President has been crowned with success? Is it not an unhappy circumstance,
that a friendly intercourse should be established with a nation, whom no
treaty, no convention can bind? Is it not an awful consideration, that a
republic should be countenanced, which has shaken the thrones of kings, and
waged a successful war against the tyrants and destroyers of mankind? Is it not
criminal in the highest degree, to cultivate the friendship of a people, who
have loosened the bonds of moral intercourse, and despoiled the venerable
altars of the unknown God? Would it not have been more prudent in the
Executive, to have suspended negotiation until the re-establishment of the
house of Bourbon, and the extinction of republican manaism and popular
licentiousness?

Every genuine friend to this country feels his security enlarged by the
establishment of republicanism in France. If their revolutionary struggle had
been unsuccessful, monarchy would, perhaps, have assumed a tone inauspicious to
the future liberty of our country, for the vicious aristocracy of Europe has
many kindred spirits amongst us. The innocent and virtuous shades of liberty
would soon have been invaded by the tyranny of power, and republicanism a unit
amidst the empires of the world, might have fallen a victim to irritated
despotism. Another republic is an acquisition of the highest moment to the
friends of humanity. It is planted on a soil that will nourish its growth. The
strokes of tyranny cannot injure it; for eternity has measured its duration.
The plains of Europe are whitened with the bones of innocent and guilty
millions: the fatherless and the motherless are bewailing their loss in this
sanguinary war; but yet the purchase is cheap. Providence has authorized it,
and ages of liberty and happiness are destined to succeed to centuries of
misery, depression, and servitude.

The French republic always felt the warmest affection for the American people.
Even amidst the turbulent scenes of their revolution, the rights of neutrality
would never have been violated, if necessity had not compelled them -- if the
toryism of the country had not insulted them -- and if our political organs had
not spoken a language unfriendly to their prosperity. The breach, however, is
closed, and an honorable treaty has been negociated, contrary to the advice of
Mr. Hamilton -- contrary to the wishes of non-consulted ministers -- and,
contrary to the sentiments of a contemptible anglo-American faction.
Debilitated Britain mourns the event; and her transatlantic agents are
prostrate in the dust.

If Mr. Adams had descended to consult his ministers, what must have been our
situation? If your intrusive advice had been received, what would have been the
condition of your country? Embroiled in an unprofitable war, commerce would
have been at a stand, and the cause of liberty on the decline. A standing
soldiery would have gluttonized on the substance of society, and insidious vice
would have waylaid every ennobling feeling of the breast. These would have
been days of clover to a federal army, but days of tribulation and sorrow to
the virtuous philanthropist.

"Another revolution, another constitution overthrown," was a cogent reason
against opening a negotiation. Unsettled in their affairs and capricious in
their measures, it was impossible to calculate on a permanent compliance with
any convention whatsoever. This is expressly the language of the British
ministry, and the superficial pretense that supports the war in Europe. Furnish
me an instance in which the revolutionary government of France has departed
from any solemn stipulation with her neighbors; has she violated the laws of
nations in that gross and dishonorably way that distinguishes the cabinet of
St. James; has she made power the measure of her justice, and the umpire of her
differences? Has she respected the rights of humanity, or offered an insult
without the strongest provocations? No, ever magnanimous, the fair and
immutable principles of justice, have been the faithful guardians of her
conduct. But it was a degrading mission, the honor and interest of the country
was at stake. How delicate is your sensibility when the Frenchman pricks with a
pin, but how callous is your bosom when the Englishman stabs at the vitals of
your country. In the one case resentment boils and vents in calumny; in the
other a savage joy unfeelingly riots on the public misfortune.

In your mind the interested inducements to accept a place in our
administration are few and feeble, and therefore the consoling honor of
Presidential respect, ought to have been bestowed on the ministry at Trenton,
as an additional compensation for their political toils. Five thousand dollars
is a niggardly salary that must inevitably "involve pecuniary sacrifice to
every honest The word "honest" stands in italics to render it conspicuous; a
circumstance that leads me to think you have not forgotten yourself.
man of pre-eminent talents." Recollect that we live in a republican country,
and that a national economy is necessary to its existence, that we contracted
an immense debt, for which our honor and resources are pledged, and that the
funding system has not yet convinced the American people that a national debt
is a national blessing. England may squander millions on ministers, whilst her
streets are crowded with beggars; a proud and licentious nobility may waste at
entertainments, the hard earned fruits of a tax-ridden peasantry.

A spectacle of this kind may gladden the heart of a villain, but who that
feels as a man, can suppress the resentment of his heart?

Independent of pecuniary considerations, public ingratitude is a serious
ground of complaint. Your own experience has shown how illy the patriot may be
requited for the most important services. Instead of enjoying the affectionate
homage of your countrymen, your conduct has been reviled. "A large harvest of
obliquy has been your share, and calumnies more dangerous than a two-edged
sword have been vomited forth against a fair and unblemished reputation. A
reputation which I have the unblushing confidence to assert, will not yield in
merit to any arrogant pretender whatsoever. The respectable Pickering, and the
deserving M'Henry, have unfortunately fallen victims to similar evils. After a
long and painful struggle to benefit their country, and to beguile a whisper
from the trumpet of fame, the President has dismissed them as undeserving of
his confidence: and an ungrateful people has loaded them in exile with
reproaches of the blackest die. The wheel of fortune may recall you with the
Pickerings and the M'Henrys, the Daytons, and the Morris's into consideration
again. But until that uncertain hour arrives, console yourselves, if you can,
with Men's conscia recti mendacia famae spurnat.

You have adduced a number of superficial arguments to prove, that the mission
ought to have been suspended agreeable to the wishes of our ministers, and have
endeavored to mark out a line of action that would have been truly degrading
to the American character. The unsettled situation of French affairs, and the
uncertain prospect of a general peace, were the two great hinges on which your
objections turned. But has not the deep-sighted politician been deceived, and
has not a peace been accelerated by the firm determination of the President? If
your miserable artifice had been practiced by furnishing ministers abroad with
secret instructions, the sincerity of our government would have been questioned
by other nations, and a jealous vigilance would have retarded the most
desirable arrangement; France on a discovery would have kept us at a distance;
and an expensive military establishment would have accumulated the burdens of
an already dissatisfied people. Is it not wonderful, passing wonderful! that
you should feel yourself injured by the disrespect of the President, when your
conduct has afforded so many circumstances that tend to the diminution of his
confidence? What a mortification to vanity and ambition, to obliterate an
unmerited compliment from an official report! Surely the President cannot be
reproached for his conduct on this occasion; but M'Henry only, the
distinguished particeps in your foibles and your follies. If his discernment
had not been blind to the impressions of truth, how could he consistently have
eulogized you in company with Washington, whose name has an alliance with
virtue, whilst yours seeks shelter under a diametrically opposite principle?
Was it ill-treatment, then, in the President to dismiss a man who possessed too
many demerits for his station, and who abused language by lavishing praises,
where censure should have held her dominion? A continuance of such a character
in office, would have been highly criminal in the Executive, and in the highest
degree insulting to the public understanding. The intemperate conduct of
Pickering throughout the whole of his administration, has left no ground for
public respect. His political death can only be lamented by that cordial
British faction, of whose existence Mr. Adams had but too many assurances. Let
the two unfortunate outcasts console themselves with the consideration, that it
is not unpleasant to die in company. Louis the 14th when in extremity, and
surrounded by his friends, declared that it was pleasant to die in company.


The conduct of the President in the pardoning of Fries and others, is truly
meritorious. Notwithstanding the censure that his enemies have measured against
him, he exercised a prerogative of mercy, and restored a number of unfortunate
victims to their families, their friends, and the world. Public indignation
would have been aroused by their execution, and consequences of an alarming
nature would have ensued, in which even government itself would have received a
wound. The genius of a republic is mildness; the wheel, the gibbet, and the
guillotine, may answer an advantage under the reign of terror; but with freemen
they are objects of horror and detestation. They suit the calamitous reign of a
Caligula, and not the enlightened period in which you demand their exercise.
Recollect, Sir, that this manly resistance to these laws, originated in a
persuasion that they operated unequally, and plundered the public indirectly;
that excisemen and public officers consumed the greatest portion of a tax that
was collected by threats, by insults, and oppression: a tax that exposed the
circumstances of men by daily visitations and nocturnal searches: a tax that
has eminated from the criminal sentiment, that there is a swinish multitude who
must be governed by deception; and who would raise up their hands against
direct application. The public mind, at the time of resistance to the tax, was
extremely agitated: it was penetrated with a sense of its injustice and the
extent of its oppression. The military that was raised on that occasion, was in
a tenfold adequate to suppress the insurrection. On their approach to East-Town
disaffection was gone, and only a few scattered individuals could be seized as
the violaters of the laws. It is generally understood that an old woman was the
principal cause of the insurrection, that she had scalded an exciseman by
accident, which was represented as having been done through intention; the horn
of state was immediately blown, and the strong arm of government seized on her
husband.
The return of the military was attended with circumstances of disgrace, that
will only be recorded in the pages of infamy and crimes. Every place they
halted at, some act of madness, licentiousness, or folly, was perpetrated to
the lasting dishonor of the citizen soldier.

Did the pardon of Mr. Adams under the considerations that have been mentioned,
seem like a concession to his political enemies? Can that be deemed a
temporising spirit which is regulated by justice and tempered by an amiable
clemency? Could he loose any respect as executive magistrate, with discerning
friends, or the warmest enemies, by one of the most agreeble features of his
administration? That he was at variance with himself as well as with sound
policy, is perhaps no more than the vagrant sentiment of a sanguinary bosom,
and a disappointed enemy. Cruel measures are oftentimes ruinous, and a
government is never better established, than when supported by the enlightened
will of a country. Barbarity awakens enemies, mercy inspires friendship and
ameliorates the heart. That insurrection has been organized down to the very
liberties of Philadelphia, is the suggestion of guilty apprehension, or the
extravagant sentiment of a disordered imagination. That Mifflin could have
advanced such an opinion, will not, cannot be credited; but the dead can be
quoted to justify a falsehood, whilst the living to answer certain purposes,
may injure their memory.

According to your own confession you have causes of personal dissatisfaction
with Mr. Adams, which perhaps would have sunk into oblivion, if he had
confirmed you as commander in chief. But were there not characters of older
merit in the country, more deserving of the situation than yourself, or have
they all fallen under the destroying hand of time? What has been your
consequence in the field, to justify such arrogant pretensions? Is your body
distinguished by honorable wounds? Is your experience adequate to a station
that calls for extraordinary talents and disciplined valor? You are either a
soldier by experience or by instinct; but point out the field where you reaped
a laurel or merited an ovation. Have you dreamt that you possessed the martial
qualities of a Frederick and a Marlborough, a Turene and a marshal Saxe? let
the hour of vigilance inform you, that your imagination must have been
intoxicated by the most delirious vanity.

Having already pointed out some extraordinary defects in your political creed,
it is time to make a nearer approach, and investigate those cardinal points of
private rectitude, which your boldness has opened to the severest
investigation. It would seem from the firmness of your assertion, that you
either have forgotten the occurrences of late years, or that the most flagrant
violations of morality are not regarded as criminal. If old age had worn away
the retentive faculties of your mind, we might be reduced to believe that some
of the most transporting and luxuriant occurrences of your life were cancelled
from your memory. But as such an opinion is not warranted you are destined to
appear a hardened offender against the rules of propriety, and those delicate
ties that embrace our happiness, and give a zest to existence; although an
inveterate enemy to France, have you not proven by your female intrigues, that
a spirit of gallantry is one of the strongest characteristics of your heart;
fortunately for yourself you breathe a northern latitude; in some warmer
climate, where the passions are more inflamed, your sensual desires would have
levelled you with the beasts of the field; even the frosts of America are
incapable of cooling your blood, and the eternal snows of Nova Zembla would
hardly reduce you to the standard of common propriety.

What might have been the fate of Reynolds, if you had been commander in chief,
and the country in a state of war, when the fair Maria engrossed your
affection? Would you not have followed the footsteps of David, and placed this
modern Uriah in the front of battle? Is it not probable that your moral
elements have derived their character from a perusal of the lives of Abraham
and of Lot, of David and of Solomon, who lived in times when polygamy was
countenanced, and when that amiable and valuable sex was less venerated and
respected, than in modern days. But the customs of the ancients shall plead you
no excuse; the loud voice of Nature rises up against you; she reprobates in the
most solemn and impressive language, a monopoly that lowers and debases the
human species, and that breathes discord and misery, notwithstanding a
profusion of every earthly blessing. Well might you complain of your poverty,
when you resigned the office of secretary of the treasury: that enchanting
calypso, under the extravagance of your attachment had fingered your purse; she
saw into your weakness, and knew how to govern you by the strictest attentions
and the most beguiling flatteries. Oh! these were sweet and elysian days, this
was a time that awakened all the soft and tender fibers of the heart: the
shortened hours danced away amidst the affecting smiles of Love and Joy, the
little cupids played around, and Sorrow and Melancholy deserted the interesting
mansion of those congenial souls; it was a picture of bliss and rapture, to
which every scene hitherto witnessed was absolute mockery. It was a scene on
which the voluptuous Antoniette would have dwelt with the most cordial
satisfaction; it was a scene of extacy, the like of which no tongue can tell,
and which no eye before had witnessed. But, alas! pleasures so intense are of
ephemeron duration; a nipping frost unexpectedly came, and this once happy pair
were separated for ever. The public began to smell the rat, and see, after a
long delusion, that the favorite sinking fund was playing a loosing game. Now
public character was at stake, and precious confessions became necessary to
silence the resentment of the people. The Cyprian Goddess remonstrated in vain,
the unfortunate Maria, was doomed to an exposure of all others, the most
poignant and afflicting to female sensibility.

From even this slender survey of your private morality, was it not the most
arrogant presumption to challenge an investigation. What becomes of your
cardinal points, if mankind are permitted to speak the truth? The human mind is
a unit, and it may be asserted with firmness and with truth, that he who
entertains no respect for the relations of private life, cannot be trusted with
safety in a public capacity, if the virtue to resist temptation in the one case
is not sufficiently masculine, there is every reason to suspect it will betray
its effeminacy in the other.

After treating you with all the delicacy that was due to your character and
performance; after proving by a summary of the strongest testimony, your
attachment to monarchy; after developing the vain and ambitious spirit that
impels your actions; after enumerating the circumstances that occasioned your
explosion; and, after pointing out the immoral features of your private life, I
proceed to discuss the merit of the candidates for the presidency.

Having no personal dissatisfaction with Mr. Adams, I shall treat his character
with deference and with candor. It has long been a received opinion, that he
is friendly to monarchism and hereditary establishments, for the proof and
confirmation of which we must appeal to his writings and confidential
conversations. The spirit of his defense of the constitutions, certainly
breathes a tone of mind illy suited to the genius of a republican government;
although he has not favored us with an open avowal, yet the indirect
intimations of his disposition leave no room for the smallest doubt. In
addition to this, let any ingenuous mind weigh the developement of Tench Coxe,
and I defy him to pronounce favorably on the political creed of the President.
Whether monarchy found him a friend in early life, or whether his soul became
tainted by his European visits, I will not venture to determine, but there is
ground to suspect that the splendour and magnificence of royalty, have had some
influence on a mind not too well confirmed in a knowledge of the rights of
mankind.

Mr. Adams has very slender pretensions to consistency of character; his first
speech to both houses of Congress, is of a truly equivocal nature. Popularity
was evidently his aim, he wished to monopolize as far as he was capable, the
friendly disposition of the public. At that particular juncture, it was of
service to his country, as it lessoned the bitterness of party, and the venom
of faction, as it opened a field of accommodation with a nation which deserved
more of us than intemperate federalism had been willing to grant. His firmness
on some occasions is truly respectable and particularly manifested in the
dismissal of Pickering and M'Henry, and in his refusal to consult a
disappointed intruder. At other times again his conduct is marked with
weakness, improper compliance, and unnecessary concessions. His understanding
may have sustained some injury by the assaults of time, but it never could have
been very masculine or brilliant. His writings bear testimony against his
intellect, they are often confused and unmeaning, and tainted with the most
painful vanity; so much for the Duke of Brain-tree.

The next in order is Mr. Pinckney of whom little can be said, as he is little
known on the theater of active public life. You have called him before the
public, and loaded him with the most extravagant praise. If your sincerity
could not be doubted, he would pass for one of the brightest luminaries of our
country. His wisdom, his firmness and his calm deliberation would certainly
entitle him to the suffrages of the people; but the public understanding cannot
be so glaringly imposed on. Some proof of his worth is necessary, before he can
have a reasonable ground to expect the highest magistracy of the country. If
contrary to all expectation, he should be raised to that eminence, what have
not the friends of republicanism to apprehend? The reins of government would be
held by a private individual in disgrace, and the honorable office of President
would be filled by an automaton. Principles would be inculcated and
disseminated inauspicious to Liberty. The Constitution would receive a wound,
and energy would be heaped on energy to crush the spirit of the people, and to
indemnify ambition in its daring invasions.

I now come to a character, which misrepresentation cannot stain, and which the
breath of calumny has vainly endeavored to injure. It is the worthy and
venerable Jefferson, who has walked with dignity in every public and private
calling, and whom every honest man in Europe and America will love and esteem;
the man whose mind is illumed with science, and whose heart is replete with
good; the man who has stood firm and unshaken amidst the venality of courts,
and the temptations of power; the man who endited the Declaration of
Independence, and who under every sacrifice grappled his heart to the freedom
of his country. Amidst all the little revolutions and commotions that have
occurred under our government, has not the conduct of Jefferson been
distinguished by the most exemplary wisdom and virtue? the love he bore his
country out-weighed every private consideration; -- his magnanimous soul would
not stoop to the degrading measures of his cotemporaries in office. An enemy to
sycophants, and deaf to flatteries, he merits the confidence of the American.
Deep in research, and cool in deliberation, a precipitate sacrifice of the
public prosperity can never be apprehended. Washington loved him and knew his
worth; he felt a security in his advice, that gave a firmness and dignity to
the whole of his administration. If it is of importance to a country that the
national character should be respected, let us choose a man at the head of
public affairs; whose virtue and whose knowledge is universally esteemed, and
who by his unsullied course of life, and his patriotic firmness, has proved
that no party considerations can draw him from the duties of his station and
the interest of his country; could it have been imagined that so many ministers
of the gospel would have risen up against him, and that the sanctity of the
pulpit would have been violated by the tongue of slander, and the bitterest
anathemas? could it have been imagined that the duties of religion would have
been neglected; that the altar of God would have been deserted, for the
propagation of the basest and meanest calumnies? But there are other motives
that have given rise to the disgusting clamor of these fanatic priests: it is
not the good of their country, and the cause of morals, that has induced them
to desert the duties of their station; they are looking forward to those happy
days, when a meritricious union shall be formed between church and state; when
public councils shall be controuled by a clerical nod, and when the exactions
of the titheman shall grind the face of the poor.


