A FUNERAL DISCOURSE, DELIVERED IN THE PRESBYTERIAN CHURCH OF NEW-BRUNSWICK, ON
THE 31st OF DECEMBER, 1799; THE DAY SET APART BY THE CITIZENS FOR PAYING SOLEMN
HONORS TO THE MEMORY OF GENESIS GEORGE WASHINGTON.

BY THE REV. IRA CONDICT, A. M.

PASTOR OF THE LOW DUTCH REFORMED CHURCH, IN THE CITY OF NEW-BRUNSWICK.

Know ye not that there is a prince and a great man fallen this day in Israel?
NEW-BRUNSWICK, NEW JERSEY:

NEW-BRUNSWICK, January 6, 1800. REVEREND SIR,
WE are directed by the Common Council of this city, to express their thanks to
you for the excellent DISCOURSE you delivered upon the late mournful occasion,
in memory of the departed friend of our country, GENERAL WASHINGTON; and we are
also instructed to request you to gratify them with a copy of the DISCOURSE for
publication.

We are with every sentiment of respect, Reverend Sir, your obedient servants.
Committee of Arrangement.
JOHN NEILSON, JOHN BRAY, JACOB R. HARDENBERGH,
THE REV. MR. CONDICT.

NEW-BRUNSWICK, January 6, 1800. GENTLEMEN,
THE thanks of the Common Council of the city of New-Brunswick, expressed to me
in your note, with respect to the discourse, which I delivered, on the late
mournful occasion, in memory of the departed friend of our country, is very
grateful to me; and be assured, that I shall ever account their approbation of
my performances, an honor to me, and hold it in high estimation. Their request
for a copy of that discourse, is very unexpected to me, and the publication of
it, as it respects myself, is far from my desire. But deference for their
opinion, and the respect which I fell to be due to their solicitation, oblige
me to a compliance. I send you herewith the requested copy. On account of
necessary avocations, this discourse was prepared in haste; in less time and
with less study, than I have devoted to many others, on ordinary occasions. And
a thought of its ever being heard or noticed, by any except the people of my
own charge, never entered my mind until the morning of the Lord's day, in which
I expected to deliver it; when, in consequence of the illness of General
Frelinghuysen, you requested me to reserve it for the more solemn occasion, on
which it had been expected that he would speak. As you had previously obtained
the consent of Mr. Vredenburgh to preach that day in my place, I thought it
inconsistent with my duty to refuse. Only one day intervening, time did not
admit of any material alteration of the discourse that I had prepared, except
the omission of some parts of it, that I might not be tedious: and those parts,
I have not thought myself at liberty to introduce into this copy. With this
exception you have it nearly as it was originally written, and I believe very
nearly as it was delivered. On the whole, it is difficult for me to think that
the discourse merits the attention which it has received. The utmost I
expected, was, that it would not disgust or offend, and might, by the blessing
of God, be in some degree useful. And I cannot help thinking, that the
solemnity of the occasion, the high respect and affection entertained for the
memory of that eminent man, and a lively sensibility to the loss of him,
contributed much to the estimation which some gentlemen formed of what was
said. This, however, I leave to the judgment of others. I commit the discourse,
such as it is, into the hands of providence; and my only prayer respecting it,
is, that it may be accompanied with a divine blessing to those who may do it
the honor of reading it. And to those who may judge that I have acted unwisely
in suffering it to appear in public print, my regards for the respectable body
who have done me the honor of requesting it, must be my apology.

With high respect, I am, Gentlemen, your obliged friend, and humble servant.
IRA CONDICT. Committee of Arrangement. MESSRS.
JOHN NEILSON, JOHN BRAY, JACOB R. HARDENBERGH,


A FUNERAL DISCOURSE.
II. KINGS, ii 12. AND ELISHA SAW IT, AND HE CRIED, MY FATHER! MY FATHER! THE
CHARIOT OF ISRAEL, AND THE HORSEMEN THEREOF. AND HE SAW HIM NO MORE: AND HE
TOOK HOLD OF HIS OWN CLOTHES, AND RENT THEM IN TWO PIECES.
"DUST thou art, and to dust thou shall return," is the righteous sentence,
that in consequence of sin, is denounced upon our whole race. "By one man, sin
entered into the world, and death by sin, and so death passed upon all men for
that all have sinned." -- The high and the low, the rich and the poor, the free
and the bond, the wise and the foolish, are alike the subjects of mortality.
One event happens to them all. As the one dies, so dies the other also. No
one abides; but all go the way, whence they shall not return. Of all the
generations that have gone before us, only two individuals have obtained the
privilege of a release, from the claim of death and the grave. -- The first was
Enoch; of whom it is said, that he "walked with God, and was not, for God took
him." And again; "By faith Enoch was translated, that he should not see death,
and was not found, because God had translated him." The other was Elijah, whose
translation is recorded in the verse preceding my text. His soul and body were
not separated from each other; but, in their natural union, taken immediately
into heaven. He was "the second man that leapt the ditch, where all the rest of
mankind fell, and went not downward to the sky." By these two instances, God
prefigured the glorious ascension of the Lord Jesus Christ; and gave to the
church, under the Old Testament, a glimpse of that life and immortality, for
both soul and body, which are now more clearly revealed in the gospel, as the
everlasting inheritance of all his saints. -- The children of God, "who shall
be alive, and remain unto the coming of the Lord, shall not sleep," the sleep
of death, "but shall be changed in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye, at the
last trump." "The dead in Christ shall rise first," incorruptible and immortal.
"Then, we which are alive and remain," being changed, "shall be caught up
together with them, in the clouds to meet the Lord in the air; and so shall we
ever be with the Lord."

IN like manner, these two worthies, Enoch and Elijah, did not see death and
corruption, but underwent an instantaneous change, equivalent 'to that which
those of the children of God experience, who die, and rise again in the image
of Christ, perfect in holiness, and having their bodies "fashioned like unto
his glorious body," spiritual, incorruptible, and immortal, mete for heaven.

WITH regard to the latter of these, it is said in the foregoing verse, "and it
came to pass, as they," Elijah and Elisha, "still went on, and talked, that,
behold, there appeared a chariot of fire, and horses of fire, and parted them
both asunder; and Elijah went up by a whirlwind into heaven." And Elisha, his
pupil, his intimate companion, and his affectionate friend, whom, by divine
command, he had anointed to be the prophet of the Lord, in his stead, saw him
carried up toward heaven, but soon the vision disappeared, and he saw him no
more. His yearning soul, intently fixed upon the excellency of that beloved
personage, now taken from his embrace, to return no more, broke forth in a
pathetic and involuntary expression of his worth, and of the incalculable
greatness of the loss, which he and his country would sustain, by his removal.
He "saw it, and he cried, my father! my father! the chariot of Israel, and the
horsemen thereof."

HE himself, had lost the guide of his youth, a most tender, affectionate and
faithful instructor, and therefore he felt, and lamented his condition, as
being like that of a fatherless child, left in a barren and inhospitable world.

AND the public had lost the best of its guard. He was "the chariot of Israel,
and the horsemen thereof." Israel made little use of chariots and horsemen in
their wars; but Elijah was to them, by his counsels and reproofs and prayers,
better than the strongest force, of chariot and horse. By his godly living, and
effectual fervent prayers, he kept off from them many destructive judgments.
His departure from them, was like the routing of an army -- an irreparable
loss! Yea, better would it have been for them, to have lost all their men of
war, than this man of God. And, therefore, in token of the deep sense which he
entertained of his own, and the public loss, "he took hold of his own clothes,
and rent them in two pieces."

FROM the whole, we observe, that to lament the loss, and speak the just
praises of one who is taken away from a life of eminent services to ourselves,
and country in general, is our reasonable duty. It seems, indeed, to be an
evident dictate of our nature. Fallen from God, as mankind are, they are not
wholly bereft of humanity, of social affections, of a sense of moral excellency
and worth, or of sentiments of gratitude to those from whom they have received
signal favors. Eminent moral excellence, commands respect, even from the
wicked; and extraordinary, selfdenied, and disinterested public services, not
infrequently compel involuntary effusions of affection and gratitude, even from
the steeled heart of disingenuous selfishness. Hence the custom of paying
public honors, to the memory of those who have been eminently distinguished by
their purity of life, their talents and usefulness has been general, among the
nations. And, instances have not been wanting, of a people, after having
sacrificed their benefactors to the rage of jealousy and party spirit, struck
with remorse, and revolting from the work of their own hands, returning with
enthusiastic ardor to pay the tribute of respect and gratitude, due to their
memory. So deeply rooted in the human heart, are the sentiments of respect, for
intrinsic worth, and of gratitude for distinguishing benefits.

IT is true, indeed, that depraved men, sometimes misplace their respects, and
pay honors where they are not due. It is also true, that the blinded multitude,
often do, in a great measure, idolize great and good men; regarding them as
though they were independent of their Maker, honoring them for their talents,
as though they had not received them, and giving them praise for their success,
their deeds of charity and usefulness, as though they were not instruments in
the hands of God. No doubt, men often give so much honor to the creature, that
they leave none for their Creator -- so much thanks to the immediate
instruments of their blessings, that they have none for God, the original
author of them, who works all in all. But these things do not militate
against the reality, the propriety, or the justness of the principle, but only
prove the misapplication and abuse of it. And can we, with any color of reason
say, that because the principle is misapplied and abused by many, it is
therefore in itself bad? Or, that because the duty to which it refers, is often
performed in a very wrong manner, therefore no such duty is at all obligatory
upon us? Certainly not. For what principle of the human mind is not perverted?
what duty is not abused by wicked men?

BUT, if to lament the loss, and speak the just praises of one who is taken
away from a life of eminent services to ourselves, and country in general, be
an evident dictate of our nature, then it must be a duty enjoined upon us by
the law of our Maker and sovereign Lord. Accordingly it is authorized and
enforced by many examples recorded in sacred scripture. This honor, as we learn
from the words of the text, Elijah paid to the memory of his departed master.
Though he was then assured, that he should receive a double portion of the same
divine spirit that dwelt in him, and should be the prophet of the Lord, in his
stead, yet he deeply regretted the loss of him, and proclaimed aloud his
superior worth. And we are told, that "the children of Israel wept for Moses in
the plains (...) ^^zekiah, who had so eminently contributed to the reformation,
peace, and prosperity of his people, "slept with his fathers, they buried him
in the chiefest of the sepulchers of the sons of David, and all Judah, and the
inhabitants of Jerusalem, did him honor at his death." And these instances are
recorded without any marks of disapprobation, and so have the force of a
precept to every other people, in similar circumstances. When the Lord takes
from us such an eminent public blessing, he calls to lamentation and mourning,
both on account of the loss, in itself considered, and the frowning aspect of
divine providence which it wears. Those whom he has honored by bestowing upon
them extraordinary gifts, and making them the instruments of much good to us,
he will have us honor. He requires us to give honor to whom ^^nor is due, and
to maintain and manifest ^ grateful remembrance of the blessings that we have
recieved through their instrumentality.

To this duty we are now called, by the death of our excellent and illustrious
fellow citizen, GENERAL GEORGE WASHINGTON. And may not the thousands of this
land, intent upon the removal of so great and good a man, to whom, under God,
we owe so much, with propriety adopt the pathetic language of Elisha, and cry,
"my father, my father, the chariot of America and the horsemen thereof." Yes,
every American will acknowledge, and all nations will testify, that he is the
father of his country. He was the chief instrument in the hand of God, of
bringing us into existence, as a free and independent people. He nursed our
tender years, and under his guardian and fostering care, we have grown up to
manhood.

LIKE a father, he, in the day of danger, directed our defense, and led us to
victory; declining any other reward, than that of the approbation and gratitude
of a free and enlightened people. Though ever firm and undaunted, even in the
most critical and dangerous situations; yet, with parental tenderness and
solicitude, he always maintained a watchful care over the lives of his
countrymen, whom he commanded; and never needlessly exposed them to danger.

LIKE a wise and faithful father, he made himself respected, more by the
propriety and rectitude of his conduct, than by the fear of his displeasure;
and always tempered his authority and the strictness of discipline, with the
soothing and captivating charms of mildness, condescension, and love. And never
was a general more respected, or more beloved.

POSSESSING the first ability both for the field and for the cabinet, and
sustaining the highest offices in the union, he, as a wise and good father,
has set before his countrymen, very admirable examples, for their imitation.
As a man, to a life of pure morals, he has added a high respect for his Maker,
and the institutions of his worship.

As a citizen, he has, by his example, taught his countrymen, to sacrifice all
private and personal considerations, to the preservation and prosperity of the
public weal. Never, perhaps, did any mere man, in similar circumstances, so
clearly show, in all his public conduct, that he was actuated and governed by a
regard to the good of his country. Let the hills and plains of New Jersey give
testimony to his wearisome, perilous and patriotic labors! they speak -- they
tell his worth, and will continue to do so, when our lips shall be closed and
sealed in death. The banks of the Delaware, the vale of Trenton, the height of
Princeton, and the plains of Monmouth, will declare his patriotism and his
praise, to generations yet unborn.

TRACE his history, and mark the admirable uniformity of his conduct! -- In
every situation, in peace no less than in war, he has stood the foremost in
the rank of patriots, with his face steadfastly set toward the public good. View
him at the head of a well disciplined and victorious army, suppressing the
desire of governing, which is so natural to the human heart; discarding all
ambitious views; hushing the well grounded murmurs of his troops; disbanding
them, and retiring with them to private life. View him again, in one of the
most perilous seasons this country ever knew, when an experiment was to be made
of the new constitution, and the public mind was much divided and agitated,
obeying the voice of the people, and taking the dubious helm of government.
What but the desire of serving his country, could have been his inducement? He
had before clearly shown, that the peaceful retirement of Mount Vernon, was
more agreeable and pleasing to him, than the bustle and parade of public life.
And in a scene so difficult, and complicated, and untried, little hope could
have been entertained by him, of adding any thing to the glory of his
character; and he knew, that by undertaking this high charge, he set his
political fame again afloat upon the uncertain and treacherous waves of popular
opinion, and might by some misconduct, or want of success, suffer much loss, if
not sink the whole of his hard earned honor. But uninfluenced by such personal
considerations, his great mind was willing, at the call of his country, to
hazard all!

EQUAL to every task, superior to every difficult emergency, and crowned with
success and glory, view him again, voluntarily returning to private life, and
mingling with the multitude of his fellow citizens. Surely, for the love of his
country, he stands unrivalled in the page of history! What affectionate father
could feel willing to do more for the welfare of his children?

As a prosperous general, as a successful president of the union, he has given
to all who come after him in public offices, a most amiable example of humility
and modesty. He was rather studious to avoid, than to receive the formal
expressions of applause, respect and gratitude with which, every part of the
continent was ready to meet him. And amidst the universal and repeated
acclamations of his country, and the admiration of the surrounding world, his
firm mind, unmoved by vanity, unsullied by pride, retained a just sense of his
limited and dependent powers, and modestly and piously ascribed all his
successes to the merciful dispositions of divine providence. Surely he has, as
a father, set before us, very amiable and admirable examples for our imitation.

AND what shall I say further? With a father's solicitude, he has left to his
country his affectionate advice, an admirable code of political wisdom, by
which we may be guided and profitted, when he is no more. Surely, while a
father is respected, while filial affection and gratitude remain and glow in
the breasts of Americans, the name of WASHINGTON, will be held most dear.
Generations yet to come, contemplating his virtues and services, and in thought
following his departed spirit, will successively and affectionately cry, my
father! my father!

AND may we not with equal propriety apply the other part of the character
which Elisha gave to his departed master, and call him the chariot of America,
and the horsemen thereof. To his wise, and prudent, and magnanimous conduct, as
the commander in chief of our forces, more than to the strength of our forces
themselves, do we owe our deliverance from British tyranny, and our
establishment as a free and independent people. And by his counsels no less
than by his arms, has he contributed to our preservation and prosperity. By
his wisdom, and the respectability of his character, he has done more than any
other man could do, toward the formation, reception and establishment of our
present happy constitution. And to the wise and prudent measures adopted and
established under his presidency in the administration of our government, with
respect to the belligerent powers of Europe, do we owe, under God, the
tranquillity which we have hitherto enjoyed. He has been our guardian angel, our
chief fortress in the hand of providence, both from external assaults, and from
internal division and anarchy. He has been a guard to us, equal to that of the
strongest force of chariots and horsemen. His very name at the head of our
military forces has, probably, more discouraged the threatening enemy from the
prosecution of their evil designs against us, than all the bulwarks and all the
battalions that we have raised. This is probable not only on account of his
known military talents, but also on account of his known influence. When he
accepted the command of our troops, the French government knew, that Americans
would rally and unite under his standard.
Such in brief, is the man whose death we deplore. We have not such another man
to loose. The brightest star in our hemisphere has fallen to the ground. Weep O
daughter of Columbia, thy glory has departed from thee! thy WASHINGTON is no
more!

By this very afflictive dispensation of providence, we are called, first, to
deep mourning. Our father, our guide, our guardian, is taken from us. With
respect to what man can do, our loss must be considered as, in a great measure,
irreparable. Had we lost all our navy, and all our fortresses, and all our
troops, we might replace them with others, of equal worth; but neither America
nor the known world, can furnish a second WASHINGTON. Let him who deems this an
unwarrantable assertion, point out the man who viewed, in every light, both
with respect to talents, integrity and goodness, is, on the whole, in regard to
civil society, his equal. If he say, there may be such an one and yet not be
known. It may be answered, he must be known and proved by a long series of
wise, faithful and generous services, so as to have the full confidence and
affection of every reasonable friend of his country, otherwise he cannot be to
us a second WASHINGTON.
While with humble resignation, we bow before the sovereign will of God, it is
surely our duty as rational creatures, as men, and especially, as the citizens
of America, to be deeply sensible of the loss which we sustain, and to mourn,
not merely in appearance, but in heart.

WE are also hereby called to give-thanks to God, for his past distinguishing
goodness to our land. The same hand that has taken away, did first bestow upon
us, and long continue with us, this great public blessing. If never before, we
should now be sensible of the Lord's mercy to us, in this respect. We should
give thanks to God, that he has honored and blessed our land, with, as far as
we can judge, the greatest man of the age; To look into the heart, is the
peculiar prerogative of God. We can judge of men only from their outward
appearance and conduct. There may, for aught we know, be men in the world, who,
had they been placed in the same or similar circumstances, would have conducted
as well as WASHINGTON, but if this honor has not been put upon them, if they
have not actually so done, if they have not, with equal clearness manifested an
equal degree of greatness and excellence of mind, they cannot be justly
esteemed by us equally great.
that he has preserved his useful life to us, so long -- and that he has made
him to us the instrument of such a series of great and distinguishing blessings.

WE are also called on this occasion to deep humiliation before God, for our
sins, which are the procuring cause of all the calamities that we experience.
The sudden manner in which this excellent man has been snatched from us, in the
midst of his usefulness, and at this dangerous crisis of our public affairs,
when his presence with us seems to be so much needed, denotes the special
displeasure of God, against the people of this land. In his righteous
providence, God has of late brought upon us, one heavy affliction after
another, and because we have not repented and turned from our sins, his anger
is not turned from us, but his hand is stretched out still. And if we do not
now humble ourselves and turn unto the Lord, from whom we have grossly and
shamefully departed, we must prepare to meet our God, in other and more awful
judgments.

BY this bereaving stroke of divine providence, we are also called to special
fervency and importunity in prayer to God -- that he would grant to our land in
general, a dispensation of his spirit and grace, and teach and enable us to
repent of our sins in truth, and to devote ourselves unreservedly to his
service, and make him our only stay and confidence, that it may be well with
us, and our children after us. Although our loss be irreparable with respect to
man, yet it is not so with respect to God. With him, all things are possible.
His hand is not shortened that it cannot save, nor his ear heavy that it cannot
hear. He can bless us with recovering grace. And if God be for us, who can be
against us? the same hand that gave to us, and took from us, GEORGE WASHINGTON,
can raise us up another of equal worth; or he can make weaker instruments an
equal, yea, a greater blessing to us. Let us, therefore, fervently pray, that
God would make us his peculiar people, and graciously condescend to be our God
-- that he would cause a double portion of that spirit of wisdom and integrity
which dwelt in WASHINGTON, to rest on his successors in public offices -- that
instead of a Moses he would give us a Joshua -- that instead of an Elijah, he
would raise us up an Elisha.

FINALLY, by this solemn and afflictive dispensation of providence, we are all
loudly called to prepare for death. We must all shortly die. Neither riches nor
wisdom, nor great usefulness, nor the highest honor and authority can shield us
from the destructive darts of the king of terrors. WASHINGTON has fallen
before him -- WASHINGTON has died -- and you and I must also die. Let us
therefore learn to keep our end in view. Let us without delay, in this day of
our merciful visitation, make our peace with God, by humbling ourselves before
him for our sins, and embracing the Lord Jesus Christ, as the only Savior that
is provided for us. Let us receive him and trust in him, as the Lord our
righteousness and strength. Let us submit ourselves to his authority, and make
his word the rule of our lives. Let us study to abound in every good word and
work, that we may be useful in our respective places, and show forth the
praises of God, our redeemer. Let us herein imitate the good example which the
father of our country has set before us. "Blessed is that servant whom his
Lord, when he comes shall find so doing."

Amen.
FINIS.

