AN ORATION ON THE DEATH OF Genesis George Washington, DELIVERED AT STAMFORD,
CONNECTICUT, ON THE 22d DAY OF FEBRUARY, A. D. 1800.

BY EBENEZER DAVENPORT, ESQUIRE.

PUBLISHED BY THE COMMITTEE OF ARRANGEMENTS.

NEW YORK: PRINTED BY JOHN FURMAN, AT HIS BLANK, STAMP AND STATIONARY SHOP,
OPPOSITE THE CITY-HALL. 1800.

ORATION, etc.
FRIENDS AND FELLOW-CITIZENS,
CALLED to the unaccustomed task of publicly addressing you, and led by a
regard for the true interests of this community, I solicit your attention to a
few of the reflections, which the event we are assembled to commemorate and
those interests are calculated to excite.

The formation of a permanent and well ordered state of Society, is deservedly
considered among the highest objects which can engage the enquiry and exertions
of mankind. On the existence of such a state, the individual and the social
improvement and happiness of man essentially and invariably depend. In that
state only, are the duties resulting from the various relations which its
several members bear to each other, and which all bear to the whole, clearly
understood and faithfully observed. It is this which guarantees the unmolested
enjoyment of property, of liberty, and of life; with the unnumbered blessings
which these lead in their train. It is this which guards under its protecting
wings, those religious institutions formed to shed the most benign influence on
all the powers and conditions of man -- assimilate him to the character of his
maker and secure the anticipation and the future possession of unmeasurable
joys. A society securing these inestimable blessings, affords a remedy to all
the moral, and renders impotent, all the natural evils to which mankind are
exposed; and supplying its various members with their full measure of
improvement and of happiness, exhibits, not merely an appearance but in
reality, a miniature of Heaven.

To introduce and establish on solid foundations, this state of society, have
the labors of the wisest and best of men, in every age, been anxiously exerted.
-- For this great end, have all the real instructors of mankind labored, in
developing the nature and urging the practice, of the duties resulting from
such a state; for enforcing a compliance with these duties, have government and
laws been established, and bands unnumbered waded through seas of blood, to hurl
the proud violaters of them from their seats.

Foremost in the accomplishment of this all-interesting object, stands the
founder of this wide extended empire, the beloved the venerated WASHINGTON,
whose departure has called forth the solemnities of this day: At the sound of
whose name, rush into the mind the overwhelming ideas of all that is
astonishingly great, and attractively amiable in the human character, and all
that is extensively beneficent and godlike in human conduct. A mind of the
largest and clearest perception, improved by industry and experience
unparalleled, concentrating the noblest excellencies of our nature, uniting the
tenderest mildness with firmness immovable, the coolest prudence with
invincible and daring fortitude, the most commanding dignity with modesty
unequalled, ardent affection for his family and friends, with unextinguishable
love for his country, and benevolence embracing the whole human race, founded
on an assemblage of virtues which has adorned and astonished the world. The
dignity of our nature unstained with its vices and its weaknesses, in him shone
with unrivalled luster. In him, virtue accompanied by the largest intelligence
was uniformly exhibited in public and in private, in scenes the most various,
trying and important. In him was it exhibited, diffusing itself in beneficence
through the world, spreading innumerable blessings through our country,
conveyed to every state and to every town; fostering the happiness of every
family, and shedding on the head of every individual, the dews of a father's
blessing.

Such was the illustrious personage whose departure has wrung every American
heart with anguish, and calls forth, throughout the world, the bursting sigh
from every virtuous bosom -- Such the personage that founded American freedom,
was the pervading soul in the formation and in the guidance of our government,
and in the establishment of the happiness and the glory of our empire. When the
thunder of war roared round our shores -- when the vengeance of a most powerful
and incenced foe flashed its lightnings to blast our infant bands, with all we
held dear, in one common ruin -- when slavery armed with its train of agonies,
flew to seize the existing and unborn millions of his countrymen for its
victims -- strong in love for his country, and leaning on the God of battles,
he braved the mighty tempest, and fought through toils and hosts unnumbered,
our path to victory, independence and peace. Had a mind less vast, a heart less
sound, an arm less powerful, a character less glorious, constituted our leader
-- had less than WASHINGTON been our chief, the sun of victory had never beamed
on the American arms -- and this wide extended empire, which, notwithstanding
its declensions, is still the glory of the world and the favorite of heaven,
had now been writhing under the lash of a foreign master, or swept away in ruin
by that wide-wasting war which has so long tempested the European world. From
these miseries, from this destruction, victory, guided by his arm, delivered us
-- severed the ties which bound us to Europe -- placed us on the high ground of
national sovereignty, and deposited in our hands the largest means ever given
to man, for attaining to national glory and happiness. A numerous people,
inhabiting a wide extent of territory, yielding the richest and most various
productions, and formed by nature for the most intimate union -- remote from
the broils of Europe -- subject to no master on earth -- compared with the rest
of mankind, singularly enlightened and virtuous, and glowing with all the fire
of freedom -- such was our character, such the situation in which he had placed
us, when he withdrew from the field of victory to his favorite retirement,
enthroned in the hearts of his country, and crowned with the applauses of an
admiring world.

But scarcely had the noise of battle ceased -- scarcely had this newborn
empire began to taste the sweets of existence and rejoice in the beams of peace
-- scarcely had this illustrious father of his country rested from his toils,
when the frenzied spirit of dissension burst forth, and spread among a people
thus great and thus greatly blessed, with rapid and deadly progress. In the
short period of time which elapsed from the commencement of peace to the
establishment of our present constitution of government* were the baleful
effects of this spirit deeply and widely experienced. A destruction of public
and private confidence -- a general prostration of morals -- convulsions which
shook the first states of the Union to their center -- the bands of our union
and government dissolving, and all our dearest interests hastening to their
extinction, were the existing effects of this dissension -- effects rapidly
plunging us into complete wretchedness among ourselves, and sinking our name
into a proverb, a hissing, and a bye-word through the world.

Let us, without prejudice, more minutely examine this spirit of dissension,
not as existing in this or that particular party, but as invariably existing in
all parties. Has it not the most malignant influence on the individual, as well
as the national character and happiness of man? Warping and contracting his
mind by invincible prejudices, does it not incapaciate him for the perception
of truth, and lead him to embrace for truth the wildest and most ruinous
errors? Lead him to approve and support as right all the acts of his party,
however wrong and destructive? To condemn, to thwart every opposite act,
however advantageous and important? Does not this spirit empoison the noblest
affections of his heart? Instead of inspiring him with love to his neighbors
and exciting endeavors for their happiness, does it not lead him to regard and
secretly to treat them, if not of his party, as his declared enemies, the
enemies of his country and of human happiness? To misrepresent their best
actions, or attribute them to the vilest of motives. Do not these feelings and
practices, cherished by indulgence and strengthened by habit, generate in his
heart, the fell spirit of revenge as the settled principle of his conduct
toward them? Infuriated by this passion, what but want of power restrains him
from plunging the dagger of death into their bosoms?

To what lengths had this dissension carried us, had not the establishment of
our present government restrained its career? What had been our condition, as a
state, composed of such individuals, of such feinds as its members? What our
condition as a combination of states, with their several legislatures frenzied
with the same passions and armed with power to wreak the full force of them
upon the property, peace, happiness, and existence of each other? Had not our
victory over a foreign foe been worse than death? Our Independence, if it
could, under such circumstances, have existed, worse than the heaviest foreign
bondage? Had not our liberty, transformed to anarchy, proved the deadliest
curse heaven could inflict? Had it not prostrated our national sovereignty with
all our darling privileges at the feet of the first foreign invader? Or deluged
this country in the blood of her sons, streaming from the murderous hands of
each other?

To rescue us from this gulf into which we were then rapidly precipitating
ourselves, the impressive example, the comprehensive wisdom, the all commanding
love of WASHINGTON, strengthened by his enlightened and virtuous compatriots,
were called forth into the most anxious and vigorous exertions. By these
exertions were the interesting principles on which our individual and national
existence and happiness invariably depend, unfolded and established in our
minds. By these exertions, was brought home to our bosoms, an irresistible
conviction of the necessity of burying our dissentions, of uniting every heart,
of bracing every arm in the establishment and support of an energetic
government; a government commensurate to the extent of the territory, the
foreign and internal relations, and the character of the people, of our
country. Was not the necessity of this government evidenced by the highest
authorities, and its adoption and support, urged by every consideration most
interesting to the human mind? Had not the word of God, the experience of ages,
and our then affecting experience demonstrated such imperfection in men, as
evinced that they have not as individuals sufficient knowledge to discern, much
less sufficient virtue voluntarily to practice the duties which they owe to
each other, and to the community of which they are members? Had not the same
authorities and the strongest dictates of reason equally demonstrated that
society cannot exist in any state, much less, in an improved and happy state,
if these duties are unknown, or when known, violated and contemned. That
therefore a government possessed of wisdom to unfold these duties in its laws,
and of power sufficient to enforce the observance of them, becomes
indispensably necessary to social existence and happiness. That the necessity
of such a government must invariably continue, until the propensities to vice
are annihilated, by a general renovation of the human character; and that every
project for lessening the coercive power of this government, and of increasing
the individual liberty of a people, not founded on that renovation of character
as its basis, is visionary and destructive?

To unite and animate our exertions in the formation of a government of this
description, calculated to save us equally as individuals and as a people, from
ruin, and to secure to us all the interests most dear to our hearts, did this
illustrious character, not less our preserver than deliverer, seconded by his
enlightened and virtuous associates, call up to our view every consideration
most interesting and important -- That if we valued that victory, for which our
fathers, our brethren, and ourselves had toiled and bled -- and if we valued
our Independence, the inestimable fruit of that victory; if we valued the full
tide of blessings which nature and art were pouring in upon us; if we valued
the real enjoyment of that liberty which we held most dear -- if we valued our
religious institutions, the highest blessings heaven could confer, and which
were equally with every other mean of our happiness, sinking in the general
wreck of our country, these immense considerations called on us to pluck the
spirit of discord from our bosoms, sheath the sword of party, banish
jealousies, unite as a band of brothers, and, by a vigorous exertion, erect a
government inspired with wisdom, and clothed with power, to save, extend, and
perpetuate the happiness, the greatness and the glory of our empire.

On that union, on that exertion, the goodly frame of our government, under his
forming hand, aided by the wise and virtuous of our country, and favored by
Heaven, has arisen; has been upheld, adorned and established, amid the
unexampled convulsions which are rending the civilized world, still shields us
in safety and in happiness; and, unless we betray ourselves and posterity, will
stand the admiration and blessing of future ages.

Do we weep that the feet of our WASHINGTON, the leading procurer of these
inestimable blessings, have stumbled on the dark mountains of death? Does grief
for our loss rend our bosoms? Are gratitude, veneration, and love for his
character and services deep engraven on our hearts? Let us evidence these
sentiments, not by idle tears, but by imitating the impressive example which he
has left us, and improving the blessing bestowed. Let us practice as far as our
circle extends, the virtues which shone with such luster and beneficence in
him. Let us bear in mind, that every motive which has been suggested, for
extirpating discord, strengthening the bands of our union, and upholding our
government, applies with redoubled force, to ourselves in particular. Let us
eradicate from our hearts and our conduct, that vile spirit of party, for which
we have become proverbial. Let us cherish the harmonizing principle of
benevolence toward each other, an unqualified love for our country, a
veneration and love for our invaluable civil and religious institutions, and a
readiness to devote our obedience, our talents, our fortunes, and our lives,
for their support.

THE END.

