SERMON ON THE DEATH OF GENERAL WASHINGTON.

A SERMON DELIVERED FEBRUARY 22D 1800, THE DAY OF NATIONAL MOURNING,
RECOMMENDED BY THE GOVERNMENT OF THE UNITED STATES, FOR THE DEATH OF GENERAL
GEORGE WASHINGTON.

"Know ye not, that there is a Prince and a great man fallen in Israel?"

2 SAMUEL 3d, 3^th. BY THE REV. EBENEZER COFFIN, A. B. PASTOR OF A CHURCH IN
BRUNSWICK.

PRINTED at PORTLAND, by RAND and BURDICK, 1800.

SERMON.
ACTS 13 th -- 36 th. DAVID, after he had served his own generation, fell on
sleep, and was laid unto his fathers, and saw corruption.


THESE words of St. PAUL, afford us a compendious view of DAVID's life and
death: -- but you will not expect me to trace the foosteps of this great
character from the sheepfold to his exit. The incidents of his life are too
numerous and complicate to admit the attempt. -- The setting sun would leave
the narration unfinished. A few observations, therefore, consistent with the
text, must suffice

LET it be observed, that DAVID served his own generation. By this it is
apparent, that he was possessed of a generous, a noble soul. -- Unlike those,
who fondly style themselves exclusive patriots at the present day, he proved by
a succession of great actions, that "self love and social are the same." As a
king, the welfare of his subjects was the main-spring of his movements; as a
good man, the love of GOD. -- Although the greatest in Israel, he became "a
servant to them all."

HE was active as light in opposing their enemies, courageous in defending
their rights, and sincere in his joy, when their happiness was the result of
his exertions. His conduct was always precisely accommodated to the exigencies
of the times.

AS the soul of the body politic, he felt himself under the strongest
obligations to give it animation and vigor. -- Hence that amazing application
of all his faculties to the encouragement of his subjects, in any new and
hazardous enterprise, which is so evident in every page of his history. In
battle he often opposed himself to the first onset of his enemies. -- He
disdained the idea of fending his troops on a forlorn hope, while he himself
was safe; -- witness his words to them when they were just going out to quell
the rebels under ABSALOM; -- "I will surely go forth with you myself also." --
Witness the answer of the people, who well knew his generous soul would have
urged him to share all their dangers: -- "Thou shall not go forth; for if (...)
flee away, they will not care for us; neither if half of us die, will they care
for us; but now thou art worth ten thousand of us; now, therefore, it is better
that thou succor us out of the city." -- Witness his refusing to drink the
water, which three of his mighty men had brought him from the well in
Bethlehem, after pushing themselves through a host of Philistines in order to
obtain it. -- He had been longing for it; but a recollection of the dangers, to
which his faithful servants had exposed themselves, prevented him from slaking
his thirst. -- His feelings were too strong to be expressed but by pouring it
on the ground. -- "Be it far from me, O Lord, that I should do this. -- Is not
this the blood of the men who went in jeopardy of their lives?"

WHAT but the blackest ingratitude could dictate a revolt from such a king? --
What, but a heart, hard as the nether millstone could withhold its love? --
What but a total extinction of humanity, could have prompted an ABSALOM to turn
his arms against the best of fathers? -- To what excess of grief must such
unnatural conduct have reduced an indulgent parent? Grief did not, however,
divert his mind from his darling object, the felicity of his subjects. So
steady is virtue, when the handmaid to knowledge.

THE good king was well apprized of the horrors of anarchy, and could duly
appreciate the blessings of peace and regularity. Let rulers aim at the
interests of their subjects and constituents, and they will secure their own.
Were they conscientiously to exchange one word in their political dictionary
for another; or rather, would they consider the word Rule, as an abbreviation
of the word Service, the people would not so often censure their diction, nor
criminate their conduct. "DAVID served his own generation."

THIS is true of him in many respects. He not only led them to frequent victory
over their enemies, and the enemies of God -- laid several nations under
tribute -- increased his revenues -- lightened the burdens of his subjects, and
preserved order at home; -- but he adjusted the affairs of his kingdom, both
civil and military in the most beneficial manner possible. -- He ordered a
standing militia, consisting of 288,000 men, to serve alternately in a body of
24,000 each month. In addition to all this, he frequently inculcated on the
minds of his people the first principles of religion, and did, indeed, write
much for their instruction.

JUST before he died he left a model of the Temple, which was afterward built
by SOLOMON; and shone as the brightest ornament of that nation. It is said,
that he had reserved 46,000 tons of gold, and many other materials, amassed by
conquest, and laid aside by the hand of a rigorous economy, for the building of
that masterpiece of architecture.

IN all these articles he served his own generation; in the last, his service
looked beyond the then present people. Let it not be unnoticed in the records
of his history, that he "acted by the will of God." Providence raised him up
and qualified him for the important station on which he reflected so much
honor. It was the will of heaven, that he should reign over Israel, and "the
inspiration of the Almighty gave him an understanding" proper to direct him in
the discharge of the arduous duties attached to Royalty. Infinite wisdom will
not send one of his servants into a field of difficulties, and not arm him
against them. He will not suffer a poor, dependant creature to fight the
battles of the Lord at his own charges. If "by him kings reign, and princes
decree justice," by him also they are endowed with qualifications adapted to
their offices.

IF "by the will of God" be meant according to that will, then DAVID may be
said to have faithfully served GOD by serving his generation. There is no doubt
of the fact. He is denominated a servant of GOD through a great part of the old
Scriptures. He was eminently such. It should be the great aim of all rulers to
discover the mind of GOD, and to make it the grand criterion of all their
administrations. Were this universally the case, the ruled would universally
rejoice. All those miserable jealousies, which disturb the peace and mar the
happiness of civil society, would want a name. Nay, I know not, in such an
event, whether subjects would not rather move in their own humble sphere, than
take the pious cares and anxieties off their shoulders who hold the reigns of
government. The highest distinction between a godly ruler and his constituents,
is, that HE supports the heaviest burden. Unenvied post of honor in the view
of every considerate mind! MOSES bitterly complained of the cares imposed on
him. He found it difficult indeed to carry in his arms a whole people, as a
father carries his children. -- He felt as a father to them; but they were too
numerous for the attention of a single man. The cares of public life are great
assistants to time in sending man to his long home. "DAVID fell on sleep and
was laid unto his fathers."

IT would be trite here to observe, that death pays no respect to persons; that
kings and peasants must lie down in the grave together; or that titles,
distinctions and honors form no barrier against the great leveller of life. We
would only take notice, that death is called a sleep, and observe, that to him
who has labored strenuously in the service of GOD and his generation, this
"sleep is sweet." To throw off all our mortal habiliments at the close of our
days must be pleasant, if we have worn them usefully. They are peculiarly
cumbersome to Kings and Rulers; they therefore, must find peculiar satisfaction
in being "unclothed," especially, if they have good reason to hope for the
garment "of immortality." -- They may then exult in the cheering idea of
exchanging corruption for incorruption; of laying down an earthly diadem, and
taking up a crown of glory. If for a time they see corruption in their bodies,
their spirits wear a brighter form beyond its corroding power. -- If they sleep
awhile, they are sure to be awakened to see with infinite satisfaction "the
morning of the resurrection."

THIS is all applicable to DAVID. Nor is it less so to the illustrious
WASHINGTON; -- "the first in war, the first in peace, and the first in the
hearts of a great people."

To give you his just character, would be to partake in some measure of its
glory -- an honor to which I dare not aspire. To say that he was born Feb. 11th
O. S. 1732, became commander in chief of the armies of America in 1775 -- that
he resigned that important, but well discharged trust in 1783 -- was
unanimously chosen President of the United States of America in 1789 --
resigned the Presidency in 1796 -- accepted the command of the armies of the
United States again in 1798 -- and that he died December 14th 1799, would be to
repeat what you have long since heard. Farther still would it be from propriety
to follow him through the field of carnage, and fix the dates of his battles
and his successes. Suffer me, however, to sketch some few traits in his
military, civil, and domestic character.

HE began early to "serve his generation by the will of GOD." His dawn was
brilliant, and if not warm and influential, it waited only for time to throw
his fellow-men beneath his more vertical rays. -- Nor were they long in waiting
-- the story of a BRADDOCK will sanction the observation. In that we may see
his salutary counsel fatally disregarded, to the diminution of that haughty
Briton's fame. There also may be viewed the bud of warlike promise opening at
the first genial touch of occasion. There we might have discerned, with no
prophetic eye, the wreaths of honor, which time was weaving for our youthful
hero. The era, destined for the full display of them, was not known. The eye of
a JACOB might, however, have pierced through future years, and led him to
predict the same things of our national deliverer, in some respects, as of
JUDAH. -- "JUDAH is a lion's whelp, gone up from the prey." He might have
described him afterward as a "lion Couchant, not Rampant" -- as one who did
not love war for its own sake, but who fought for peace, that he might enjoy
without molestation, what his strength and courage had fairly won.

THIS character was completely exhibited by the man, the warrior, whose removal
we now lament. -- That ambition, which, by its madness and cruelty condemns
many of its votaries to "everlasting fame," found no place in his capacious
mind. He fought for the birthright of his countrymen, Liberty. -- He struggled
against a powerful, and a haughty foe, who was determined to wrest from us that
invaluable gift of heaven. The hidden lightning of his spirit flashed in the
face of an opposing cloud, but could never promote an equilibrium. The balance
was in his favor. Victory marched by his side in the cause divine, and thus
became worthy of her name. Apparent inaction in HIM was sometimes of actions
the greatest. It has been well observed of him, that his delay was conquest.
His policy was truly FABIAN, and therefore the best possible for his country,
raw and undisciplined as were its troops. He well knew that "tide in human
affairs, which, taken at the flood, leads on to fortune." -- That tide began to
flow, when war with an imperious aggressor first dressed our hero in a suit of
freedom, and bade him represent the nation. He wore it with invincible firmness
and unalterable dignity, till he could present each of his fellow-countrymen
with the same glorious robe. Having secured the grand object of his exertions,
he retired from the tented field to his beloved Mount, richly laden with the
evergreens of fame, there to drink the pure breath of peace, there to indulge a
highly dignified leisure. -- This boon he was not long to enjoy.

As he had descended from the greatest circle ever described by one luminary in
the atmosphere of man, so the mere voluntary twilight of his radience still
held the admiring eye of the nation.

HIS country soon again demanded in the language of humble necessity, the full
blaze of his genius. Occasion kindled his benevolent spirit, and he
majestically answered the demand.

THE old confederation upon a slight survey was found totally inadequate to the
purposes of maintaining harmony and order, or of concentrating the interests of
the American States. The experience and discernment of a WASHINGTON, were
importunately requested and freely granted. In the fabrication of the
Constitution under which we now live, he was a prime agent. -- His penetration
was the telescope, through which an august body of Statesmen and Patriots
deigned to look for the remotest consequences of its articles. No wonder, then,
that he was embraced by the nation at large in the choice of a President.

THE firmness, the dignity, the enlightened patriotism, which he exhibited in
the discharge of his weighty Presidential duties, have been so thoroughly
experienced, as to leave our encomiums in the rear of his worth. He was the
central fixed star in the political sphere, around which revolved many bright,
though inferior lights. In him were united both the powers of attraction and
repulsion. His dignity suffered none of his train rudely to approximate within
the line of decent distance; while his alluring excellence drew them into the
focus of his benignity. Whoever once saw his mere exterior must have wished to
unlock the casket which contained a brilliant of the first water. -- Vain,
however, is an attempt fully to portray a character like his. We want those
shades, by which we readily discern the semblances of common men. -- The
cardinal virtues must sit for their likenesses, to give the world the great
Contour of his moral countenance; and virtues of a lower class must fill the
remainder of the picture.

LET us not forget, that he was confessedly a soldier of Christ, and as such
"wrestled not only against flesh and blood, but against principalities and
powers, and the rulers of the darkness of this world also. He took much of the
"armor of God" -- "His loins were girt about with truth, and his breast plate
was righteousness." -- "His feet were shod with the preparation of the gospel
of peace," and this rendered his journey through a thorny world more safe and
easy. Faith was his shield and the hope of savation his helmet. Thus he was
enabled "to quench the fiery darts of the wicked, and having done all, to
stand."

AFTER having ornamented, yea, highly dignified the Cabinet, put faction to the
blush, laid his cool hand on the distracted pulse of anarchy and rebellion, and
reduced it to the moderate vibration of health, he once more nobly relinquished
his glorious station, and returned to his beloved Vernon, to discharge the
duties and taste the pleasures of private, domestic life. -- Here he was the
kind husband, the feeling master, and the benevolent neighbor. -- Like the
worthies of the old Testament, he was Prophet, Priest, and King in his own
family. With him slavery forgot her chains, and his household was peace and
love. The acme of his perfection however, was not fully attained, till he
complied with the invitation once more to become the bulwark of his country. --
Glorious sacrifice of the calm hours of the evening of life! Too exalted a
conduct to admit a parallel! -- When did the almond flourish with such ennobled
beauty? History is silent, and silent will remain, perhaps, forever.

IMPIOUS. France dared not to declare open hostilities, but said to herself the
"old Lion is couched down, who shall dare to rouse him?"

HERE we pause! -- Regret for his loss succeeds to the pleasure of recounting
the deeds of his important life! -- Yet let us not cruelly wish his return,
while we believe his Vernon was but a step-stone to mount Zion. -- Like
Sampson, he slew more at his death, than in his life; since even the numerous
children of Envy we laid asleep. Envy herself stops at his grave, and
pronounces his eulogy.

WHILE we sincerely lament his departure, let us remember that God, with whom
is the residue of the spirit, can qualify others to fill every important
station in the field and in the cabinet, and enable them to "serve their
generation according to his will." Let us pray that he would impart the spirit
of our much regretted friend to our worthy PRESIDENT, and make the subordinate
officers in civil trust, as angels of God to this people. May we all be enabled
to serve our generation according to the will of heaven, that we may "be laid
to our fathers in peace."

AMEN.

