A COPY OF THE PETITION OF DOCTORS HYDE AND FITCH, TO THE Hon. the GENERAL
ASSEMBLY of the STATE OF VIRMONT: PRAYING FOR A Medical Lottery.

UNTO WHICH ARE ANNEXED, The Recommendations of sundry Gentlemen; and Doctor
DUNCAN'. Reasons why the Prayer of said Petition ought to be granted.

May LEGISLATORS all in good combine,
And in good works with Brilliant luster shine;
Give Patronage to every noble plan
Which may promote the happiness of Man:
Spread (...) new Discov'ries round.
Till they drive darkness from Columb'a's ground;
Presenting to the (...) Pupil's view,
What he should know in things both old and new:
What he should shun, if he would not destroy
Those comforts which the human race enjoy;
What he should do to free mankind from pain,
And raise them up to health and strength again.
PRINTED IN THE YEAR M,DCCC.

COPY OF THE PETITION, etc.
To the Honorable, the GENERAL ASSEMBLY of the State of Vermont, convened at
Middlbury, in October, 1800.
The PETITION of DANA HYDE, and RUSSEL FITCH, of the County of Windham in said
State,
Most Humbly Shows:
THAT it appears to your Petitioners, that SAMUEL STEARNS, Physician, and
Doctor of Laws, presented a Petition to the Hon. the General ASSEMBLY of this
State, at their Session at Windsor, in October last; exhibiting, that at a
great expense, and with much care and attention, he had compiled sundry Medical
Productions, which he intends to publish in two large Volumes in Folio, under
the names of An AMERICAN DISPENSATORY, and The COLUMBIAN PRACTICE OF PHYSIC,
and SYSTEM OF SURGERY; and praying that the Hon Jonathan Hunt, the Hon. John
Bridgman, the Hon. Luke Knoulton, Genesis John Stewaad, and Josiah Arms. Esquires,
might be empowered to raise by a LOTTERY, such a sum or sums of Money, as they
might find necessary for the purpose of defraying the expense of Compiling and
Publishing the said Medical Productione, that copies of them might be given
gratis to the Physicians, Surgeons, Apothecaries and Students in Physic, for
the immediate purpose of spreading medical knowledge in America.

That sundry Physicians were appointed by both Houses to examine the work, who
highly approved of the same; but on supposing a general Lottery impracticable,
recommended that a sum not exceeding two thousand Dollars should be granted to
the Doctor, to encourage him in the prosecution and publication of the work.

That to make way for the establishment of a Lottery, granted for the relief of
a Lawyer's Son, the matter was postponed to the present Session, through the
influence of several Gentlemen of the Bar, who pretended to doubt, whether the
Productions had been sufficiently examined or not.

That your Petitioners find that said Productions had been sufficiently
examined and recommended before they were brought into this State, (...)
appears by the Certificates of Jared Potter, M. D. John Spaulding, Surgeon;
Isaac Knight, M. D. and Doctor Daniel Gorden, all of Connecticut; and of Seth
Smith, Physician in Rhode Island; and that a Medical Lottery upon a general
plan, had been recommended by more than fifty Gentlemen, containing some of the
most respectable Characters on the Continent.

That although your Petitioners esteem these Recommendations sufficient to
satisfy all rational men, and that (...) and recommendations are needless as
they can add no merit to the Work; yet, at the request of the Author, they have
been perusing his productions, and find them well arranged and executed.

That they, therefore, esteem it to be an imposition for men not skilled in
Medicine, to attempt to stop the progress of the publication of this Work*
under the pretense of its not being sufficiently examined.

That it appears that these Productions are the first and only Systems of
Pharmacy, Physic and Surgery, which have ever been compiled in America; and the
Author informs* that he began the Work twenty-eight years ago; has traveled
more than 23,000 miles, and spent upwards of 5,000 dollars in the prosecution
of the same.

That, as this Work contains an account of those things which have stood the
test of Ages in the cure of Diseases, with the new medical Discoveries and
improvements collected from the different parts of the world; and as our old
medical Books lead Students into error in many instances and expose the lives
of the people, by misguiding Practitioners; the publication of these new
Systems is a matter highly important to the Citizens of the United States.

That it is to be regretted that this Work has not been published before; that
for the want of publications, the new medical Discoveries have been hidden from
our Practitioners, and (...) useless; while Congress, in a very laudable
manner, have, by sums of money taken from the national Treasury, printed and
dispersed their new Laws throughout the United States of America, for the
purpose of promoting the increase of legal knowledge in this country*

That so little attention has been paid to the cultivation and improvement of
the Medical Art, when for the want of that light and information, which might
easily be communicated by the assistance of the Public; our Practitioners have
been groping in the dark, our citizens groaning with pain, and large sums of
our money floating across the Atlantic for medical Books, when we might have
enough of our own.

That your Petitioners are sensible, that large numbers of the gentlemen of the
faculty in this country, have had their learning to pay for after they began to
practice, Horses and Medicine to provide, Lands to buy, Houses to build,
Families to maintain, Taxes to pay, and large numbers of Poor People to visit,
who are unable to make payment; and that for these reasons, those Gentlemen are
unable to pay for medical Books, and stand in as much need of assistance from
the Public, as the Gentlemen of the Bar, and others did from the national
Treasury.

That from hence it is manifest, that the Publication of these medical Systems
by Subscription, will by no means answer the great and good purpose of giving
the new medical Discoveries and Improvements, a speedy and general spread
amongst the Gentlemen of the Faculty, throughout the United States of America.

That your Petitioners apprehend, that this important business might easily be
accomplished by money raised by a Lottery, if Trustees were only vested with
power to raise such sums as may be necessary; and that Books may be printed and
dispersed throughout the United States, by money thus raised, with as much
expedition, as by money taken out of a treasury -- that as the expense of
carrying on this work, is at present unknown, they think that a limited Lottery
may prove too small impede the progress of Publication, and thus injure the
Public.

That they esteem a general Lottery, or one sufficient to defray the expense of
compiling and publishing the productions already mentioned, PRACTICABLE, and
have just reason to believe, that a Medical Lottery of this kind, would be
greatly encouraged by the citizens of the United States in general, and that it
would be no damage, but an honor and profit to this State.

Therefore, that Medical Light and Information may no longer be shut out of
this Country by poverty,

Your Petitioners pray, that your Honors will be pleased to take these things
into your serious consideration, and to grant that the Bill brought (...) year
may be amended That instead of the small sum of 2,000 dollars, the Trustees may
be empowered to raise such a sum or sums of money by a Lottery, as they may
find necessary for the purpose of defraying the expense of compiling and
publishing our American Dispensatory, and the Columbian Practice of Physic, and
System of Surgery, that Copies of them may be given gratis to to the
Physicians, Surgeons, Apothecaries and Students in Physic, for the immediate
purpose of spreading medical knowledge in America; the Trustees making such
compensation to the Author, out of the moneys thus raised, for the privilege of
printing from his Productions, as is customary in similar cases.

And your Petitioners also pray, that your Honors will be pleased to appoint
the said Jonathan Hunt, John Bridgman, Luke Knoulton, John Steward, and Josiah
Arms, Esquires, as Trustees of said Lottery; and to vest them with power to
appoint suitable persons to manage it; or, otherwise, to act thereon, as your
Honors in your wisdom may see fit.

And, as in duty bound, shall ever pray, DANA HYDE, RUSSEL FITCH.


These may certify that we have considered of the contents of preceding
Petition, and that in our view the object of it is highly important, and
promises much benefit to the Americans, by rectifying errors and introducing
improvements into our Medical Theory and Practice, and thus contributing to
preserve and restore the health of Mankind; and that it therefore merits the
attention and patronage of the Legislature. That it is our opinion, that it is
the best method which can be contrived for the purpose of spreading medical
Light and Information in America; and that a general Lottery would be greatly
encouraged by the citizens of the United States in every part of the Union, and
prove both Honorable and Profitable to the State of Vermont.

Daniel Steward, Col. 1st Reg't. Stephen Greenleaf, jun. Major. John Noyes, A.
M. of Brattleborough. Abel Duncan, Physician in Dummerston. Edw. R. Campbell,
Phys. in Westminster. Jabez Penniman, Phys. in Westminster. Broughton White, A.
B. in Westmoreland. Samuel Minot, Col. in Putney, John Campbell, Physician, in
Putney, Joshua Hyde, Col in Putney. Noah Sabin, Judge of Probates, in Putney.
Noah Sabin, jun. Jus. Pacis. Putney. William Sargeant, Colonel, Dummerston.
Alexander Campbell, Physician, Putney. Jason Duncan, Jus. Pacis. Dummerston.
William Boyde^, Colonel, Dummerston.


Doctor DUNCAN's Reasons why the Prayer of the foregoing Petition ought to be
granted.
THIS may Certify, that by reason of the new Discoveries and improvements in
Chemistry and other branches of Medicine, made within a few years past, the
virtues of the mineral, vegetable, and animal productions of the universe, have
been more fully ascertained; new remedies discovered; new modes of composition
invented; and new, cheaper, and more easy methods of cure introduced into the
practice of Physic, in places where these things have been but partly made
known.

That in consequence of these discoveries and improvements, the medical Books
still used in this country are found to be too full of error; giving an
erroneous account of the virtues of Medicines, and the genuine methods of
curing Diseases; directing medicines injurious to the Human Body; infusing
mistaken ideas into the minds of Students, and exposing the lives of the
People, by misguiding Practitioners, when they attempt to heal the sick.

That for the want of proper Publications, these new medical discoveries and
improvements are principally unknown to the greatest part of our Practitioners,
who grope in the dark for the want of information.

That the only way to put the Theory and Practice of Physic upon a less
dangerous and more profitable basis, is, to publish and spread amongst all the
Gentlemen of the Faculty, a regular system of Pharmacy, Physic, and Surgery,
free from the errors recorded in our medical Books.

That such Systems are already compiled by Doctor STEARNS; the work stands
highly recommended by those who have examined it; and I have lately traveled
in the Northern, Middle, and Southern States; but can hear of no other person
who has ever attempted to compile such Productions in America; and although
they are much wanted; yet, they have been suffered to lie useless for the want
of proper encouragement, to the great damage of the community, and dishonor to
the country.

That the inability of the Gentlemen of the Faculty, to pay for such
productions, and the necessity of publishing them by money raised by a Lottery,
is fully set forth in the preceding Memorial of DANA HYDE, and RUSSEL FITCH,
Surgeons to Col. STEWARD'S Regiment. But it ought, however, to be added, that
it is said, that Congress never have, nor do ever incline to grant any kind of
a Lottery under the present Constitution; and that one cannot be obtained,
without applying to a General Assembly, who can easily grant one that may be
sufficient.

That it appears, when the census was taken, that the inhabitants of the
Northwestern Territory were conjectured to be 5,000, and those of Vermont,
85,000; and yet the Legislature of the former have granted a Lottery of 400,000
Dollars, in order to open a Canal; and it is my opinion, that the General
Assembly of Vermont, can just as easily grant one sufficient to defray the
expense of Compiling and Publishing a System of Pharmacy, Physic, and Surgery,
if they may see fit, and that a general Lottery is PRACTICABLE, notwithstanding
the sentiments of a few who have been otherwise minded,

Who can suppose that one fiftieth part of the tickets in the Lottery
abovementioned, will ever be sold in the Northwestern Territory? -- And who can
suppose that one twentieth part of the tickets in a Medical Lottery, would ever
be sold in Vermont?

Such Lotteries then, must draw money from other States, and enrich those that
grant them.

That a Medical Lottery is more necessary and important than any ever granted
in America; and I cannot see how such a scheme can prove injurious to this
State, inasmuch, as the gentlemen nominated as Trustees, are all men of honor
and of property, and it cannot be supposed, that they would suffer the State or
any individual to be injured. It therefore appears to me, that it would be both
an honor and profit to this State, that it would draw money into it from
distant Parts; produce a great revolution in the Theory and Practice of Physic;
raise the medical Art to a higher degree of perfection, and immortalize the
name of our General Assembly.

That as some who have not duly considered of this matter, may admire why these
productions are not published by subscription; I shall take the freedom to
mention, that, that is a very slow way of spreading medical Knowledge; and that
I have just reason to believe, that more may be done in this way in five years
by a Lottery, than in a hundred by Subscription; for Doctor RUSH wrote
upon-twenty seven diseases; published his first volume eleven years ago; and I
am informed, that but very few of the Physicians have ever seen it in the
northern States. That Doctor BARTRAM of Philadelphia, published an excellent
Treatise upon Botany, seven years ago, and I cannot learn that it has ever been
seen in Vermont.

That the inability of the Gentlemen of the Faculty to pay for such
productions, prevents their circulation. Dr. STEARNS, has written upon more
than 1387 Diseases, all the different cases in Surgery, and all the various
subjects approved of in the Apothecaries' Art; and should he attempt to publish
his Productions by Subscription, I apprehend they would not be sufficiently
spread in a century.

Now who amongst the Gentlemen of the Faculty have ever been enlightened by the
publication of Dr Rush's and Bartram's useful productions in places where their
Books have not appeared? And who can be illuminated by the promulgation of Dr.
STEARNS'S Systems, in places where they never will be seen, unless generally
spread?

If they are published by subscription, but a part of our Practitioners will be
enlightened; others will remain in darkness, administering improper remedies,
and be ignorantly destroying the lives of men, women and children. Indeed, it
is as presumptuous to suffer our physicians, to practice without being
acquainted with the new discoveries, as it would be to send men into battle
without military skill, arms, or ammunition. It is therefore highly important,
that these discoveries be spread amongst all the Gentlemen of the Faculty.

Our national Legislature, on being sensible that their Laws could not be
sufficiently spread without the assistance of the Public, passed an Act, dated
March 3d, 1795, and another two years since; ordaining that 5,000 Setts of the
Laws of the United States, should be printed, and dispersed as follows, viz.
4,500 Setts among the people, in proportion to the number of Federal
Representatives sent from each State; and the remainder amongst the members of
Congress, the Supreme and District Judges, Marshals, Attorneys and other
officers of government. It has been said, those setts contained 15,000 volumes;
and that the whole expense was defrayed by money taken out of the National
Treasury.

That I esteem this to be a very laudable transacton of Congress; for their
laws could not be obeyed nor executed unless they were known; any more than New
Medical Discoveries and Improvements can regulate the practice of Physicians,
or prove serviceable to the community whilst they remain unknown.

That in like manner medical Books may be printed and spread amongst the
Gentlemen of the Faculy, throughout the United States of America, and with as
much expedition, by money raised by a Lottery, as by that taken from a national
Treasury. This method would furnish all our Physicians, Surgeons, Apothecaries
and Students in Physic, with regular systems to guide them in all the difficult
and dangerous cases, operations and processes they may have to encounter. And
this may undoubtedly be done with less than one fourth part of the expense of
purchasing medical Libraries in Europe, which are intermixed with error, and
not furnished with an account of the new discoveries which have never been
published.

That as the medical Art, is the most beneficial of all the Arts that ever the
ALMIGHTY suffered to be known and practiced among the Children of Men, the
cultivation and improvement of it ought to be encouraged by all who wish to
promote the Health and happiness of mankind; and he must be very inhumane who
attempts to discourage this important work.

But is it not admirable! that so little has been done toward encouraging,
cultivating and improving this useful Art in America? That 193 years have
revolved since it was first settled by the Europeans, and no regular System of
Pharmacy, Physic and Surgery has ever been published, and spread amongst our
Practitioners at the expense of the Public?

That an almost innumerable number of new Medical Discoveries and improvements
have been suffered to lie useless, whilst swarms of unlearnt impostors have
been suffered to rush into the practice of Physic, without Books, and without
the necessary qualifications, when the restoration of Health and prolongation
of Life, so essentially depends upon our Practitioners being duly qualified.

That the benefits that would naturally result from the spreading of Medical
Systems amongst the Gentlemen of the Faculty, by money raised by a Lottery,
prudently managed, and drawn in different Classes would be almost beyond
description: -- For,

1. It would induce the rich to help those indigent Practitioners and Students,
who are unable to furnish themselves with Medical Libraries.

2. It would lay a proper foundation for the raising up of regular bred
Physicians, Surgeons, and Apothecaries amongst ourselves.

3. It would lay open the virtues of the Productions of our own Country, so far
as they are known: and bring them more and more into use amongst our
Practitioners.

4. It would lessen the importation of Drugs, and of Books; and save vast sums
of money from being exported out of our Country.

5. It would raise the method of compounding Medicines, to a much higher degree
of perfection, and make them more beneficial to the distressed,

6. It would make the cure of Diseases more easy, and the practice of Physic
less expensive. And,

7. It would greatly increase the Riches, and promote the Health and Happiness
of the People.

That from what has been said, I trust it will appear to every one who duly
considers of the matter, that a General Lottery is both practicable and
absolutely necessary; and that it is highly important, that the Prayer of the
preceding Petitioners should be granted.

ABEL DUNCAN.
September, 1800. TO WHOM IT MAY CONCERN.




