A SERMON, DELIVERED BEFORE THE MILITARY OFFICERS, APOLLO LODGE, AND A ^^RGE
AND RESPECTABLE NUMBER OF THE CITIZENS OF TROY, JANUARY 12th, 1800.

IN CONSEQUENCE OF THE DEATH OF Lieutenant General George Washington.

BY JONAS COE, A. M. Minister of the Presbyterian Church, in Troy.

[ Published at the Request of the Hearers.]

TROY: PRINTED AT THE BUDGET OFFICE, BY R. MOFFITT and Co.

1800.

THE following Discourse was hastily composed, without any view to publication:
But, at the particular request of a number of those who heard it delivered, it
is submitted to the Public, without any material alterations. That it may
contribute to instamp on the public mind, more deeply, the memory of LIEUT.
GENERAL WASHINGTON, whose death gave rise to it, and excite a general emulation
to imitate his virtues, is the ardent desire of

THE AUTHOR.
TROY, January 13, 1800.
II. SAMUEL, 1. 27. How are the mighty fallen, and the weapons of war perished!
THE sudden and alarming death of our venerable Father and illustrious Citizen,
who is lately fallen, is an event so affecting and important, that I rise to
address you, on the present occasion, with the mingled emotions of diffidence
and sorrow. When we consider the magnitude of the subject which is to occupy
our present attention, and the universal gloom it has spread over every mind
throughout this extensive country, it seems utterly beyond the power of human
description to paint it in a proper manner. In order, however, to accomplish
this, as far as possible in my present situation, and lead our minds to a
suitable contemplation and improvement of this melancholy dispensation of
Divine Providence, I have chosen the passage of sacred scripture which is now
before us.

IT is a part of an elegant elegy, composed by the Poet of Israel; and sung by
him, to express the deep sorrow of his heart, on a mournful and solemn
occasion. The occasion was this. When the royal leader of God's chosen people
had received information that his country was invaded by a numerous army of the
Philistines, he led forth the armies of Israel against them. Zealous of his
country's rights, and attached to the highest interest of his people, like an
intrepid hero, he personally entered the field of battle, with his brave and
affectionate sons around him. But, not with standing all his military prowess
and mighty achievements, his army gave way to their formidable enemies; whose
archers singled out the royal family, and pressed hard after the valiant Saul
and beloved Jonathan, and overtook and flew them on mount Gilboa.

WHEN tidings of this melancholy and mournful event reached the ears of the
pious David, the son of Jesse, his benevolent heart was overwhelmed with
sorrow, and he burst forth in the pathetic language of our text. How are the
mighty fallen, and the weapons of war perished!

WAVING all remarks on the analogy, which may be supposed to exist, between the
King of Israel and our beloved WASHINGTON -- we shall immediately proceed to
consider the passage before us, with particular reference to the latter, who
has so recently fallen under the power of death; and hold up to your view, the
improvement which we should make of it.

IN this view of our subject, I am persuaded that every heart in this assembly
will resound our text, and exclaim, How are the mighty fallen, and the weapons
of war perished!

I SHALL consider the word mighty, in discussing this subject, in the most
extensive sense, as implying greatness and excellence, as well as power.

OUR venerable father, whose death we this day commemorate, was mighty, in the
first place, in his PERSONAL TALENTS and VIRTUES.

NOT only, my Brethren, was he peculiarly majestic in his external form, and
uniformly dignified in the whole of his deportment, but he was endowed with a
mind of superior talents and illustrious virtues, which fitted him for great
and mighty achievements. He possessed a clear and comprehensive understanding,
which seemed at once to enter into the most intricate subjects, and almost
instantly view them in all their connections and parts. He appeared equally
formed for the field or the cabinet; and could as readily marshal the
contending army, as balance the power of civil government. His will was
energetic and decisive, and seemed always subservient to his reason and
judgment, and the will and sovereignty of the people. His affections were pure
and ardent, and glowed with one steady and increasing flame of love to his
friends and his country. All the powers of his mind were enlarged, noble, and
dignified; far superior to every thing mean, low and debasing; and were
generally employed, from early life, in the great affairs of our nation.

As to his virtues, they were as splendid as his talents, and shone conspicuous
in all his conduct. He was clothed with a dignified humility as with a garment;
and his great mind appeared never elated with all the triumphs of victory, the
plaudits of his country and splendor of courts. He was temperate, amidst all
the luxury and entertainments of life; and made his appetite wholly subservient
to sit him for more vigorous exertions, more extensive usefulness and elevated
glory. He was patient under the most severe trials and unprovoked abuses; so
that when he was reviled, he reviled not again: when he suffered he threatened
not, but committed himself to him who judges righteously. He was persevering
in the midst of the most perplexing difficulties and gloomy discouragements,
and rose paramount to every obstruction, which was thrown in his way, in the
salvation of his country: And nothing was able to daunt his courage, or move
his firm and unshaken mind. In battle, he was the determined and invincible
warrior: When victorious, the humane friend of peace. Benevolence was a
distinguishing trait in his character; and he was the generous benefactor of
the citizen, the soldier, and the prisoner whom the fortune of war cast into
his power. The whole train of cardinal virtues appear to have resided in our
venerable father, in an eminent degree. In his enlarged mind, was combined the
wisdom of a senate, and his majestic presence struck with more profound awe
than a host.

NEITHER are these splendid virtues, which we have now been contemplating, all
that embellished our illustrious citizen. In addition to these, he had others
of a superior nature, which adorned and finished his dignified character.

DEEPLY in his heart appears to have been implanted, a supreme veneration for
the most high God, as well as a tender regard for his fellow-men: And he
uniformly attributed all his causes of martial victory, and political glory, to
HIS universal, beneficent, and overruling Providence. His great mind was
superior to modern licentious philosophy; and he readily discerned, and
cordially embraced, the Christian religion, as of divine authenticity, and as
the only rational system of moral truth, upon which guilty mortals can build a
permanent hope of immortal life, and eternal salvation. -- Under these
impressions, he annexed himself to the church of Christ, and avowed his
attachment to the glorious gospel. Through all the vicissitudes of his important
life, he uniformly attended the public worship of God, with punctuality and
reverence; and gave his highest sanction to all the institutions of religion.
And we have ground to believe, that his elevated soul was embellished with the
grace of the gospel; and that he was enabled, by the divine influence which he
constantly derived from its author, to maintain that circumspection of conduct,
that dignity of character, and majestic glory, for which he is so universally
famed. Of such vast importance did real religion appear to this great and good
man, that he inculcated it upon the inhabitants of the United States, in the
most forcible manner, in his farewell address. Hear it, as recorded in that
ever-memorable bequest, which he made when he retired from public life; and let
it sink deep into our hearts, as the words of a dying father. Of all the
dispositions and habits, (said he,) which lead to political prosperity,
Religion and Morality are indispensable supports. In vain would that man claim
the tribute of patriotism, who should labor to subvert these great pillars of
human happiness, these firmest props of men and citizens. The mere politician,
equally with the pious man, ought to respect and cherish them. A volume could
not trace all their connections with private and public felicity. Let it simply
be asked, where is the security for property, for reputation, for life, if a
sense of religious obligation desert the oaths, which are the instruments of
investigation, in courts of justice? And let us with caution indulge the
supposition, that Morality can be maintained without Religion.

SUCH, my Brethren, were the religious sentiments of our venerable father,
which he bequeathed to us, his children, in his last legacy: And such, as we
have been considering, were the illustrious assemblage of talents and virtues,
which constituted his amiable character. They were early discovered to reside
in him: And President Davis, as if endowed with a prophetic spirit, when
preaching before the Virginian volunteers, in the year 1755, pointed him out as
the probable savior of his country.

IN the view of all these great talents and amiable virtues, which adorned the
character of our illustrious citizen, who is now mouldering in the gloomy
grave, we might, with the utmost propriety, adopt the language of our text, and
exclaim, How are the mighty fallen, and the weapons of war perished!

2. OUR illustrious WASHINGTON, whose death we this day commemorate, was
mighty, in his PUBLIC TRANSACTIONS and ACHIEVEMENTS.

IN describing these, it will not be expected that a minute detail be given.
This would far exceed the limits to which we are circumscribed, and would swell
our discourse to volumes. All, therefore, that I at present intend, is to give
a very general view of the public transactions and martial achievements of this
great man, in order to instamp his memory more deeply on our hearts, and lead
us to suitable mourning and lamentation.

THE superior talents and splendid virtues with which he was endowed by Divine
Power, fitted him to shine in public life, and capacitated him for great and
mighty achievements. An opportunity presented, in the morning of his days, to
call them forth into vigorous exertion. In 1755, about the twenty-third year of
his age, he marched, at the head of the American volunteers, to defend our
western frontiers, against the common enemies of our country. In the forests of
Ohio, in General Braddock's defeat, he displayed such martial skill, such
undaunted bravery and feats of arms, as endeared him to his country, and
pointed him out as our rising patriot, and invincible hero.

BUT a far more extensive and important field was afterward opened for the
display of his great talents and amiable virtues, and which gave full scope for
his mighty achievements. When haughty Britain assailed our rights, and invaded
our privileges; when she assumed an unlimited jurisdiction over the citizens of
America, and declared she would bind us in all cases whatsoever, without our
consent; when she threatened the subversion of both our liberty and religion,
by sovereign taxation and ecclesiastical establishments; and when our whole
country stood fearful and dismayed, trembling at the issue of such unbounded
usurpation and arbitrary power: Then, O! then it was, that our venerable
father, brave patriot, and invincible hero, flew to arms, organized our armies,
and determined, under God, that he would conquer or die. His majestic presence
animated our disheartened citizens, and called forth our forces, from every
part of the country. He soon taught our hands to war, and our fingers to fight,
and led forth our troops into the field of battle. With an army of his sons,
though inexperienced in war, yet lovers of liberty and the rights of their
country, he attacked and beat the veterans of tyranny, and soon acquired
laurels of military glory.

ALTHOUGH, in the course of our revolutionary war, he was frequently placed in
the most perplexed situation, and embarrassing circumstances; although he was
betrayed by some in whom he confided, and was deserted by others; and although
he had every difficulty to encounter, which could originate from scanty
resources, unequipped troops, and a formidable foe; yet his great and unshaken
mind surmounted the whole. He persevered, in spite of every obstacle which was
thrown in his way, in obtaining our freedom and independence. Neither
prosperity appeared to elevate, nor adversity to depress his spirits: B^^ with
one calm, unmoved, and magnanimous temper of mind, he traveled through the
various vicissitudes of eight years war; and finally led our youthful,
determined, and brave armies* to splendid victory and glory: And permanently
established both the liberty and independence of our country.

WHILE the mere recollection of the martial achievements, and public
transactions, of our illustrious father and invincible hero, fires our souls
with veneration and love for his amiable character; how are their ardour damped
by these sable ensigns and garments of woe with which we are surrounded, and by
the irresistible impression, that so much greatness and human glory is buried
in the dust! " How are the mighty fallen, and the weapons of war perished!" --
Mourn, O ye lofty hills, and embattled plains, which have been witnesses to his
mighty achievements! Weep, ye American heroes, who have fought and bled at his
majestic side; for your illustrious leader, and glorious commander, is now no
more! Lament, ye Brethren of Masonic order; for your father, your brother, and
the brightest ornament of your respectable fraternity, is mouldering in the
silent dust! Grieve, all ye sons and daughters of America, and let tears of
sorrow stream down every cheek; for the securer of our rights, the defender of
our liberties, and the glory of our land, is shrouded in the gloomy grave!

WERE I to stop here, in recounting the public transactions of this great man,
I should not give you a general view of one half his worth.

NO sooner had he accomplished the great object of his martial career, and
presented us with our freedom and independence, than he was called to concert,
with the patriots and statesmen of our country, the best means for their
preservation and perpetuity. And here his talents and virtues were not less
conspicuous than in his former great transactions. He appeared equally
capacitated for framing governments and commanding armies; and he presided
over, and took an active and decisive part in, that august body which formed
the constitution of the United States: A constitution which admirably combines
the clashing interests of this extensive country; which secures liberty with
order; and which is happily calculated to promote the peace, prosperity, and
felicity of all classes of citizens.

NOR did the great transactions of this good man cease to shine here. More
resplendent glory was yet in reserve, for him, whom God delighted to honor.
For as soon as the federal constitution was reduced to form, and adopted by the
states in the union, our venerable father was called to preside as chief
magistrate of our country, by the unanimous voice of the people. He filled this
highest seat in the western world, with the highest dignity and glory; and
administered the government of the United States with an inexplicable mixture
of mildness and energy. He adhered, with the utmost fidelity, to the
constitution of our government, and never discovered the least ambition to
overleap the bounds there prescribed him. And he appeared uniformly to study
the peace, prosperity, and happiness of his country; and constantly exerted his
great talents, during the whole course of his civil administration, to raise
our infant empire to respectability, dignity, and glory.

IN this elevated situation, he was grave, plain, and accessible. His great
mind was superior to the regalia and haughtiness of kings, and the splendid
trappings and pomp of courts. And his virtuous soul seemed never to desire to
avail himself of any personal or domestic advantage, from all his victory and
glory. He loved his country; -- therefore he endured the most painful toil, and
laborious fatigue, and fought for her liberty and independence. He loved his
people; -- therefore he governed them with moderation and justice, with
mildness and energy, and uniformly fought their highest interest. While he was
at the helm, under God, we were always secure, in the midst of the tempestuous
political ocean. He rode out the storm of both foreign and domestic faction --
steered us safely through the raging billows of European commotion -- and
retired from the chief magistracy of his extensive country, loaded with laurels
of the most consummate earthly glory.

3. OUR illustrious WASHINGTON, whose death we this day commemorate, was mighty
in his PRIVATE CHARACTER and LIFE.

AFTER our venerable father retired from the great theater of public life, to
which he had been repeatedly called by the general voice of his country, he
cheerfully sat himself down as a private citizen, to enjoy that freedom and
independence for which he had so nobly fought, and to submit to those laws,
which he himself had sanctioned. In this situation, as a private citizen, he
did not waste away the residue of his days in rounds of luxury and dissipation,
like the heroes and statesmen of antiquity; but he employed his time in
promoting domestic and social happiness, and advancing the interests of his
country; and actually engaged, when again solicited, to become the commander
and leader, of her armies. His private character, as far as I am acquainted, is
as spotless and dignified as his public life. He was the affectionate husband
-- the tender parent -- the obliging neighbor -- and generous friend; as well
as the invincible hero -- the wise legislator -- and great statesman. Of him,
it may be most-emphatically said, When the ear heard him, then it blessed him;
and when the eye saw him, it gave witness to him; because he delivered the poor
that cried, and the fatherless, and him who had none to help him. The blessing
of him who was ready to perish came upon him; and he caused the widow's heart
to shout for joy. He was eyes to the blind, feet to the lame, a father to the
poor, and the cause which he knew not he searched out; and he break every yoke.

NOR were his moral and religious character less amiable, than his political
and military were great. He appears obviously to have been endowed with that
wisdom which comes down from above; which is first pure, then peaceable,
gentle, easy to be entreated, without partiality, and without hypocrisy, full
of mercy and good fruits. He walked not in the counsel of the ungodly, nor
stood in the way of sinners, nor sat in the seat of the scornful; but his
delight was in the law of the Lord, and his happiness to do good to men.

THE close of his life was doubtless spent, as he intimates in his farewell
address, in preparing for his approaching dissolution. For he was well
apprized, that notwithstanding all his greatness and glory, he was a frail
mortal, and must soon mingle with his original dust. He was thoroughly
convinced that he was a dependant creature, that he was an accountable being,
who stood in need of everlasting salvation; and that he was destined for a
boundless eternity. To prepare for this, he retired from the busy scences of
human life, to his peaceful abode at Mount Vernon; where he died, in the
sixty-eighth year of his age, with the same greatness of mind with which he
lived: And from whence, we have good ground to believe, that his immortal
spirit has been escorted by shining Angels, to the regions of celestial glory.

THUS terminated the life of our illustrious WASHINGTON, whose personal talents
and virtues -- whose public transactions and achievements -- and whose private
character and life, are without a parallel. As he was human, he was liable to
the frailties and imperfections of our degenerate nature. But whatever these
were, they were few in him, when contrasted those with which are usually
attached to great political and military characters; and are all swallowed up
in the effulgence of his virtues and excellencies.

IN him were combined the Hero -- the Statesman -- the Patriot -- and the
Christian. A rare assemblage in a human character! He was the light of our
councils -- the ornament of our church -- the bulwark of our land -- and the
glory of the world.

BUT I dare not attempt his eulogium -- Every transaction of his life -- and
the world, will resound his praise.

BUT notwithstanding all his greatness, majesty, and glory; he is fallen! he is
fallen a victim to death! How are the mighty fallen, and the weapons of war
perished! The beauty of America is s^ain upon the high places. Ye Mount of
Vernon, let there be no dew, neither rain, upon you; for there the shield of
the mighty is deposited. Ye sons and daughters of America, weep over our
illustrious WASHINGTON, who is with us no more!

IN reviewing our subject, and reducing it to practical improvement, no person
in this assembly, I am persuaded, can refrain from mourning the loss of so
great and good a man. But while we give vent to all the feelings of our
overwhelmed spirits, on this mournful and solemn occasion; let us weep like
Christians, with a holy resignation to the will of Heaven. Let us be thankful
to the sovereign of the universe, that he raised up such an eminent character
among ourselves, furnished him with such illustrious talents, and continued him
so long such a distinguishing blessing to this extensive country. Let us bless
God, that he did not die by the hand of some cruel tyrant, or fall victim to
some inhuman mercenary; but that he expired at his own peaceful retreat,
surrounded with his affectionate friends, and furnished with every
accommodation which could alleviate the agonies of dissolving nature, and
facilitate his transition out of time into eternity. O! let us praise the
eternal Jehovah, that we have such good foundation to hope, that he was fitted
for, and has winged his way to brighter regions beyond the skies; where the
wicked cease from troubling, and the weary are at rest; and where he is joining
the holy heroes and patriots of Israel, in exclaiming unto him who loved us,
and washed us from our sins in his own blood, and has made us kings and
priests unto God; to him be glory and dominion for ever and ever.

2. IN improving our subject, let us all be led to realize that we are mortal,
and must shortly die. If our illustrious father, after all his usefulness,
greatness, and glory, has fallen a victim to the king of terrors; who among us
can expect to (...)? Whatever talents and virtues we may any of us possess
(...) useful we may have been to our country; with whatev^^ ^^lendour and
wealth we may be surrounded; and however elevated may be our situation in life;
yet we are constantly liable to the arrest of death, and may be suddenly
hurried into a boundless eternity. This (...) the lamentable case of our
illustrious friend, whose death we this day deplore. While we, therefore, mourn
his sudden death, with hearts of humble and genuine sorrow; let us wisely
improve this melancholy providence, to prepare us for our approaching
dissolution. Let us look with a holy indifference on all human glory and learn
to view it as fading and swiftly passing away. And let us be anxiously
solicitous, to secure an interest in that immortal splendor in the kingdom of
Heaven, which is in reserve for all the followers of the blessed Jesus; and
which will increase and brighten throughout all eternity.

3. LET our subject excite within us, a high emulation to imitate the dignified
example of our illustrious citizen. Like him, let us employ our time and our
talents for the most important and dignified purposes. Like him, let us devote
ourselves to the service of God and our country; and uniformly maintain a
profound veneration for the one, while we are engaged in promoting the highest
interest of the other. Like him, let us be humble, temperate, patient, and
persevering; and cherish and exercise the whole train of cardinal virtues. Like
him, let us cautiously avoid modern philosophy, and adhere to the Christian
religion; and cordially embrace its divine author, as the only foundation of
our eternal salvation. And, like him, let us uniformly countenance, and
solemnly (...) upon, all the institutions of the gospel, and see that our souls
are embellished with its divine grace, if ever we expect to be formed for great
and dignified transactions. Copy after his great example, in both your public
transactions and private life; and steadily follow his illumined path, to
usefulness, to honor, and glory. And then, like him, you will be respected and
loved while you live; you will be lamented when you die; and will dwell for
ever with him, in the same bright regions of elevated joy and everlasting
felicity.

FINALLY, Brethr^^ (...) assured that all terrestrial things are tending to
dissolutio^ (...) soon pass away. The time is hastening on, when King^^^^ (...)
Empires, and Republics, and States, will all be dissolv^^, (...) ^umble into
ruin: When the Heavens shall pass away with a great noise, and the elements
shall melt with fervent heat: And when the earth also, and the works that are
therein, shall be burnt up. The solemn period is coming, when God will stain
the pride of all human glory, by the resplendent effulgence of his Son; and
when Kings and Emperors, Heroes and Patriots, and all description of
c^^racters, will have to stand before HIM who is King of Kings and Lord of
Lords, and receive their final doom. -- Blessed are they who shall receive from
his sovereign voice that divine eulogium* " Well done good and faithful
servant, enter into the joys of thy LORD." -- AMEN.

ERRATA.
Page 5th, line 7th -- for "He," read (...)

Page 6th, line 17th -- for "causes," read career.


