A DISCOURSE, DELIVERED AT NEW HAVEN, FEB. 22, 1800; ON THE CHARACTER OF GEORGE
WASHINGTON, Esquire. AT THE REQUEST OF THE CITIZENS;

BY TIMOTHY DWIGHT, D.D. PRESIDENT OF YALE-COLLEGE.

PRINTED BY THOMAS GREEN AND SON, NEW HAVEN: 1800.

A PROCLAMATION, BY THE PRESIDENT of the United States of America.
WHEREAS the Congress of the United States have this day resolved, "That it be
recommended to the People of the United States to assemble on the 22d day of
February next, in such numbers and manners as may be convenient, publicly to
testify their grief for the death of general George Washington, by suitable
eulogies, orations and discourses, or by public prayers:" and "That the
President of the United States be requested to issue a Proclamation for the
purpose of carrying the foregoing resolution into effect." NOW THEREFORE, I
John Adams, President of the United States of America, do hereby proclaim the
same accordingly.

Given under my hand and the seal of the United States, at Philadelphia, the
sixth day of January, in the year of our Lord, one thousand eight hundred, and
of the Independence of the United States the twenty-fourth. JOHN ADAMS.
By the President, TIMOTHY PICKERING, Secretary of State.

IN pursuance of the foregoing proclamation, the citizens of New Haven convened
and appointed a committee, with full powers, to make suitable arrangements for
a public testimony of the respect of the citizens for the memory of General
George Washington. Pursuant to this appointment the committee agreed on the
following exercises and marks of grief, which were exhibited on the 22d instant.

AT six o'clock in the morning, the solemnities of the day were introduced by
the tolling of all the bells for half an hour. The tolling was repeated (...)
o'clock. The flag of the United States (...) the public square, at half staff,
and the (...) displayed colors, through the day, (...)

AT two o'clock P.M. the citizens assembled, in unusual concourse, at the brick
Meeting House, where were performed the following exercises: 1. A Funeral
Anthem. 2. An appropriate Prayer, by the Rev. James Dana, D. D. 3. Music. 4. A
Sermon, by the Rev. President Dwight. 5. The reading of Genesis Washington's
farewell Address, to the Citizens of the United States, on declining public
Life, by the Rev. Bela Hubbard. 6. A pertinent Prayer, by the Rev. John Gemmil.
7. A Funeral Dirge.


THE citizens of both sexes wore, on the left arm, black crape, or ribbons, as
badges of mourning; the pulpit was dressed in black; secular business was
suspended; the exercises were solemn and impressive; and the attention and
conduct of the citizens evidenced their gratitude for the eminent services, and
their veneration for the distinguished virtues, of the illustrious man, whose
death they deplored.

AT a Meeting of the Committee of Arrangements, February 24, 1800, RESOLVED,
That the thanks of the citizens of New Haven be presented to the Rev. Timothy
Dwight, D.D. for his pertinent and eloquent Discourse, delivered on the 22d
instant, and that a copy be requested for publication.

RESOLVED, That the proceedings of the town, the discourse, and General
Washington's farewell address, be published for the benefit of the citizens of
New Haven, and to perpetuate the remembrance of the melancholy occasion.

By order of the Committee, HENRY DAGGETT, Chairman.

DEUTERONOMY, XXXIV. 10, 11, 12. And there arose not a prophet, since in
Israel, like unto Moses, whom the Lord knew face to face;

In all the signs and wonders, which the Lord sent him to do in the land of
Egypt, to Pharaoh, and to all his servants, and to all his land;

And in all that mighty hand, and in all that great terror, which Moses showed
in the sight of all Israel.


TO praise such as have lately died, is the instinctive conduct of sorrow. From
those who surround the bed of a departed friend, the first accents, which
succeed the involuntary burst of anguish, are enumerations of his real or
supposed virtues. Even in the mouths of the intelligent, and in the chambers of
the refined and delicate, the praise is warm and unqualified, and nature
overleaps every bound, raised by artificial decorum. Among nations less
enlightened, open and strong commendations of the dead are inwoven in the
established manners, and demanded by common decency; while, among savages,
funeral songs, replete with passionate sentiments, glowing imagery, and
excessive panegyric, are prominent features of national character, and splendid
parts of public celebration.

TO this general voice of nature Revelation has added its supreme sanction. The
text, which I have just now read, is an eulogy of the highest kind. When we
remember the numbers, and the character, of the prophets who followed Moses;
when we consider that of this number were Samuel, David, Isaiah, and Daniel; we
cannot but feel, that it would have been difficult to ascribe to him a more
honorable character.

WHAT then has been the cause, that no efforts of the mind have been less
approved, than funeral eulogies; and that an insipid panegyric is become
proverbial phraseology? Has it not been, on the one hand, that grief, and not
reason, has given birth to the praise, and that grief alone can admit its
truth, or feel its propriety? Has it not been, on the other hand, that the
Eulogist has come, in form, to make the most of his theme; to create a
character which has not existed, and to supply worth which he does not find; to
display his ingenuity, rather than the features of the deceased; and to gain
applause for his own talents, rather than respect for the subject of his
panegyric. For these or some other reasons, few attempts of this nature have
succeeded; and the effort to gain esteem for the dead has terminated in
producing contempt for the living.

BESIDE the difficulties, always attendant on attempts of this nature, the
present occasion involves some, which are peculiar. The subject of eulogy at
this time is so splendid, as to induce, and authorize, every man to demand all
that can be said by the human genius, and to stipulate for its noblest efforts
only; so near to the heart of an American, as to warrant an unqualified
rejection of whatsoever falls beneath its expectations and its wishes; so often
and so illustriously panegyrized, both at home and abroad, as to have little
chance for novelty, or success. The very (...) of Washington has become an
equivalent to the highest human dignity and worth, and all additions to it have
long passed rather for the mere unburdening of an American heart, than for the
means of honoring his character. Where so much is demanded, and so little will
be accepted, temerity only can furnish confidence to the speaker, and persuade
him, that he shall satisfy the wishes of his fellow citizens.

TO some person, however, the task, assigned to me, must have fallen; and to
none could it have fallen without anxiety. I have ventured upon it, with an
intention to perform a duty, not with a hope to fulfill expectation. Funeral
panegyric I have always shunned; and would more willingly have avoided it on
this occasion, than on any other.

THIS apology, which may probably seem long, and useless, will, it is hoped,
nevertheless prove of some use to the speaker. It is hoped, that it will, in
some degree, justify the undertaking, and explain and vindicate the manner in
which it will be executed; that it will lead my audience to expect, and show
the reasons why I shall exhibit, a plain and chastized account of my subject;
and that it will induce them to consider what I shall assert, however it may
differ from their opinions and feelings, as believed and felt by me.

HUMAN greatness is of many kinds, and appears under many forms; but the
diversities of personal greatness have their foundation in the intellect, and
in the heart. How far this is, in either case, the result of the original
structure of the mind, and how far of effort and acquisition, it is probably
impossible for man to determine. We see some actually great; but the cause, and
the means, have in a degree been, hitherto, in a state of uncertainty.

IN all cases, in which this distinction has been achieved, whether
intellectual, or moral, there must to superior endowments and seize, be
superadded, by Providence, a happy field, in which they may be advantageously
displayed. Some object seen, and felt, by the mind, to be of sufficient
importance to justify high and ardent efforts, and to repay the labors, and
the sufferings, which attend them, must be presented to the understanding, and
lay hold on the heart. In this situation, if ever, the man rises above himself,
feels his powers in a new manner, exerts talents of which he was before
unconscious, and virtues which had hitherto been dormant. Himself, as well as
the world, is astonished at what he is, and at what he does; the fisherman is
changed into an Apostle; the Mahommed.
trader of Mecca becomes the founder of a religion, and an empire, embracing a
fourth of mankind; and the Nadir Kouli Khan.
leader of a gang of thieves ascends the throne of Persia, and places beneath
his feet the scepter of Hindostan.

AMONG those occasions, which have lifted man above his ordinary sphere, none
have displayed with more splendour, either talents, or virtues, than the
revolutions of religion and empire. The conquest of nations, and the subversion
of governments, formed, as well as exhibited, Nebuchadnezzar, Cyrus, Alexander,
Hannibal, Caesar, Ghengis, Timur-bec, Kouli Khan, Frederic, 2d. Hyder Al^, and
various others of a similar character. To all these the pride of victory, the
extension of conquest, and the increase of dominion, rose in full view; and,
with a fascination wholly irresistible, prompted them to contrive, to dare, and
to attempt, beyond the limits of ordinary belief. When we contemplate these
men, however, our admiration is always mingled with disgust; and the few things
in their characters, which claim esteem, are lost in the multitude of those,
which force abhorrence. The luster shed around them is gloomy and dismal; a
glare of Avernus; a "darkness visible;" at which the eye gazes with a mixture
of astonishment and horror. We sicken, while we read their exploits; and blush,
that such scourges of the world should have claimed a common nature with
ourselves.

BUT there have been happier occasions for calling into action, and into light,
the superior faculties of man. Empire and religion have, at times, changed for
the better. Men have arisen, whom the world has not only admired, but revered,
and loved; to whom applause was not the mere outcry of astonishment, but the
silent and steady testimony of the understanding, the cheerful and instinctive
tribute of the heart. When oppression was to be resisted, government to be
reformed, or the moral state of mankind to be renewed, the Ruler of the
Universe has always supplied the means, and the agents. Where to the human eye
the whole face of things has worn an uniform level; where every family was lost
in insignificance, and every citizen was a peasant, and a slave; energy, asleep
under the pressure of weary circumstances, and talents, veiled by humble and
hopeless obscurity, have been roused into action, and pushed forward to
distinction and glory.

AMONG the men, who, at such periods, have risen to eminence, the Prophet, who
is the subject of my text, is unquestionably the first. In all the talents
which enlarge the human mind and all the virtues which ennoble the human heart,
in the amiableness of private life and the dignity of a ruler, in dangers
hazarded and difficulties overcome, in splendour of destination and the
enjoyment, and proofs, of divine complacency, he is clearly without a rival.
Companions, perhaps superiors, he may find in some single walk of greatness;
but in the whole progress he is hitherto alone.

FOR this preeminence he was plainly fitted by nature, and education, by the
manner of his life, and the field of his employment. Born with a soul superior
to his kind, educated in the first school of wisdom, trained to arms, and to
policy, in the most improved and powerful court in the world, and nurtured in
wisdom still more sublime in the quiet retreats of Midian, he came forth to his
great scene of public action, with the most happy preparation both for success
and glory. God was about to accomplish a more important revolution than had
ever taken place, and had formed and finished the instrument, which so
illustrious a design required.

IN whatever course of life, in whatever branch of character, we trace this
great man, we find almost every thing to approve, and love, and scarcely any
thing to lament, or censure. When we see him at the burning bush, sacrificing
his diffidence to his duty, and resolving finally to attempt the first great
liberation of mankind; when we accompany him to the presence of Pharaoh, and
hear him demand the release of the miserable victims of his tyranny; when we
behold him laying Egypt waste, and summoning all the great engines of terror
and destruction to overcome the obstinacy and wickedness of her monarch; when
we follow him to the Red Sea, and behold the waters divide at his command, to
open a passage for the millions of Israel; and at the same command return, to
deluge the Egyptian host; when we trace him through the wonders of Sinai, and
of the wilderness; when we mark his steady faith in God, his undoubting
obedience to every divine command, his unexampled patriotism, immovable by
ingratitude, rebellion, and insult, his cheerful communication of every office
of power and profit to others, and his equally cheerful exclusion of his own
descendants from all places of distinction; when we consider his glorious
integrity in adhering always to the duties of his office, unseduced by power
and splendor, unmoved by national and singular homage, unawed by faction and
opposition, undaunted by danger and difficulty, and unaltered by provocation,
obloquy, and distress; when we see him meek beyond example, and patient and
persevering, through forty years of declining life, in toil, hazard, and trial;
when we read in his writings the frank records of his own failings, and those
of his family, friends, and nation, and the first efforts of the historian, the
poet, the orator, and the lawgiver; when we see all the duties of self
government, benevolence, and piety, which he taught, exactly displayed in a
life approximating to angelic virtue; when we behold him the deliverer of his
nation, the restorer of truth, the pillar of righteousness, and the reformer of
mankind; his whole character shines with a radiance, like the splendor, which
his face derived from the Sun of Righteousness, and on which the human eye
could not endure to look. He is every where the same glorious person; the Man
of God; selected from the race of Adam; called up into the mountain, that
burned with fire; ascending to meet his Creator; embosoming himself in the
clouds of Sinai; walking calmly onward through the thunders and lightnings; and
serenely advancing to the immediate presence, and converse, of Jehovah. He is
the greatest of all prophets; the first type of the Savior; conducted to
Pisgah, unclothed of mortal flesh, and entombed in the dust, by the immediate
hand of the Most High.

IN a sphere, in some respects less splendid, but in the eye of wisdom and
virtue scarcely less honorable, Paul, also, rose to finished glory and
greatness, as the enlightener, and reformer of mankind. He was not, like Moses,
the emancipator of a nation, the head of a new church, or the founder of an
empire; but he was the most illustrious follower of the Son of God, in
establishing Christianity, and in accomplishing the salvation of men. No
labors of man claim a higher moral distinction, than his; no mind was ever so
expanded, or elevated, with the noblest knowledge; no heart was probably ever
warmed with more various, or more exalted virtue. No man ever struggled more
firmly with dangers; or rose more gloriously above difficulties; regarded
friends with more affection, or enemies with more compassion; felt for himself
less, or his fellow men more; or attained a more sublime and unmingled piety,
than Paul. To his labors mankind are, directly, more indebted, than to those
of any other man, for the moral wisdom, the virtue, the peace, and the
happiness, which they now enjoy.

SUCH excellence we are not to look for among those, who have received no
supernatural assistance; yet, in similar revolutions of empire, similar
emancipations of mankind, and similar renovations of the human character, both
talents and virtues have appeared with high luster and dignity. As proofs of
this assertion, many names of no small celebrity might be recited here, were it
necessary; but it will be sufficient for the present occasion, to mention three
only, as distinguished, in my view at least, above others. These are the first,
and second Gustavus, of Sweden, and Alfred the Great, of England. Were not his
character clouded by some serious defects, I should add to this list Henry the
fourth, of France.

THE first Gustavus accomplished for Sweden what the great man, whose character
and death we are assembled to commemorate, accomplished for us; a deliverance
from political thraldom, and the establishment of political freedom and safety.
Illustriously descended, distinguished in early youth for a series of
honorable actions, and already the object of governmental confidence and
public hope, he was trepanned by the treachery of Christiern the third, of
Denmark, one of the most faithless, proud, and bloody tyrants, that ever
disgraced the name of man; was thrown into prison, and secretly ordered to be
put to death; solely because his claims of power in Sweden were great, and his
worth gave the fairest promise of seeing them substantiated. Released from his
dungeon by the good offices of a generous Danish Nobleman, he escaped through
many dangers to his native country. There friendless, forsaken, seen only to be
shunned, and known only to excite the dread of death for not betraying him to
Christiern, he at length betook himself to the mountains of Dalecarlia; a
province yet but half subdued, and inhabited by a generous band of peasants,
glowing with the unconquerable love of liberty. Here unknown but by distant
rumor, without authority, without a friend, without a shilling, and hunted by
the Usurper and his creatures through every solitude and cell, he wrought in
the mines, to procure his daily bread. But such a man cannot be long obscured.
The peasants of Dalecarlia he found still brave and sincere, and boldly invited
them to victory and freedom. Charmed by his dignity and gracefulness of person
and demeanor, fascinated by his eloquence, and secure under his conduct and
bravery, these plain men followed him eagerly into the field of conflict; to
any other a field of despair; to him, of hope and triumph. At their head, he
met the veterans of Denmark, only to defeat them; and sat down before their
castles, only to take them. Within a short period, he overran, and redeemed the
whole of his native country; every where present; the animating, informing,
directing principle of the army, and of the nation; and by the unanimous voice
of the Estates was advanced to the throne. In this high station, enjoying every
testimony of public respect short of adoration, for his distinguished wisdom,
gallantry, patriotism, and piety, he revived the agriculture, renewed the
wasted cities and villages, restored the commerce, re-established and improved
the justice, secured the liberty, reformed the religion, and engrossed the
hearts, of his grateful nation. "In all other respects," says the Catholic
Vertot.
writer of his life, "except the introduction of Lutheranism into his kingdom,
he deserves the praise and admiration of posterity."

THE second Gustavus, having, from the age of 18, reigned in Sweden, with
singular wisdom, equity, and glory, for twenty years, appeared in Germany,
1631, in the illustrious character of Defender of the Protestant religion,
against the last great efforts of the Catholics, in that country, for its
destruction; and gloriously lost his life in establishing the cause, for which
he died. He is thus described by a respectable modern historian. Russell.


"NO prince, ancient or modern, seems to have possessed in so eminent a degree,
as Gustavus Adolphus, the qualities of the hero, the statesman, and the
commander; that intuitive genius which conceives, that wisdom which plans, and
that happy combination of courage and conduct which gives success to an
enterprise. Nor was the military progress of any leader equally rapid, under
circumstances equally difficult; with an inferior force, against warlike
nations, and disciplined troops, commanded by able and experienced generals."

"BUT Gustavus had other qualities beside those of a military and political
kind. He was a pious Christian, a warm friend, a tender husband, a dutiful son,
an affectionate father. The sentiments suited to all these softer characters
are admirably displayed in a letter from him to His Minister.
Oxenstiern, written a few days before the battle of Lutzen, in which he lost
his life." In this letter is the following memorable passage.

"Consider me as a man, the guardian of a kingdom, who has struggled with
difficulties, and passed through them with reputation, by the protection and
mercy of heaven; as a man, who loved and honored his relations, and who
neglected life, riches, and happy days, for the preservation and glory of his
country, and faithful subjects; expecting no other recompense, than to be
declared the prince, who fulfilled the duties of that station, which Providence
had assigned him in the world."

"THE merit of Alfred (says Hume) both in public and private life, may with
advantage be set in opposition to that of any monarch or citizen, which the
annals of any age or nation can present to us. He seems indeed to be the model
of that perfect character, which, under the denomination of a sage or wise man,
philosophers have been fond of delineating, rather as a fiction of their
imagination, than in hopes of ever seeing it really existing: so happily were
all his virtues tempered together; so justly were they blended; and so
powerfully did each prevent the other from exceeding its proper boundaries! He
knew how to reconcile the most enterprising spirit with the coolest moderation;
the most obstinate perseverance with the easiest flexibility; the most severe
justice with the gentlest lenity; the greatest vigor in command with the most
perfect affability of deportment; the highest capacity and inclination for
science with the most shining talents for action;" See Note A*
and, let me add, the warmest devotion and piety with the utmost candor and
liberality. "His civil and military virtues are almost equally the objects of
our admiration; excepting only, that the former, being more rare among princes,
as well as more useful, seem chiefly to challenge our applause."

AS a fourth in this dignified groupe, may, with the fullest confidence, be
placed the hero, statesman, and father, of our own country. I have introduced a
summary account of these great men into this discourse, that by comparing his
character with theirs, and seeing them stand side by side, my audience may be
enabled to form a more accurate estimate of his worth. Greatness is a term
wholly comparative; its true import is, therefore, to be seen by comparison
only. On the one hand, superiority to the common mass, and on the other
approximation, equality, or eminence, with respect to such as have been thus
superior, is all that is intended by the word. As Moses and Paul were the
greatest human characters among such as have been supernaturally assisted; and
the three princes, whom I have here characterized, were, if I mistake not, the
first among those, who have become great by means merely natural; to sustain a
fair resemblance to these men must be highly honorable; to be near them, an
enviable distinction; to equal them, the crown of the most exalted ambition.

AS the sphere of Paul's exertions was peculiar, he must of course be passed by
in such a design. As Moses was inspired, and sustained by a peculiar agency of
the Most High, the comparison with him must in many respects be unfairly
instituted. Yet a strong resemblance between him and the hero of our own
country is so evident, that the recital of it is become almost proverbial. The
occasions, the talents, the virtues, the divine interpositions, and the issue,
were so similar, as to strike the most undiscriminating eye, and to find an
easy acknowledgment from every tongue. Particularly, the preeminence of Moses
to all the great men in Israel, marked so strongly in the text, and the like
distinction justly claimed by the American leader, not only over his
countrymen, but over all men of the present age, form a most honorable ground
of comparison.

THAT General Washington is, with propriety, introduced as a proper companion
to the three illustrious princes, whom I have mentioned above, as a companion,
whom, on equal terms, they may be fairly supposed cheerfully to welcome to
their number and rank, will, I trust, appear from a just account of his
character.

THERE are two methods, in which such an account may be advantageously given; a
recital of what he has done, and an exhibition of the attributes which he
manifested.

IN very early life, he began to be, in a sense prophetically, distinguished
for wisdom and conduct superior to his years; and executed so ably several
important commissions, which he received from the legislature of Virginia, as
to secure their confidence, and command the applause of the whole country. Such
trusts have been rarely committed to so young a man, and have probably been
never better lodged in the hands of any man. That in the existing circumstances
success was, in one of the cases, completely achieved, that, in a second, so
little disaster ensued; and that, in a third, total ruin was prevented; is
plainly and chiefly to be attributed to the skill and firmness of a youth
between nineteen and twenty-three, acting in the last case only in a voluntary
office.

AFTER acquiring, both in public and private life, the universal esteem,
through the following season of peace, he was chosen, in the year 1774, one of
the Representatives in the first Congress. Here his former reputation, and the
proofs which he daily gave of superior wisdom and worth, induced that body to
choose him, in 1775, commander in chief of the American armies, employed to
resist the hostilities of Great Britain. This hazardous office he accepted with
a See Note B.
modesty, which always accompanies and announces merit, and with a firmness of
decision, which no future embarrassment could move. Under a government just
formed, and marked with infantine weakness; in a country composed of separate
and deranged sovereignties; amidst a people now first seriously connected; at
the head of armies formed of mere militia, a band of scouts and yet to be made
soldiers, and of officers ignorant of the discipline which they were to teach,
and of the movements which they were to guide; strangers, rivals, and sometimes
enemies; without ammunition, arms, clothes, or money; enlisted for a summer;
and plunged by inexperience into all the exposures, discouragements, diseases,
and miseries, of unprovided military life; he became the body of union to the
people, and to the soldiery, guided the one to wisdom, and led the other to
victory. In his own letters, See Note C.
not less illustrious commentaries than those of Caesar, and on a more glorious
war, he is seen, through the veil of his modesty, to have been the pillar, on
which the country suspended itself; the soul, by which the army was formed,
quickened, and actuated. In the midst of the immense and momentous concerns,
lying always on his mind, no want, nor its supply; no suffering, nor its relief;
no evil, nor its remedy; no improvement in the affairs of the army, or the
country, nor the means by which it might be best accomplished; eluded his
attention. He is there proved, and without intending it, to have been the
source of almost every important measure, the origin of the great mass of
meliorations, in our system.

IN this war, for which we were so unfurnished, as to render it, in the eye of
sober judgment, more like Quixotism than justifiable enterprise, his cautious
wisdom, more necessary, more varied, and more extraordinary, than that of the
celebrated Roman, justly gained him, abroad, as well as at home, the title of
the American Fabius. To the minds of unskilful, ardent, and partial judges,
however, this wisdom, without which we now clearly see our country must have
been lost, appeared to result from imbecility and fear. So far did this
opinion, together with some concurring circumstances, operate, as to engender a
serious attempt to raise a foreigner, in every respect his inferior, to the
supreme command. Had not this childish and wretched attempt been ably and
strenuously opposed, had not the great body of officers of distinction solemnly
pledged themselves to each other never to serve, while he lived, under any
other commander, there is reason to fear, that it would have succeeded. Of this
glaring attempt against him his mind, superior alike to savor and to frowns,
took no other notice, than what has been buried in silence. Satisfied with
himself, and strong in the attachment of those whom he commanded, he rose above
every attack, danger, and enemy.

A country, an army, situated as were ours, carried misfortune in their face.
The country was unskilled and unfurnished; and its councils, composed indeed of
great and good men, were yet in no degree versed in the business, which they
were now called to direct. The army was formed of brave and hardy soldiers, and
of gallant and sensible officers; but it was gathered, and dispersed, in a day;
and, when most necessary, and presented with the fairest opportunities of
successful enterprise, had disappeared. Never did he appear greater, than in
these seasons of trial and depression. No enterprises of his shine with more
luster, than his decampment from See Note D
Long Island, his retreat from General How through New Jersey, his descent upon
Trenton, See Note E.
his elusion of Lord Cornwallis at Trenton, his consequent march through
New Jersey, in which he defeated the British corpse at Princeton, and the
address, with which he preserved the appearance of a considerable force at
Morristown, where, through the winter, he had only eleven or twelve hundred
men, and these under a successive inoculation, to resist the whole British army.

BUT his military life had also its seasons of prosperity. His successes were,
however, almost always obtained at the head of a force, inferior to that of his
enemy, and of consequence were, in an eminent degree, the result of his own
efforts. Like the illustrious men, to whom I have compared him, he had the
happiness of ending the great controversy, in which he had engaged, and in
which his country was the stake, with a final and complete triumph. All that,
for which he fought, and that the greatest prize, which excites human
contention, he gained; and lived long enough to reap a glorious reward of his
labors in the peace and safety, the veneration and blessings, of his
countrymen.

HIS political, was not less honorable than his military, career. When, under
the weakness and inefficiency of the Confederation, these States were falling
asunder, and tumbling into anarchy and ruin, he contributed, at the head of the
General Convention, more, by his wisdom, virtue and influence, than any other
man, to the final adoption of the Federal Constitution; and thus saved his
country a second time. Twice summoned by the unanimous voice of the nation to
the Presidency of the General Government, he there, in a series of wise, firm,
and generous measures, stepped often between the State and destruction. His
Proclamation of Neutrality, particularly, was the hinge, on which, at that
time, the whole well being of our country turned. No public measure was ever
more necessary, more happily timed, or more prudently conducted. To that
measure is it probably owing, that we are allowed thus peaceably to assemble,
this day, in honor to his memory.

THE luster of all his military and political actions, and the glory of his
whole character, apparently incapable of addition, he has nevertheless enhanced
by two singular traits of distinction; his refusal to accept of a compensation
for his services; and has repeated, voluntary resignation of his high offices,
whilst in the entire possession of universal veneration, and perfectly assured
of the unanimous public suffrage. I do not here intend, that great men ought of
course to decline pecuniary rewards; or to retire, in all circumstances, from
public to private life. It could not have been the duty of either of the
princes, whose character I have given. But no duty forbade him to do both; and
in doing both he has secured a glory, which is singular. Nothing could have so
discovered his selfpossession, evinced his superiority to ambition, or proved
his mind to be the residence of patriotism and principle.

IN private life he was the same dignified character. All his affairs were
superintended by himself, and were of course always in exact order and
prosperous thrift. To his neighbors, to the public, to all men, he was just,
generous, and humane; to the Sea Note F.
poor a steady, and conspicuous benefactor; and to his family whatever is found
in the fullest and most amiable discharge of the domestic duties.

THROUGH the plantation, on which he resided, ran a stream, stored with fish.
This fishery two days in the week he made, together with his own boats and
nets, the property of the surrounding poor; and frequently directed his
servants to aid them in taking and curing their booty.

IN the course of the war, he wrote, as I have been well informed, to his
friends in Virginia, a proposal to free his servants, should the Legislature
think it consistent with the general welfare. This plan he has realized in his
will; and the public are already informed, that it will be speedily executed by
his most respectable Executrix.

AFTER the surrender of Yorktown, he returned, at the end of eight years
absence, to visit his family. His servants had voluntarily arranged themselves
in two lines, from his mansion house to the creek which runs before the door.
When he came in sight, these humble and affectionate domestics sent up a shout
of joy, and uttered an extravagance of transport; the women by shrieking,
beating their breasts, and rending their hair; and the men by cries and tears,
and all the gesticulations, with which nature, in uninformed and unpolished
society, gives vent to excessive passion. When he had crossed the creek, he
delayed his progress to his beloved abode, to shake all the adults by the hand,
and to speak tenderly and affectionately to the children. "Never," said the
gentleman, from whom I received this information, "was I so delightfully
affected, except at the surrender of Yorktown; and then, only because I
considered the independence of my country as secured."

ON the attributes, manifested by this great man in his conduct, I beg leave to
make the following observations.

GENERAL WASHINGTON was great, not by means of that brilliancy of mind, often
appropriately termed genius, and usually coveted for ourselves, and our
children; and almost as usually attended with qualities, which preclude wisdom,
and depreciate or forbid worth; but by a constitutional character more happily
formed. His mind was indeed inventive, and full of resources; but its energy
appears to have been originally directed to that which is practical and useful,
and not to that which is shewy and specious. His judgment was clear and
intuitive beyond that of most who have lived, and seemed instinctively to
discern the proper answer to the celebrated Roman question; What good purpose
will it answer?
Cui bono erit? To this his incessant attention, and unwearied observation,
which nothing, whether great or minute, escaped, doubtless contributed in a
high degree. What he observed he treasured up, and thus added daily to his
stock of useful knowledge. Hence, although his early education was in a degree
confined, his mind became possessed of extensive, various, and exact
information. Perhaps there never was a mind, on which theoretical speculations
had less influence, and the decisions of common sense more.

AT the same time, no man ever more earnestly or uniformly sought advice, or
regarded it, when given, with more critical attention. The opinions of friends
and enemies, of those who abetted, and of those who opposed, his own system, he
explored and secured alike. His own opinions, also, he submitted to his proper
counselors, and often to others; with a demand, that they should be sifted,
and exposed, without any tenderness to them because they were his; insisting,
that they should be considered as opinions merely, and, as such, should be
subjected to the freest and most severe investigation.

WHEN any measure of importance was to be acted on, he delayed the formation of
his judgment until the last moment; that he might secure to himself, always, the
benefit of every hint, opinion, and circumstance, which might contribute either
to confirm, or change, his decision. Hence, probably, it in a great measure
arose, that he was so rarely committed; and that his decisions have so rarely
produced regret, and have been so clearly justified both by their consequences
and the judgment of mankind.

WITH this preparation, he formed a judgment finally and wholly his own; and
although no man was ever more anxious before a measure was adopted, probably no
man was ever less anxious afterward. He had done his duty, and left the issue
to Providence.

TO all this conduct his high independence of mind greatly contributed. By this
I intend a spirit, which dares to do its duty, against friends and enemies, and
in prosperous and adverse circumstances, alike; and which, when it has done its
duty, is regardless of opinions and consequences.

NOR was he less indebted to his peculiar See Note G.
firmness. He not only dared to act in this manner, but uniformly sustained the
same tone of thought and feeling, such, as he was at the decision, he ever
after continued to be; and all men despaired of operating on him unless through
the medium of conviction. The same unchanging spirit supported him through
every part of his astonishing trials, during the war; and exhibited him as
exactly the same man after a defeat, as after a victory; neither elated nor
depressed, but always grave, serene, and prepared for the event.

FROM other great men he was distinguished by an exemption from favouritism. No
man ever so engrossed his attachment, as to be safe, for a moment, from
deserved reproof, or censure; nor was any man ever so disrelished by him, as,
on that account, to fail of receiving from him whatever applause, or services,
his merit could claim. Hence his friends feared, and his enemies respected him.

HIS moderation and self government were such that he was always in his own
power, and never in the power of any other person. Whatever passions he felt,
they rarely appeared. His conduct, opinions, and life, wore unusually the
character of mere intellect. Hence he was never found unguarded, or
embarrassed; but was always at full liberty to do that, and that only, which
expediency and duty demanded. A striking instance of this trait in his
character is seen in the well known fact; that he never exculpated himself from
any charge, nor replied to any calumny. His accusers, for such he had, had
opportunity to make the most of their accusations; his calumniators, if their
consciences permitted, to sleep in peace.

HIS justice was exact, but tempered with the utmost humanity, See Note H.
which the occasion would suffer. His truth no sober man, who knew him,
probably ever doubted. Watchful against his own exposures to error, he was
rarely found erring; jealous of doing injustice, if he has done injustice, it
is yet, I believe, unrecorded.

HIS reservedness has been at times censured. To me it appears to have been an
important and necessary characteristic of a person situated as he was. In
familiar life a communicative disposition is generally pleasing, and often
useful; in his high stations it would have been dangerous. One unguarded or
ambiguous expression might have produced evils, the remedy of which would have
been beyond even his own power. No such expression is recorded of him.

HIS punctuality was extreme. He rose always with the dawn; he dined at a given
minute; he attended every appointment at the moment. Hence his business public
and private was always done at the proper time, and always beforehand.

NO person appears to have had a higher sense of decorum, and universal
propriety. The eye* following his public and private life, traces an
unexceptionable propriety, an exact decorum, in every action; in every word; in
his demeanor to men of every class; in his public communications; in his
convivial entertainments; in his letters; and in his familiar conversation;
from which bluntness, flattery, witticism, indelicacy, negligence, passion, and
overaction, were alike excluded.

FROM these things happily combined, always seen, and seen always in their
native light, without art, or affectation, it arose, that, wherever he
appeared, an instinctive awe and veneration attended him on the part of all
men. Every man, however great in his own opinion, or in reality, shrunk in his
presence, and became conscious of an inferiority, which he never felt before.
Whilst he encouraged every man, particularly every stranger, and peculiarly
every diffident man, and raised him to self-possession, no sober person,
however secure he might think himself of his esteem, ever presumed to draw too
near him.

WITH respect to his religious character there have been different opinions. No
one will be surprised at this, who reflects, that this is a subject, about
which, in all circumstances not involving inspired testimony, doubts may and
will exist. The evidence concerning it must of course arise from an induction
of particulars. Some will induce more of these particulars, and others sewer;
some will rest on one class, or collection, others on another; and some will
give more, and others less, weight to those which are induced; according to
their several modes, and standards, of judging. The question in this, and all
other cases, must be finally determined before another tribunal, than that of
human judgment; and to that tribunal it must ultimately be lest. For my own
part, I have considered his numerous and uniform public and most solemn
declarations of his high veneration for religion, his exemplary and edifying
attention to public worship, and his (...) devotion, as proofs, sufficient to
satisfy every person, willing to be satisfied. I shall only add, that if he was
not a Christian, he was more like one, than any man of the same description,
whose life has been hitherto recorded.

AS a warrior, his merit has, I believe, been fully and readily acknowledged;
yet I have doubted whether it has always been justly estimated. His military
greatness lay not principally in desperate sallies of courage; in the daring
and brilliant exploits of a partisan: These would have ill suited his station,
and most probably have ruined his cause and country. It consisted in the
formation of extensive and masterly See Note I.
plans; effectual preparations, the cautious prevention of great evils, and the
watchful seizure of every advantage; in combining heterogeneous materials into
one military body, producing a system of military and political measures*
concentering universal confidence, and diffusing an See Note J.
influence next to magical; in comprehending a great scheme of war, pursuing a
regular system of acquiring strength for his country, and wearing out the
strength of his enemies. To his conduct, both military and political, may, with
exact propriety, be applied the observation, which has been often made
concerning his courage; that in the most hazardous situations no man ever saw
his countenance change.

PERHAPS, I shall be thought to have dwelt too long, and too minutely, on his
character. I hope I shall be justified, partially at least, when it is
remembered, that I have been seizing the best opportunity, which I shall ever
enjoy, of teaching, in the most affecting manner in my power, the youths
committed to my instruction, and forming a part of this audience, the way to
become great, respectable, and useful.

SUCH, my friends and fellow citizens, was the man, whose death we are
assembled to lament, and whose worth we commemorate. Like the illustrious
subject of my text he stands alone in his nation. Like him he was great in the
splendour of designation, in wisdom, in effort, in success, in the importance of
his talents, virtues and labors, to the nation over whom he presided in war
and peace; in the estimation, the love, and the tears, of his country. On this
resemblance I have dwelt less, because I suppose others have dwelt more; yet I
cannot forbear to add, that in the death of these distinguished men there is a
similarity not a little striking. Both died in advanced years, but without any
previous decay of faculties, or glory; both left their respective nations, not
indeed established, but so far advanced, as not absolutely to demand a
continuance of their superintendency; and both were honored by a national and
spontaneous mourning, as the last tribute of public veneration. Miraculous
support our nation could not hope for under any leader; but the signal
interpositions of Heaven in our behalf, while under his guidance, ought never
to be forgotten.

TO Americans his name will be ever dear; a savor of sweet incense, descending
to every succeeding generation. The things, which he has done, are too great,
too interesting, ever to be forgotten. Every object which we see, every
employment in which we are engaged, every comfort which we enjoy, reminds us
daily of his character. The general peace, liberty, religion, safety, and
prosperity, strongly impress, in every place, what he has done, suffered, and
achieved. When a Legislature assembles to enact laws; when Courts meet to
distribute justice; when Congregations gather to worship God; they naturally,
and almost necessarily, say "To Washington it is owing, under God, that we are
here." The farmer pursuing his plough in peace, the mechanic following the
business of his shop in safety, ascribes the privilege to Washington. The house
which, uninvaded, shelters us from the storm, the cheerful fireside surrounded
by our little ones, the table spread in quiet with the bounties of Providence,
the bed on which we repose in undisturbed security, utters, in silent but
expressive language, the memory, and the praise, of Washington. Every ship
bears the fruits of his labors on its wings, and exultingly spreads its
streamers to his honor. The student meets him in the still and peaceful walk;
the traveller sees him in all the prosperous and smiling scenes of his journey;
and our whole country in her thrift, order, safety, and morals, bears,
inscribed in sunbeams, throughout her hills and her plains, the name and the
glory of Washington.

FROM a subject so singular, and so edifying, it is not easy to fail of gaining
useful practical instruction. Particularly, the inestimable benefits which we
have derived from the efforts of this great man. cannot but prompt every
ingenuous mind to remember, with unceasing gratitude, the goodness of God in
bestowing upon us such a blessing; God, who formed and furnished him for
labors so useful, and for a life so glorious. In what a manner must the late
war have closed, had the supreme command of our armies fallen to a weak or
unprincipled man? What would have been its issue, had the powerful attempt to
displace him, and to substitute a foreigner, succeeded? Think, I beseech you,
of the uniform condition of a conquered nation; a nation too, considered as
rebels by their conquerors. Think what it would have been to have had your
armies betrayed* your lands ravaged, your houses burnt, your best citizens
brought to the halter, your wives and daughters dishonored, and your children
houseless, naked, and famished. Think of the long and hopeless period, through
which the broken spirit, the ruined morals, the wide-spread ignorance, and the
lost energy, of your country would have perpetuated your miseries, and
prevented your posterity from emerging again to the character of men, and the
blessings of freemen.

TO these wretched scenes contrast your present freedom, peace, safety, glory,
and felicity. To whom are they owing? The heart spontaneously answer, "First to
God, and next to Washington." I mean not to detract from the wisdom, bravery,
or worth, of his generous companions in the council, and in the field.
Cheerfully do I render to them the illustrious honors, which they have
merited, and won; and heartily do I rejoice to see those, who still live,
sustaining and increasing, in so many instances, the high estimation, which
they had so amply deserved of their country. But in all that I have said of
their illustrious Chief they will be the first to unite, because they have
known him more intimately than others. With them will all their countrymen
instinctively accord; for his labors have been so great, so good, so
endearing, that they cannot but be seated in every American heart. May our
gratitude to the Author always accompany, and totally transcend, our admiration
of the instrument; let it inspirit every reflection, and mingle with every joy.

BY him, also, are our rulers, at the present and at every future period,
taught how to rule. The same conduct will ever produce substantially the same
effects; the same public well being, the same glory, the same veneration. To be
wise and good; to forget, or restrain, the dictates of passion, and obey those
of duty; to seek singly the public welfare, and lose in it personal
gratification; to resist calmly and firmly the passions, and pursue only the
interests, of a nation, is the great secret of ruling well. When these things
are exhibited in the strong light of example, and crowned with success and
honor, they are taught in a manner beyond measure more impressive, than can be
found in rules and arguments. Here they are already tried, and proved. Here
they are seen surrounded by all their delightful attendants, and followed by
all their happy consequences. The conviction produced is complete, the
impression supreme. From this great example all rulers may learn wisdom, and
our rulers more than any other. They are rulers of the very people, who loved
and reverenced him, and who will, of course, love and reverence them, so far as
they tread in his footsteps. They, also, know and feel his character, and
success, more than is possible for others. Wisdom, therefore, and duty demand
of them, and in a peculiar degree, studiously to copy so glorious a pattern.

THE youths, also, of our country, who wish to become great, useful and
honorable, will here find the best directions, and the most powerful
incitements. To be great, useful, and honorable, they must resemble him. The
very actions, which he performed, they may indeed not be called to perform; the
sufferings, which he underwent, they may not be obliged to undergo; but the
attributes, which he possessed and displayed, must, in a good degree, be
possessed and displayed by them also.

LET them particularly remember, that greatness is not the result of mere
chance, or genius; that it is not the flash of brilliancy, nor the desperate
sally of ambition; that it is, on the contrary, the combined result of strong
mental endowments, vigorous cultivation, honorable design, and wise direction.
It is not the glare of a meteor; glittering, dazzling, consuming, and
vanishing; but the steady and exalted splendor of the sun; a splendor which,
while it shines with preeminent brightness, warms also, enlivens, adorns,
improves, and perfects, the objects, on which it shines: glorious indeed by its
luster; but still more glorious in the useful effects produced by its power. Of
this great truth the transcendant example before us is a most dignified
exhibition. Let them imitate, therefore, the incessant attention, the exact
observation, the unwearied industry, the scrupulous regard to advice, the
slowness of decision, the cautious prudence, the nice punctuality, the strict
propriety, the independence of thought and feeling, the unwavering firmness,
the unbiassed impartiality, the steady moderation* the exact justice, the
unveering truth, the universal humanity, and the high veneration for religion,
and for God, always manifested by this great man. Thus will future Washingtons
arise to bless our happy country.

AS a nation we may derive from him many kinds of instruction and profit. This
occasion will, however, allow me to insist on one only: The steady pursuit of
that policy, which he so uniformly and successfully pursued, and has so
forcibly recommended. In his farewell to the country which he so loved and
defended, we have his last, and to us his dying words; a most impressive
recommendation of the best means of our national welfare; the sum of all the
political wisdom, which he had imbibed from his vast experience; the substance
of that policy, by which alone our safety and happiness can be ensured. In it
we are most affectingly taught to preserve our union; to despise trifling
discriminations; to reverence our constitution; to reject watchfully all
associations and factions, formed to oppose it; to preserve a well balanced
administration; to encourage literary institutions; to promote, as of primary
importance, morality and religion; to cherish public credit; to observe justice
and good faith toward all nations; to cultivate harmony and peace with all; to
indulge antipathies and favouritism toward none; to resist, as dangerous and
deadly, all foreign influence; to connect ourselves, politically, as little as
possible; and to hold, as much as maybe, a strict and perpetual neutrality
toward powers at war. Here all the national interests of America are
consulted; here all its political wisdom is summed up in a single sheet.
Nothing can be added, nothing without injury taken away. How greatly are these
precepts recommended by the character of their author, and by the success with
which they have been followed in practice. How strongly are they enforced by
his labors for our country, by the glory which he attained while steadily
pursuing them, and by the manner, and the time, in which they were delivered.
Happy, beyond measure, is it for these States, that he pursued them so long;
that they have been so closely followed by his able and virtuous successor;
that they are now the only policy of our government, and the efficient policy
of our country. Happy, beyond measure, will it be, if our nation should
henceforth make them its great political creed, and the only rule of its
political measures, at home, and abroad. Faction, party, dissension, will then
cease; murmurs be lost in peace and prosperity; intrigues be rendered infamous
and hopeless; foreign influence no more lift up its snaky head; the danger of
invasion vanish; the government our country totter no more; the great political
problem, Whether a free and happy Republic can be durable, be finally and
propitiously solved; and Americans find less reason to lament, that Washington
is dead; because they will still see him live in the policy and glory, the
safety and peace, the virtue and felicity, of his beloved country.

NOTES.
A.
It is a curious fact, that Hume, although he is obliged to recite the
extraordinary piety of Alfred, yet totally omits the mention of it in his
panegyric on his character.

B.
For specimens of the peculiar modesty of General Washington see his written
acceptance of the chief command of the army, and his acceptance of the
Presidency. Observe, also, the fact; that he never made his great actions any
part of the subject of his conversation.

C.
There have been many doubts concerning the character of General Washington, as
a writer. Various persons have denied, that he was at all, or in any
respectable degree, the author of the several compositions, which are presented
to the public, as his. It may be a satisfaction to my readers to be informed,
that the address to the officers of the army in reply to the letters of Major
Armstrong, was penned by his own hand, and never seen by any person, until
after it was publicly delivered. The originals of his answers, also, to the
addresses presented to him, in his last tour through the Eastern States, are
now on file (as I am informed from high authority) in his own hand.

When he began to read the abovementioned address to the officers, he found
himself in some degree embarrassed by the imperfection of his sight. Taking out
his spectacles, he said, "these eyes," my friends, "have grown dim, and these
locks white, in the service of my country, yet I have never doubted her
justice."

The style of General Washington, it is observed by the authors of the British
critic, is strongly marked with th^^ dignified simplicity, which is the proof
of a great mind.

D.
Upwards of 9000 men, together with the great body of artillery, ammunition,
horses, carriages, cattle, provisions, etc. were conveyed from Long Island to
New York, while the British army was so near, that their men were distinctly
heard at work with their pick-axes and shovels. The river is near a mile wide,
and the decampment lasted thirteen hours; yet the enemy were perfectly ignorant
of the measure, until it was completed. It ought here to be observed, that,
about 2 o'clock in the morning, a thick fog providentially favored the
retreating army.

E.
The first knowledge, which Lord Cornwallis had of the retreat of General
Washington, was in the morning; a few minutes before the noise of the cannon at
Princeton was heard at Trenton. Sir William Erskine, it is asserted, urged Lord
Cornwallis to place a strong body of troops at the bridge over Sanpink Creek;
apprehending, that General Washington would retreat into the heart of
New Jersey rather than attempt to cross the Delaware. This, however, was
refused. Very early in the morning, Lord Cornwallis, while in bed, was
informed, that Gen^^^^ Washington had decamped. Sir William at that moment came
in. His Lordship asked him, whither he believed the American General to be
gone. At that instant, the artillery was heard from the neighborhood of
Princeton. "My Lord," said Sir William, "General Washington tells you where he
is. Do you not hear him calling to you to come after him?"

So silently was this retreat conducted, that the American sentinels at the
bridge knew nothing of it, until themselves were ordered to quit their post.

F.
To the superintendant of his estate he wrote from the army in the following
terms.

"Let the hospitality of the house be kept up with respect to the poor. Let no
one go hungry away. If any of this sort of people should be in want of corn,
supply their necessities, provided it does not encourage them in idleness. I
have no objection to your giving my money in charity when you think it will be
well bestowed; I mean that it is my desire, that it should be done. You are to
consider, that neither myself nor my wife are in the way to do these good
offices." See Doctor Trumbull's Sermon. Note.

G.
In a letter from a gentleman in Alexandria to his friend in Hartford,
published in the Connecticut Courant, it is declared, that General Washington
closed his own eyes. Thus, it appears, his firmness forsook him not even in the
article of death.

H.
[The humanity of General Washington has been impeached, and his character
virulently attacked, with respect to the execution of Major Andre; but he was
most unjustly impeached. I am warranted to declare, that he felt and exhibited
the tenderest compassion for that unfortunate young man, and that Major Andre
often expressed to an American officer, of high respectability, the very polite
and humane treatment, which he received from General Washington.]

I.
Among the plans devised by General Washington for military operations, and
expressive of his (...) of mind, I beg leave to mention the plan for attacking
the British on the Delaware, in three points at once, of which only the attack
on Col. Rahl at Trenton succeeded, the others being prevented by the ice; the
plan of attacking the troops at Princeton; the plan of crossing the Brandywine
to attack Lord Cornwallis; the plan of attack at Germantown; the plan of the
bold and successful attack on Stoney Point; and the great plan of capturing the
British force at Yorktown, involving the complete illusion of Sir Henry Clinton.

To these ought to be added a bold and masterly design of attacking the whole
British force on New York Island, near the close of the campaign in 1782. In
this design Col. Talmadge was to have attacked the enemy on Long Island, the
preceding night, with a body of 750 choice troops, and thence to have marched
on horseback to Hell-Gate, where boats, ready to receive him, were to have
transported the corpse to the opposite shore. Another body under the command of
a General Officer was to have marched to Kingsbridge, to attack the enemy in
front, and to keep them in full expectation of being assaulted there only:
while the main body of the army was to have gone in boats down Hudson's River,
and, landing below the enemy in the night, was to have made the principal
attack on their rear. The American army was at this time in great force, and
perfectly disciplined and supplied. Had this design been attempted, there is
every reason to believe, that, attacked at one moment, in front, flank and
rear, at daybreak, and with total surprise, the triumph over them must in all
probability have been complete. It was prevented by a circumstance wholly
providential. Two British frigates moved up the North River the preceding day,
anchored directly opposite to the American army, and thus prevented the
intended embarkation. There is not a reason to imagine, that the British
commander had a suspicion of the design formed against him. It is (...) happy,
that it miscarried; for the provisional articles of peace had been already
signed in Europe. Of the above design I have the best information.

J.
[In no period of General Washington's military life did his talents and
commanding influence appear more conspicuous than at the battle of Monmouth.
The flower of the army under General Lee were retreating before the enemy, and
almost without having made any resistance. When they were thus thrown back upon
General Washington, at the head of his fatigued and illsupplied army, it is
surprising, that the panic did not become general. General Washington brought
his own troops forward, checked the British, and soon convinced Lee's flying
troops, not only, that there was no occasion for their retreat, but that they
could defeat the enemy. General Washington never had full credit for this
heroic exploit; and it has been thought, that if full justice had been done by
the Courtmartial, General Lee would have been cashiered.]

[His astonishing power of commanding the minds of men was often exemplified in
quieting mutinies, of which he had too many during his military course. But no
writer has done him justice for his Fabian conduct when the army was on the
borders of disbanding. Some well written inflammatory pieces were addressed to
the army, after the preliminary articles of peace had been signed, (...) them
not to lay down their arms, until the country should do them justice. Their
toils and sufferings had opened them for any desperate undertaking. In the
glorious office of Mediator between his country and the army he appeared with a
dignity supreme. He convened and addressed the officers; the hurricane of
passion subsided; and reason, duty, and peace resumed their dominion. The
address, and the public orders which followed it, are perpetual monuments of
his greatness and patriotism.

N. B. For the Notes included in brackets I am indebted to Col. Talmadge.

THE PRESIDENT's ADDRESS. TO THE PEOPLE OF THE UNITED STATES.
FRIENDS AND FELLOW-CITIZENS,
THE period for a new election of a Citizen, to administer the executive
government of the United States, being not far distant, and the time actually
arrived, when your thoughts must be employed in designating the person, who is
to be clothed with that important trust, it appears to me proper, especially
(...) may conduce to a more distinct expression of the public voice, that I
should now apprise you of the resolution I have formed, to decline being
considered among the number of those, out of whom a choice is to be made.

I beg you, at the same time, to do me the justice to be assured, that this
resolution has not been taken, without a strict regard to all the
considerations appertaining to the relation, which binds a dutiful citizen to
his country; and that, in withdrawing the tender of service which silence in my
situation might imply, I am influenced by no diminution of zeal for your future
interest; no deficiency of grateful respect for your past kindness: But am
supported by a full conviction that the step is compatable with both.

The acceptance of, and continuance hitherto in the office to which your
suffrages have twice called me, have been a uniform sacrifice of inclination to
the opinion of duty, and to a deference for what appeared to be your desire. I
constantly hoped, that it would have been much earlier in my power consistently
with motives, which I was not at liberty to disregard, to return to that
retirement, from which I had been reluctantly drawn. The strength of my
inclination to do this, previous to the last election, had even led to the
preparation of an address to declare it to you; but mature reflection on the
then perplexed and critical posture of affairs with foreign nations, and the
unanimous advice of persons entitled to my confidence, impelled me to abandon
the idea.

I rejoice, that the state of your concerns external as well as internal, no
longer renders the pursuit of inclination incompatible with the sentiment of
duty, or propriety: And am persuaded whatever partiality may be retained for my
service, that in the present circumstances of our country, you will not
disapprove my determination to retire.

The impressions with which I first undertook the arduous trust, were explained
on the proper occasion. In the discharge of this trust. I will only say, that I
have with good intentions, contributed toward the organization and
administration of the government, the best exertions of which a very fallible
judgment was capable. Not unconscious, in the out-set, of the inferiority of my
qualifications, experience in my own eyes, perhaps still more in the eyes of
others, has strengthened the motives to diffidence of myself: And every day the
increasing weight of years admonishes me more and more, that the shade of
retirement is as necessary to me as it will be welcome. Satisfied that if any
circumstances have given peculiar value to my services, they were temporary, I
have the consolation to believe, that while choice and prudence invite me to
quit the political scene, patriotism does not forbid it.

In looking forward to the moment, which is intended to terminate the career of
my public life, my feelings do not permit me to suspend the deep acknowledgment
of that debt of gratitude which I owe to my beloved country, for the many
honors it has conferred upon me; still more for the steadfast confidence with
which it has supported me; and for the opportunities I have thence enjoyed of
manifesting my inviolable attachment, by services faithful and persevering,
though in usefulness unequal to my zeal. -- If benefits have resulted to our
country from these services, let it always be remembered to our praise, and as
an instructive example in our annals, that under circumstances in which the
passions, agitated in every direction, were liable to mislead, amidst
appearances sometimes dubious -- vicissitudes of fortune, often discouraging in
situations, in which not unfrequently want of success has countenanced the
spirit of criticism -- the constancy of your support was the essential prop of
the efforts, and a gurantee of the plans by which they were affected.
Profoundly penetrated with this idea, I shall carry it with me to my grave, as
a strong incitement to unceasing vows, that Heaven may continue to you the
choicest tokens of its benificence -- that your union and brotherly affection
may be perpetual -- that the free Constitution, which is the work of your
hands, may be sacredly maintained -- that its administration in ever department
may be stamped with wisdom and virtue -- that, in fine, the happiness of the
people of these States, under the auspices of liberty, may be made complete, by
so careful a preservation and so prudent a use of this blessing, as will
acquire to them the glory of recommending it to the applause, the affection,
and adoption of every nation which is yet a stranger to it.

Here perhaps, I ought to stop. But solicitude for your welfare, which cannot
end but with my life, and the apprehension, of danger natural to that
solicitude, urge me on an occasion like the present, to offer to your solemn
contemplation, and to recommend to your frequent review, some sentiments; which
are the result of much reflection of no inconsiderable observation, and which
appear to me all-important to the permanency of your felicity as a people.
These will be offered to you with the more freedom, as you can only feel in
them the disinterested warnings of a parting friend, who can possibly have no
personal motive to bias his counsel. Nor can I forget, as an encouragement to
it, your indulgent reception of my sentiments on a former and not dissimilar
occasion.

Interwoven as is the love of liberty with every ligament of your hearts, no
recommendation of mine is necessary to ^^^tify or confirm the attachment.

The unity of Government which constitutes you one people, is also now dear to
you. It is justly so; for it is a main pillar in the edifice of your real
Independence, the support of your tranquillity at home, your peace abroad; of
your safety; of your prosperity; of that very liberty which you so highly
prize. But, as it is easy to foresee, that from different causes and from
different quarters, much pains will be taken, many (...), to weaken in your
(...) the conviction of this truth; as this is the point in your political
(...), against which the batteries of internal and external enemies will be
most constantly and actively, (though often covertly and insidiously) directed,
it is of infinite moment that you should properly estimate the immense value of
your National Union, to your collective and individual happiness; that you
should cherish a cordial, habitual, and immovable attachment to it;
accustoming yourselves to think and speak of it as of the palladium of your
political safety and prosperity, watching for its preservation with jealous
anxiety; discountenancing whatever may suggest even a suspicion that it can in
any event be abandoned; and indignantly frowning upon the first dawning of
every attempt to alienate any portion of our country from the rest, or to
enfeeble the sacred ties which now link together the various parts.

For this you have every inducement of sympathy and interest. Citizens, by
birth or choice, of a common country, that country has a right to concentrate
your affections. The name of AMERICAN, which belongs to you in your national
capacity, must always exalt the just pride of patriotism, more than any
appellation derived from local discriminations. With slight shades of
difference, you have the same religion, manners, habits and political
principles. You have in a common cause, fought and triumphed together; the
Independence and Liberty you possess are the work of joint councils, and joint
efforts, of common dangers, sufferings and successes.

But these considerations however powerfully they address themselves to your
sensibility, are greatly outweighed by those which apply more immediately to
your interest. Here every portion of our country finds the most commanding
motives for carefully guarding and preserving the union of the whole.

The North, in an unrestrained intercourse with the South, protected by the
equal laws of a common government, finds in the productions of the latter,
great additional resources of maritime and commercial enterprise, and precious
materials of manufacturing industry. The South in the same intercourse,
benefiting by the agency of the North, sees its agriculture grow, and its
commerce expand. Turning partly into its own channels the seamen of the North,
it finds its particular navigation invigorated -- and while it contributes, in
different ways, to nourish and increase the general mass of the national
navigation, it looks forward to the protection of a maritime strength, to which
itself is unequally adopted. The East in a like intercourse with the West,
already finds, and in the progressive improvement of interior communications,
by land and water, -- will more and more find a valuable vent for the
commodities which it brings from abroad, or manufactures at home. The West
derives from the East supplies requisite to its growth and comfort -- and what
is perhaps of still greater consequence, it must of necessity owe the secure
enjoyment of indispensable outlets for its own productions to the weight,
influence, and the future maritime strength of the Atlantic side of the Union,
directed by an indissoluble community of interest as one nation. Any other
tenure by which the West can hold this essential advantage, whether derived
from its own separate strength, or from an apostate and unnatural connection
with any foreign power, must be intrinsically precarious.

While then every part of our country thus feels an immediate and particular
interest in Union, all the parts combined cannot fail to find in the united
mass of means and efforts, greater strength, greater resource, proportionably
greater security, from external danger, a less frequent interruption of their
peace by foreign nations; and what is of inestimable value! they must derive
from Union an exemption from those broils and wars between themselves, which so
frequently afflict neighboring countries, not tied together by the same
government; which their own rivalships alone would be sufficient to produce,
but which opposite foreign alliances, attachments and intrigues would stimulate
and imbitter. Hence likewise they will avoid the necessity of those overgrown
military establishments, which under any form of government are inauspicious to
liberty, and which are to be regarded as particularly hostile to Republican
Liberty: In this sense it is, that your Union ought to be considered as a main
prop of your liberty, and that the love of the one ought to endear to you the
preservation of the other.

These considerations speak a persuasive language to every reflecting and
virtuous mind, and exhibit the continuance of the Union as a primary object of
a patriotic desire. Is there a doubt, whether a common government can embrace,
so large a sphere? -- Let experience solve it. To listen to mere speculation in
such a case were criminal. We are authorized to hope that a proper
organization, of the whole, with the auxiliary agency, of governments for the
respective subdivisions, will afford a happy issue to the experiment. It Is well
worth a fair and full experiment. With such powerful and obvious motives to
Union, affecting all parts of our country, while experiment shall not have
demonstrated its impracticability, there will always be reason to distrust the
patriotism of those, who in any quarter may endeavor to weaken its bands.

In contemplating the causes which may disturb our Union, it occurs as matter
of serious concern, that any ground should be furnished for characterising
parties, by Geographical discriminations -- Nothern and Southern -- Atlantic
and Western; whence designing men may endeavor to excite a belief, that there
is a real difference of local interests and views. One of the expedients of
party to acquire influence, within particular districts, is to misrepresent the
opinions and aims of other (...). You cannot shield yourselves too much against
the jealousies and heart burnings which spring from these misrepresentations:
they tend to render alien to each other those who ought to be bound together by
fraternal affection. -- The inhabitants of our western country have lately had
a useful lesson on this head: They have seen, in the negotiation by the
Executive, and in the unanimous ratification by the Senate, of the Treaty with
Spain, and in the universal satisfaction at that event, throughout the United
States, a decisive proof how unfounded were the suspicions propagated among
them, of a policy in the general government and in the Atlantic states
unfriendly to their interests in regard to the Missisippi; they have been
witnesses to the formation of two treaties, that with Great Britain and that
with Spain, which secure to them every thing they could desire, in respect to
our foreign relations, toward confirming their prosperity. Will it not be
their wisdom to rely for the preservation of these advantages on the UNION by
which they were procured? Will they not henceforth be deaf to those advisers,
if such they are, who would fever them from their brethren, and connect them
with aliens?

To the efficacy and permanency of your Union, a government for the whole is
indispensable. No alliances, however strict, between the parts can be an
adequate substitute; they will inevitably experience the infractions and
interruptions which all alliances in all times have experien^^^ -- Sensible of
this momentous truth, you have improv^^ (...) first essay, by the adoption of a
constitution of a government better calculated than your former for an intimate
Union, and for the efficacious management of your common concerns. This
government, the offspring of your own choice, uninfluenced and unawed, adopted
upon full investigation and mature deliberation, completely free in its
principles, in the distribution of its powers, uniting security with energy,
and containing within itself a provision for its own amendment, has a just
claim to your confidence and your support. Respect for its authority,
compliance with its laws, acquiescence in its measures, are duties enjoined by
the fundamental maxims of true liberty. The basis of our political systems is
the right of the people to make and to alter their constitutions of government.
But, the constitution which at any time exists, till changed by an explicit and
authentic act of the whole people, is sacredly obligatory upon all. The very
idea of the power and the right of the people to establish government,
pre-supposes the duty of every individual to obey the established government.

All obstructions to the execution of the laws, all combinations and
associations, under whatever plausible character, with the real design to
direct, control, counteract or awe the regular deliberation and action of the
constituted authorities, are destructive of this fundamental principle, and of
fatal tendency. They serve to organize faction, to give it an artificial and
extraordinary force -- to put in the place of the delegated will of the nation,
the will of a party, often a small but artful and enterprising minority of the
community; and, according to the alternate triumphs of different parties, to
make the public administration the mirror of the ill concerted and incongruous
projects of faction, rather than the organ of consistent and wholesome plans
digested by common councils and modified by mutual interests.

However combinations of associations of the above description, may now and
then answer popular ends, they are likely in the course of time and things, to
become potent engines, by which cunning, ambitious and unprincipled men, will
be enabled to subvert the power of the people, and to usurp for themselves the
reins of government; destroying afterward the very engines which have lifed
them to unjust dominion.

Toward the preservation of your government, and the permanency of your
present happy state, it is requisite, not only that you steadily discountenance
irregular opposition to its acknowledged authority, but also that you resist
with care, the spirit of innovation upon its principles, however specious the
pretexts. One method of assault may be to effect in the forms of the
constitution, alterations which will impair the energy of the system, and thus
to undermine what cannot be directly overthrown. In all the changes to which
you may be invited, remember that time and habit are at least as necessary to
fix the true character of government, as of other human institutions that
experience is the surest standard, by which to test the real tendency of the
existing constitution of a country -- that facility in changes upon the credit
of mere hypothesis and opinion, exposes to perpetual change, from the endless
variety of hypothesis and opinion; and remember, especially, that for the
efficient management of your common interest, in a country so extensive as
ours, a government of as much vigor as is consistent with the perfect security
of liberty, is indispensible. Liberty itself will find in such a government,
with powers properly distributed and adjusted, its surest guardian. It is,
indeed, little else than a name, where the government is too feeble to
withstand the enterprises of faction, to confine each member of the society
within the limits prescribed by the laws, and to maintain all in the secure and
tranquil enjoyment of the rights of person and property.

I have already intimated to you, the danger of parties in the state, with
particular reference to the founding of them on geographical discriminations.
Let me now take a more comprehensive view and warn you in the most solemn
manner against the baneful effects of the spirit of party, generally.

This spirit, unfortunately, is inseparable from our nature, having its root in
the strongest passions of the human mind. It exists under different shapes in
all governments -- more or less stifled, controled, or repressed; but in those
of the popular form, it is seen in its greatest rankness and is truly their
worst enemy.

The alternate dominion of one faction over another, sharpened by the spirit of
revenge, natural to party dissension, which in different ages and countries has
perpetrated the most horrid enormities, is itself a frightful despotism -- But
this leads at length to a more formal and permanent despotism. -- The disorders
and miseries, which result, gradually incline the minds of men to seek
security, and repose in the absolute power of an individual; and sooner or
later the chief of some prevailing faction more able or more fortunate than his
competitors, turns this disposition to the purposes of his own elevation, on
the ruins of Public Liberty.

Without looking forward to an extremity of this kind (which nevertheless ought
not to be entirely out of sight) the common and continual mischiefs of the
spirit of party are sufficient to make it the interest and duty of a wise
people to discourage and restrain it.

It serves always to distract the Public Councils and enfeeble the Public
Administration. It agitates the community With ill founded jealousies and false
alarms; kindles the animosity of one part against another, foments occasionally
riot and insurrection. It opens the door to foreign influence and corruption,
which find a facilitated access to the government itself through the channels
of party passions. Thus the policy and will of one country are subjected to the
policy and will of another.

There is an opinion that parties in free countries are useful checks upon the
administration of the government, and serve to keep alive the spirit of
Liberty. This within certain limits is probably true, and in governments of a
monarchical cast, patriotism may look with indulgence, if not with favor upon
the spirit of party. But in those of the popular character, in governments
purely elective, it is a spirit not to be encouraged. From their natural
tendency it is certain there will always be enough of that spirit for every
salutary purpose. And there being constant danger of excess, the effort ought
to be by force of Public opinion, to mitigate and assuage it. A fire not to be
quenched; it demands uniform vigilance to prevent its bursting into a flame,
least instead of warming, it mould consume.

It is important likewise, that the habits of thinking in a free country,
should inspire caution, in those entrusted with its administration, to confine
themselves within their respective constitutional spheres, avoiding in the
exercise of the powers of one department to encroach upon another. The spirit
of encroachment tends to consolidate the powers of all the departments in one,
and thus to create, whatever the form of Government, a real despotism. A just
estimate of that love of power, and proneness to abuse it, which predominates
in the human heart is sufficient to satisfy us of the truth of this position.
The necessity of reciprocal checks in the exercise of the political power; by
dividing and distributing it into different depositories, and constituting each
the guardian of the public weal against invasions by the others, has been
evinced by experiments ancient and modern; some of them in our country and
under our own eyes. To preserve them must be as necessary as to institute them.
If, in the opinion of the people, the distribution or modification of the
constitutional powers be in any particular wrong, let it be corrected by an
amendment in the way, which the constitution designates -- But let there be no
change by usurpation; for though this, in one instance, may be the instrument
of good, it is the customary weapon by which free governments are destroyed --
The precedent must always greatly overbalance in permanent evil any partial or
transient benefit which the use can at any time yield.

Of all the dispositions and habits which lead to political prosperity,
Religion and Morality are indispensable supports. In vain would that Man claim
the tribute of Patriotism, who would labor to subvert these great pillars of
human happiness, these firmest props of the duties of men and Citizens. The
mere Politician, equally with the pious man ought to respect and to cherish
them. -- A volume could not trace all their connections with private and public
felicity. Let it simply be asked where is the security for property, for
reputation, for life, if the sense of religious obligation desert the oaths
which are the instruments of investigation in Courts of Justice? -- And let us
with caution indulge the supposition, that morality can be maintained without
Religion. Whatever may be conceded of the influence of refined education on
minds of peculiar structure; reason and experience both forbid us to expect
that national morality can prevail in exclusion of religious principle.

It Is substantially true, that virtue or morality is a necessary spring of
popular government. The rule indeed extends with more or less force to every
species of free government. Who that is a sincere Friend to it can look with
indifference upon attempts to shake the foundation of the Fabric?

Promote, then as an object of primary importance, institutions for the general
diffusion of knowledge. In proportion as the structure of a government gives
force to public opinion, it is essential that public opinion should be
enlightened.

As a very important source of strength and security, cherish public credit.
One method of preserving it is to use it as sparingly as possible; avoiding
occasions of expense by cultivating peace, but remembering also that timely
disbursements to prepare for dangers, frequently prevent much greater
disbursements to repel it: Avoiding likewise the accumulation of debt, not only
by shunning occasions of expense, but by vigorous exertions in time of peace to
discharge the debts which unavoidable wars may have occasioned, not
ungenerously throwing upon posterity the burden which we ourselves ought to
bear. The execution of these maxims belongs to your representatives, but it is
necessary that public opinion should cooperate. To facilitate to them the
performance of their duty, it is essential that you should practically bear in
mind that toward the payment of debts there must be revenue; -- that to have
revenue there must be taxes -- and none can be devised which are not more or
less inconvenient and unpleasant -- that the intrinsic embarrassment
inseparable from the selection of the proper objects (which is always a choice
of difficulties) -- ought to be a decisive motive for a candid construction of
the conduct of the government in making it, and for a spirit of acquiescence in
the measures for obtaining revenue which the public exigencies may at any time
dictate.

Observe good faith and justice toward all nations; cultivate peace and
harmony with all -- Religion and Morality enjoin this conduct; and can it be,
that good policy does not equally enjoin it? It will be worthy of a free,
enlightened, and (at no distant period) a great nation, to give to mankind the
magnanimous and too novel example of a people always guided by an exalted
justice and benevolence. Who can doubt that in the course of time and things,
the fruits of such a plan would richly repay any temporary advantages which
might be lost by a steady adherence to it? Can it be, that Providence has not
connected the permanent felicity of a Nation with Virtue? The experiment, at
least, is recommended by every sentiment which ennobles human nature. -- Alas!
is it rendered impossible by its vices?

In the execution of such a plan, nothing is more essential than that
permanent, inveterate antipathies against particular Nations, and passionate
attachments for others should be excluded; and that in the place of them, just
and amicable feelings toward all should be cultivated. The Nation which
indulges toward another an habitual hatred, or an habitual fondness, is in
some degree a slave. -- It is a slave to its animosity or to its affection,
either of which is sufficient to lead it astray from its duty and its interest.
Antipathy in one nation against another disposes each more readily to offer
insult and injury, to lay hold of slight causes of umbrage, and to be haughty
and intractable, when accidental or trifling occasions of dispute occur.

Hence frequent collisions, obstinate, envenomed and bloody contests. The
Nation, prompted by ill will and resentment, sometimes impels to war the
government, contrary to the best calculations of policy. The government
sometimes participates in the national propensity, and adopts through passion
what reason would reject; at other times, it makes the animosity of the nation
subservient to projects of hostility instigated by pride, ambition, and other
sinister and pernicious motives. The peace often, sometimes perhaps the liberty
of Nations has been the victim.

So likewise, a passionate attachment of one Nation for another produces a
variety of evils. Sympathy for the favorite Nation, facilitating the illusion
of an imaginary common interest, in cases where no real common interest exists,
and infusing into one the enmities of the other, betrays the former into a
participation in the quarrels and wars of the latter, without adequate
inducement or justification. It leads also to concessions to the favorite
nation of privileges denied to others, which is apt doubly to injure the Nation
making the concessions; by unnecessarily parting with what ought to have been
retained; and by exciting jealousy, ill will, and a disposition to retaliate,
in the parties from whom equal privileges are withheld: -- And it gives to
ambitious, corrupted or deluded citizens (who devote themselves to the favorite
Nation) facility to betray, or sacrifice the interests of their own country,
without odium, sometimes even with popularity; gilding with the appearances of
a virtuous sense of obligation a commendable deference for public opinion, or a
laudable zeal for public good, the base or foolish compliances of ambition,
corruption, or infatuation.

As avenues to foreign influence in innumerable ways, such attachments are
particularly alarming to the truly enlightened and independent patriot. How
many opportunities do they afford to tamper with domestic factions, to practice
the arts of seduction to mislead public opinion, to influence or awe the public
councils; such an attachment of a small or weak, toward a great and powerful
nation, dooms the former to be the satellite of the latter.

Against the insiduous wiles of foreign influence (I conjure you to believe me,
fellow citizens) the jealousy of a free people ought to be constantly awake;
since history and experience prove that foreign influence is one of the most
baneful foes of Republican Government. But that jealousy to be useful must be
impartial; else it becomes the instrument of the very influence to be avoided,
instead of a defense against it. Excessive partiality for one foreign nation,
and excessive dislike of another, cause those whom they actuate to see danger
only on one side, and serve to veil and even second the arts of influence on
the other. Real patriots, who may resist the intrigues of the favorite, are
liable to become suspected and odious; while its tools and dupes usurp the
applause and confidence of the people to surrender their interests.

The great rule of conduct for us in regard to foreign nations, is in extending
our commercial relations, to have with them as little political connection as
possible. So far as we have already formed engagements, let them be fulfilled
with perfect good faith. -- Here let us stop.

Europe has a set of primary interests, which to us have none, or a very remote
relation. Hence she must be engaged in frequent controversies, the causes of
which are essentially foreign to our concerns. Hence therefore, it must be
unwise in us to implicate ourselves, by artificial ^^es, in the ordinary
vicisitudes of her politics, or the ordinary combinations and collisions of her
friendships, or enmities.

Our detached and distant situation, invites and enables us to pursue a
different course. If we remain one people, under an efficient government, the
period is not far off, when we may defy material injury from external
annoyance; when we may take such an attitude as will cause the neutrality, we
may at any time resolve upon, to be scrupulously respected; when belligerent
nations, under the impossibility of making acquisitions upon us, will not
lightly hazard the giving us provocation; when we may choose peace or war, as
our interest, guided by justice, shall counsel.

Why forego the advantages of so peculiar a situation? Why quit our own, to
stand upon foreign ground? Why, by interweaving our destiny with that of any
part of Europe, entangle our peace and prosperity in the toils of European
ambition, rivalship, interest, humor or caprice?

It Is our true policy to steer clear of permanent alliances, with any portion
of the foreign world; so far, I mean, as we are (...) liberty to do it; for let
me not, be understood as ^^^able of patronizing infidelity to existing
engagements. I hold the maxim no less applicable to public than to private
affairs, that honesty is always the best policy. I repeat it, therefore, let
those engagements be observed in their genuine sense. But in my opinion, it is
unnecessary, and would be unwise to extend them.

Taking care always to keep ourselves, by suitable establishments, on a
respectable defensive posture, we may safely trust to temporary alliances for
extraordinary emergencies.

Harmony, liberal intercourse with all nations, are recommended by policy,
humanity and interest. But even our commercial policy, should hold an equal and
impartial hand; neither sending or granting exclusive favors or preferences --
consulting the natural course of things; diffusing and diversifying by gentle
means the streams of commerce, but forcing nothing; establishing, with powers
so disposed, in order to give trade a stable course to define the rights of our
merchants, and to enable the Government to support them; conventional rules of
intercourse, the best that present circumstances and mutual opinion will
permit, but temporary, and liable to be from time to time abandoned or varied
as experience and circumstances shall dictate; constantly keeping in view, that
it is folly in one nation to look for disinterested favors from another; that
it must pay with a portion of its Independence for whatever it may accept under
that character; that by such acceptance, it may place itself in the condition
of having given equivalents for nominal favors, and yet of being reproached
with ingratitude for not giving more. -- There can be no greater error than to
expect, or calculate, upon ^eal favors from nation to nation. It Is an illusion
which experience must cure, which a just pride ought to discard.

In offering to you, my countrymen, these counsels of an old affectionate
friend, I dare not hope they will make the strong and lasting impression I
could wish -- that they will control the usual current of the passions, or
prevent our nation from running the course which has hitherto marked the
destiny of nations: But if I may even flatter myself, that they may be
productive of some partial benefit, some occasional good; that they may now and
then recur to moderate the fury of party spirit, to warn against the mischiefs
of foreign intrigue, to guard against the impostures of pretended patriotism;
this hope will be a full recompense for the solicitude for your welfare, by
which they have been dictated.

How far in the discharge of my official duties, I have been guided by the
principles which have been delineated, the public records and other evidences
of my conduct must witness to you and to the world. To myself, the assurance of
my own conscience is, that I have at least believed myself to be guided by them.

In relation to the still subsisting war in Europe, my Proclamation of the 22d
of April, 1795, is the index to my plan. Sanctioned by your approving voice,
and by that of your Representatives in both Houses of Congress, the spirit of
that measure has continually governed me; uninfluenced by any attempts to deter
or divert me from it.

After deliberate examination, with the aid of the best lights I could obtain,
I was well satisfied that our country, under all the circumstances of the case,
had a right to take and was bound in duty and interest to take a neutral
position. Having taken it, I determined, as far as should depend on me, to
maintain it, with moderation.

The considerations which respect the right to hold this conduct, it is not
necessary on this occasion to detail. I will only observe, that according to my
understanding of the matter, that right, so far from being denied by any of the
Belligerent Powers, has been virtually admitted by all.

The duty of holding a neutral conduct may be inferred, without any thing more,
from the obligation which justice and humanity impose on every nation, in cases
in which it is free to act, to maintain inviolate the relations of peace and
amity toward other nations.

The inducements of interest for observing that conduct will best be referred
to your own reflections and experience. With me, a predominant motive has been
to endeavor to gain time to our country to settle and mature its yet recent
institutions, and to progress without interruption, to that degree of strength
and consistency, which is necessary to give it, humanly speaking, the command
of its own fortunes.

Though in reviewing the incidents of my administration, I am unconscious of
intentional error: I am nevertheless too sensible of my defects not to think it
probable that I may have committed many errors. Whatever they may be, I
fervently beseech the Almighty to avert or mitigate the evils, to which they
may tend. I shall also carry with me the hope that my country will never cease
to view them with indulgence; and that after forty-five years of my life
dedicated to its service, with an upright zeal, the faults of incompetent
abilities will be consigned to oblivion, as myself must soon be the mansions of
rest.

Relying on its kindness in this as in other things, and actuated by that
fervent love toward it, which is so natural to a man who views in it the
native soil of himself and his progenitors for several generations; I
anticipate with pleasing expectation that retreat, in which I promise myself to
realize, without alloy, the sweet enjoyment of partaking, in the midst of my
fellow-citizens, the benign influence of good laws under a free government --
the ever favorite object of my heart, and the happy reward as I trust, of our
mutual cares, labors and dangers.

G. WASHINGTON.
United States, 17 th September, 1796.

