A Discourse DELIVERED DECEMBER 29, 1799; OCCASIONED BY THE MELANCHOLY DEATH OF
GEORGE WASHINGTON, LIEUTENANT GENERAL AND COMMANDER IN CHIEF OF THE ARMIES OF
THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA; Who departed this life, December 14, 1799.

BY JOHN FOSTER, A. M. Pastor of the Third Church and Society in Cambridge.

Published at the request of the Hearers.

Printed by SAMUEL HALL, No. 53, Cornhill, BOSTON. 1800.

2 KINGS, ii. 12. -- MY FATHER, MY FATHER, THE CHARIOT OF ISRAEL, AND THE
HORSEMEN THEREOF! --


WHEN the death of General WASHINGTON was announced, these significant and
expressive words were among the first that occurred to my thoughts. They are
the words of the prophet Elisha, on beholding Elijah translated from earth to
heaven!

THE idea of the many distinguished benefits, which this eminent servant of God
and man had conferred on his country, rushed into his mind, and inspired him
with such an affecting sense of the unspeakable loss, sustained in his
departure, that, overwhelmed with grief and regret, he cried out, "My father,
my father, the chariot of Israel, and the horsemen thereof!"

THE propriety of this apostrophe will be seen and felt by every one, who
reflects, that warlike chariots, as well as horsemen, were in general use, both
among the Jews and Pagans of antiquity; and that on these they principally
relied in the day of battle. In this short, but comprehensive sentence,
therefore, Elisha not only recognizes in Elijah, the venerable, endearing, and
provident qualities of a parent; but ascribes to him all the influence and
energy of a numerous host; and bewails his exit as a misfortune, which reduced
the kingdom to a weak and defenseless condition!

PURSUANT to this interpretation of the text, I propose briefly to consider, I.
The singular favor which Heaven bestows on a people, by raising up men of
elevated genius and patriotism to take part in the conduct of public concerns:
II. The deplorable calamity of being deprived of their abilities and labors,
by death: and then, to improve the subject by pointing out the uses to be made
of such afflictive bereavements.

BY far the greater part of mankind, in every region of the earth, however
disposed, are, in the nature of things, incapable of managing the affairs of
state. Engrossed by the cares and pursuits which personal desires and wants
create, they have neither leisure nor inclination to prepare themselves for so
important a trust. For this purpose, a concurrence of circumstances and
properties, which can fall to the share of but very few, are indispensably
requisite. Beside undeviating rectitude of intention, a capacious
understanding, much study, accurate observation, extensive knowledge,
inflexible firmness, and great presence of mind, are essential characteristics
of a good magistrate, or leader. I need not remark, that persons of this
description are rarely to be found, and therefore proportionably estimable.

WITH such men at the head of the different departments, a nation has little to
fear, but from its own degeneracy. Like the sun in the firmament, they are the
center and source of light; and, while they regulate the motions of the several
parts of the system, and confine the most excentric to their proper spheres,
they shed a benign and salutary influence on the whole. Meanwhile, by their
vigilant circumspection, they guard against the hostilities of foreign powers;
and, in case of actual annoyance or invasion, furnish the best human means of
indemnity and defense. Under their administration, tumult and faction
disappear, and every thing conspires the promotion of order, peace, and
security.

HAPPY the land, whose rulers are thus commissioned and sent, not to tyrannize
and oppress; but "for the punishment of evil doers, and for the praise of them
that do well:" and peculiar are the obligations of its inhabitants to Him, "by
whom kings reign and princes decree justice," for his distinguishing goodness!"
"For promotion comes neither from the east, nor from the west, nor from the
south. But God is the judge: He puts down one, and sets up another."

THIS, my brethren, has hitherto been our favored lot. Few nations can boast a
more ample supply of illustrious statesmen and warriors than America. We have
now at our head, a man whose integrity and wisdom demand our highest confidence
and esteem; and we can recount many in the legislative and judiciary branches
of our government, in the military line, and even in private life, who are
blessings to their country, and ornaments to human nature! -- Still, however,
we cannot but deeply feel and lament the loss of one of the greatest and best
men, whom this, or any preceding century, has produced.

I PROCEED, then, II. To consider the deplorable calamity of being deprived of
such characters, by death.

AMONG the severest judgments which the prophets, of old, denounced against the
Jews, were the following: "Behold the Lord, the Lord of hosts, does take away
from Judah, and Jerusalem, the mighty man, the man of war, the judge, and the
prophet, and the prudent, and the ancient. And I will give children to be their
princes, and babes shall rule over them. And the people shall be oppressed,
every one by another, and every one by his neighbor: the child shall behave
himself proudly against the ancient, and the base against the honorable."
Isaiah iii. 2, 4 5.
A more just and striking description of that anarchy and confusion, to which
the want of able politicians and skilful chiefs invariably exposes a community,
can hardly be conceived. Every people, in this situation, is more or less
exposed to these distresses. For although there may be others, capable of
succeeding and doing honor to the station of the deceased; yet it cannot be
certain that the preference will be given to the most deserving survivor. It is
possible, at least, that ignorance, party zeal, or self-opinionated obstinacy
may vest with the authority those who are totally unfit to govern: the
consequence of which would be, a change of measures, fatal to the dignity and
happiness of the nation! -- But imagination must paint the long catalogue of
evils which would inevitably follow such a mistaken decision; for language is
inadequate to the task!

How great and portentous, then, is "our breach! Who can heal us?"

THE father, the friend, and the deliverer of his country sleeps in the silent
tomb! And where is the man who will refuse to pay a tribute of the sincerest
respect to his memory; or to contemplate, with undissembled gratitude, his
multifarious labors of love for the land in which we dwell?

HAVING previously signalized himself, both by his courage and conduct, THE
reader will scarcely need to be reminded, that the author here alludes to the
gallant behavior of General [then Col.] WASHINGTON, at Braddock's defeat, in
1755, and to the many other valiant achievements of his youth; too many to be
enumerated in a single discourse.
he was early invited to the supreme command in the revolutionary war. During
that long and arduous struggle for liberty, he surmounted the most perplexing
difficulties, outbraved the most formidable opposition, and, with a degree of
perseverance and address which astonished the world, finally compelled one of
the greatest powers in Europe to acknowledge the independence and sovereignty
of its colonies. Yet far from being elated by his unexampled success, or, like
the haughty monarch of Babylon, ascribing it to the might of his own arm, his
language was uniformly the language of piety, gratitude, submission, and
confidence toward God.

AT the conclusion of the war, the army, who had fought and bled in the
American cause, had claims, to a large amount, upon the public; nor was it
possible that these claims should be immediately satisfied. Hence discontent
and murmurs prevailed; and a refusal to lay down their arms, till they were
indemnified, was even contemplated. In this state of things, had the commander
in chief been actuated by those ambitious views which have usually governed the
conduct of heroes, both ancient and modern, how easily might he have subjected
to his own control, those provinces, which he had been able to protect against
foreign invaders! But he recoiled at the thought; and instead of availing
himself of the unlimited ascendency he had gained, to distress his country, no
sooner was the object, for which an army had been raised, completed, than he
persuaded his troops peaceably to disband, and wait with patience the reward of
their toils; "AFTER the return of peace, the United States were reduced to the
disagreeable necessity of dismissing their brave troops, without paying them
their stipulated wages. In this emergency, an attempt was made, by spirited and
anonymous publications, to inflame the minds of the officers and soldiers, and
induce them, previously to laying down their arms, to unite in redressing their
own grievances.

"As soon as General WASHINGTON was informed of the nature of these papers, he
requested the general and field officers, with one officer from each company,
and a proper representation from the staff of the army, to assemble on an early
day. When they were convened, he addressed them in a pathetic and animated
speech, in which he pledged himself to exert all his abilities and influence in
their favor; requested them to rely on the faith of their country, and
conjured them, "as they valued their honor; as they respected the rights of
humanity; as they regarded the military and national character of America, to
express their utmost detestation of the man, who was attempting to open the
floodgates of civil discord, and deluge their rising empire with blood."

"THE patriotic exertions of their beloved General saved the states from
impending danger. The army was disbanded, and returned peaceably to their
respective places of abode." Vid. Miss H. Adams's History of New England, page
478, 479.


while he himself retired to private life, and rejected every other
compensation but the heartfelt pleasure of having emancipated millions from the
yoke of bondage, and laid a foundation for the freedom and prosperity of
millions more, yet to be born!

HE did not, however, so far seclude himself from society, as to become
indifferent to its welfare; nor was his fondness for the calm enjoyments of his
happy retreat, though great, sufficient to prevent his hearing and obeying the
call of his country, when her exigencies again demanded his attention and his
talents. He readily stepped forth, and with other long-tried patriots, formed
that excellent constitution, which is, at once, the pride and security of every
freeborn American. When this constitution had received the sanction of the
different states, and was to be brought into operation; and when all eyes were
fixed upon him, as the first president, and supreme executive of the Union,
disclaiming the wish and expectation of reward, he assumed the reins of
government, and exchanged the pleasures of rural solitude, for the anxious
cares and arduous duties of the most public and responsible office in the
nation. When he had discharged the functions of this office, during the terms
for which he was successively chosen, with a degree of rectitude and
discernment, no less honorable to himself, than advantageous to his
constituents, he felt at liberty to revisit the peaceful shades of his
retirement. "HAVING been twice chosen," says Genesis Marshall, in a pathetic
address to Congress, on this mournful occasion -- "Having been twice
unanimously chosen the Chief Magistrate of a free people, we see him, at a time
when his re-election, with the universal suffrage, could not be doubted,
affording a rare instance of moderation, by withdrawing from his high station,
to the peaceful walks of private life."
Once more, therefore, he took an affectionate leave of his country; and while
he gave them such admonitions and advice, as ought to be engraved on every
heart, SEE his Farewell Address.
he left the cabinet with a renown, equalled only by that, with which he had
before quitted the field!

DESTINED to be necessary and beneficial to the multitude of his brethren, even
to the last, it was not long before he was again placed between them and
impending danger.

THE disgraceful and bloody contests of Europe began to bear a threatening
aspect on the well-being of the United States; and there was an alarming
prospect, through the rapacious ambition of unprincipled tyrants, that, instead
of adhering to that impartial neutrality, which had been wisely recommended and
adopted, we should be driven to arms, in defense of our dearest rights. In
these perilous circumstances, who so proper to defeat the machinations, and
repel the assaults of our enemies, as He, who, under God, had given us our
national existence? To him, therefore, our worthy President directed his
thoughts, and judiciously nominated him Generalissimo of the American forces.

THOUGH grown old in the service of his country, and having a claim, on this
account, to rest and repose, for the remainder of his days; yet the revered
patriot, in the style of his accustomed magnanimity, consented to fill the
important, laborious, and hazardous station. His bare acceptance of this trust
has doubtless been attended with the most salutary effects. Known and
venerated, as he was, in every part of the civilized world, who could question
the justice, and the ultimate success of a cause, which so great and so good a
man had voluntarily espoused? That power, from which, at the eventful moment,
we had most to apprehend, had witnessed his military skill, and the unbounded
affection and confidence, which the people at large cherished toward him.
When, therefore, its leaders beheld him entrusted with the conduct of our
troops, and observed the promptitude and spirit with which our defensive
arrangements were made, is it not probable, to say no more, that this
spectacle, so contrary to their avowed expectations and sentiments, SEE the
dispatches of our first envoys to France: in which it is more than intimated,
that the French rulers believed the people of the United States detached from
their government; and that so great a portion of our citizens were in their
interests, that it would be dangerous, if not impracticable, for Congress to
resist or counteract their designs.
gave rise to their subsequent policy in refraining from menaces and insults,
and taking a more pliable and pacific tone? Hence, we are authorized to
believe, that, by his declared readiness to come forward for the purpose, when
occasion should require, he has contributed, even in retirement, to our safety
and deliverance. As the guardian and watchman of the nation, his very attitude
filled our foes with dismay, and constrained them to relinquish, or* at least,
to suspend their hostile designs.

SUCH, O Washington, greatly esteemed in life, and universally lamented in
death -- Such were the dignity and usefulness of thy character! To thy latest
breath thou have promoted the prosperity and honor of the land which gave thee
birth! With what propriety, then, may every true American exclaim, "My father,
my father, the chariot of our Israel, and the horsemen thereof!" For no more,
alas! shall we enjoy the benefit of thy wisdom in council, or of thy prowess in
arms, except by the happy fruits they have produced, and the invigorating
influence of their recollection! Adieu, therefore, venerable shade -- Adieu,
till the heavens be no more! Receive, in the regions of immortality, that
recompense of thy labors for the good of mankind, which earth could not
confer! "Though dead, thou yet speak;" and never, never may thy country
ungratefully forget thy distinguished services and virtues! Never may she
forfeit that independence and glory, which, under the direction of an indulgent
providence, thou have procured for her; that providence, the superintendency
and blessing of which thou have constantly and devoutly recognized, as the
origin of all thy brilliant achievements! May thy mantle fall upon many, and
may a portion of thy spirit be diffused through all classes of thy surviving
countrymen!

I AM, now, to improve the subject by pointing out the proper uses to be made
of this afflictive bereavement.

A CRISIS, when the abilities and exertions of eminent men were more necessary
to the preservation of her sovereignty and peace, America has never seen. At
this crisis, therefore, to be deprived of one, who has been so invariably, and
so conspicuously useful to us, is a manifest token of the divine displeasure at
our sins, and calls loudly upon us to lie low in the dust before that God, from
whom we have revolted. Let us, then, lay it seriously to heart, and
submissively inquire, "wherefore it is that the Lord has this controversy with
us?" A general reformation is, certainly, desirable, expedient, and necessary.
-- Such a reformation, nevertheless, cannot be effected, but by the amendment
of individuals; for, of individuals the community is composed. Under this
impression, let each one critically examine the prevailing tenor of his desires
and pursuits, and compare it with the rule of his duty, in relation both to God
and man. However contracted the sphere, in which we move, it is in our power,
either to counteract, or to advance the commonweal. Indeed, one or the other of
these must be the perpetual result of all our actions. Taught, therefore, both
by reason and scripture, that "as righteousness exalts a nation, so sin is
the reproach of any people," let us studiously avoid transgression, and
"abstain from the very appearance of evil." First of all, let us cultivate the
profoundest reverence for the authority of Jehovah; and under the influence of
this corrective and commanding principle, let us pay a constant and
conscientious attention to all the intimations of his will. Not content with
mere pretensions to piety, morality, or patriotism, let us investigate the
nature and extent of these obligations, and from christian motives, display a
cheerful and unreserved conformity to them, in the whole series of our
deportment.

I KNOW it has been alleged by some infidel writers, that the gospel no where
enjoins the love of our country. But this allegation I conceive to be
unfounded. Does not every page of the New Testament implicitly inculcate this
duty? And does not the uniform course of our Savior's life intelligibly and
powerfully recommend it? Who ever prayed more earnestly for the welfare, or
wept more sincerely at the misfortunes of his country, than he? Did he discover
no appropriate attachment to it, when he made its inhabitants the first offers
of his religion; and when, in defiance of the most cruel persecutions, and with
the certain prospect of the most ignominious death, he persisted in his
endeavors to promote their virtue and felicity?

SHALL we, then, extol those pagan worthies, who, though exiled from their
native clime, continued inflexible, notwithstanding, in their regard to its
interest, and unwearied in their endeavors to increase its honor? Shall we
represent them, as instructing all succeeding ages in the noble principles and
offices of patriotism? And shall we, in the mean time, refuse an equal, nay, a
far superior degree of the same honor to Jesus of Nazareth? No, my brethren,
for Jesus of Nazareth was a perfect pattern of this, as well as of every other
excellence. This, therefore, is incumbent upon us, not only as citizens, but as
Christians. We are especially urged to it by the critical situation, into which
we are thrown by the loss we now deplore. Bereft of the counsel and guidance of
him, who has been so long and so extensively viewed as our safeguard and
defense, will not those, who seek our hurt, be emboldened to redouble their
arts and intrigues, to facilitate and hasten our ruin? And are we not
furnished, by this apprehension, with the strongest arguments for union,
firmness, and public spirit among ourselves?

HAPPY for us, while the departure of our beloved Chief admonishes us of the
importance, his example clearly teaches us the nature of the patriotic
affections: thrice happy, if we be disposed to walk in his steps! The system of
his politics was pacific, and yet dignified and consistent. Perseverance in
such a system, alike independent of every foreign power, and of all foreign
interference, is manifestly requisite to save us from national degradation. Nor
let any imagine, because he is incapable of contributing, like him, to its
adoption and prevalence, that, therefore, he has nothing to do in so good a
cause. Every man has his influence in society; and every man is bound to exert
it, not by sowing the seeds of dissension and jealousy; not by indulging party
feelings and designs; not by obstructing the measures of government, or
calumniating the characters of those who administer it. These are the
ebullitions of disappointed ambition, which grasps at every place of honor and
emolument, and would sacrifice an empire at the shrine of pride and avarice!
Such were neither the temper, nor the practice of WASHINGTON. He was not eager
for promotion; and when it was forced upon him by the united voice of the
people, he was apparently induced to accept it, not so much by the impulse of
inclination, as by the dictates of conscience. He was willing to serve his
country in any station, to which she called him; and to his immortal honor be
it remembered, the rank which he held at his death, was a voluntary descent
from his former exaltation! It is equally incumbent upon us all, to aim rather
at usefulness, than distinction; and, satisfied with the post which nature and
the public have assigned us, to discharge, with fidelity, the various duties it
imposes; and contribute, though it be but a single mite, to the harmony, order,
and stability of the great whole. To this end, we are visibly obliged, without
conferring with self, or selfish men, to make the general good the rule of our
decisions and actions. Deaf to the importunities of clamorous seekers, (for
such are of all mankind the most unqualified to rule), we should countenance
none, either by our conversation, or our suffrages, but those whom we believe,
in our hearts, both capable and desirous of rendering service to the nation.

WHEN, by these means, we have done our utmost to place integrity and talents
in the administration, it is no less our duty to "strengthen the hands, and
encourage the hearts" of our rulers, not only by a personal submission to the
laws; but by inducing others, as far as in us lies, to "lead quiet and
peaceable lives in all godliness and honesty."

COULD these pure intentions, and this laudable conduct, universally prevail,
peace at home, and respectability abroad, would be our favored lot! We might
set every adversary at defiance, and trust in God, that, as those illustrious
names, who have hitherto been our shield and protection, are numbered with the
dead, others will be raised up in their stead, to defend our rights, and
perpetuate our prosperity!

ANOTHER thought, which the subject and occasion jointly suggest, while it
additionally enforces the preceding obligation, particularly invites us to "lay
up in store for ourselves, a good foundation against the time to come."

HAD wealth, had fame, had friends been sufficient to "redeem from death,"
WASHINGTON had not died! But "there is no discharge in that war!" High and low,
learned and ignorant, free and bond, must "lie down alike in the dust: for the
small and the great are there!" Such being "the end of all the living," how
vain and insignificant, in comparison, are the possessions and acquisitions of
time; and how infinitely important is a seasonable preparation for eternity!
"Let not the wise man, then, glory in his wisdom; neither let the mighty man
glory in his might; let not the rich man glory in his riches; but let him that
glories, glory in this, that he understands and knows the Lord!"

OUR chief emulation should be, to "obtain an inheritance among all them that
are sanctified;" and since "we have no continuing city here, to seek one to
come. For the world passes away, and the lust thereof; but he that does the
will of God, abides forever." Soon shall the fierce contentions of kingdoms
and states, and the bustling rivalries of individuals, be superseded by the
more awful war of elements, and conflagration of matter! But sooner still shall
a final period be put to all our sublunary cares and pursuits! The king of
terrors is not far from every one of us! "In such an hour as we think not," we
may be summoned into the invisible state, and called to a strict and solemn
account for "the deeds done in the body!"

"SEEING then we look for such things," and are apprised of their speedy and
certain approach, by the dictates of reason, the declarations of scripture, and
the awakening admonitions of providence, "what manner of persons ought we to
be, in all holy conversation and godliness!" Can we cherish anticipations of
this kind, and yet presume unduly to covet the pleasures, the profits, or the
honors of this lower creation? Can we consent, for the sake of these momentary
and perishable seize, to forfeit the complacency and approbation of
Heaven, or to injure the community to which we belong? Let us rather resolve,
never to gain the least gratification, or to receive any degree of applause,
but as the reward of laudable designs and exertions; designs and exertions, at
once, acceptable to God, and serviceable to man.

IF, in this way, we rise into public estimation, let us improve our increased
influence in the cause of truth and righteousness. But if, after all, it be our
fate to remain in the humbler walks of life, let us not repine at the divine
ordination; but exercise a pious resignation and obedience to the will of our
Maker, and strive, even in the narrow circle by which we are circumscribed, to
mitigate the ills, and enhance the enjoyments of humanity. -- In any event,
whether in affluence, or in poverty; whether "in good report, or in evil
report," let us "serve God and our generation" faithfully; hold ourselves in
habitual readiness for our last change, and "give all diligence to make our
calling and election sure. If we do these things, we shall never fall: for so
an entrance shall be ministered to us abundantly, into the everlasting kingdom
of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ."

FINIS


