DESULTORY REFLECTIONS ON THE NEW POLITICAL ASPECTS OF PUBLIC AFFAIRS IN THE
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, SINCE THE COMMENCEMENT OF THE YEAR 1799.

Keep watch! make thy loins strong, fortify thy power mightily; for he that
dashes in pieces is come up before thy face. The shield of his warriors is made
red, the valiant are in scarlet. Behold thy people in the midst of thee are
women! where is the dwelling of the lions, and the feeding place of the young
lions? -- There the lion even the old lion walked, and the lion's whelp, and
none made them afraid. The lion did tear in pieces enough for his whelps, and
strangled for his lionesses, and filled his holes with prey, and his dens with
ravine. NEW YORK, PRINTED FOR THE AUTHOR, BY C. AND R. WAIT, AND PUBLISHED BY
J. W. FENNO, NO. 141, HANOVER SQUARE. 1800.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THE following sheets have been hastily composed, during a very short space of
time, under strong impressions that the subject was of an urgent nature:
whether to this cause, or a more simple one, the numerous faults in them, be
attributed, no impression of injustice will be received. It will be very
obvious to every reader that the author courts not the consideration of the
high, nor the favor of the low: The perfidious patronage of courtiers and the
dirty caps of the million, are to him objects of equal contempt. He has no
favor to seek of either. It will be also very apparent that he speaks the
language of no party whatever, all sects being equally indifferent in his view,
who has a single eye, to the honor and peace, of his country. Impressed with
the fullest convictions of the reality of the dangers with which America is at
present threatened, he thought it a duty to offer his projet for warding them
off; believing, that, should it not be the means of drawing forth the efforts
of able and adequate persons, it can at least serve to sound an alarm that must
be useful, however numerous may be the dissentient opinions with regard to the
measures he would propose in this jeopardous crisis; for he has long been
convinced, that all the principal disasters of the United States have arisen
from the people's ignorance of public affairs, and of course of their real
situation. The time serving, mean and miserable politics of Government he
conceives to have brought us to the verge of ruin; and that career, (in which
it appears miraculous that we have so long continued with so much impunity)
must be energetically foreclosed, or the post-obiit of our prosperity will very
soon be inscribed on the crowded tablet of republican delusions. He reserves
for a less adverse occasion, some reflections on the domestic polity of the
commonwealth, and in connection therewith, the necessity of various oeconomical
reformations in the system of this Government, and modifications in the
principle and practice of taxation.

June 30, 1800.
NEW POLITICAL ASPECTS.
THE tendencies of public measures for more than twelve months past, have been
such as to excite the fearful apprehensions of all true friends to their
country.

To change a system of policy, under which a people find themselves merely
exempt from evils common in the lot of nations, would seem to require deep
reflection, mature judgment, and an ample view of the train of consequences
dependent thereon, in all their different probable aspects, and in every
possible line of extension and connection.

CHANGE is from the very nature of things an evil. To change even from bad to
good, is not at all times expedient or safe; since it implies a confession of
error and often of guilt, which the pride of man revolts at.

BUT when in any country, principles, under which the nation soared toward the
temple of glory, with an eagle's flight, are totally abandoned, exploded, and
reversed, it becomes an object of ten-fold importance to cast our eyes, in deep
contemplation around us, and to explore amidst the secret recesses of narrow
jealousy and private views, the motives and the grounds, on which it has been
presumed to urge us toward a condition in which misery and ruin stare us in
the face; it behooves us, under such circumstances, to examine well the position
we have abandoned and that to which we are so rapidly advancing.

"There is a tide in the affairs of men,
Which, taken at the flood, leads on to fortune;
Omitted, all the voyage of their life
Is bound in shallows and in miseries."
THE tide in the affairs of America, had attained its full flood in the summer
of 1798; when the whole extent of the continent bristled with the bayonets of
indignant volunteers, when the aged and revered Washington, stepped forth to
command them, with the declaration that his successor had "exhausted to the
last drop, the cup of reconciliation," and when that successor himself
proclaimed, with oracular solemnity, that he would never send another
supplicating embassy to the Republic of France.

THE French interest in America, was every where on the decline; and every
narrow consideration of local prejudice, daily yielded more and more, to that
honorable zeal for the national glory which pervaded all hearts. The people
were united; or, if a few murmurs of discontent were still heard, they were the
growlings of the impotent and discomfited; of wretches, who, long habituated to
turbulence and rebellion, now vainly vented their stupid slanders upon those,
who had, to all human appearance, cut off every hope of a return of the times
of old.

THE American name was rising rapidly to dignity and eminence: the fame of our
resistance to the wiles and the arms of France, exalted our reputation at once
for wisdom and for courage. The proudest and greatest of nations, took us with
joy by the hand; exulting over our late return to reason, she promptly unfolded
her arcana to our view, and opened every avenue that could lead to political
consequence, or commercial prosperity. UNTIL the fatal mission of suppliants to
France in 1799, the dispositions of the British Cabinet toward America, had
evinced the most rare urbanity and friendship. Mr. Pit, of his own mere
motion, made a tender of the good offices of the British Government to procure
for this country the most favorable commercial treaties that could be obtained
from Russia and the Port. Nor was this the only instance of as unequivocal
friendship.


UNDER these auspices, the instruments of our trade whitened every sea, the
produce of our industry crowded every port, and our ensign waved in every
harbor of the known world.

BUT the wind changed -- the weathercock turned -- and now, how different are
the aspects! It even seems a question how long we may be permitted to enjoy
those advantages which have ever been common and essential to us as a nation.

IN a contest like that which was carrying on before our eyes -- in a warfare
of confusion against order, an insurrection of every vile propensity, against
every good that remained to mankind in common, the hope to continue neutral was
foolish, and the wish to remain so, dishonorable. It became at length so
palpable, that we had our election to make, which side between the contending
parties we would espouse, and so clear that our all was equally at stake upon
the issue with the rest of the world, that even the rabble took cognizance of
the question, and with one accord, shouted to arms! A government without power
and without disposition to avenge the insulted dignity of the country, and the
stripes, wounds and executions of its citizens, was actually pricked on by
popular acclaim, to some show of spirit: -- it was goaded by laborious and
untiring exertions, to an exhibition and parade of intention, which now,
abandoned, has served only to saddle us with a frivolous expense, without
alleviating a single mischief.

ALTHOUGH the doors of the temple of Janus, have been alternately shut and
opened, with puerile irresolution, almost every day for these four years, the
friendship of Great Britain, and the friendship of France, still present
themselves to us as two great alternatives. Here, I know it will be sagaciously
inquired, are we not an independent nation? And have we not a right to do what
seems meet in our own eyes.

I AM ready to answer, without hesitation, that a nation is no further
independent of other nations, than one individual is independent of another in
society. In either case, there are bonds of strong obligation. No nation may
withhold from another privileges which are by nature common to all, by the mere
right of power: nor can any one justly withhold or bar the rights of another to
full and impartial justice.

NATIONS are actuated, in their connections, and even intercourse with one
another, by interested motives; and miserable is that policy, which instead of
fostering advantageous connections by creating interests, is seduced by vain
conceptions of a fastidious independence, to destroy them, under a belief

"That self-dependent, she can fate defy,
As rocks resist the billows ad the sky."
THE various wants as well as various productions of different nations,
constitute a natural binding chain of connection; all vauntings of
self-dependence, are, therefore, foolish; but, in our peculiar situation, to
talk of independence, in the sense in which many apply the term, is
preposterous in the extreme.

IT seems hardly in the power of conception to suppose men so ignorant as to
seek a change in the whole order of things merely for the sake of maintaining
this visionary self-dependence; and yet it seems thus only to be accounted for,
that we behold an humble and submissive policy suddenly put in force toward a
nation, in the present order of things our natural enemy, and a most repulsive
THE Act of Congress awarding a salvage of one half, in cases of recaptures,
contrary to all former usage; the violent and indecorous disruption of the
Board of Commissioners under the 6th article of the treaty; and the general
tone of hostility, assumed of late by official characters, as well as the
hotheaded zealots out of doors, are sufficient evidences of the existence of
this disposition.
and hostile system adopted toward another to which we have indissoluble ties.

IN deciding between the friendship of Great Britain and the friendship of
France, the primary assemblies of the people on the British treaty, and the
same repeated on the commencement of hostilities against France, have shown
that there was but one voice. Jealous of Great Britain, as of the authority of
an ancient superior, the people sought not, wished not, needed not any closer
or other connection with her than already existed in the treaty. So perfect an
understanding was there, that her cruisers convoyed our ships as their own, an
almost unlimited commerce was opened to us in her oriental and other dominions,
in many ports where where no flag but the British had ever before been
permitted to wave. On the other hand, how great was the unanimity in the
measures pursued against the French Republic. Of the natives of the country,
the descendants of the original stock, nineteen twentieths went hand and hand
with the government. Prosperity bearned on the humblest nole in the
commonwealth, a manly courage glistened in the countenances of the young, and
joy at the bright prospect before them, gladdened the hearts of the aged. The
imposthume of much wealth and peace seemed broken, and inoffensively dispelled.

BUT it seems we made a show of war to avoid war. SEE the newspapers during the
last twelve months.
In infantine language, it was make believe fight, in order to keep peace.
Wretched degradation of human nature! This outgoes the utmost wanderings of
Gallic philosophy, and men are thus at once very fairly reduced to a level with
asses. This, however, is only one of the trappings and suits of versatility;
there is that within which passes show.

It cannot be, frivolous and vain as modern statesmen are; it cannot be, that
we made war for the love of peace. This is too much like the murderer, who
killed Don Carlos for his own good. Besides, the apostle of war, told us from
his high place, that we were to gird on our swords and fit us for a long and
bloody fight; ships were built, at an expense of many millions, and soldiers
enlisted for the war. We were not thus farcically wheedled into all this
expense, and all these sacrifices; it cannot have been: truth lies in a deeper
well even than this.

THAT there is a time for peace and a time for war, required no very profound
research nor very various reading, to be apprized of. The signs of the times,
were moreover of very simple and obvious interpretation; nor, do they seem at
first to have been misconstrued.

SINCE there are times when there ought to be war, and since there are also
times when there ought not to be war: to keep peace, when the hand of war is
upon us, is to carry on the worst of hostilities; it is a contest against the
decrees of nature, inasmuch as it is to refer that season of war which in the
nature of things is inevitable, to a season when there ought to be peace. For,
as we have not yet dipped so deep into the infsatuation of millenarianism, or
the whimsies of those other pestiferous prophets, who teach that the nature of
man is perfectible, as to believe that the organization of nature and of
mankind, in time to come, will be essentially variant from what it has been
found through ages past, so we are to calculate on the usual periods of war,
which have been common in the lot of every nation. IF we are to be sunk into a
nation of Jews or Dutchmen, if every honorable sentiment, if all manly courage,
all national pride is to be locked up in warehouses, and (...) in bales and
packages, why then in deed let us at once assume the characteristic (...) let
our insignia be, the goose and her golden eggs, and our legend, (...)


ONE of these periods has long since arrived. It arrived at a moment,
auspicious for staying the enervating inroads which fifteen years of sluggish
peace and insignificance had made. This influence of pacific habits yielded so
slowly to the sense of honor and of duty, that half the means and the sinews
of war fell before the rapid violences of a most pernicious enemy, ere it was
found expedient to resist. But it was so found at last, and when the resolution
came, it came in unusual majesty and overbearing force. Never had a government
less reason to complain of the temper and spirit of its subjects. Their
treasuries were disembogued with alacrity -- on the instant, they stood, with
assumed arms, utrinque parati. Cheerfully they gave all that was asked, and the
necessities of the state would have met with no deficiency in supply, but in
the utter exhaustion of the people.

If ever there was a time for war, it was that in which America made her
exhibitions of hostility to keep peace. The expenses, the inconveniences, the
evils, all -- every bugbear of the Philippians were of necessity encountered.
But while the friendly enemy were actually belligerantes, we chose to exhibit
in reverse the curious spectacle of an hostile friend, cauponantem bellum.

AN armed and hostile peace, under a popular form of government, is of all
conditions the most preposterous. The stupid populace, too abject in ignorance
to think rightly, and too depraved to draw honest deductions if they could,
judge, for the most part, of what they see, by what they feel. Burdens are
imposed, taxes are increased, the public debt magnifies, and yet it is peace.
If in the calm of peace, the vessel of state drifts into the gulf of debt, what
shall stay her when the hurricane of war blows its loud blast? But you will
proceed to state, how that this is peace and yet it is not peace: how that it
is a kind of warlike peace, or pacific war; of which the nature and essence is
admirably such, as to cost us all that a war could cost, without producing any
one of those benefits that ordinarily accrue from war. The spirit of enterprise
is damped not encouraged. The ardent valor of our youth at once the ornament
and pride of every nation, is stifled not promoted -- the honor and glory of
the American name are buried amidst the dust and rubbish of negociations,
supplicating embassies, and assurances of respect: -- all which, in the
Phoenician tongue, are, to a sovereign people, words of very potent
signification.

UNDER the auspices even of these mock hostilities, the maritime affairs of the
country began to flourish in an unexampled manner. The natural temper of the
people, burst the trammels by which a cold and cowardly policy had repressed
it, and assumed a character, which at once displayed magnanimity and created
it. A noble career of emulation had commenced, and the fame of a gallant
commander existed at the same time a splendid ornament to himself, and a most
valuable treasure to his country.

THERE are times, when the valor and constancy of an individual, may preserve
an empire; but it seems to have been our peculiar fortune, that noble actions,
performed at the utmost need of the commonwealth, should be utterly useless to
the state, and productive of no honor, but the abuse of villains, to their
authors. We have had our Camillus; but, we have pitched him down the tarpeian
rock of oblivion, not for subsequent apostasy, but for the very deed of
greatness itself.

As there are times when the constancy and valor of an individual, may
preserve an empire, so there are frequent crises, when the obstinacy of a
wrong-head and a fool may destroy it. Hence has arisen a scrupulosity, in well
regulated governments, of commiting the safety of a whole country into the
hands of any single person. In divine governments as well as human, where the
salus populi is at all regarded, the chief magistrate, to whom, for the sake of
unity in action, the executive powers are committed, is restrained by various
and complicated provisions, from sallies of madness, from fits of spleen and
hypocondriac, from wreaking his private malice, and sacrificing the honor and
the peace of his country, at the shrine of his own weak and despicable vanity.

FOELIX quem faciunt aliena pericula cautum. The misfortune, however, is, that
such happy are very few. Nations rarely profit by the experience, fortunate or
disastrous, of other nations; and still less perhaps by the dangers and
miseries which they encounter, than by instances of their success and
prosperity. There is a propensity in human pride to shun as a pestilence every
imputation, involving its sagacity and discretion. Hence, when the weak,
wavering and timid policy of governments, which have manifestly fallen victims
thereto, is held up as a memento to any other, obviously treading in the same
footsteps, there will never be wanting enthusiastic and violently patriotic
persons, to discover some shade of difference in situation, whereby she is to
be rescued; fatalists who will hardily declare, that though through such and such
errors, empire after empire has tottered from its base, yet the same errors can
never bring their own to ruin, it being divine, and its endurance registered
above.

BUT although nations may not learn wisdom from the experience of other
nations, there is at least one source, whence they might with great safety and
propriety deduce it, -- from their own. After suffering great extremity from
the adoption of wavering and irresolute conduct, it would be natural to expect
that wavering and irresolute conduct would be abandoned; the very reverse has
been the case with regard to us, and by how much we have been disgraced and
endangered by any errors, by so much the more has it been studied to repeat
them.

FROM as prosperous a condition as ever yet nation enjoyed, we have been
prematurely hurled to a state of the deepest decline. The fatal expedition to
Paris, commenced in the tears, proceeds amidst the groans, and must terminate
in the ruin of all the upright part of this community. The honest, faithful,
generous friends of the American government, have been, with a perfidy
unparalleled, betrayed into the power of an enemy, who relinquishes no
advantage, who forgets no injury, who neglects no proffered opportunity of
striding toward the final gaol of his ambition, the subversion of the existing
state of society, and intermediately, the plunder, subjugation and
assassination of the unhappy victims thus betrayed into his hands.

THE very men who through many a long year, had toiled with the ardor and
enthusiasm of patriots, adjoined to the patience and perseverance of slaves, to
fortify a bulwark, (which they vainly thought they beheld in the government)
against their dangerous and daring enemies, were by one sudden stroke in one
short hour, beaten off their ground, overwhelmed with confusion, and left
abandoned to all the ridicule, and all the rage of their antagonists. Suddenly,
down fell the mighty fabric of popular opinion; the bulwark, which it guarded,
mouldered away; the champions of the faith, in moody, sullen despair, retired
from the field, and nauseating nonsense, meanness, abject servility, and the
effeminacy of Sybaris, now reign with a pomposity, undisturbed even by any
casual exertions of genius or common sense.

THE expedition to Paris having been complotted, and the plot ratified by the
acquiescence of the Elect, it was boldly ventured on, and impudently started
upon the town not only unsupported by the opinions of a single man of credit or
respectability, but wholly unknown to those very persons, who by the spirit, if
not by the letter, of the constitution, certainly had a voice on the occasion.

INDIGNANT at an outrage so flagrant upon truth, honor, decency, avowed
opinion, solemn declaration, and the feelings, prejudices, and bias of the
country, the nation rose almost as a man against the flagrant shame. But all
sense of honor and shame were lost in those, whose actions ought to have been
wholly guided thereby.

HOPELESS of preventing the fatal sacrifice of the honor and peace (...) is now
in jeopardy, at least, if it be (...)
of the country, it was as fruitlessly sought to retard the final hour.

IN the course of that short space, which intervened the appointment of the
suppliants and their departure, the jack puddings, at the footstool of whose
power, it had been contemplated so ignominiously to prostrate the dignity of
the country, perished the victims of that eternal justice, which the events of
our own time demonstrate, more clearly perhaps, than those of any other, to
proceed only from on high. Every un-supplicating temper, would have been better
satisfied with the public execution of these ruffians by some lawful authority:
but, it certainly would not have been so well-ordered, had they fallen by any
other hand, than that which smote them.

THE destruction of these vile monsters, did not however ward off, nor even
respite for an hour, the ruin to which ignorance, self-sufficiency, and a most
blind and criminal pertinacity has destined us. Delendi eramus et delemur.
DELEMUR. -- A gailicism latinized; but very significant and very descriptive of
our singular situation.
Wise and virtuous men -- men whom Americans have been in the habit of
revering, as the fathers and founders of the national character, exerted their
energies against the infatuated (...). They strove in vain: the struggle of
patriotism against an antique vanity, and a (...) and pompous consequence which
brooks no counsel, was in vain. Equally in vain would have been the
remonstrances of Pericles, of Phocion and Demosthenes: Fufidius FOR the
character of this prototype of Presidential firmness, see the works of one
Flaccus. Fufidius vappae bellum timot ac nebulenis.
Dives agris, dives positis in foenore nummis,
Quinas hic capiti mercedes exsecat, acque
Quanto perditior quisque est, tanto acrius urget.

would have said, I am not to be informed or enlightened by your efforts. All
the things which you speak are known unto me, and the question you have mooted,
has been decided beforehand. ONE consolation remains to the defeated, and
since insulted remonstrators. They are essentially acquitted of all
responsibility. To each and every of them, one might truly say -- Mine nor my
country's death, come not on thee. To old Mr. Illpause on the other hand we may
recommend, (what, indeed, he seems already to be in possession of) this line of
the vain orator of Rome. ^
Which may import --

O! happy country, that, in (...) to come
^



IN vain was it objected to the departure of the Suppliants, that the
indispensable preliminary -- the sine qua non, whereto the faith of the
adventurous and desperate pacificator was pledged, had become null and void, by
the abrogation of the power of those who constituted one of the parties. What
were Rewbell and the rest, to him; or, what indeed was he to Rewbell? all
ruffians and murderers, are alike in his eyes, and since before the footstool
of ruffians and murderers, the country was to be humiliated, what imported it,
whether the knee-worship was paid to Buonaparte or to Barras? to wave the
forfeiture of faith, in sending the suppliants without the sine qua non, it
must be allowed that if it had been sought to select a point of time the most
improper, and a government, of all those which have gone before, the most
odious and offensive, those objects were attained. THE profligacy with which
the character of this country has been so often exposed for "daws to peck at,"
out-Herods Herod. The memoirs of Nero, Tiberius, or Caligula, will be found
wanting in instances of similar (...). With a temerity and an insensibility to
our duties and relations, at once unpardonable and unparalleled, we have
hastened, with a "scandalous ostentation," to greet every infernal villain,
whom the turmoil of an infernal revolution has exalted from its loathsome
level, to murderous command. How a government which has thus set itself up as
the universal champion of sedition, insurrection, and despotic power, when
irregularly obtained, can possibly expect duration or tranquillity, it might be
interesting to enquire.

FROm Brissot to Buonaparte, (without doubt, the foulest monster that ever
defiled human shape) we have hastened with the same scandalous ostentation, to
greet each successive fortunate assassin with equal joy. The last scene that
ends this strange eventful history, "threatens some consequences. Which an
unaccountable forbearance alone seems hitherto to have watded off.




YES, the point of time was the most untoward one, that could have been
stumbled upon, whether we consider it in regard to our own particular
situation, the particular situation of France, or the general aspect of the
cause of the coalition.

OUR own situation was one of a most peculiar kind. We owed every thing we had
or hoped for, to the spirit of hostility which had been with such difficulty
excited against France; for, every man is at this day convinced, that the
country would have been long since made an appendage to that empire, had not
the people been roused by laborious exertions, to a just sense of the dangers
of peace with the French Republic. To make a treaty with her, therefore, under
such circumstances, is to destroy us in the very act of being saved.

THE very peculiar situation of France at the time when this black design was
projected, forbade in terms still more forcible, if possible, the execution of
the scheme. Not only had no change for the better taken place in the
administration of the affairs of that distracted country, but on the contrary,
every thing had changed, as much as possible for the worse. The villain Merlin,
the pirate and minister of justice, had newly come into the Directory, and that
enormous wretch and monster Talleyrand, who to fill up the measure of his
atrocious iniquities, had demanded bribes from us, was also newly constituted
Secretary for foreign affairs. Such and so favorable were the auspices so far
as related to the particular situation of France, under which we were to
conclude a peace. To heighten the coloring of this part of the picture, were a
superfluous act. Other circumstances equally forbidding, and equally
disgraceful, might be adduced, but one alone shall conclude. The assurances on
the faith of which the expedition was bottomed, came from the mouth of the
pestiferous Talleyrand.

THE general aspect of the affairs of the coalition was flourishing beyond
example; while, an uncontrollable depression clouded the hopes of the enemy.
Such was the point of time selected for sacrificing us, such the auspices under
which we were again protrasted at the footstool of rebels, regicides and
usurpers.

To the pirate Merlin, who ordered our ambassador to tell us, that we must
break our incomprehensible treaty with England, if we would gain the favor of
himself and fellows; who would make no treaty with America, because he was
daily amassing thousands from the plunder of her commerce by his sixty
privateers, -- to the brutal Barras, who had told us we were the slaves of
England; and the blood-stained Rewbell, the Crassus of the revolution: -- to
these pirates, ruffians, freebooters and assassins, has succceded one more
ferocious, cruel, sanguinary, avaricious, vainglorious and insatiable than
all, -- the successful rival of Danton, in premeditated villainy, of
Robespierre in wild ambition, and of Marat, in cool deliberate thirst for
carnage and rapine; a most "remorseless, treacherous, lecherous, kindless
villain;" whose cruelties have stained the age with a deeper dye of sanguinary
barbarity, than those of any other atrocious monster of the revolution; whose
heart is relentless as the bosom of Tisiphone whose crimes outvie in number,
the revolutionary fiends that surround him; who has assassinated christians in
the guise of an infidel; and infidels for the love of infidelity; one who would
cut the throat of humanity, while peeping through the blanket of the dark, she
cried, hold -- hold! and hurl the reeking heart of mercy a prey to his
murdering sans culottes; who in fine has outdone Attila, Alaric, Genseric, or
Genghis Khan, not indeed in the extent of his ravages, but in the detestable
deliberation with which he has offered up cities and countries to pillage,
violation and conflagration, at the shrine of his insolent and lowbred vanity.
Still the supplication goes on. All this is nothing to Fufidius: Quanto
perditior quisque est, tanto acrius urget.

IT is fairly impossible, that such a juncture should have been stumbled on by
chance, for, such an expedition; and I greatly fear, that it is "amidst the
secret recesses of narrow jealousy, and private views," and vanity made drunk,
as I have before remarked, that the grounds of this execrable step are to be
explored.

HERE, a scene opens to our astonished view, which is well calculated to appal
the senses of men not prepared for the worst results of the worst designs of
deliberate malice. It will be expedient to touch lightly on the several topics
which this subject involves; fortunately, a cursory view of them will suffice
for our purpose.

THAT a deliberate purpose is entertained, of involving this country in a most
horrible and ruinous war, there are various incidents of evidence, which it
would neither be prudent nor proper to dilate on. It may be received as a fact,
that he who seems so ambitious to be the arbiter of peace and war, expressly
declared his conviction, that a war with Great Britain was the only means left
of reconciling parties in this country. That the expedition of the suppliants
was decided on with a resolution to consider Great Britain in a new and remote
light, is abundantly proved by various subsequent occurrences.

It is then in suspicion, jealousy, or perhaps to use a more explicit term, in
enmity to Great Britain, that the redintegration Ira amantium, etc.
of affection for France is founded. This enmity, however, was pent up in very
narrow confines; it operated in a single breast only; and for all its
consequences, there is a very single responsibility. But of what avail is that
responsibility to us? If we must be destroyed, what satisfaction is it to us to
know the instrument of our destruction? Does calamity press any the less heavy,
for that we see the hand which inflicts it? Besides where there is no tribunal
to take cognizance of breaches, and where there is no spirit to set enquiry on
foot, what is responsibility but a visionary thing?

HOWEVER preposterous it must seem, that the destinies of a nation should be
committed to the caprice of a most capricious man, it is worth while for those
who are most deeply interested in the events which every day brings forth, to
enquire, whether it is attributable to any other cause, than the caprice and
vanity of that man, that we are in so degrading a situation with respect to
France, and in so dangerous a one with respect to England.

THE detrusion of one of the first characters whom America has had the honor of
giving birth to, from an office which he had long filled with unbounded
applause, with eminent honor and utility to his country, throws much light on
this subject, even when viewed as a simple and naked fact: but when we come to
search into the grounds of that extraordinary act, and when we consider the
ignominious manner in which it was thought fit to perpetrate it; when we review
the torrents of calumny to which that unfortunate and honorable man has been,
with such perfect nonchalance, devoted; when we consider these things through a
medium, clarified from the sophistry and perversion of slaves, the humble tools
and instruments of an authority, more arbitrary and more inscrutable than the
Turkish divan, then it is, that we discern those hidden things that belong to
our destruction; then it is that we discern an ill-smothered flame, still
preying after so many years, upon a heart, the malice of which, no lapse of
time can charm, no change of circumstances appease. Naturalists tell us of a
foolish bird, which hiding its head in a thicket, imagines itself unseen,
because it cannot see.

IF the late Secretary of State had a fault, it was to have too imperfectly
renounced those Prejudices against Great Britain, which rankle in the breasts
of Americans. His office, however, had afforded him opportunities superior to
those of other men, of witnessing the candor and liberality of the British
Cabinet in all its intercourse with America. Hence he had become more free from
those bitter and stupid prejudices, than the men by whom he was surrounded. His
antipathy to France and to her revolution, and his conviction that our safety
lay in opposing her in arms, was deliberatedly established. Such ought to be
the convictions and motives to action, of every American Secretary of State --
of every American public officer.

ANIMATED by these convictions, and in the exercise of his official duty, that
officer came forward in a manly and elaborate state paper, to expose the
fallacy of French faith (...)
the instability of their republican counsels, and the precariousness of their
duration. The doltish gull, whom those Retiarii had caught in their subtle net,
he with equal boldness exposed to public contempt, in all the shallowness with
which he had suffered himself to be practiced upon, by artifices the most
palpable. The man of Thessaly was dragged out of the thickset hedge; FROM
tampering with the Man of Thessaly, the R^tiarii turned their eyes to another
character equally profound, and here their perseverance was crowned with
consummate success. "With such a little net, did they ensnare as great a fly as
Cassio."
for their policy did not impose gyves upon him, as it had done on other more
illustrious ambassadors; but his friend and patron, THE attachment of Mr.
Illpause to this sagacious character is well known. He gave him very lately for
a toast; and it is said he openly wished success to his election as Governor of
Massachusetts.
felt himself wounded by the sarcasms which had been cast upon him, supported
him uniformly, and at length avenged his disgrace.

THIS admirable exposition of French intrigue, electrized the continent; it was
every where received with rapture; and the popularity of its author, as was
natural, became "exceeding great." But the exceeding great popularity of the
Secretary delighted not the man of peace. Aut Caesar aut nullus, is his motto,
and the unfortunate Secretary approached too near to holding a divided empire
THOUGH a divisum imperium cum Jove, might not have been pleasant to the
immortal man, methinks he needed not have smitten the victim with a
thunderbolt. This opportunity may be a proper one on which for me to say that
these persons are alike objects of indifference to me, in every personal view.
Mihi Otho Galba Vitellius, etc.
with him in the hearts of the people. To urge this subject further would
partake of futility. The sequel, unlike the code of Domitian, (at least in this
one respect) is inscribed on a conspicuous tablet, in very legible characters.

THE ideas of men respecting national relations in these enlightened times,
partake rather of the crudeness of the dark ages, than of that perfectibility,
toward which we are supposed to have advanced with so rapid strides. It seems
to be seriously imagined that the desires and affections -- the feelings,
prejudices, and animosities, of foreign powers, may be controuled and regulated
as our own; and that an exhibition of what is called American firmness -- the
fitting out of a few extra frigates, and the imposition of an embargo, will at
any time curb "the insolence of Britain" as they say it has done that of France.

IT is to this despicable self conceit, that we owe much of the misery which
has come upon us. The victory of the Nile, the loss consequent thereon, of an
army of forty thousand veterans to France, the accession of Russia to the
coalition, and the reverses which had befallen the arms of France, afforded to
Illpause a very desirable pretext under which to give vent to his jealousy and
hatred of Great Britain.

ACCORDINGLY all of a sudden, he discovers, that the success which had crowned
the arms of England, had broken the balance of power, and of course might
endanger in some future age, the welfare of these independent States. Therefore
he resolves to restore the balance, by stopping short in that progress which
was making toward a confidential connection with Great Britain, and to turn
again to France, as the rock of reliance. Immediately, his apostles preach in
every tabernacle, the dangers of foreign connections, the value of
independence, and the weight and consequence of America in the scale of
nations. While Europe said they, is wasting herself away, in murderous broils,
let us display an honorable magnanimity by keeping aloof from the idle
squabbles of her old and corrupt nations, and reserve that dignity and
importance which we possess for the more honorable purpose of controuling
their ambition. These doctrines soon gained extensive credit, and it has become
a test of impartialism and columbianism, to profess equal hatred to all nations.

THUS, when a French cruizer captures an American ship, and murders the
officers and crew, it is "an instance of more than British cruelty," and when a
band of pirates seize a British man of war and murder their officers, the
murderers are bemoaned in the columbian gazettes as martyrs to the cause of
liberty. If some swindling, cowardly, neutral, Swede, Dane or American, is
overtaken on the high sea, mendaciously, covering the property of the enemy, or
basely aiding and abetting his attacks upon all the peace of all the world,
these miscreants are up in arms on the instant, to defend and justify the
perjury and treachery, and to malign the power which has chastized that perjury
that treachery.

THE avenues of public opinion being in possession of idiots, whose malice
transcends their dullness, are constantly shut against every liberal exposition
of truth, or detection of falsehood, on every subject relating to Great Britain.
A columbian printer would as soon meet his evil genius in arms, as publish any
thing even squinting at liberality toward that nation. But, on the other hand
their whole power is exerted in belying and blackening the British name and
nation, with an avidity and a perseverance, that evinces how much they fell
themselves at home when thus employed

BUT these wretches are fools, villains and liars of the first magnitude, the
very foster-fathers of rebellion and every soul and unnatural crime; it is
their vocation to cry down reason and honesty, and to propagate error and
delusion of the grossest kind. We do not, therefore, wonder at these things
coming from them; but when we see an high and respon ible public character,
entering the lists of calumny, and tearing open old wounds, to gratify personal
and private rancour, there is a call for all our indignation and all our rage

BECAUSE the man was obliged to sculk in Holland in the habiliments of a
sailor, from the pursuit of Sir Joseph Yorke's messenger, at a time when he was
acting in Holland the part of Genet in America, and because the king put some
slight upon him at a subsequent period, are we to be made the sport of his
prejudice and private pique?

THAT such is our deplorable fortune, the following paper seems to evince:

BETWEEN one and two o'clock the President was addressed by Wm. FITSBURGH, Esquire
on behalf of the citizens of Alexandria, as follows, to which the President
made the subjoined reply:

ADDRESS TO JOHN ADAMS, PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES,
Sir,
The citizens of Alexandria see among then with (...), their revered President;
his (...) brings to their view the constancy and ability with which he labored
in the vineyard of liberty, when devotion to its cause was surrounded with the
gibbet and the halter.

HER intrepid and faithful defender, dear as he then was to the sons of
America, is now more dear from the additional claim on their hearts, growing
out of his unabated zeal in extending and confirming their common happiness.

IN this presentment of our respectful homage to the successor of our late
incomparable Washington, we cannot but add our prayer, that like him you will
pass through the storms and vicissitudes which always encircle the highest
nations, most admired when best understood.

ON behalf and at the request of the citizens of Alexandria.

Alexandria, June. 11, 1800.
REPLY OF THE PRESIDENT TO THE PRECEDING ADDRESS.
TO THE CITIZENS OF ALEXANDRIA.
GENTLEMEN,
I receive from the citizens of Alexandria, this kind salutation on my first
visit to Virginia, with much pleasure. In the earlier part of my life, I felt
at sometimes an inexpressible grief, and at others, an unutterable indignation,
at the injustice and indignities which, I though wantonly heaped on my
innocent, virtuous, peaceable and unoffending country. And perceiving that the
American people, from New Hampshire to Georgia, felt and thought in the same
manner, I determined refusing all favors and renouncing all personal
obligations to the agressors, to run every hazard with my countrymen, at their
invitation by sea and land in opposition and resistance -- well knowing that if
we should be unfortunate, all the pains and all the disgrace which injustice
and cruelty could inflict, would be the destination of me and mine. Providence
smiled on our well meant endeavors, and perhaps in no particular more
remarkably in giving us your incomparable Washington for the leader of our
armies. Our country has since enjoyed an enviable tranquillity and uncommon
prosperity. We are grown a great people, this city and many others, which I
have seen since I left Philadelphia, exhibit very striking proofs of our
increase, on which I congratulate you. May no error or misfortune throw a veil
over the bright prospects before us.

JOHN ADAMS.
Alexandria, June 11, 1800.
WHEN the French Harlequin Plenipo, Adet, expatiated in his memorable appeal to
the sovereignty of America, on the cruelties of England; when he revived the
recollection of an unhappy period of feuds and revolutions, which the lapse of
many years had covered with a thick veil; when he called up the whitened bones
of martyred Columbians, clad in complete sustian, to hover about the
ferruginous instrument of the ploughman; we needed no elaborate commentary to
enlighten our minds as to the object and tendency of the inflammatory harangue

BUT when a man whose duty it is to keep the public peace, and promote the
public interests, no less by festering amicable relations with friends, than by
chastizing the insolence of enemies; when such an one launches forth into
inuendoes and accusations of such a nature, what are we to expect? What had the
"injustice and cruelty of England" toward this redoutable patriot, to do with
the occasion? He might with equal propriety have repeated a passage from the
Seven Wise Masters, for any honorable end that he could have in view.

ONE would suppose that to revive the memory of a most bloody, cruel and
unnatural civil war, whereby every member of the community has had to mourn
some privation of fortune or of friends, could only be desirable to a malignant
heart, actuated by some sinister design in the instance.

To what else than to a desire of reviving the spirit of hostility against
England, shall we attribute the inuendoes before us? for the war in which this
mighty man thus exposed himself to all the pains and all the disgrace, which
the injustice and cruelty of England could inflict, is no longer waged -- a
peace has been concluded, and acts of oblivion passed, whereby the wounds of
the war are cicatrized, if not healed. Besides the result proved this bitter
accusation, this dreadful attack upon the character of that people, to be
utterly groundless: the result proved that if he had been "unfortunate" he
would have suffered neither cruelty nor injustice at the hands of Great
Britain. The verity of this exhibition of dignified rage, is, however, a
quality of it, which I wish to have nothing to do with: the purpose for which I
quoted it, has already appeared sufficiently plain in the "discontented paper"
itself.

THAT the wavering and wanton conduct of this government must excite a very
high degree of contempt in the British government and nation, every
well-informed man will easily believe. That they will hold us very cheap, that
they will regard our interests with an eye of perfect indifference, is equally
probable. But that a state of war must inevitably arise out of these
circumstances, I believe is credible, only from the manifestations of our own
government.

MORE than nine tenths of the people of America believe that Great Britain,
cannot or dare not go to war with them. What, say they, will become of her
West India Islands, and other Colonies, which depend on us for their bread,
beef and fish? what will become of her manufacturers and artizans? Strong in
this confidence, they imagine that she will bear, with American tameness, every
aggression that can be made upon her by this country, and accordingly outrage
her, as a young scoundrel spendthrift and rake does the guardian of his estate.

But we shall find to our cost, if this conduct be persisted in, that all such
ideas are completely fallacious. The ties which ought to bind this country to
Great Britain, are very forcible ones; for we are dependent on her for various
necessaries of life, while she is in every such respect essentially
independent. Canada, and her other possessions in North America are fully
adequate to the supply, not only of her West India possessions, but of all her
dominions, with every species of provisions. I have known seventeen ships,
averaging three hundred tons each, lying at Quebec, at one time laden with
wheat, the produce of Canada, and of a quality equal to any that the earth can
produce.

THAT this country presents a very extensive mart for the commodities of Great
Britain, is a very obvious fact. Equally obvious is it, that those commodities
are to us not only indispensable, but derivable from no other source. Whence,
but from the dominions of Great Britain can America be supplied with cloths,
linens, muslins, silks, hosiery, and woollens of all kinds? with hardware,
metals of every species, and a variety even of raw materials? the lien
therefore, the security for good behavior, is in her hands, and the
calculations on this score, which have been so very current, are not only
disgraceful, but unfounded.

IT is with this nation, so competent to every purpose of annoyance and
distress to us, that so many of the people of this country, and so efficient a
portion of its government, if a judgment may be formed from the stultiloquence
in which they indulge, are willing to break off the ties of amity, and to rely
on a broken reed, in the power of her covenanted foe.

I SHALL not suppose the force of this infatuation to be such, as to lead to
actual, or declared war. But I do sincerely believe, that the train of
measures, which have been taken and which are still pursuing, will produce a
chilling coldness toward America, in the British government and nation; among
the consequences of which will be, the excision of a trade to her Asiatic
possessions, which employs annually more than fifteen thousand tons of American
shipping; a suspension of the credits given by her merchants; and all the
extensive consequences which must arise from the influence of her ill will in
the Italian ports, in Portugal, Russia, Hamburg, and in short wherever her
influence extends.

IN such an extremity, what friendly power will there be left us to rely on?
France! she needs our assistance, but can afford us none, nay among the least
improbable of events, is the sudden restoration of the king; and the least
improbable consequence of that event, the ill will of the French Court, who
will most assuredly demand the repayment of the money which it loaned us.

THESE things, it will be said, are but contingencies; and different men,
according to their different habits of thinking, will deem them more or less
remote. But even allowing them to be contingencies, what evils avoided or what
good in prospect, have we to set off against them, to authorize us in
encountering the hazard of these contingencies? It appears to me, that the
fatuity which is driving us into these straits, will not leave us a title to so
honorable an epitaph even as the foolish Spaniard, who, taking, while in sound
health, medicine, which destroyed him, had inscribed on his tomb, I was well --
would be better -- now here I lie.

THESE sad scenes, these dire aspects, soon ceasing to be seen, in speculation
only, will soon be present to our eyes, in more ghastly deformity than is easy
to conceive. The people however begin to fear these evils, and the beginning of
fear is the beginning of wisdom. But our retrogression from the path of honor
and safety, toward this hideous precipice of danger, has been so rapid and so
far elongated, that we are now almost on the extreme verge; and I tremble to
think how much energy is requisite, and how little may be found, to retrieve
our erratic steps.

THE time is arrived, when we must repudiate the author of our evils from any
share in our confidence, and adopt all proper and honorable means to thwart
those future measures, by which he may attempt to sacrifice the honor and
safety of the country.

UNDER the auspices of a wise and prudent ruler, we may then proceed, by
judicious provisions, to ward off in future similar disasters to those which
have so nearly destroyed us. The arbitrary power now deposited in the hands of
one man, must be checked and regulated, somewhat after the manner of the
British Constitution, or by any better, if better can be devised by American
ingenuity. Experience has shown us, how entirely we have entrusted "our lives
and sureties all" into the power of a single man; and if we have common wisdom,
we shall profit by that experience to bar up in future every avenue (...) so
dangerous, and in our case so ruinous an exercise of an authority so
inconsistent with the spirit of freedom or the nature of man, as that by which
we have suffered.

UNDER the auspices of a wise and prudent ruler, we might proceed to other
reformations absolutely essential to the continuance of our existence, as a
truly great, free and independent nation. Those egregious baubles of
sovereignty, those pestiferous incitements to demagogy, the State Governments,
might be abolished, and their officers rendered dependent as they ought to be
on the Government of the United States, instead of having it in their power as
at present, to organize revolts against that government.

THIS would be a very admirable act for a new administration to commerce its
career with, the unfortunate people being in as distressful a situation amidst
the jars and clashings of the multiplicity of jurisdictions, as they would be,
placed between two globes, revolving in contact; so that a more popular, or a
more judicious step could not be adopted.

THE present topographical location of the States should, in order the more
effectually to abolish the memory of Federalism, be totally changed, and the
Continent divided into ten, fifteen or twenty counties, to be governed by a
Lieutenant, or Prefect, appointed by the Executive: certain subaltern
appointments should be in his gift. These Praefects would constitute as proper
an Upper House for one branch of the Legislature, as could well be devised. I
venture to affirm that it would be found a more proper and independent branch
than that for which it would be substituted.

UNDER the auspices of a wise and prudent ruler, the elective franchise might
forever be cut off from all paupers, vagabonds and outlaws, and the Legislation
of the country placed in those hands to which it belongs, the proprietors of
the country. At present we are the vassals of foreign outlaws. The frequency of
elections, those elections being now entrusted to men of sense, men of
principle, and men having an interest connected with the interests of the
country, declines of course; as the folly and danger of annual elections can
now be securely remedied.

THUS, will the public burdens be alleviated -- thus will public dilapidations
cease -- thus will undue influence -- corruption of the lowest and basest sort
be eradicated; -- while the people grow quieter, happier, and are better
served, without a ruinous and useless expense.

THE principle of Federalism must be abolished or it will very soon destroy the
principle of union. It is influence, that sways the scepter of irregular or
popular Governments; and I will leave any man to decide what comparison the
influence of the Government of the United States will bear with the sixteen
Governments of the States: It is as sixteen to one.

BUT these should be gradual and secondary reformations; they are now only
touched on, and that merely for the sake of committing to the public judgment,
opinions on which their welfare may very essentially depend, and which I have
the pleasure to know, prevail in no inconsiderable extent.

THE measure which most pressingly demands adoption, is, an immediate
declaration of war against France, and her dependencies, Spain and Holland. It
is time, after having so long and so pusillanimously beheld England fighting
our battles, while we have rather comforted and abetted the common enemy, than
even wished well to the opposition to him; it is time, after having fattened so
long upon the spoils of the war, to bring our mite of contribution into the
general chest, and to relieve, as we may effectually do, the generous assertors
of the christian cause.

THE conquest of the remaining possessions of France, Spain and Holland in the
West Indies, might be effected by this country, with very little expense or
inconvenience. The naval force already extant, is fully adequate, and the
regular troops lately embodied through its intervention would have achieved
the conquest, without difficulty. This country possesses such advantages for
carrying on expeditions against the west India Islands, as must render her
cooperation in the cause very acceptable. In short, the contingent we could
bring into the coalition would be such as to entitle us to assume the rank of a
first rate power, and to make stipulations the fulfillment of which could not
fail to fix us in a state of prosperity and to extend our empire and renown. To
instance, for our quota of 25,000 troops (which should act separately and
independently) and a stipulated quantum of military stores, etc. Great Britain
should guarantee to us the Island of Cuba, or, which would be more convenient
to our commerce, that of Porto Rico. Either of these possessions would amply
remunerate us for the most expensive exertions that the conquest of them could
require. In the East, we might establish ourselves in the possession of Batavia
or the Mauritius, and thus secure a footing in the Indian Ocean, highly
essential to us, but now depending on the most precarious tenure.

IT is in vain to attempt to disguise the truth, that America is essentially
and naturally a commercial nation; and that from her location on the map of the
world she must ever remain so. It ought therefore to be the undeviating care of
the Government, whether it be Federal or Jacobinical, or true Columbian, to
secure on the most advantageous footing possible, our commercial intercourse
with foreign nations. To procure admission to our flag in ports whence it is
now excluded: to obtain it by right where it now rests on the ground of
sufferance; and to establish it on a regular and permanent footing, in those
cases where it is at present precarious and temporary; is not merely the
province of the Government, but a duty, an obligation which its subjects have a
right to hold it to.

WE have a right to expect, and the Government ought to exact from Spain, the
opening of those of her ports in South America the most convenient for
refitting our whalers on that coast. For the want of this privilege, our people
are subjected to (...) privations and hardships, during voyages of two years'
duration.

FROM Portugal, through the intervention of Great Britain, it could not be
difficult to exact, for some adequate compensation which we could offer, the
same privileges in Brazil, a station the most convenient to the whaling ground.

PEPPER, Spices, Cottons of various kinds, and above all Sugar and Coffee, are,
whatever negro philanthropists may assert, undoubtedly necessaries of life.
Whence are we to derive these, should our present precarious resources be cut
off to us? Already, from the disadvantages to which we are subjected, do we pay
nearly three prices for them, and a state of things seems very likely to arise
in which they will be placed utterly without the reach of the middling and
lower orders. Such a contingency, when we have it so fairly in our power, it
would be the height of folly not to foreclose. Besides, while we deduce these
commodities from the possessions of foreign powers, we can never be said to be
truly independent. While we have to ask Great Britain, or France, or Denmark,
for supplies which we cannot dispense with, those nations have a lien upon us,
a security for our good behavior which is derogatory to our dignity, and
inconsistent with our self-will.

THE attainment of these ends, is believed with confidence to be neither
impracticable nor difficult. For although our repulsive and jealous disposition
toward Great Britain, may cause her now to view us as aspiring to become a
rival with her in certain branches of her commerce; yet, once entered on a
footing of good intelligence, and honorable confidence, the ground would be
wholly changed, and by judiciously playing into each other's hands, the two
nations might and would concenter in their own ports the commerce of the whole
world.

UNDER the auspices of such a system of action, what terrestrial power could
interfere with us, what violence could jostle us, what unrevenged insult,
degrade or annoy?

A NATIONAL character is thus at once founded, and the American name ceasing to
be an opprobrium, shall pass abroad over the earth as the denomination of a
race of men illustrious for their courage and the wisdom of their policy.

ON this theme, I could dwell forever. It will be the salvation of the country.
Nay, the country is otherwise doomed to irretrievable perdition. It is a long
and a dark night, that succeeds the going down of our sun, now just lingering
above the horizon. There was a time, and opportunity too, which seized, had
placed us far beyond the reach of those dire calamities which have assailed us,
and those worse which threaten. But we were cast upon Time for deliverance, and
Time Justly might we apostrophize this enemy of our State, in these words of
Shakespeare. "Misshapen Time, copesmate of ugly night;
Swift subtle post, carrier of grisly care;
Eater of youth, false slave to false delight,
Base watch of woes, sin's packhorse, virtue's snare:
Thou nursest all, and murderest all that are,
Why has thy servant opportunity
Betrayed the hours thou gav'st me to repose?
Canceled my fortunes and enchained me
To endless date of never ending woes?
Time's office is to find the hate of foes,
To eat up error by opinion bred;
Time's glory is to calm contending kings,
To unmask falsehood and bring truth to light;
To stamp the seal of time, on aged things;
To wake the morn and centimed the night;
And wrong the wronger 'till he render right"

has betrayed, perhaps destroyed us: for the period of war is about to expire,
and the circumstances and the relations of things by which we were to have
profited, expire along with it.

It is worth while to reflect on the condition in which a peace probably will
place us.

WE shall have upon our hands a controversy with Great Britain; which being for
no less an object than twenty-one millions of dollars, can be regarded in no
very trifling (...) insignificant light. With regard to France, what better
aspect would our circumstances wear? His Majesty, restored to the throne of his
ancestors, can feel little disposition to amity with those, who have so
uniformly aided and abbetted the murderers of his princely brother: Nay, what
is more likely than that he would demand the reimbursement of the money loaned
us by the crown?

IT must be confessed that should we be swallowed up, by this coalition of
power, we shall have been accessory to our own destruction; for we have given
to each and either, mortal offenses enough to justify a war of extermination
against us.

BUT the present deplorable aspects may brighten: there is yet an interval open
for our rescue; and the people are and have long been ready and willing to
embrace it. May there speedily arise those who are able and willing to lead
them out of this dark valley of the shadow of death, into the path of political
salvation.


