A SERMON, DELIVERED AT DANVILLE, AT THE REQUEST OF HARMONY LODGE; AS A TRIBUTE
OF RESPECT FOR THE MEMORY OF THE LATE Genesis GEORGE WASHINGTON; FEBRUARY 26 th,
1800.

By JOHN FITCH, A. B. PASTOR OF THE CONGREGATIONAL CHURCH IN DANVILLE.

PEACHAM, VERMONT, Printed by FARLEY and GOSS.

1800.

HARMONY LODGE.
WEDNESDAY, February 26 th, A. L. 5800.
Voted, THAT the thanks of the Lodge be presented to the Rev. JOHN FITCH, for
his Sermon delivered before the Lodge, this day, on the event of the Death of
our illustrious and beloved Brother, GEORGE WASHINGTON; and that Brothers
SAMUEL CHAMBERLIN, JOSEPH MOFFETT, and WILLIAM MATTOCKS, be a Committee to wait
upon him, and request a Copy for Publication.

Extract from the Minutes, JOSEPH MOFFETT, Secretary.

To the MASTER and BRETHREN of HARMONY LODGE.
GENTLEMEN,
THE flattering testimony of esteem, which you have shown me, in requesting for
the press a copy of my Discourse, delivered on occasion of the Death of our
late much beloved President, (...), aside from the view, which I may have of
the institution itself, a (...) remembrance. To bestow flattering encomiums,
becomes the character, which I ought to sustain, as little, as to pass
unmerited censure; and, it is, really, a gratifying consideration, that my
plainness of speech has not given offense.

Amidst the numerous and well digested compositions, which this occasion will
present to the public, I am persuaded, that the publication of my Discourse,
will neither do honor to myself, nor add celebrity to its patrons. Willing,
however, to gratify your wishes, and to contribute my mite, toward
perpetuating the memory of our beloved President, I shall not refuse a copy.

With sentiments of respect, be assured, Gentlemen, that I am your friend and
humble servant,

JOHN FITCH.

A SERMON.
ECCLESIASTES, ix. 15. Yet no man remembered that same poor man.
THE conduct of man toward his fellow creatures in different circumstances,
not only affords a curious subject for speculations but, if carefully traced
out, would be found fully to develope the principles of human action. The
circumstances, in which mankind are providentially placed, rather than the
characters they sustain, seem to be the criterion, by which is determined the
degree of respect, that shall be paid them. Hence, real worth, if clothed in
rags, must live and die in obscurity; while gaudy attire, and high sounding
titles procure for many a worthless person, a tribute of respect, which is due
to the virtuous only. For this cause, among others, did Solomon inscribe on all
the pursuits of human life, "vanity of vanities." And to place the subject in a
striking light, he sets before us a familiar example, expressed in the plain,
unadorned language of inspiration. "There was a little city, and few men within
it; and there came a great king against it, and besieged it, and built great
bulwarks against it. Now there was found in it a poor wise man, and he by his
wisdom delivered the city;" but mark the returns which he received: " Yet no
man remembered that same poor man." Incapable through poverty of flattering
their pride by a splendid equipage, or gratifying their appetites by sumptuous
entertainments, his good deeds are forgotten, he must retire to his former
obscurity, and have the mortification of experiencing the ingratitude of a
people, whom he had saved from destruction.

Were mankind universally disposed to render to each other that tribute, which
gratitude requires, the circumstances, in which persons might be placed, would
make no alteration as to the respect, which would be paid them: A real
benefactor, whether he were found among the rich or the poor, the high or the
low, would ever receive the tribute of a grateful remembrance. This concise
narrative, therefore, virtually contains this charge against mankind, that they
are not naturally inclined to remember their benefactors, as they ought to
remember them.

To illustrate this general proposition, we shall first say how a benefactor
should be remembered; and then offer some considerations to show, that mankind
are not naturally inclined thus to remember them.

1. We are to say how a benefactor should be remembered. Barely mentioning such
expressions as these; remember the poor; remember thy Creator, is sufficient to
convince any person, that the term remember often includes more, than merely
retaining in the mind an idea of the thing remembered. He, that says to the
hungry, be ye fed, or to the naked, be ye clothed, does more than merely retain
in his mind an idea of their necessities, and yet, his conduct falls short of
what is implied in remembering the poor. In all cases, it is necessary, that
works bear testimony to the truth of our assertions, and therefore, by works,
as well as by words or thoughts must we remember a benefactor.

1. We should remember our benefactors by doing them good. That command, which
bids us "pray for those that hate us, and do good unto those, that despitefully
use us," doubtless requires, that we do good unto those, that do good unto us.
This is what the law of benevolence requires; it is what the natural
unenlightened conscience of all mankind teaches them, as their duty. Are our
benefactors in necessitous circumstances? we should cheerfully afford them
relief, if it be in our power. Are their characters unjustly aspersed? we
should openly espouse their cause, and defend their injured innocence. Do they
merit a respectful attention? we should grant it to them in customary forms.
And, does their devotedness to our interests claim our confidence! we should
spare them the painful sensations, which result from seeing a stranger
preferred before them* Sensations, which ingratitude alone would ever wish to
excite. And, though our chief and principal attention is to be paid them, while
living, yet the "pale shades of death" have their demands, and the voice of a
benefactor calls to us even from the grave. There is something inhuman in the
thought of vilifying the memory of the dead, or even, in forbearing to pay some
testimony of respect to a departed friend. A respectful attention to the
deceased, is what every benefactor has a right to expect; it is what humanity
requires; it is what that providence, which reminds us of our own approaching
dissolution, demands.

2. Our benefactors are to be remembered by an imitation of their benevolent
example. The simple idea of a benefactor implies something, that is worthy of
imitation. It implies, that an unpurchased good has been conferred: And,
whatever may have been the conduct of a benefactor in other respects, it
proposes to our imitation, in one instance at least, the example of a
benevolent disposition. An example, which gratitude requires, that we ever bear
upon our hearts. Are we, therefore, in circumstances, in which we can do good
to others, and do it not? we are chargeable with having forgotten the example
of our benefactors. Are we able to relieve the distressed, to supply what is
lacking in the circumstances of the needy, and to cheer with the soothings of
friendship the disconsolate sufferer, and do it not? each benefaction, which we
have received, reproaches us with the forgetfulness of ingratitude. Are we
capable of doing good to public bodies -- to societies -- to our country, and
do it not? those, who have devoted themselves to the service of their country,
those, who have "jeoparded their lives in the high places of the field," and
the blood, which has been shed, in defending the rights of mankind, rise up
against us, and resent the neglect, as a fruit of the basest ingratitude.

3. Our benefactors are to be remembered by being considered and received as a
gift from God. It is not sufficient, that we trace the streams of beneficence,
which are flowing to us in many (...), to their immediate sources, and render
due (...) a fellow creature; we should follow them (...) their ultimate source,
and learn to adore that divine goodness, which animates all nature, and
demands, from the united tongues of created intelligences, a tribute of
thankful praise. It is God, we are told, that forms the spirit of man within
him, that gives a benevolent disposition, ^^d an ability to exert it: It is
God, that prepares the heart, that moves the disposition, and prompts to
action: And, it is God, that directs the steps of man, and enables him to put
his benevolent intentions into execution. The whole process, therefore,
originates ultimately in divine goodness; and, while we forget, that this is
the case, or neglect to acknowledge it by an affectionate attachment to the
service of our Maker, we do not remember, in their true character, those, who
have been made the instruments of divine goodness to us, and are not in a
suitable situation to render them those constant returns of gratitude, which
they have deserved. While we forget even in our hearts, that there is a God, on
whom our benefactors are entirely dependent, we assign to them, in a certain
sense, the rank of Gods, and when we find them incapable of supporting that
station in the scale of being, to which we in an idolatrous manner have exalted
them, we are generally ready, not only to pull them down, but even to tear from
their brows the laurels, which they really deserve to wear.

Upon this idea, I would wish to be indulged the liberty of dwelling for a
moment, as it not only shows the importance of religion to those, who have
deserved well of their country, but also as it points out a considerable source
of that complaint and calumny, which is often cast upon the administration of
civil government. While we, from a principle of religion, which governs our
feelings as well as our belief, ascribe the success, which attends the plans of
a General, or a Politician, to the goodness of an overruling Providence, and
revere the men, who have been our benefactors, as instruments in the hands of
God, we assign them the place, that belongs to them; we give them just the
praise, that is their due, and, upon a reverse of fortune, should not find
ourselves greatly disposed to load them in an ungrateful manner, with unmerited
calumny. The thought, that they are but instruments in the hands of a holy and
wise God, will forbid every complaint, and be a powerful check against
ascribing their want of success to a want of benevolence. On the contrary,
while we forget, that there is an overruling hand in all these events, and
ascribe the benefit received almost wholly to the wisdom and goodness of the
immediate agent, we shall be ready, upon every unfavorable occurrence, to
suspect, that he has not exerted himself as he might have done, or, that, under
the influence of some sinister motive, he is disposed to neglect our good, or
to make us the victims of his own ambition or revenge. And by such a thought we
at once blast his well-earned laurels, and rob him entirely of the tribute of a
thankful heart, which his conduct has deserved. By ascribing too much to our
benefactors, in the instances, in which they have done us good, we are
naturally led to demand too much of them in future, and, if our expectations
are not equalled, we are strongly inclined to load them with curses, and to
forget, that we ever owed them any returns of gratitude. So long, therefore, as
the course of human affairs is variable, so long as pure religion does not warm
the hearts of mankind in general, so long the wisest, and most faithful
administrators of public affairs have no reason but to expect, that their
administration will at times be censured in an ungrateful manner. However
gratifying, of course, it may be to the vanity of the human heart to have its
successes attributed wholly to itself, to the exclusion of divine Providence,
it is in fact putting it into a situation, that is incompatible with that
steady, persevering respect, which gratitude demands. It is, therefore, the
spirit of religion only, that places our benefactors in their true light, and
secures to them a continuance of that attention and confidence, which their
benevolent conduct has merited; and of course, where true religion is wanting,
it is impossible, that there should be that remembrance of a benefactor, which
there ought to be.

Having thus shown how a benefactor should be remembered, we proceed

II. To offer some considerations to prove, that mankind are not naturally
inclined thus to remember them.

It is a painful task to draw the dark side of the human character, and point
out those detestable principles, by which the human heart is often actuated. It
is necessary, however, that it should at times be done. Our divine Redeemer,
whose compassionate soul could weep at the follies and sins of an apostate
world, was much employed in unfolding the human heart, and in exposing the
hypocrisy and wickedness, to which it is often abandoned. And, in following his
example as a public teacher, it is frequently necessary, that we lay aside the
language of palliation, that we strip off the disguise of external appearance,
and expose in all their deformity, the worst principles by which the human
heart is actuated.

It may, perhaps, be thought, that forgetfulness of benefactors is no very
prominent feature in the human character; and, that in this, they err less,
than in many other respects. A regard, however, for truth, and a belief in the
justness of sacred representations, bids me assert, that such an opinion is not
well founded; and, we presume, that a careful review of the conduct of (...)
will fully justify the assertion.

In support of this, let the following things be noticed.

1. In the human character there is a great degree of selfishness. The numerous
commands, which are found in the word of God, to love our neighbors, and to
look on the things of others, as well as the more positive declarations, that
all seek their own things, are a sufficient proof, that selfishness is deeply
rooted in the human heart. And, in support of this painful truth, may we not
appeal to that conduct, which generally characterizes the different classes of
mankind? Is it not selfishness, that lies at the foundation of a desire for
property, and which suggests to busy seekers that variety of methods, which are
adopted for its attainment? Is it not selfishness, that stimulates to excessive
indulgence, those, who sacrifice at the altar of sensual intemperance? Is it
not selfishness, that nourishes the dissocial passions of anger, envy and
revenge, from which a conduct shocking to humanity often proceeds? Is it not
selfishness, that excites ambitious desires, that supplies an heroic courage,
and that often prompts to actions called great and noble? Is it not
selfishness, that leads many in the paths of morality, while pride or ambition
only curb the impure desires which rankle in their hearts? Is it not
selfishness, that leads us almost to adore a truly great and conspicuous
character, whose virtues may flatter the vanity of his admirers, while a poor
benefactor, from whom no such advantage is to be derived, is neglected and
forgotten? And, is it not owing to the prevalence of the same disposition, that
complaints, rebellions and revolutions are much more frequently attempted under
a mild and peaceable administration, from which little is to be dreaded, than
under one, that is more severe? And when these things are considered, is it
possible not to believe, that mankind are naturally selfish, and of course,
that they are not naturally inclined to render to their benefactors that, which
is their due? To some, it is true, we may be ready to make suitable returns,
because in some circumstances, such a conduct would accord with the selfish
feelings of the heart; but, so long as there is one benefactor unnoticed or
unrewarded by us, let his circumstances be what they may, so long we claim in
vain the possession of a thankful disposition. While, therefore, the evidence,
that selfishness prevails to so great a degree in the human heart, is so
complete, we cannot believe, that a real disposition to remember benefactors,
prevails there also.

2. Mankind are naturally attached to certain systems, and divide themselves
into certain parties, within the limits of which their benevolence is generally
confined. There is scarcely any subject, in which mankind are generally
interested, respecting which they are not divided. And the effects of such
divisions are almost invariably inconsistent with that impartial regard, which
public benefactors have a right to expect. In religion, the friends of certain
sentiments class themselves together, imbibe a peculiar regard for each other,
and will generally extol the virtues, and endeavor to exalt as much as
possible, the reputation of their own denomination; while those, who have
embraced a different system of faith, are greatly disregarded, and their
virtues treated with peculiar coldness. In politics, the effects of party
spirit are not less evident, nor are the different parties in any respect more
just in their comparative representations of each other. In social life, the
distinction of fashionable and vulgar is chargeable with the same consequences,
though on a smaller scale. And, may I not add, that particular societies, not
excepting even those, which are professedly founded on the principles of
benevolence, are not free from party attachment, or from its unhappy
consequences. A public benefactor, therefore, can only expect, that his merits
will be duly appreciated, and rewarded by those of his own party, and need not
be surprised, should he, from others receive the coldness of inattention, or
the more painful effects of unjust suspicion or malicious calumny.

3. This painful truth is further evident from that general neglect of
religion, which prevails among mankind. When we consider, that all things here
below are the workmanship of a God, and that all events are under a
superintending Providence, we cannot but believe, whatever we may feel, that
"every good and perfect gift comes down from the Father of Lights." And, when
this is considered, would it be possible, if we were possessed of a right
disposition, for us to forget our maker? Would it be possible for us not to
notice in a most thankful manner the hand, that supports, defends, and
nourishes us from day to day? The fact, however, is certain: We do forget our
heavenly benefactor: We do conduct toward him in a most ungrateful manner.
Instead of reverential expressions, his ears are often assailed with the
language of profaneness and blasphemy. Instead of a just sense of dependence,
and a thankful acknowledgment for favors, he hears a vainglorious boasting in
language like this, "by the strength of my hands I have done it, and by my
wisdom, for I am prudent." Instead of confidence in God, and a cordial reliance
upon his grace through a crucified Savior, he sees little but a presumptuous
resting on an arm of flesh. And, instead of a cordial obedience to his
commands, he beholds every where the most evident tokens of a most unnatural
rebellion. Such are the natural feelings of the human heart, and at such a
distance is it from the exercise of that religion, the first precept, of which
is, "thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart." Now, if this be the
case, where is the evidence, that mankind are naturally just to their
benefactors? Why is it, that their first and greatest benefactor is totally
disregarded? Or, can they be supposed to possess a principle of justice even to
their fellow creatures, while they are so evidently unjust to their Creator?

We may, therefore, assume it as an undoubted truth, that mankind have not
naturally within them, that disposition, which is implied in remembering a
benefactor: A truth, which we ought to lament, and for which it becomes us to
be deeply humbled before a holy, and a righteous God. It is a truth, which
ought to be most sensibly impressed upon our minds this day, lest, while we are
attempting to do justice to the memory of one, who was raised up in divine
Providence for our good, we are found wanting in the most essential part of our
duty.

While we are endeavoring to realize and improve that afflictive Providence,
which has this day called us together, we may doubtless be allowed to adopt the
language of inspiration, and say, "truly a great man is fallen in our Israel."
Whether we consider him in public or in private life; in the field, in the
cabinet, or in the domestic circle, he appears equally the great man -- the
conspicuous character. His cool unshaken courage, while encountering a superior
foe; his address in supplying a want of the means of defense, and in securing
the confidence of his country amidst complicated disasters; his animated zeal,
which could transform a small undisciplined band of men into a formidable army;
the plans, which he concerted, and by which he was enabled to free our land
from a powerful invasion; his coolness and deliberation in council; his
readiness to listen to advice, coming from whatever quarter it might; his
ardent love of liberty, and his zealous attachment to the cause of his country,
all declare, that he was raised up for the time and place, in which he lived,
and that he was particularly fitted for the important part, which he acted upon
the public theater of life. And when to this portrait of his public character,
we add the virtues, that adorned the man; his amiable disposition; his love of
industry and order; his freedom from vice of every description; his attachment
to the arts of civilized life; his reverence for the name of God; and his
uniform regard for religion, we behold one of the most finished characters,
which the higher sphere of life has ever produced: We behold one who, as we
trust, was truly wise; one, who to us was highly useful; and one, who will ever
demand our grateful remembrance.

While he was living, there were not wanting numbers, who duly appreciated his
merits, and who uniformly paid him that tribute of respect and confidence,
which was his due. Did suspicion attack the purity of his intentions? Numbers
were found, who readily stepped forward and espoused his cause. Did partyism
misrepresent the measures, which he adopted? Numbers were found, who readily
justified them, and exposed the insidious designs of his opposers. Did envy
industriously strive to blacken his character, and prejudice the minds of his
countrymen against him? Numbers were found, who met such attempts with a
becoming resentment, and supported with a grateful firmness, both his character
and the measures of his administration. Though some few may be chargeable with
^^^hankful neglect, yet the unanimity, with which the highest and most
dignified office in the bestowment of his country was successively conferred
upon him, and the unaffected testimonials of sorrow, which his death has fixed
upon every countenance, clearly evince, that the great body of the people are
free from such a charge. But, have we remembered him with that disposition,
which real gratitude implies? WASHINGTON was born in the higher sphere of life;
he was ever a conspicuous and dignified character, and it has long been our
glory, that we have duly noticed and rewarded his merits. But, while our minds
are, as it were, dazzled by the splendors of this great man, may it not be,
that there is some "poor, wise man," who as really claims our gratitude, though
not to the same degree, but, who is now suffering the pain and mortification of
unmerited neglect? If there is such a character thus neglected by us,
WASHINGTON himself feels the neglect; for, it proves, that the respect, which
we have shown to him, arises rather from the luster, which his greatness
reflects upon ourselves, than from a really grateful disposition.

The virtues of our WASHINGTON are also to be imitated, or we do but poorly
requite the good, which he has done for us. And in this view there is much,
that claims our attention. When called by the voice of his country to defend
her insulted rights; his ready obedience, entering the field with scarcely a
distant prospect of success, devoting himself entirely to the good of his
country, and uniformly refusing any conpensation for his numerous and painful
services, evinced the benevolence of his disposition, and says unto us, go ye
and do likewise. Amidst the tumults, irregularities and temptations of war, the
uniformity of his temper, the propriety of his conduct, and the frowns with
which he invariable and severely checked every species of profaneness,
intemperance and dissoluteness of manners, attest both the purity, and firmness
of his heart, and say unto us, go ye and do likewise. In the dignified station
of President, his attachment to the principles of union, to the harmony of
jarring parties, which must ever exist in a land, where freedom of thought and
speech is the boast of each individual, and to a system of neutrality amidst
the disturbances of Europe, clearly indicate an ardent love of his country, and
say unto us, though acting in a humbler sphere, go ye and do likewise. In
leaving the arduous task of government, in descending voluntarily to the rank
of a private citizen, and in submitting, without any kind of indignant
resentment, to be chosen to some of the lowest offices of civil government, he
evinced such an uncommon greatness or magnanimity of mind, as is of itself
superior to grades or distinctions of honor, and thereby says unto us, go ye
and do likewise. In private life, the delicate attachment, which he showed to
his companion; the tenderness, with which he treated his domestics; the gravity
and moral purity of his deportment; the attention, which he paid to the arts of
civilized life, and to useful industry; and the uniform regard, which he
discovered for the religion of his forefathers, form a most beautiful
character, and say unto us, in a manner peculiarly persuasive, go ye and do
likewise. Though like us, he was but man, and though at certain times the
imperfections of humanity might be visible in his conduct, yet there was
certainly much in him, that we may well remember by a careful imitation. And if
we do it not, whatever may be the testimonials of our grief and respect upon
this occasion, we do but, in fact, insult the memory of this truly great and
virtuous man.

But while we are endeavoring to remember in a grateful manner, the good deeds,
which he has done for his country, we should be careful not to forget, that all
is to be considered as a gift from God. Upon a subject like this, we are
perhaps in danger of ascribing too much to the instrument, and of paying to
that a kind of idolatrous homage, while we almost forget the Great, the Wise
Disposer of all human events. It ought ever to be deeply impressed upon our
minds, that, whatever may be ascribed to our benefactors, the glory should
ultimately redound to that God, who gave them to us. We should never forget,
that it was God, that raised up to us a WASHINGTON, and qualified him for the
important part, which he was called to act. We should never forget, that it was
God, that disposed him to step forth in defense of his country's rights; that
endowed him with a cool and steady courage in the day of battle; that gave him
persevering firmness in the midst of disasters and gloomy prospects; that
concerted his plans; that fought his battles; that bid him conquer; and made
him, in a political sense, the father of his country. We should never forget,
that, whatever is due to the illustrious man, the glory of his whole life must
be ascribed to that invisible hand, that gave, that made him useful, and that
has again taken him away.

Permit me now, in applying the subject more immediately to ourselves, to ask,
whether, considering the things, which have been said, we have not reason to
look within ourselves, and to blush for the degeneracy of our hearts? Can we
say amidst all the respect, which we have shown him; amidst all the confidence,
that we have reposed in him; and amidst all the testimonials of grief, which
his death has occasioned, that we have really possessed those feelings, which
are implied in remembering a benefactor? Can we say, that we have uniformly
imitated his example, and ascribed his merits and usefulness to the goodness of
an overruling Providence? Can we say, that our hearts like his, have been
filled with a love of virtue for virtue's sake; and that the sincerity of our
religion testifies, that we are not unmindful of our divine benefactor? Have we
not, on the contrary, reason to mourn, and should not this day be to us a day
of sorrow, a day of deep humiliation and repentance before that God, whom we
have almost uniformly slighted? And does not that solemn providence, which has
this day called us together, and which teaches us, that no qualifications, no
character, nor no situation is a preservative from the grave, urge upon us this
duty, in a manner peculiarly forcible?

The circumstances of this day's meeting, and the objects which I behold,
admonish me, that, before I close, some particular addresses will be expected.
My first attention is due to that society, which, without any knowledge of the
intentions of our Supreme Executive, has made choice of this day, to manifest
their participation in the general sorrow, which now pervades our land.

GENTLEMEN,

I SHALL not take this opportunity either to justify, or to condemn the
principles of your institution, not even so far as they are submitted to public
inspection. An object of more importance and solemnity demands our attention. A
tribute of gratitude is due to the memory of our beloved WASHINGTON; and still
more, to that God, who in goodness has favored us with such a gift. While that
afflictive Providence, which has taken from you an illustrious brother, and
from our country a faithful parent, bids our tears to flow, it is our duty, not
only to submit to the hand of God, but to endeavor to improve in the best
possible manner, this distressing dispensation.

It is not to be denied, that the institution of Masonry receives a real luster
from the name of WASHINGTON. It is your part, on the contrary, to see, that the
institution does not eventually prove a disgrace to him. How much soever you
may pride yourselves in his virtues, it is still a truth, which you ought to
feel, that the nature and tendency of your institution will be judged of, in
part, by the characters, which you sustain. If, therefore, while you boast of a
fraternal connection, you should be guilty of bringing a stigma upon the
institution, and, in that way, of insulting his memory with a conduct, at which
he himself would blush, how could you answer it to his injured virtues? If,
from your mouths the language of profaneness should often be heard; if your
social meetings should be devoted to bacchanalian revels; if they should be
prostituted to the base purposes of political intrigue, if your names should be
enrolled among the dissolute disturbers of domestic felicity; if you should be
found favoring each other at the expense of the rights of your fellow citizens;
if, in fine, there should be in you an apparent contempt of the cross of our
divine Redeemer, with what propriety could you be considered as the brethren of
one whose life was purity itself, and who ever discovered a serious regard to
the institutions of our holy religion? Or, if you must be thus considered, will
not the character of your illustrious brother suffer from the connection?
Should such characters as these be indulged amongst you, you may possibly
think, that the reputation of Masonry is safe, while shielded by the virtues of
an illustrious brother. But, can you offer such an affront to humanity, as to
demand, that the virtues of the dead be made to protect the vices of the living?

Do not indulge a thought, that these things are spoken with a view to reproach
your society, or to depreciate the institution in the view of your fellow
citizens. Receive them rather as testimonials of regard for the memory of our
common defender, and as proofs of a real desire to have the respectability and
usefulness of your order supported. Flattering encomiums are here useless: For,
you cannot be insensible, that while the veil of concealment is industriously
thrown over your peculiar concerns, suspicion will be watching you in the most
critical manner; that every action and word will be severely scrutinized, and
that the character and tendency of your institution will be judged of, rather
by the character of the individuals, who compose it, than by any thing, that
may be said respecting it. And, if in an unguarded hour you should be left to
reproach the character of that august personage, on whose account you exhibit
those badges of mourning, at your hands, doubtless, will his country require it.

The solemnities of this day, the precepts of benevolence, the demands of
gratitude, and the rights of humanity, all require, that you take heed to
yourselves. And, while pressing these things upon you* I can, most cordially,
recommend to your imitation the example of that illustrious brother whose death
you now lament: And, will assure you, that, if you make him your constant
pattern, and study to walk in his footsteps, your institution will not only be
considered as useful, but will even command the respectful attention of your
country. Let, therefore, his venerable image be ever present to your minds; let
a remembrance of his virtues be a check upon the first sallies of every impure,
every unsuitable desire, and, under a sense of your dependence, let your knees
be bent in humble adoration at the throne of grace, while you supplicate that
divine assistance, which alone can lead you in the paths of virtuous
usefulness, and of religious improvement.

Beholding in this assembly a respectable number, who are not included in that
society, which we have just been addressing, but who are equally interested in
the solemnities of this day, I shall not be excused, should I pass them by in
silence.

I do not doubt, my friends, that you really participate in the sorrows of this
mournful occasion, and that you are animated with an ardent desire to testify
your respect for the memory of that great man, who has fallen. And, while you
are mingling your tears with those of your country, over the tomb of your
beloved chief, let them not be the tears of bereaved affection merely, let them
be the tears of deep repentance -- the tears of returning gratitude.

Before you I have endeavored to discuss an important subject, and to lead your
minds, into what appears to me, to be the path of duty. May the spirit of
divine grace make it effectual to your hearts; That you have been wanting in
returns of gratitude to this truly useful man, I would, by no means, be thought
to suggest. Whatever may have been the case with others, I shall be justified
in asserting, that, notwithstanding the calumnies raised against his
administration, and the arts, which have been used to prejudice him in your
minds, your confidence has ever remained unshaken; you have uniformly rejected
with a becoming resentment the aspersions cast upon his character, and it has
long been your glory, that you were the friends of your country's chief
defender. But, can I say, that you have done all, that duty requires? Can I
say, that suitable returns of gratitude have been rendered to that God, who
gave you a WASHINGTON to sight your battles, to guide your councils, to teach
you how to live, and again, to teach you how to die? If I find that, which I
can commend, do I not also find that, which I must in faithfulness censure?
And, may I not be allowed to improve the solemn objects, which this occasion
presents, with a view to the interests of your immortal souls? Transport
yourselves for a moment to the tomb of your beloved chief, and imagine, that
you hear his departed spirit addressing you in language like this: I have past
the gloomy portals of the grave: Do you prepare to pass them also. I have
passed them with composure and serenity of mind, because my life was virtuous,
and my conduct useful: Do you prepare to pass them thus, by walking in the
path, which my footsteps have marked. I have passed them with the glow of hope,
because I confided in God, and trusted in a crucified Savior: Do you prepare to
pass them thus, by subjecting every thought, and every feeling to the revealed
will of your holy Sovereign. I have met my God, my final Judge in the world of
spirits: Do you prepare to meet him there also, for meet him you must, either
in mercy or in anger.


