MR. Fowle's ORATION, DELIVERED AT PLTMOUTH, THE 4 th OF JULY, 1800.

AN ORATION, DELIVERED AT PLYMOUTH, IN NEW HAMPSHIRE, ON THE ANNIVERSARY OF THE
INDEPENDENCE OF America, JULY 4th, 1800.

BY Robert Foul, Rector of the Episcopal Church, New-Holderness.

CONCORD: PRINTED BY GEO. HOUGH.

1800.

AN Oration.
"To boast our Liberty, is weak and vain,
While tyrant vices in our bosom reign;
Nor Liberty alone our Nation saves --
Corrupted Freemen are the worst of slaves."

WE are assembled to commemorate the anniversary of the birthday of our
Country. The smiles of Heaven have, as yet, blessed that effort of our infancy
when the intrepid Fathers of our Nation declared us a free, sovereign and
independent People, while the floating batteries of Great Britain pointed the
fateful tubes of war against our shores, and its armies were ravaging our
territories.

AFTER a seven years struggle, led on by the illustrious Hero of the age, our
enemies, astonished at the efforts of our hardy yeomen, whose valor only was
discipline, and the skill of whose Leader they found to be strength, granted us
the precious boon of Independence. The clangor of arms was heard no more, and
the clarion of war ceased to assail our ears.

AT an early period of the settlement of this Country, the discerning eye of
the politician must have seen that the Independence of America was an embryo in
the womb of time. If its birth was premature, the weakness of the infant has
been cherished with a proportionate degree of tenderness -- its growth has
improved -- it has now reached the stature, and assumes the dignity, of
manhood. During the interval, till it arrived to its present state, our infant
Republic was not without symptoms, which its ablest physicians have thought to
be dangerous.

AFTER the establishment of peace, a portentous cloud hung around our horizon.
The arm of the Nation became nerveless. The old Confederation, paralized by the
impeded flowing of the nervous spirits of the Union, proved inadequate, and
unable to conduct the great affairs of the Nation. -- But by an exertion which
perhaps history can scarcely parallel -- by an unanimity equalled only in the
records of American virtue, the old Constitution was suffered to expire, and a
new one, like the Phoenix from its ashes, rose in its place, consolidated the
Union, and gave vigor to Government. Selected from the volume of experience,
composed by the events of past ages, it profited by the errors of former times,
and appears to be a happy transcript of human political wisdom -- and by the
firmness and integrity of its Administration, has drawn forth flattering
encomiums from the pens of European politicians. But its effects pronounce its
eulogium -- These were felt like the electric shock through the body of the
Nation. The active hand of industry, which had almost forgotten its office,
felt a new flow of spirits and strength -- The national credit returned from
its ebb; and the war-worn, scarr'd veteran, received a pension, for his toil,
from the Country which he had fought to save -- Our commerce soon whitened the
ocean; and the treasures of Europe* Asia and Africa, were thrown in profusion
on the bosom of our Country -- The industrious husbandman, the hardy cultivator
of our soil, rose with cheerfulness at the early morn, to pursue the labors of
the field; and, fearless of danger, joyfully filled his bosom with sheaves --
his Country was free and happy. We might indeed expect that such a Country,
under such a Government, would be the proper soil for the luxuriant growth of
patriotism; but the richest soils produce the rankest weeds -- and Faction,
like the tares among the wheat, finds a place in the purest Republics.

THUS, after a train of prosperity had distinguished America among the nations
of Europe, a period of trouble commenced -- The jealousy of Great Britain,
suspecting our partial friendship for France, assailed our defenseless
commerce. This attack was terminated by an amicable negotiation. But when the
flame of war burst forth in Europe, and Victory pursued the standards of
France, she cast the lustful eye of dominion on the fair Country of America; to
violate whose sacred rights, was no barrier to her designs -- It was devoted as
a victim to swell the catalogue of her perfidies. Jealous of her rival, and
emboldened by her example, our unprotected commerce became an easy prey to her
lawless rapacity. When injured, America complained of her wrongs; her
Ambassadors were treated with insult -- The emissariess of the Republic had
been commissioned to sow division among our citizens; that by distracting our
councils, they might weaken the energy of Government. This fatal principle, the
operation of which is marked with a disastrous train of evils among the
Republics of Europe, has been too successfully practiced on ours -- Its
contagion has spread, and our Liberty has been endangered. What had we not to
fear, when we consider the means which were used? Its enemies, to effect their
purpose, are hurling the shafts of malice, dipped in the venomous gall of
detraction, against the Rulers of our Nation -- The engines of wickedness are
busily employed to destroy our confidence in them -- The measures of Government
are held up to view as pregnant with political death -- and we are told, that
all the evils of Pandora's box are ready to be opened on our devoted Country.
If we lived in an age of unquestioning credulity, these fictions might gain the
currency of credit.

THE means used for national defense, and the consequent expenses, are also
insidiously managed as instruments to persuade the credulous into the belief,
that their fatal predictions will soon be verified. But the flimsy covering of
their arguments does not screen their futility -- A posture of defense is a
pledge of security, and we shall gain respect only as we hold ourselves in a
condition to command it -- Then, and not till then, however galling it may be
to the pride of imperious nations, this tribute will be paid.

DESIGNING and misled men, thus attempting to sap the foundations of the
political edifice, are like the son of Manoah, famous on the records of sacred
history, who in the last struggle of his life, to revenge himself for the abuse
received from the Philistines, crushed the pillars of the house where they were
assembled, and perished with them in its ruin: For what sovereign balsam will
these disquieted persons apply to the wound which they pretend rankles in their
liberties? What deep empirics have discovered a catholicon for the disorders of
the body politic? Do they wish to throw their dearest rights on the turbulent
ocean of Democracy, and expose them to the gales of man's lawless passions? In
doing this, they would grasp at a shadow, while they lose the reality, and find
it a dream of misjudged theory.

PROUD of his Country, proud of its Government, the true American wishes for no
change -- His heart is the repository of their love -- To the illustrious and
patriotic Heroes and Statesmen, whom his Country has produced, he is willing to
confide its safety -- His oraisons will ascend to the Throne of Heaven on the
wings of sincerity, that a stream of wisdom from the divine fountain may
replenish and fertilize their minds, and that, when the God of nations shall be
pleased to call them from the stage of action, they may, like Elijah of old,
impart a twofold portion of their spirit to succeeding Elishas.

BLESSED with a Constitution of Government whose prominent features are wisdom
and strength, let us embrace, support, and protect it with an ardency of
affection, a glow of zeal and a firmness of virtue -- Let us esteem it as a
most precious treasure, and transmit it pure to posterity. Our exertions in
this cause are not confined to our own persons -- The lisping infant, whose
tender age we are bound to cherish, looks to us for the preservation of the
invaluable blessing -- And the dear partners of your bosoms, and the pledges of
your mutual love, in the eloquent language of a trickling tear, and in the
silent, though impressive rhetoric of tenderness, beseech you to regard your
sacred, dearest rights, and not sacrifice your virtue at the altar of Faction.

THE true spirit of an American is figured in the emblem of our Standard. There
we behold the Eagle, towering with the boldest flight: In one talon carrying
the shafts of death, ready to be hurled with dauntless vigor against the
enemies of our Liberty: In the other the olive branch of peace, extended to
every nation, stimulated with a desire of friendship on the honorable ground of
reciprocal advantage: In her beak supporting the charter of our Freedom, the
birthright of Americans, and the terror of disorganizers. While the spirit
there displayed actuates the Nation in general, we have no enemy to fear. The
crest-fallen opposer of Government will hang his head, pressed by the weight of
hopeless mischief -- Abashed by the virtue of its friends, he will seek a
refuge in the covert of obscurity, and emaciate with the mania of disappointed
ambition.

PERHAPS the crisis is nearly arrived, when our virtue is to be proved; when
our patriotism is to be assayed on the touchstone or purity. We hope it will
bear the most scrutinizing trial, and come forth as silver seven times purified
in the fire. The integrity of our Chief Magistrate, the fortress of our safety,
is assailed by arts whose meanness is characteristic of its opposers. While the
virtuous citizens of America glory in his wisdom and firmness, they analizing
the merits of others by the standard formed in their own judgments, would blast
his fame, and wrest the staff of Government from his hands. But though they may
attempt to hide the virtues of an ADAMS in the mists of aspersion, their luster
will dispel the cloud, and while it charms the lovers of real merit, will flash
blindness on the eye balls of Calumny. We trust he will yet be the magnet of
our affections, and that our choice will be directed to this Pole Star of our
hopes -- Let us strengthen his arm by our confidence. Shielded by this, the
shafts of malice will spend their force, and fall guiltless of injury. We may
fear that their plans are extended through the different parts of the Union;
and that by their artifices, maneuvers, and a false show of patriotism, many
well meaning citizens have been duped into their designs, and, unconscious of
danger, have been ensnared by the cobweb machinery of their pretexts.

THE Federalism of New Hampshire has triumphed. Although some of her sister
States have yielded their honor, we are not without a hope that they will awake
from their lethargy, and with manly vigor oppose their danger.

WE have a loud call for the faithful exercise of our Virtue. If we yield this
fortress, the Palladium of our Liberty, we throw ourselves on the bosom of
destruction. And let us not forget that the altars of our holy Religion must be
guarded and protected by the hands of piety. We must reverence its sacred
precepts, which teach submission to rightful authority. The Philosophy, which
blasts the hopes of a Christian, and which, by shutting the avenues to future
bliss, robs him of his best comfort, that cordial to the way-worn pilgrim of
piety, merits our detestation. When men are taught that death is an eternal
sleep, the flattering doctrine blunts the stings of vice; and the fear of
future punishment, which in some measure arrests its prevalence, is thereby
diminished.

A GOVERNMENT without Religion, is but a feeble sanction to the rights of the
citizen. To this, the perpetration of the most barbarous deeds in France, bears
an agonizing testimony. Though once the leading model of polished manners, that
nation has shown itself capable of actions which the tongue of a Christian
would not wish to relate, nor could his ear listen to the recital without
horror. The wounds which we have received from this deficiency of principle,
still bleed, and speak with a thousand mouths. Arm yourselves, therefore,
against the attacks on the invaluable blessing of your Religion. The pens of
writers worthy a better cause, with shining abilities and with subtilty of
argument, are endeavoring to disseminate the most pernicious poison into our
minds: -- But let the sentiments of the revered WASHINGTON prove an antidote to
its effects. Though this primary Star in the Constellation of American worthies
has set -- though the cold hand of death has sealed the eyes of this
illustrious Hero and Statesman, yet he still lives in our memories; he lives in
the great example which he has left his Countrymen; he lives in the records of
his wisdom which he has bequeathed to them and their Posterity. In these he
has taught us, that, "of all the dispositions and habits which lead to
political prosperity, Religion and Morality are indispensable supports. In vain
(adds he) would that man claim the tribute of Patriotism, who should labor to
subvert these great pillars of human happiness -- these firmest props of the
duties of men and citizens." Let us engrave these sentiments on our hearts, in
characters durable as his fame, and bright as the virtue which suggested them.

IT becomes us, as a free, sovereign and independent Nation, to be prepared for
every event which political discernment may predict as possible. Though the
prospect of peace glimmers with a ray of hope, the blessing may be more distant
than our wishes may lead us to expect. But while we cherish and show a
disposition for peace, we are free from the charge of delighting in the
desolations of war; and shall prove to the world with what reluctance we should
appeal to this last and dreadful resource -- and that we wish "the rights and
liberties of nations to be fully restored." Blessed with the means of national
happiness, independence, and glory, we desire only the undisturbed enjoyment of
what Heaven has been pleased to bestow on our Country. Let us prove to the
world, that the violator of these enjoyments will find the rouzed resentment of
Americans will not be easily appeased. While our Navy is chastizing the
marauders of the ocean, may the public virtue of our citizens beam like the
splendour of the Sun, and like the destructive lightning blast the plots
inimical to the peace and happiness of our Country. --

THEN may we hope, that till the Conqueror of Time has extended his banners
over the world, and Kingdoms, Empires and States, have yielded to his dominion,
the prosperity of Columbia will be continued -- and that its Freedom and
Independence will only end with the last wreck of matter,

May Heaven indulgent hear this last request,
And grant Columbia ever to be blessed;
Inspire her Sons with Freedom's sacred flame,
And give our Liberty a deathless name.
Long may her ADAMS guide the helm of State --
Heaven's choicest blessings be his happy fate,
Till death shall call him to the realms above,
To dwell forever with the GOD of love.
FINIS.

