Doctor EMMONS'S SERMON.

A SERMON, ON THE DEATH OF Genesis GEORGE WASHINGTON, PREACHED FEBRUARY 22, 1800.

BY NATHANAEL EMMONS, D, D. Pastor of the Church in Franklin.

PRINTED AT WRENTHAM, MASSACHUSETTS, BY NATHANIEL AND BENJAMIN HEATON.

1800.

A SERMON.
II SAMUEL 1. 27. How are the mighty fallen, and the weapons of war perished!
WHEN David first heard of the death of his father and of his friend, he was
deeply affected, and discovered the strongest marks of unfeigned sorrow. "Then
he took hold on his clothes, and rent them; and likewise all the men that were
with him; and they mourned and wept until even, for Saul, and for Jonathan his
son, and for the people of the Lord, and for the house of Israel." As the
remains of these illustrious warriors were in the power of their enemies, David
could not, as he did on a similar occasion, follow them to their graves, and
weep over them there. But all that he could do, in his distressed situation, he
did. Being no less expert with his pen, than with his lyre and spear, he poured
forth the tender emotions of his heart in a solemn, plaintive, funeral dirge.
Though he felt a warmer attachment to Jonathan than to Saul, yet in celebrating
their virtues, their talents, and their public services, he pays them an equal
tribute of public respect. He endeavors, with all his poetic skill, to inspire
the whole nation with the same sensibilities, which he felt in his own bosom,
and calls upon them, in the most pathetic strains, to unite in deploring the
untimely decease of the great ornaments and benefactors of their country. "How
are the mighty fallen, and the weapons of war perished!" Our loss is great and
irreparable! The death of our generals is the death of our hopes and the
destruction of our arms! Our national calamity calls for our national mourning,
lamentation, and sorrow. These are the sentiments, which this beautiful poem
was designed to inculcate. And these are the sentiments, which every people
ought to feel and to express, when those, who have been eminently useful in
life, are laid in the dust.

To describe men of eminence, and to show the propriety of lamenting their
death, will be the business of the ensuing discourse.

No man was made merely for himself, but all men for the service of each other.
Usefulness, therefore, does not so much consist in seeking our private,
personal happiness, as in promoting the general welfare of all with whom we are
any way concerned. Though most men are capable of doing something for others as
well as for themselves; yet only a few individuals possess either talents,
opportunities, or inclinations, to become extensively useful. And among these
there are so many degrees of merit, that it is extremely difficult to determine
the precise point, where mediocrity ends and eminence begins. It is easy,
however, to give a general description of those, in various departments of
life, whose uncommon exertions for the public good justly place them in the
noble rank of eminent men.

Since the general good of society requires particular persons to devote
themselves to particular employments, any individual, of a superior genius and
of an enterprizing spirit, may become eminently useful, in any lawful
profession. The theoretical farmer, who spares no labor nor expense, in trying
experiments, and in discovering the easiest and best modes of cultivating the
earth, is an eminent citizen. The man, who pursues the business of commerce
upon the broad basis of general utility, promotes the public good as well as
his own, and is extensively useful to his country. The man, who, by close
application and critical observation, makes advances in the healing art, and
employs his superior skill in relieving the pains and maladies of his fellow
men, is a great public blessing. The man of genius and integrity, who is
profoundly learned in the law, and who exerts all his abilities in promoting
the cause of justice and defending the rights of his fellow citizens, does
honor to his profession, and contributes largely to the general good of civil
society. In a word, every one of a public spirit and superior talents, who
makes it his supreme object, in his private employment, to promote the public
happiness, is an eminently useful man.

There is a higher class of eminent men, who move in the higher walks of life.
These, instead of seeking merely the honors and emoluments of office, have so
much greatness of mind and goodness of heart, as to employ their public and
important stations, as the means of more public and extensive usefulness. On
this eminent list we ought to place all those, who shine with a peculiar
luster, either in the seats of learning, or in the courts of justice, or in the
councils of state, or in the supreme command of fleets and armies.

But there are some who rise higher still on the scale of usefulness; I mean
those, who extend their views beyond the limits of their own nation or country,
and exert their influence to promote the general good of all mankind. There are
a few individuals, among the many millions of our race, who have heads and
hearts equal to such a great, extensive, and benevolent design. It must be
allowed by all, that the Inventors of useful arts and sciences, the Founders of
civil, religious, and literary institutions, and the Deliverers of nations and
kingdoms from slavery and ruin, are the most illustrious and eminently useful
men in the world. The happy effects of their great and noble exertions, will
continue and increase to the remotest periods of time.

When such eminently great and useful men are removed from the stage of life,
their removal is a public calamity, which calls for public mourning and sorrow.
All nations have felt the propriety of lamenting the loss of those who have
been eminently useful in life, and of paying them peculiar honors at death.
This appears from the practice of the Egyptians, Greeks, and Romans, and
especially from the funeral rites of the Jews, at the decease and interment of
their eminent Judges, Generals, Kings, Priests, Prophets, and Patriarchs. When
the pious Patriarch Jacob died in Egypt, his death was publicly lamented, by a
most solemn and splendid funeral. His body being embalmed, the Egyptians
mourned for him threescore and ten days. And after this we are told, "Joseph
went up to bury his father; and with him went up all the servants of Pharaoh,
the elders of his house, and all the elders of the land of Egypt. And all the
house of Joseph, and his brethren and his father's house. And there went up
with him both chariots and horsemen: and it was a very great company. And they
came to the threshing floor of Atad, which is beyond Jordan, and there they
mourned with a great and very sore lamentation; and he made a mourning for his
father seven days. And when the inhabitants of the land, the Canaanites, saw
the mourning in the floor of Atad, they said, This is a grievous mourning to
the Egyptians." The decease of Aaron on his journey to Canaan was deeply
regretted. "When all the congregation saw that Aaron was dead, they mourned for
Aaron thirty days, even all the house of Israel." Though Moses, the servant of
the Lord and king in Jeshurun, died and was buried in private; yet his death
was publicly and universally lamented. It is recorded to his honor, that "the
children of Israel wept for Moses in the plains of Moab thirty days: so the
days of weeping and mourning for Moses were ended." Samuel was an eminent
Prophet and Judge in Israel, and his death was deplored as a national loss. We
read, " All the Israelites were gathered together, and lamented him, and buried
him in his house at Ramah." Our text and context contain the lamentation,
occasioned by the premature and sudden death of Saul and Jonathan. In a few
chapters forward, we find a particular account of the funeral honors paid to an
eminent General, who fell by the hand of an assassin. "And David said to Joab,
and to all the people that were with him, Rend your clothes, and gird you with
sackcloth and mourn before Abner. And king David himself followed the bier. And
they buried Abner in Hebron. And the king lifted up his voice and wept at the
grave of Abner; and all the people wept. And the king said to his servants,
Know ye not that there is a prince and great man fallen this day in Israel?" Of
Jehoiada the priest we read, that "he waxed old, and was full of days when he
died. And they buried him in the city of David, among the kings, because he had
done good in Israel, both toward God, and toward his house." It is recorded of
Hezekiah, that pious prince and eminent reformer, that "he slept with his
fathers, and they buried him in the chiefest of the sepulchers of the sons of
David. And all Judah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem did him honor at his
death." The same religious people more deeply lamented the untimely death of
Josiah, and paid a more public and lasting respect to his memory. The account
of his death and of their conduct is very striking. "And the archers shot at
king Josiah, and the king said to his servants, Have me away; for I am wounded.
His servants therefore took him out of that chariot, and put him into the
second chariot that he had; and they brought him to Jerusalem, and he died, and
was buried in one of the sepulchers of his fathers. And all Judah and Jerusalem
mourned for Josiah: and the singing-men and singing-women spoke of Josiah in
their lamentations to this day; and made them an ordinance in Israel." Though
God often reproved his ancient people for paying religious homage to the idols
of the Heathens; yet we never find, that he reproved them for paying funeral
honors to departed men of superior merit, among their own nation. Their example
in this respect, therefore, seems to have a divine sanction, and plainly
teaches us the propriety of lamenting the death and commemorating the virtues
of those, who have been eminently useful in life. But the propriety of this may
be still further illustrated. Here then permit me to observe,

1. The death of eminent men never fails to diminish the glory of a people.
Such illustrious characters are the ornaments of human nature, and of the
nation to which they belong. Multitudes, whom God has endued with noble
talents, and favored with peculiar opportunities of doing good, either bury or
abuse their intellectual powers, and become a reproach to their country as well
as to their race. But those do honor to their nature and to their nation, who
display superior abilities, by a series of great and noble actions. A few such
illustrious characters will render a nation respectable in the eyes of all the
world. The Grecians were never very rich, nor very numerous, and yet there
never was a more renowned nation on earth. Their eminent men have commanded the
respect and admiration of all succeeding ages. Great and good characters are a
greater glory to any nation, than all their wealth and numbers. Whenever,
therefore, their greatest and best men are removed by death, their glory
departs, and they necessarily sink in the view of surrounding nations. This
seems to have been the first idea, which struck the mind of David, in composing
his mournful elegy on the death of Saul and Jonathan. "The beauty of Israel is
slain upon the high places." As their lives had increased, so their death
diminished, the glory of their nation. And any people have reason to lament the
loss of their glory, when they are bereaved of the fathers and friends of their
country.

2. The death of eminent men not only diminishes the glory, but weakens the
strength, of a people. Wisdom is better than weapons of war. The strength of a
nation lies in the heads and hearts of those, who have the care and direction
of the national concerns. A people may possess a very rich soil, a very
extensive country, and very ample resources of wealth; and yet be extremely
weak and defenseless, merely for the want of able men, to preside in their
councils, and to lead in their armies. This was frequently the case in the
Jewish nation. In the time of Joshua, they were strong, and struck terror into
all their enemies; but after his decease, though they increased in numbers, yet
they declined in strength, and became an easy prey to every people, who had
courage enough to invade their country. In the days of David they were again
universally respected and revered; but in succeeding ages, the want of wise and
valiant men exposed them to poverty, meanness, and slavery. The strength of the
most powerful nations has often been suspended upon the exertions of a single
warrior or statesman. Alexander raised the Grecians to the empire of the world,
and that empire was suspended upon his life; for his death divided and
dissolved his extensive dominions. Though it is not very commonly the case,
that a single person is the sole support of a people; yet the death of one who
sways either the scepter or the sword, never sails to give a great national
shock, and to weaken either the civil or the military strength of the kingdom.
David was deeply impressed with this painful thought, while deploring the death
of those, who fell in the defense of their country. "How are the mighty
fallen!" He repeats the sad reflection. "How are the mighty fallen, and the
weapons of war perished!" What avail all our numbers, all our fortresses, and
all our national resources, after our mighty men of valor, wisdom, and
experience, are laid in the dust! The same sentiment he expressed with greater
sensibility on the death of Abner. "I am this day weak, though anointed king."
A nation often sustains a greater loss by the death of an able General, than by
the defeat of a numerous army. For it is much easier to recruit a numerous
army, than to replace a renowned General. No men have been more sincerely and
universally lamented than those brave and mighty Generals, who have fallen in
the field of battle, and by their death depressed the hearts, and weakened the
hands, of a whole nation. A people, therefore, can never have a greater cause
for public mourning and lamentation, than the loss of noble patriots and
warriors, who have been the strength and protection, as well as ornaments, of
their country. I may add,

3. The removal of wise, virtuous, and valuable men from a people is not only a
distressing, but an alarming dispensation of divine providence. It indicates,
that God is about to bring a train of heavy judgments upon them, for their
ingratitude, and abuse of public blessings. He often took away from the house
of Israel their greatest and best men, as a prelude to a series of national
calamities. This appears from his express declaration, by the mouth of the
prophet Isaiah. "Behold, the Lord, the Lord of hosts, does take away from
Jerusalem, and from Judah the mighty man, the man of war, the judge, and the
prophet, and the prudent, and the ancient, the captain of fifty, and the
honorable man, and the counselor, and the cunning artificer, and the eloquent
orator." This was a heavy calamity in itself, and a presage of impending
judgments. For it is added, "And I will give children to be their princes, and
babes shall rule over them, and the people shall be oppressed." We often find a
train of evils following the death of great and good men in Israel. After the
death of Joshua and of the elders that outlived him, the people fell into
licentiousness, anarchy, and confusion, from which they never recovered, until
the days of David. Solomon was a prince of peace, and raised the nation to the
summit of earthly glory; but his death divided the kingdom, and threw the
twelve tribes into all the horrors and miseries of civil war; the fatal
consequences of which remain to this day. When a pillar of the state is taken
away, it never fails to weaken or unsettle the whole frame of government. While
the celebrated Pit guided the national councils of Britain, success crowned
all her enterprises; but as soon as he ceased to breathe and to speak, her
councils were distracted, her schemes were blasted, and she sustained a loss,
which will never be repaired. It has often happened in the course of human
affairs, that a kingdom has fallen, by the death of a single statesman or
warrior. And it ought to be remembered, that what has been, may be again. God
severely frowns upon a people, when he takes away their great and useful men;
and at the same time, threatens them with still further tokens of his awful
displeasure. This shows the duty, as well as the propriety, of their going into
mourning, under the bereaving hand of his providence, which has laid those in
the dust, who once gave energy to their government, and victory and triumph to
their arms.

You will now, my hearers, spontaneously conclude, that we have great reason to
deplore the late death of General WASHINGTON, as a severe frown of Heaven upon
our rising nation. He was unquestionably the most useful as well as most
illustrious man, of the present age. He early entered upon the theater of
public life, and spent near fifty years in the service of his country. In such
a long course of time, the important stations which he filled, and the trying
scenes through which he passed, gave him ample opportunities of performing the
most signal deeds of valor, of wisdom, and of patriotism. Though our nation has
produced many eminent men in the civil and military departments, as well as in
every learned and unlearned profession; yet America never produced any other
man, who has been so eminently and extensively useful to his country and to the
world, as WASHINGTON THE GREAT. It is hard to say, whether the strength of his
mind was superior to the ardor of his patriotism; or whether this was superior
to his success in his country's service. In the military department, he
undoubtedly intended to save his nation from the sword of their enemies; and
here he was completely succeeded. In the civil department, he undoubtedly
intended to save his nation from anarchy and confusion; and here he was also
completely succeeded. In every situation, whether in the field or in the
cabinet, or in his beloved seat at Mount Vernon, he always had it in his heart,
to sacrifice his personal interest to the national happiness. This he
discovered by the repeated and astonishing instances of his disinterested
conduct. Though he jeoparded his life in the high places of the field, purely
to defend the lives and liberties and fortunes of his countrymen; yet he would
never accept of any pecuniary rewards for his military exertions, which it was
in their wishes or power to bestow. Though he took the reins of government into
his hands, in mere condescension to the unanimous voice of the nation; yet he
utterly refused to receive the legal emoluments of his arduous office. And
though, after his retirement from public life, the people once more testified
their high estimation of his personal merit, by offering him a gratuity for his
great and noble services; yet his patriotic heart would not permit him to
accept it, on any other condition, than that of devoting it wholly to public
and beneficent uses. How many men of distinction, in the late American war, had
the courage to perform noble and heroic deeds; and yet, at the same time, had
the meanness to make their private fortunes, by defrauding the public? And how
many famous statesmen and heroes, in other nations, have first gained the
applause of their country, and then merited the execration of the world, for
their mean and mercenary motives? But it is the peculiar glory of Washington,
that his character will admit of no deduction. He never deserted, he never
defrauded, he never oppressed the people, whom he defended in war, and governed
in peace. Instead of putting his money, he put his character at interest. The
noble, patriotic spirit, which he uniformly displayed, spread a glory over all
his public conduct, and had a greater influence, than all his wisdom and valor,
in uniting America and the world in his favor. His love to his country
effectually secured his country's love, which placed him in those eminent
stations, in which he performed such pre-eminent services, as will embalm his
memory, and perpetuate his fame, to the latest generations.

But, alas! amidst all his glory and usefulness, God has been pleased to remove
him, not only from our sight, but from our help. "How is the mighty fallen, and
the weapons of war perished!" The glory of our nation is departed. We have lost
a large share of respectability in the eyes of Britain, in the eyes of France,
and in the eyes of every nation, to which our flag has wafted the fame of
Washington. Distant nations have heretofore formed their opinions of America,
from the great and amiable character of him, who defeated our enemies, and put
us in possession of the most perfect freedom and independence. Whether,
therefore, they are friendly or unfriendly to our growing country, they cannot
view us in that exalted light, in which they were constrained to view us, while
we justly claimed, as our own, the greatest patriot, the greatest general, the
greatest man, in the world.

But our national strength, no less than our national glory, is diminished. How
are the weapons of war perished in the perishing hand of Washington! Whilst he
lived to direct and animate our little band of warriors, they virtually
possessed all the martial spirit and strength of the United States. His single
voice could call as many fighting men into the field to their assistance, as
the most pressing exigencies of the times could demand. This our foreign
enemies believed, and kept their distance. This our internal enemies knew, and
remained in silence and despair. But God has seen fit to take from us the
mighty man and man of war, who was the ornament and defense of our country, at
a most critical time, when the world are in arms, and every nation seems to be
spreading misery and destruction to the utmost of their power. Though the
armies of Europe have not invaded our country, yet the courts of Europe have
employed all their political arts to embarrass our government, divide our
councils, and draw us into their destructive contentions. And how far they have
succeeded, the melancholy event, which we this day deplore, may serve to
discover. The death of our renowned Chief may encourage, unite, and strengthen
all our national enemies. How far it may affect our present Embassy to France
and the present opposition to the administration of government, we cannot
determine, though we have certainly much to fear. The decease of the Friend and
Father of our country would have been, at any time, a public calamity; but at
this dark and distressing day, it is a peculiar frown of Heaven. God is now,
therefore, loudly calling us to humiliation and mourning. And though we may say
and do too much, yet there is the utmost danger of our feeling too little,
under his correcting hand. The plain and solemn language of his providence is,
"Put not your trust in princes, nor in the son of man, in whom there is no
help. His breath goes forth, he returns to his earth; in that very day his
thoughts perish." Washington is no more with respect to us, and it will be
gross idolatry still to confide in his tomb, or to depend upon any influence of
his in our favor, in the world of spirits. His removal, at this peculiar time,
we have reason to believe, was designed as a solemn admonition to America, to
renounce an undue dependence on an arm of flesh, and to place their supreme
confidence in the Lord Jehovah, in whom there is everlasting strength. And what
could have been better calculated to produce this desirable effect? Is
Washington dead? His successor in command may die. Is Washington dead? The
President may die. Is Washington dead? The wisest and best man in any
department may die, and disappoint the hopes of the court, of the army, of the
navy, of all his fellow citizens. Death has lately made breach after breach in
the congregation of the mighty. How many men of eminent wisdom, integrity, and
patriotism, who were the bulwarks of our land, have been followed to their
tombs, by their weeping countrymen, in the course of a very few months! "Cease
ye therefore from man, whose breath is in his nostrils: for wherein is he to be
accounted of?"

God seems to be coming out against us in the way of judgment, and it nearly
concerns all ranks and orders of men, to prepare to meet him in the alarming
dispensations of his providence. By the death we are deploring, he is reading a
solemn lecture on the vanity and frailty of life, and teaching every one the
absurdity, as well as criminality, of relying on any inherent quality or
outward circumstance, to shield him from the stroke of death. Let not the
strong man trust in his strength; for Washington the Mighty is dead. Let not
the rich man trust in his wealth; for Washington the Wealthy is dead. Let not
the great man trust in his greatness; for Washington the Great is dead. Let not
the benevolent man trust in his benevolence and usefulness; for Washington the
Father of his country and the Friend of man is dead. This solemn instance of
mortality, which has now assembled the whole nation in the houses of God, and
dressed all classes of citizens in the garments of mourning, loudly calls them
to consider, that "they are this day going the way of all the earth." The time
cannot be far distant, when they must all descend to the grave, stripped of
their wealth, of their ornaments, and of all their earthly distinctions, and
lie as low in the dust, as the man they lament.

But while we are contemplating the tomb of Washington, and deploring the day
of his death; let us not forget to rejoice at the day of his birth. That day
was a signal mercy to America, which ought to be had in grateful and perpetual
remembrance. He was born neither too early, nor too late, for his own glory, or
the public good. He came upon the stage of life, at the very time, when the
widest field of usefulness was opened before him. He entered into that field,
and spent his days in performing the most illustrious and essential services
for his native country. For these, we justly owe him a large debt of public
gratitude and respect, which is the only proper and adequate reward of eminent
virtue and public usefulness. We can easily calculate the value of that time or
strength, which is employed for our personal benefit; but who can fully
estimate the worth of those eminent virtues and talents, which are displayed in
eminent services for the public good? The path to every species of eminence is
extremely steep and difficult. No man ever arrived at extraordinary usefulness,
without extraordinary exertions. It is as hard to comprehend the cares, the
perils, the self-denying and arduous labors of those, who guide the movements
of armies, or direct the councils of state; as it is to estimate the great and
numerous benefits, which may accrue to a nation, to a country, or to the world,
in the course of ages, from their great and noble efforts. Nothing, therefore,
can fully discharge our strong and endearing obligations to the Father and
Defender of our country, but the most grateful emotions of heart, and the most
durable monuments of public respect. Let these be erected, and sacredly
preserved, as long as the name of Americans shall be known in the earth But
while we are faithful to the Fame of our illustrious Benefactor, let us be wise
to appreciate his great and amiable Example, which is really more valuable to
each of his countrymen, than all his legacies, bequeathed to his friends. There
is something in his illustrious life, which comes home to the business and
bosom of every person, whether he acts in a public or private capacity. Let
those, who manage the affairs of government, imitate his wisdom, integrity,
patriotism, and invincible firmness. Let those, who command in the field,
imitate his courage, fortitude, prudence, patience, secrecy, and
self-possession. Let those, who live in wealth and affluence, imitate his
private charity and public beneficence. Let those, who are fond of splendour and
parade, admire his Republican virtues, and imitate his sublime simplicity of
manners. Let the wealthy and independent farmer follow his example of economy,
industry, and perseverance in business. Let the aged imitate his decent gravity
and perfect equanimity. Let the young despise the vanities, which he despised;
avoid the vices, which he avoided; and practice those sober and manly virtues,
which he practiced, in the morning of his days. In a word, let all classes and
descriptions of men imitate that moderation, that public spirit, and that
tender concern for the good of all mankind, which he so eminently displayed in
every part of his private and public life. Whoever wishes to be eminently
useful in any private employment, or public station, let him think, and act,
and live like Washington. He never lost any time. He never pursued any trifles.
He never neglected any advantages. He never buried any talents. He never lived
for himself, but for the universal benefit of his fellow men. This commanded
their love and admiration, while he lived; and this throws them into mourning
and sorrow, at his death. "How beautiful is such an example? how worthy of
universal imitation?" Whoever follows it, shall live universally beloved, and
die universally lamented.

AMEN.

