MR. ELLIOTT's DISCOURSE, ON THE DEATH OF GENERAL WASHINGTON.

A DISCOURSE, DELIVERED ON SATURDAY, FEBRUARY 22, 1800, THE DAY RECOMMENDED BY
THE CONGRESS OF THE UNITED STATES TO LAMENT THE DEATH AND PRONOUNCE EULOGIES ON
THE MEMORY OF GENERAL GEORGE WASHINGTON.

BY JOHN ELLIOTT, PASTOR OF A CHURCH IN GUILFORD.

PUBLISHED BY REQUEST.

printer's or publisher's device

HARTFORD: PRINTED BY HUDSON AND GOODWIN. 1800.

A DISCOURSE, etc.
JOSHUA xxiv. 29. And it came to pass, after these things, that Joshua, the son
of Nun, the servant of the Lord, died.


THE birth of an empire to independence and sovereignty is, to the whole world,
an interesting event; interesting in proportion to the probable extent of its
future connexions, and the effects this event and these connexions will
produce, in distant climates and remote periods of time. -- Few nations, if
any, justly appreciating the unalienable rights of human nature, or even their
self-interest, can sit unconcerned spectators of the mighty struggle for
liberty, in which her votaries and children are called, from time to time, to
engage. Ever since the discovery of America, its affairs have deeply claimed
the attention and been the subjects of the policy of the kingdoms of Europe. It
needed no more than human wisdom to foresee that the vast increase of
population, and access to the hidden stores of nature, in a new world, would
excite an universal spirit of enterprise, enlarge the boundaries of science,
and expand, to a much broader extent, the wings of active and enriching
commerce. -- Actuated by these views, various nations early made colonial
establishments in the newly-discovered country, which, tho not immediately
lucrative, promised, at a future period, permanent and extensive advantages.
Mutual jealousy between the sovereigns who claimed the right of soil, from
discovery or conquest, and from whose dominions settlers emigrated to these
distant regions, soon arose, and a desire to protect and advance the welfare of
their infant colonies proved the source of rancorous and bloody wars.

The British settlements in North America were extensive, and so happily
situated that they flourished to a degree far surpassing those of any other
nation. They presented a wide and inviting prospect for emigration and
commerce, and streams of opulence, which would naturally increase with the
progress made in the cultivation of the wilderness, flowed back and enriched
the native country. That they would, at some period, arrive to manhood, assert
their rights and break by violence, the shackles of foreign oppression, was
perfectly consistent with the natural course of human affairs, and early
predicted.

A fundamental error in the principle of parliamentary legislation and a system
perseveringly maintained by the British government evidently calculated to
cramp the genius, repress the enterprise, and drain the wealth of the
colonists, prepared the American mind for the auspicious event. Every person of
discernment contemplated the contest as violent, requiring an immense sacrifice
of blood and treasure; but the object was of such vast magnitude, that no
sacrifice was thought too great, no price too dear, to obtain and secure
heaven-born liberty.

To accomplish a revolution so grand and important as that achieved in our
country, it was absolutely necessary that, in our unorganized state, some
illustrious character should be found, whose splendid military talents should
direct the patriotic ardor and natural energy of his countrymen, and who, by
his address, should mould their opinions and conciliate their esteem. -- Then
was it that the Divine Director turned the eyes of the guardians of the public
welfare to the great, the immortal WASHINGTON.

That we may improve this solemn occasion to the glory of the living God, and
realize the propriety of a national mourning, let us attend to the following
considerations.

FIRST. God is the all-wise Sovereign of the universe and supreme arbiter of
nations.

He is the great Lord over all, the Almighty Ruler of the skies; sits enthroned
in glory unfading, and crowned with honors everlasting. His kingdom extends to
all worlds and all periods, and his dominion will have no end. With sway
uncontroled and power irresistible, He overrules all events on earth. He has
been and will be constantly and unalterably, carrying on a grand scheme, in the
whole circle of sublunary affairs, for his own glory and the good of his
church, from the beginning to the end of time. In the rise and fall of empires
and kingdoms, in the mighty revolutions which occur among nations, in the
alternate beams of prosperity and clouds of adversity which they experience,
the ALMIGHTY displays his glorious perfections and high supremacy. Does a
nation rise to eminence and greatness, shine in the arts of peace, or prove
successful in those of war; or is it cast down from the zenith of opulence and
glory, overtaken with sad reverses, and plunged into infamy and ruin, the Lord
has done it. When according to the counsels of heaven, great and highly
interesting events and revolutions, in the condition and government of a
country, are about to be accomplished, divine wisdom ever introduces upon the
theater of life, such talents, characters and concurrence of circumstances, as
are necessary for the completion of the work. Such instruments are prepared for
the management of public concerns, that the end designed will not fail. When
the Hebrew tribes were to come up from the land of cruel bondage, MOSES, the
servant of the Lord, was sent, with a divine commission, to lead them forth
with signs and wonders. -- When the vast continent of America, which for ages,
had been embosomed in the pathless ocean, and lain hidden from the view of the
civilized world, was to be discovered, COLUMBUS was inspired with an
unconquerable spirit of foresight and enterprise, with dauntless fortitude to
execute his projected schemes, and explore unknown seas and distant regions of
the earth. -- When the period had arrived that the banners of independence
should be unfurled in these oppressed colonies, a new empire be erected on the
broad basis of rational liberty, and the United States, spurning the galling
yoke of foreign tyranny, should assume a name and rank among sovereign nations,
the ALMIGHTY prepared the illustrious WASHINGTON to organize the untutored band
and lead the marshalled battalions to the bloody combat. Extraordinary and
singularly eminent characters, who soar far above the brightest of their
contemporaries, are not often needed to accomplish the designs of Providence.
For this end divine power, wisdom and goodness will ever provide fit and
adequate instruments; but characters with uncommon talents and extent of
capacities are not raised up, unless some field is opened for their display. A
second dignified personage, tho qualified by the gifts of nature to shine with
unrivalled luster, like him whose exit from time, we this day, as a nation,
bemoan, will not obtain equal celebrity, until a scene is unfolded for the
useful exhibition of the same supereminent talents, which rendered him, so
justly, the glory of his country and the admiration of the world.

Among all nations, whether more barbarous or more polished, men of military
genius have obtained a vast ascendency in the minds, and received high-sounding
applause from the bulk of mankind. The heroic exploits of signalized commanders
have employed the pen of the historian, the eloquence of the orator, and the
fancy of the poet. Undistinguished praise however, is by no means, just. Unless
directed by moral principle and improved for the good of mankind, eminent
talents are awfully destructive of human happiness: Those who possess them
become the curse of heaven and the scourge of the human race.

The fame of ALEXANDER has been borne on every wind. Monarchs graced his
triumph and extensive regions owned his sovereignty. But what were the benefits
resulting to mankind from his might victories, his extensive conquests? He wept
that there was not another world to conquer: With much propriety might the
world weep at the appearance of another such conqueror! -- CAESAR, at the head
of the Roman legions, vanquished and subdued the numerous and valiant tribes,
which spread over the wide extent of territory between Rome and Britain. What
advantage has been derived from these martial achievements? -- Great warriors
have too often been the butchers of their fellowmen; and the eclat which
attended them, has been in proportion to the desolating havoc which marked
their progress.

But when a man endowed by nature with an exalted genius and evidently formed
for great undertakings, applies it uniformly and with its utmost energy, to the
sole benefit of mankind, to the utter exclusion of the idea of private
emolument; when he stands forth the undaunted champion of liberty, inflexibly
determined, at the hazard of every thing dear, to redress the grievances of his
country, raise her from the dust of foreign prostration, boldly assert her
rights and maintain her dignity; and, having accomplished the great object for
which his sword was drawn, nobly refusing the reward which his toils and
sacrifices richly deserved, retiring from public scenes and employments, to the
peaceful shades of private life; he exhibits a finished pattern of the Man, the
Hero, and the Lover of his country. To him, as an agent in the work of the
Lord, ought a tribute of gratitude and praise to be returned and bestowed.

II. God sometimes exercises a peculiar providence toward an oppressed people,
and by signal interpositions saves them from (...) and ruin.

The two most remarkable instances, in the annals of the world, to verify this
observation, are the Jewish and American nations. -- To rescue the former from
under the despotim of Pharaoh, MOSES was especially raised up, by a peculiar
train of circumstances educated at the Egyptian court, where a favorable
opportunity for the improvement of his natural talents was enjoyed; and honored
with a commission from heaven, in the terrible display of divine power, to
bring them forth from the house of bondage. At the red sea JEHOVAH proclaimed,
by his wonderful acts, his determination to save his chosen people from the
hand and cruelty of the proud oppressor. -- The history of events, from the
catastrophe of the red sea to their entrance upon the promised possession, is
replete with wonders.

The support of between two and three millions of souls, in a barren desert,
for the space of forty years, so that their food did not fa^l, nor their
clothes wax old, is one of the most surprising and wonder-working providence
of which we can possibly conceive. The flinty rock must gush with refreshing
streams, the manna must descend from heaven, and the quails cover the camp, to
nourish and preserve the Israel of the Lord.

When their heaven-guided march was completed and the fair inheritance
brightened before their eyes, as MOSES, that eminent instrument of divine
goodness to the chosen tribes, was not allowed to go over Jordan, JOSHUA was
ordained the organ of divine communication, to lead them to the peaceable
possession. -- In providing, according to the peculiarity of circumstances,
such illustrious characters as MOSES and JOSHUA, furnishing them with such
extraordinary qualifications, and enabling them to perform such wonderful
deeds, we see special tokens of the divine presence and care.

Clearly manifest and little less signal, was the hand of heaven in the
American revolution. -- In the contest which decided the fate of this empire,
on the one hand is seen entering the field, a nation possessed of immense
wealth; an established system of drawing into effectual energy its ample
resources; a fleet which rode in triumph on the ocean, commanded by officers
thoroughly skilled in naval affairs and inspired with the highest sentiments of
honor, and manned with seamen, who were inured to the havoc of death, and whose
pulse beat high for the glory of their king and country; an army; trained in
all the terrible discipline of war, formidable from its numbers, bold from its
success, equipt with every necessary for the camp and the field, and led by
Chiefs adorned with laurels gathered on the bloody plains of Europe: -- On the
other, a nation is beheld, spread over a wide extent of territory, exposed on
either side to hostile invasion or savage incursion, without an organized army,
or navy, without military stores or military knowledge; without officers to
command or soldiers accustomed to the rigor of severe discipline and
subordination; destitute of every requisite for carrying on a war, and having
no general government, to systematize public affairs and wisely improve the
great advantages which the God of Nature had bestowed upon the country. -- How
striking the contrast! Calculating on common principles, how vast was the
superiority on the side of our foes! How awfully portentous the cloud which
then gathered over America! -- But these renowned commanders were captured and
the laurels were plucked from their brows, or their prowess was unavailing;
hardy veterans, by thousands, invaded our shores, and either enriched our
fields with their blood, or yielded to superior force. Never was British valor
more completely foiled! Never was British pride so deeply humbled as in the
loss of two whole armies in so short a term! -- When the fabric of independence
tottered to its base, when the sanctuary of liberty was ready to be demolished,
when the name of the United States was ready to be blotted out forever, and the
illustrious characters who adorned the revolution to be branded with eternal
infamy, the Supreme Sovereign said, Let America be free, and America was free.
"If it had not been the Lord who was on our side, when men rose up against us,
then they had swallowed us up quick, when their wrath was kindled against us.
Blessed be the Lord, who has not given us a prey to their teeth."

There was a particular providence in unfolding the scene gradually, in uniting
the feelings of a great people in the abhorrence of tyranny, in rendering the
patriots of America willing to run the most imminent hazard of property, of
fame and of life, and in having ready a chosen instrument, with some experience
and a profound judgment, to execute the divine purpose of our political
salvation. -- The winds, the waves, the ice, and the floods were made to
conspire to attain the same end. In the foreign connexions which we were
enabled to form; in the lively sympathy of a great and magnanimous monarch,
since doomed by popular phrenzy to an untimely fate; in the respect and
obedience paid through the land to a mere shadow of government, at a time
highly favorable for the uncontrollable passions of man; in the events of
battles; in the almost miraculous preservation of the invaluable life of our
heaven honored Hero, and in numerous conspicuous instances, we trace the
special interference of the ALMIGHTY in the establishment of our independence
and empire.

III. The most eminent and extensive services to mankind will not save from
death.

This relentless and insatiable foe has triumphed, and will continue to
triumph, over the most elevated morrals. His dominion is established over all
the race of Adam. The great and the small, the high and the low, the honorable
and the despised, must lie down in the grave. MOSES had his task assigned him
in life, his sphere of usefulness allotted. The designs of heaven in preparing
him to act in an extraordinary capacity being accomplished, he was removed from
time. JOSHUA, his successor, acted his part on the theater of life, in leading
the children of Israel to the quiet possession of the conquered country, and
then yielded to the mighty destroyer of human kind. The same may be said of the
most affluent, the most beloved, the most honored among the sons of men. Name
CRAESUS, SOLOMON, or any even the most renowned princes, "the brightest
ornaments of thrones and of humanity," and it will be found that their earthly
career was closed by the same melancholy event. The grim tyrant assaults the
splendid palace with equal boldness and with equal success, as the humble
cottage. He is not dismayed by the ensigns of office, the regalia of courts,
the elevation of ranks. These, at a single blow, he levels with the dust and
buries in undistinguished ruin. Death ascends the throne and plunges headlong
its high possessor. -- Nay, more than monarchs bow to the fatal stroke, for
WASHINGTON is fallen! -- Let not the greatest of generals, the most eminent of
statesmen, the most highly esteemed and most dearly beloved of men, expect to
escape death, for WASHINGTON is fallen! Let not the man "first in war, first in
peace, and first in the hearts of his countrymen" hope to avoid the deadly
arrow, for WASHINGTON is fallen! -- Since the peerless trophy obtained on
Calvary's mount, have few so splendid, graced the triumph of the king of
terrors! O Death! How numerous, how signal are thy victories! In every age, in
every country, in every climate, do thou display thy sable ensigns in solemn
pomp! Palaces are in thy dominion and kings are thy subjects. Thou reignest in
more complete empire than the crowned worms of the dust; today, they wield a
scepter over thousands and millions of the human race; tomorrow, they bow to
thine all-devouring sword! -- Haughty conqueror! Why could not thy fury be
appeased by the numerous victims which are constantly sacrificed at thy shrine?
Why did thou enforce thy claim upon the beloved Father of his country? Why
spread the mantle of mourning over a nation, over millions, at a single blow?
-- Never again shall such an opportunity be offered, such an object be
presented to thy dart: And he shall rise and live, when thou art forever
destroyed by the almighty power of the Prince of Peace.

IV. Men of superior excellence ought, while living, to be respected, and, when
dead, remembered with gratitude.

Good rulers are a distinguished blessing. They are the gift of God to any
people. The Giver is not to be forgotten because of the greatness of the gift.
-- Talents and virtue, in an high degree, are the great requisites for those
who fill exalted stations. Talents, to be useful and efficient, must be adapted
to the peculiar genius, situation and circumstances of a country. Those which,
in their display, would entitle to an high seat in the temple of fame, under
some circumstances, and in some stages of society, would little conduce, in
others, to the splendour of high renown. Opportunities for the exhibition of
such as claim high and unrivalled pre-eminence do not often occur. Revolutions
in politics and government usually open the widest field, and present the
broadest theater for the exertion and application of all that is rare, great
and magnanimous. In trying and dark periods in the state of nations, the world
has been astonished, at times, with the view of a resplendent sun, bursting
from the clouds of obscurity and beaming with radient brightness in the
political horizon. His splendors, while they dazzled the eye, have diffused
light over the face of community and spread joy to thousands of trembling
hearts. -- In seasons when tempests shake the pillars of ancient
establishments, and the disorganization incident to material changes at home
clouds the aspect, talents more original in their nature, and different in
their kind, are required, than in scenes of public tranquillity, when the sky
is unclouded and the sun shines with luster.

The mariner who, without difficulty or dishonor, could steer the ship, when
the surface of the ocean was smooth, the breeze of wind gentle and the noonday
sun lighting the heavens and the earth, would be driven from the helm, when the
face of the great deep was violently convulsed, the elements, in fierce
contention, howled, and the horrors of midnight enveloped the waves and the
firmament in impenetrable gloom.

It is to be observed that a universal genius, or a man endowed with abilities
to conduct, with wisdom, energy and success, civil and military arrangements,
is a rare phenomenon. To be crowned with laurels won by valor and skill in the
field of battle, and to shine, like the light of heaven, among the celebrated
and distinguished senators of a nation is rarely the lot of any mortal. --
Virtue is the guide for the profitable and useful improvement of great and
splendid talents. Misapplied they resemble the sweeping deluge, the destructive
tornado or ungovernable flames. They spread devastation in an hour, which years
cannot repair. -- How important is it, that great men should also be good men!

When a MOSES, a JOSHUA, a DAVID, a SOLOMON are exalted to be rulers and
legislators, they should be honored as chosen of the Lord. -- Real merit,
without envy or detraction, should receive, from a grateful people, and ample
reward. A worthy patriot is a glorious title; add to this disinterested, and
you rise higher in the scale of worth and admiration. When God removes from
earthly scenes those who have filled high stations with dignity, usefulness and
applause, such dispensations ought not to pass unnoticed. They are deeply
interesting to the future welfare of a country. Shall singular worth, shall the
unremitted efforts of the most shining talents for public good, shall the most
noble achievments, the most heroic enterprises be forgotten, the moment the
mortal remains of the possessors and actors are deposited in the silent vault?
Such praiseworthy deeds ought to be recorded on the hearts of their
countrymen, more lastingly than on tables of brass, and the blessings enjoyed
should ever remind us of the toils, the dangers, and the virtues of those, by
whom they were obtained.

The children of Israel testified their solemn and affectionate remembrance of
MOSES by mourning, at his death, thirty days.

Let us improve the subject by the following reflections.

1st. God has designed this land for many important purposes of his glory and
the good of mankind.

Earthly affairs are controlled by divine wisdom, power and goodness. Great
were the preparations made, in the state of the nations, for the glorious
appearance of the Messiah in the flesh; and the mighty revolutions of the
present era are doubtless designed as preparatory steps to the happy,
milennial state of the Christian church. The whole history of events since the
first settlement of this empire, the great things which God has done for us as
a nation, and in special his kind providence in blessing us with "the Hero of
the age," are standing testimonies and evident presages that auspicious and
extensive designs are yet in the womb of time. The kingdom is the Lord's, and
He is governor among the nations. Our natural and political situation opens
high and animating prospects. Our internal resources are immense, and our
strength increasing with such rapidity, that every external pressure may soon
be set at defiance.

The system of the federal government is new in the annals of the world,
combining, beyond any example in ancient or modern times, liberty, order and
energy. The freedom of religious enquiry, belief and worship, fully enjoyed,
removes the causes of heavy grievances among some nations, and weakens the
temptations to infidelity in others. Science diffuses her benign influence
among all classes of citizens. The enterprizing spirit of America explores
every region and corner of the earth for the acquisition of wealth, and the
bravery of her martial sons affords the strongest hope, that when resistance to
foreign foes is necessary, by the blessing of heaven, it will not be without
success.

This land seems destined by heaven to be an asylum for the persecuted and
oppressed among the nations of Europe. From the corruption, tyranny and
butcheries which destroy the greatest portion of human felicity on the eastern
continent, may they fly to these hospitable shores and share in the inestimable
blessings of liberty. The foundation seems evidently laid for vast improvement
^n politics, science and morals; for an happy, flouri^hing and powerful empire;
an empire, respected for its government, its laws, its purity of religion, its
commerce and its numbers; a theater on which the glories of the Redeemer's
kingdom will, in the latter day, be illustriously displayed.

2d. We learn the mutability of sublunary things. Statues of brass are corroded
by the gnawing tooth of time; the most durable monuments of art crumble to the
dust; crowns fall from the head. Cities loose their magnificence; empires are
buried in the gulf of oblivion; and all earthly glory fades. Can it then be
surprising that the most beloved, the most renowned mortal, should, to day,
shine in the highest splendors of the earth, and tomorrow lie low at the feet
of death? That this may be the case our assembling in the divine courts this
day is a solemn proof.

The Almighty disposer of human events has commissioned death to triumph over
WASHINGTON, the father and the savior of his country! A complete delineation
of the character, the virtues, the exploits of this highly distinguished man, I
shall not attempt. Even eulogy blushes when employed on so sublime a theme and
confesses that to do perfect justice is beyond her power. His life and his
deeds are the highest encomiums which can possibly be bestowed, and the fame of
these will blazon, till time and earth shall be no more. Future Xenophons shall
record his ever-memorable heroism; future Homers describe his glowing ardor
amidst embattled hosts -- future Millions invoke the muse's aid to tune his
praise, and future Robertsons detail the battles he fought, the victories he
won, the heroes he conquered. Greece stands abashed, and Rome hangs her head;
and in future ages, when the poet, the historian, and the orator have
celebrated the sages, the conquerers, the patriots of antiquity, and lavished
upon them a profusion of praise, the trumpet shall sound still louder the name
of WASHINGTON and conclude the list.

The description given above will show the feeble and destitute situation of
the colonies when WASHINGTON was appointed commander in chief of their forces.
It was soon found that the public confidence was not misplaced.

During the revolutionary war he displayed such talents as saved his country
and astonished the world. With great means, great effects may be produced; but
to produce great effects, with small means, requires much higher wisdom. Here
the American Hero shone, like the sun in the firmament. In retreating where a
stand would have been ruin to the cause, even when greatly censured; in
concealing the real state of his force from his enemies and from his own army;
and in various ways, annoying, distressing and escaping the foe, he exhibited
consummate prudence and foresight. Had it not been for the peculiar disasters
and embarrassments with which he was necessitated to contend, one half of the
excellencies of his character, the unshaken fortitude of his mind, and the
wonderful extent of his mental resources, would not have been known. Trenton
and Princeton will stand, to the end of time, monuments of his readiness to
seize a favorable oppurtunity to attack, of his soundness of judgment and
military address. -- His fame soon spread beyond the Atlantic and one of the
first potentates in Europe did not disdain to place a gallant army under his
command. -- The independence of his country being established, like
Cincinnatus, he resigned his eminent station, and, accompanied by the plaudits
and fervent prayers of millions, retired to the cultivation of his estate. Had
CAESAR, or had CROMWELL commanded the army, a military despotism would have
been established; but WASHINGTON's magnanimity was equal to his success!

By the unanimous suffrages of his fellow-citizens was he repeatedly called to
the presidency of the United States. At length he retired from public life,
fondly hoping to spend the evening of his days in that retreat for which he had
long and ardently sighed. A gathering cloud involves the nation in darkness and
threatens the demolition of the noble fabric cemented by the blood of
thousands; his country again calls; the eye of age brightens into youth, the
sword is drawn; when, lo, the summons of death arrives! -- He loved his
country, he adored the supreme Ruler, ascribing to Him the glory of all
success; he beheld the great objects for which he embarked upon the tempestuous
ocean of public life obtained, and, magnanimous and serene in death, has bid
the earth adieu.

WASHINGTON, the pride of America, the glory of the age, now sleeps in the land
of silence and of death. The brightest sun in our national horizon is gone down
to rise no more. While to the high mandate of heaven's sovereign, with humble
submission, Americans bow, well may they weep! The Hero, the patriot, the sage;
their friend, their benefactor is laid in the dust. Does a family gather around
the bed of a fond, a dying parent, and pour out a flood of tears, when the
solemn hour of parting arrives; and shall not the children of Columbia weep,
when the father of his country lies low? Yes. Let the tear of sensibility
glisten in every eye. Another such occasion will never call. Ye war-worn
soldiers, know that your beloved commander is consigned to the tomb. Ye aged
sires, know that he, under whom your sons have fought, and bled, and died, is
now no more! Ye virgins, testify your grief that your friend, your father, your
guardian has fled. Let the whole mass of people feel and realize, that the
great defender of their rights, himself "a senate" and "an host," has finished
his earthly career.

"From Vernon's sacred hill dark sorrows flow,
Spread over the land, and shroud the world in woe.
Ask hoa^y age from whence his sorrows come,
His voice is silent, and his sorrow dumb;
Enquire of infancy, why droops his head,
The pratler lisps -- Great WASHINGTON is dead."
In sad responses sounds from shore to shore,
"Our Friend, our Guide, our Father is no more."
But let not the hearts of Americans despond. A noble and majestic pillar in
the national fabric is broken, but the corner stone is not removed. He who
rendered our deplored chief so rich a blessing, lives forever; and though he has
now spread darkness about our paths, can easily dispel the cloud and cause the
sun to shine. -- Characters, wisely selected and worthy of public honors, adorn
our senates, dignify our tribunals of justice, and fill the executive
departments of government.

Trained under the auspices of the best of instructors, military leaders are
ready to draw the sword, and, under the sanction of the Almighty, lead the sons
of liberty to fame, to glory and triumph.

American youth! Let the hallowed flame continue to burn in your bosoms. On you
devolves the arduous, but the glorious task to save your country from anarchy,
from infamy, from subjugation. By the blood which has fertilized the plains,
by the bones which have whitened in the sun, by the memory of the valiant
heroes who have fallen; by the numberless bleeding hearts, the bitter offspring
of the revolution; by the hopes and prospects of posterity -- by the ashes of
WASHINGTON, be adjured to prove yourselves worthy of an inheritance, rescued
from the fangs of tyranny at a price so dear!

Let the meritorious services of our departed Hero and his patriotic brethren
in the field, whether they nobly fell or survived the furious storm, secure to
them their just reward, a "deathless fame." Let his "spotless example" be
followed, his wise moral and political maxims inculcated and remembered, his
virtues, many and eminent, public and private, be admired, be imitated; his
invaluable legacy be engraven upon every heart. Let us praise the Lord that he
has lived in an high degree of usefulness, enjoyed the love and the admiration
of his countrymen to the concluding scene, far beyond HANNIBAL, COLUMBUS, and a
long train of the most worthy patriots; and come at last to the grave in a good
old age, with untarnished glory and unsullied honor.

As the conclusion of the whole; remember that death will sooner or later cut
down every individual. -- Earthly honors are fading, worldly glory transitory.
Those of heaven are immortal; that of the upper world perpetual. The
approbation of our judge will be infinitely more important than the wailing and
lamentation of millions. This alone is our passport to the kingdom of glory.
Let me then point you to an example compared with which that of WASHINGTON is
obscured with clouds, and to the death of a superlatively dignified personage,
which caused nature to agonize with groans, that of the glorious and exalted
Redeemer. Calvary's mount ha^^ witnessed the solemn and tremendous scene of a
divine person yielding up the Ghost. -- Our beloved Hero lies in the solitary
tomb, but the celestial conqueror burst the bands of death, the bars of the
grave, and ascended to the realms of eternal light and day. High in the
heavens, mansions are prepared for the reception of all who sincerely believe.
To that world of peace, and joy, and glory shall all his faithful followers, in
God's own time be exalted. The valley of death is first to be traversed, but
the light will soon burst forth and bright prospects open to view. -- To those
blissful regions may we all ascend through the infinite merit of the great
Redeemer!


