A PLAIN AND SERIOUS ADDRESS TO THE MASTER of a FAMILY (...) FAMILY RELIGION.

(...)

A plain and serious Address, etc.
SIR,
YOU may easily apprehend, that the many interruptions to which personal visits
are liable, make it difficult for ministers to find a convenient time, in which
they may apply themselves suitably and largely to those committed to their care,
or at least, if they resolve to do it, will necessarily make their progress
through large congregations very slow. I therefore take this method of visiting
you while alone, and of addressing you on the very important subject of
Family-Religion. For your own sake, and the sake of those dearest to you, I
entreat you to give a calm attentive hearing. And I would particularly desire,
that if it be by any means practicable (as with a little contrivance and
resolution I hope it may) you would secure one hour on the morning of the
Lord's day after you receive it, not merely to run over this letter in a
cursory manner, but deliberately to weigh and consider it, and to come to some
determination, as in the sight of God, that you (...) will not, comply with the
pe^ition which it brings; if I may not rather say, with the ^^mand which in his
name it makes upon you.

As I purpose to deliver it to every master of a family under my stated care,
or to every mistress where there is no master (that no offense of any kind may
be taken, which it is in my power to prevent) I know it will come to many, who
have long been exemplary f^^ their diligence and zeal in the duties I am
recommending; to many, whom their own experience has instructed in the
pleasures and advantages which flow from them; an experience which will enforce
them more effectually than any thing which it is possible for me to say. Such
will I hope, by what they read be confirmed in pursuing the good resolution
they have taken, and the good customs they have formed; and will also be
excited more earnestly to endeavor to contribute toward introducing the like,
into other families over which they have any influence, and especially into
those which may branch out from their own, by the settlement of children or
servants. In this view, as well as to awaken their thankfulness to divine
grace, which has inclined them to the discharges of their duty in so great,
yet so frequently neglected, an article of it, I hope the heads of praying
families will not peruse this letter in vain. But it is intended as an address
to those, who have hitherto lived in the omission of it: And if there were but
one such master of a family under my care, I would gladly submit to the labor
in which I am now engaging for his sake alone. To such therefore I now turn
myself; and Oh that divine grace might engage every one of such a character to
hear me with attention, and might enforce upon his conscience the weight of
reasons, the evidence of which the lowest may receive, and to which it is
impossible that the highest should find any thing solid to object!

Oh my dear friend, whoever you are (for I know not one under my care to whom I
may not address that appellation) give me leave to tell you plainly, that while
I write this I have that awakening scripture in my view: Pour out thy fury upon
the heathen that know thee not, and upon THE FAMILIES THAT CALL NOT ON THY
NAME. I appeal to you as a man of ordinary sense and understanding (as it needs
no more) to judge whether this do not strongly imply that it may be taken for
granted, every Family which is not a heathen family, which is not quite
ignorant of the living and true God, will call upon his name. Well may it then
pain my heart, to think that there should be a professed Christian Family, whom
this dreadful character suits. Well may it pain my heart, to think of the
divine fury, which may be poured out on the heads and on the members of it: And
well may it make me desirous, to do my utmost to secure you and yours, from
every appearance, from every possibility, of such danger. Excuse the
earnestness with which I may address you. I really fear, lest while you delay,
the fire of the divine displeasure should fall upon you: And as I adore the
patience of God in having thus long suspended the storm, I am anxious about
every hour's delay, lest it should fall the heavier.

I will therefore, as plainly and seriously as I can, endeavor to convince you
of your duty, if peradventure you are not already secretly convinced of it; as
truly I believe, most who neglect it, under the regular administration of
gospel ordinances, are.

I will then touch on a few of the objections, which have been pleaded to
excuse in some degree so shameful an omission. And this will naturally lead me
to conclude with a few hints, which may serve by way of direction, for the
proper introduction and discharge of the services to which I am endeavoring to
engage you.

I mean not to handle the subject at large, which would afford abundant matter
for a considerable volume; as indeed several volumes have been written upon it
by divines of different denominations, who, however various in other opinions,
agree here; as what intelligent christian can disagree? But I mean to suggest a
few plain things, which it is evident you have not sufficiently considered, and
which if duly weighed, may be the blessing of God answer my present purpose.
Now the arguments I shall propose will be such, that if you will not regard
them, little is to be hoped from any other: For surely the mind of man can
discover none of greater and more universal importance; though I readily
acknowledge, that many others might enforce them with greater energy and
address. Yet if the most earnest desires of succeeding can add any of the
proper arts of persuasion, they will not be wanting here. And I would fain
speak, as one who considers, how much of the glory of God, how much of your own
happiness, and that of your dear children, for time and eternity, depend on the
success of what I am now to lay before you.

What I desire and entreat of you is, that you will honor and acknowledge God
in your families, by calling them together every day to hear some parts of his
word read to them, and to offer for a few minutes at least, your united
confessions, prayers and praises to him. And is this a cause, that should need
to be pleaded at large by a great variety of united motives? Truly the petition
seems so reasonable, and a compliance with it from one who has not quite
renounced religion might seem so natural, that one would think the bare
proposing it might suffice. Yet experience tells us, it is much otherwise. Ths
letter will come into the hands of some, who, though they maintain a public
profession of religion, have been again and again exhorted to it in vain, and
that perhaps for succeeding years. I might say a great deal to upbraid such
especially, on account of this neglect; but I rather choose to entreat to the
future performance of the duty; humbly hoping, that, criminal as former
negligence has been, a gracious God will mercifully forgive it, to those who
repent and desire to reform.

And oh that I could engage you to this, by representing in the plainest,
kindest, and most affectionate manner, the reasonableness, and advantage of
this duty! for if it be reasonable, if it be evidently advantageous, there are
numberless general precepts of Scripture, which must comprehend and enforce it,
if it were less immediately supported than it is by particular passages; which
yet, as I shall presently show, do many of them strongly recommend it to us.

Consider, sir, for I address myself to every particular person, seriously
consider the apparent reasonableness of family religion. Must not your
consciences presently tell you, it is sit that persons who receive so many
mercies together, should acknowledge them together? can you in your own mind be
satisfied, that you and your nearest relatives should pay no joint homage to
that God, who has set you in your family, and who has given to you, and to
the several members of it, so many domestic enjoyments? your Creator and
theirs, your Preserver and theirs, your daily Benefactor and theirs? can it be
right, if you have any sense of these things each of you in your own hearts,
that the sense of them should be concealed and smothered there, and that you
should never join in your grateful acknowledgment to him? can you imagine it
reasonable, that when you have a constant dependence upon him for so many
mercies, without the concurrence of which your family would be a scene of
misery, you should never present yourselves together in his presence, to ask
them at his hand? upon what principles, is public worship to be recommended and
urged, if not by such as have their proportionable weight here?

Indeed the force of these considerations has not only been known and
acknowledged by the People of God in all ages; we have not only Noah and
Abraham, Joshua and David, Job and Daniel, each under a much darker
dispensation than ours, examples of it: but we may venture to say, that
wherever there has been a profession of any kind of religion, it has been
brought into private houses as well as public temples. The poor heathens, as we
certainly know from the remaining monuments of them, had their Lares and their
Penates, which were household images, some of them in private chapels, and
others about the common hearth, where the family used to worship them by
frequent prayers and sacrifices. And the brass, and wood, and stone, of which
they consisted, shall (as it were) cry out against you, shall rise up against
you and condemn you, if while you call yourselves the worshippers of the one
living and Eternal God, and boast in the revelation you have received by his
prophets and by his Son, you presume to omit an homage, which the stupid
worshippers of such vanities as these failed not to present to them, while they
called them their Gods. Be persuaded then I beseech you, be consistent in your
conduct. Either give up all pretenses to religion or maintain a steady and
uniform regard to it, at home as well as abroad, in the family as well as in
the closet, or at Church. But the reasonableness of this duty, and the
obligations which bind you in conscience to the practice of it, will farther
appear, if you consider,

The many advantages, which will, by the divine blessing, attend a proper
discharge of it. And here, I would more particularly represent the good
influence, which family devotions are likely to have, upon the young persons
committed to your care, upon your own hearts, and upon the advancement of a
general reformation, and the propagation of religion to those that are yet
unborn.

Consider in the first place, what is most obvious, the happy influence which
the duty I am r^^^mmending might have upon the young members of your family,
the children and servants committed to your care. For I now consider you, (...)
parent and a master. The Father of a (...) is a phrase, that comprehends both
(...); and with great propriety, as humanity obliges us to endeavor to take a
(...) care of all under our roof. And (...),

You ^ught to consider your servants, in this view, with a tender regard. They
are probably in the flower of life, for that is the age which is commonly spent
in service; and you should recollect how possible it is, that may be if rightly
improved, the best opportunity their whole life may afford them for learning
religion, and being brought under the power of it. If your servants are already
instructed in it, by being brought up in families where these duties have been
maintained; let them not, if they should finally miscarry, have cause to impute
it to you, and to testify before God in the day of their condemnation, "that it
was under your roof that they learnt the neglect and forgetfulness of God, and
of all that their pious parents, perhaps in a much infecrior station of life to
you, had in earlier days been attempting to teach them; to teach them, in
moments taken from labor, or from repose almost necessary for their
subsistence. On the other hand if they came to you quite ignorant of religion
(as if they came from prayerless families, it is probable that they do) have
compassion upon them, I entreat you, and endeavor to give them those
advantages which they never yet had; and which it is too probable, as things
are generally managed, they never will have, if you will not afford them.

But I would especially, if I might be allowed to borrow the pathetic words of
Job, entreat you by the children of your own body. I would now as it were
present them all before you, and beseech you by all the bowels of parental
affection (which I have myself so strongly felt) that to all the other tokens
of tenderness and love you would not refuse to add this, without which many of
the rest may be worse than in vain.

Give me leave to plead with you, as the instruments of introducing them into
being. O remember, it is indeed a debased and corrupted nature you have
conveyed to them. Consider that the world, into which you have been the means
of bringing them, is a place in which they are surrounded with many
temptations, and in which, as they advance in life, they must expect many more,
so that in plain terms, it is on the whole much to be feared, that they will
perish in the ignorance and forgetfulness of God, if they do not learn from you
to love and serve him. For how can it be expected they should learn this at
all, if you give them no advantages for receiving and practicing the lesson at
home?

And let me further urge and entreat you to remember, that these dear children,
whose tender age, and perhaps amiable forms and dispositions, might attract the
affection and solicitude of strangers, are committed to your especial and
immediate care by God their Creator. And he has made them thus dependent upon
you, and others that have in their infancy and childhood the care of them, that
there might be hereafter a better opportunity of forming their minds, and of
influencing them to a right temper and conduct. And can this by any means be
effectually done, if you do not at proper times call them together, to attend
to the instructions of the word of God, and to join in solemn prayers and
supplication to him? at least is it possible it should be done any other way
with equal advantage, if this be not added to the rest?

Family worship is a most proper way of teaching children religion, as you
teach them language, by insensible degrees; a little one day and a little
another; for to them line must he upon line, and precept upon precept. They may
learn to conceive aright of the divine perfections, which they hear you daily
acknowledging and adoring them: Their hearts may be early touched with pious
remorse for sin, when they hear your confessions out before God: They will know
what mercies they are to ask for themselves, by observing what turn your
petitions take; your intercessions may diffuse into their minds a spirit of
love to mankind, a concern for the interest of the church, and of their
country; and what is not, I think, by any means to be neglected, sentiments of
loyalty toward those in authority over us, when they hear you daily invoking
the divine blessings upon them: And your solemn thanksgivings for the bounties
of providence, and for benefits of a spiritual nature, may affect their hearts
with those gracious impressions toward the gracious author of all, which may
excite in their little breasts love to him, the most noble and genuine
principle of all true and acceptable religion. Thus they may become christians
by insensible degrees, and grow in the knowledge and love of the truth, as they
do in stature.

By observing your reverent and solemn deportment (as reverent and solemn I
hope it will always at such seasons be) they may get some notion of an
invisible Being, before they are of age to understand the definition of the
term God; and may feel their minds secretly impressed with an humble awe and
veneration, before they can explain to you their sense of it. And whatever
instructions you give them concerning his nature and his will, and the way of
obtaining his favor by Jesus Christ, all your admonitions relating to the
importance of that invisible world we are going to, and the necessary
preparation for it will be greatly illustrated by the tenor of your daily
devotions, as well as by those excellent lessons which the word of God, when
solemnly read to them morning and evening, will afford. Nor is it by any means
to be forgotten, that while they hear themselves, and their own concerns,
mentioned before God in prayer, while they hear you earnestly pleading for the
divine blessings upon them (especially if it be in expressions wisely varied,
as some particular occurrences in their lives and in yours may require) it may
very probably be a means of moving their impressible hearts; as it may
powerfully convince them of your deep and tender concern for their good, and
may add great weight to the instructions you may address to them: So that it
may appear, even while you are praying for them, that God hears. And indeed I
have known some instances of excellent persons, who have dated their conversion
to God, even after they had begun visibly to degenerate, from the prayers, from
the serious and pathetic prayers, which they have heard their pious fathers,
perhaps I might add their pious mothers, presenting before God on their account.

Indeed were this duty properly attended to, it might be expected, that all
christian families would, according to their respective sizes and
circumstances, become nurseries of piety; and you would see in the most
convinsing view, the wisdom of providence, in making human infants so much more
dependent on their parents, and so much more incapable to shift for themselves,
than the offspring of inferior creatures are.

Let me then entreat you, my dear friend, to look on your children the very
next time you see them, and ask your own heart, how you can answer it to God,
and to them, that you deprive them of such advantages as these? advantages,
without which it is to be feared, your care of them in other respects will turn
to but little account, should they be ever so prosperous in life. For what is
prosperity in life without the knowledge, and fear, and love of God? what, but
the poison of the soul, which swells and kills it? what but the means of making
it more certainly, more intolerably miserable; when all its transient and empty
amusements are passed away, like a (...), when one awaketh? In short, not to
mention the happy influence it may have on their temporal affairs, by drawing
down the divine blessing, and by forming their minds to those virtues which
pave the way to wealth and reputation, health and contentment, which make no
enemmies, and attract many friends; it is, with respect to the eternal world,
the greatest cruelty to your children thus to neglect giving them those
advantages which no other cares in education itself exclusive of these can
afford: And it is impossible, you should ever be able to give them any other
equivalent. If you do your duty in this respect, they will have reason to bless
you living and dying: and if you neglect it, take care that you and they come
not, in consequence of that neglect, into a world, where (horrid as the thought
may now seem) you will forever be cursing each other. And thus I am falling
insensibly, because so natu^ally, from what I was saying of the concern and
interest of those under your care, to your own, so far as it may be
distinguished from theirs.

Let me therefore press you to consider, how much your own interest is
concerned in the matter; the whole of your interest, both spiritual and
temporal. Your spiritual interest is infinitely the greatest, and therefore
will begin with that. And here let me seriously ask you, do you not need those
advantages for religion, which the performance of family duty will give you,
added to those of a more secret and a more public nature, if peradventure they
are regarded by you? these instructions, these adorations, these confessions,
these supplications, these intercessions, these thanksgivings, which may be so
useful to your children and servants, may they not be useful to yourselves? may
not your own hearts have some peculiar advantage for being impressed, when you
are the mouth of others in these domestic devotions, beyond what in a private
station of life it is otherwise possible you should have? Oh these lessons of
religion to your own souls, every morning and evening, might be (if I may be
allowed the expression,) either the seed, or foretaste, of salvation to you.
Nay, the remoter influence they may have on your conduct, in other respects,
and at other times, when considered merely in the general as religious
exercises performed by you in your family, is to be recollected as an argument
of vast importance.

A sense of common decency would engage you, if you pray with your family, to
avoid a great many evils, which would appear doubly evil in a father or a
master, who kept up such religious exercises in his house. I will not now, sir,
speak of yourself, for I would not offend by supposing any thing grossly bad of
you. But do you imagine, that if reading the scripture and family prayer were
introduced into the houses of some of your neighbors, drunkenness and
lewdness, and cursing and swearing, and profaning the Lord's day, would not,
like so many evil demons, be quickly driven out? the master of the family would
not for shame indulge them, if he had nothng more than the form of duty kept
up; and his reformation though only external, and at first on a kind of
constraint, would carry with it the reformation of many more, who have such a
dependence on his favor as they would not sacrifice, though by a madness very
prevalent among the children of men they can venture to sacrifice their souls
to every trifle.

And may it not perhaps be your more immediate concern, to recollect, that if
you prayed with your family, you would yourself be more careful to abstain from
all appearance of evil? you would find out a way to suppress that turbulency of
passion, which may now be ready to break out before you are aware, and other
imprudences, in which your own heart would check you by saying, "does this
become one, that is by and by to kneel down with his domestics, his children
and servants, and adore God with them, and pray against every thing which
displeases God, and makes us unfit for the heavenly world? I will not say this
will cure every thing that is wrong; but I believe you are already persuaded,
it would often have a very good influence. And I fear, it is the secret desire
of indulging some irregularities without such a restraint, that, infamous as
such a victory is, has driven out family prayer from several houses where it
was once maintained, and has excluded it from others. But if you have any
secret disinclination of heart rising against it in this view, it becomes you
seriously to take the alarm; for, to speak plainly, I have hardly known a
blacker symptom of damnation, than a fear of being restrained in the commission
of sin.

After this it may seem a matter of smaller importance, to urge the good
influence which a proper discharge of family duty may have upon your own
temporal affairs; both by restraining you from many evils and engaging you to a
proper conduct yourself, and also by impressing your children and servants,
with a sense of religion. And it is certain, the more careful they are of their
duty to God, the more likely they will be to perform their duty to you. Nor can
any thing strengthen your natural authority among them more than your presiding
in such solemnities, if supported by a suitable conduct. But I would hope
nobler motives will have a superior weight, and therefore waving this topic, I
entreat you as the last argument to consider,

The influence it may have on a general reformation and on the propagation of
religion to those who are yet unborn. You ought to consider every child and
servant in your family, as one who may be a source, not only of life, but (in
some degree) of character and happiness to those who are hereafter to arise
into being: yea, whose conduct may in part affect those that are to descend
from them in the following generation. If they grow up while under your eye,
ignorant of religion, they will certainly be much less capable of teaching it
to others; for these are the years of discipline, and if they be neglected now,
there is little probability of their receiving after-instruction. Nor is this
all the evil consequence; for it is highly probable that they will think
themselves authorized by your example to a like negligence, and so you may
entail heathenism under disregarded christian forms, on your descendants and
theirs in ages to come. Whereas your diligence and zeal might be remembered and
imitated by them, perhaps when you are in your grave; and the stock which they
first received from you, might with rich improvements be communicated to great
numbers, so that one generation after another might learn to fear and serve the
Lord. On the whole, God only knows what a church may arise from one godly
family, what a harvest may spring up from a single seed; and on the other hand,
it is impossible to say, how many souls may at length perish by the treacherous
neglect of a single person, and to speak plainly, by your own.

These, sir, are the arguments I had to plead with you, and which I have
selected out of many more: And now give me leave seriously to ask you, as in
the presence of God, whether there be not on the whole an unanswerable force in
them? And if there be, what follows, but that you immediately yield to that
force, and set up family worship this very day. For methinks, I would hardly
thank you for a resolution to do it tomorrow, so little do I expect from that
resolution. How can you excuse yourself in the continued omission? Bring the
matter before God. He will be the final judge of it: and if you cannot debate
the question as in his presence, it is a sign of a bad cause, and of a bad
heart too; which is conscious of the badness of the cause, and yet will not
give it up, nor comply with a duty, of your obligations to which you are
secretly convinced, and yet in effect say, "I will go on in this sin, and
venture, the consequence." Oh it is a dreadful venture, and will be found in
effect provoking the Lord to jealousy, as if you were stronger than he.

But perhaps there may arise in your mind some objections, which may in some
degree break the force of this conviction, and which in that view it may be
expedient for me to discuss a little, before I dismiss the subject, and close
my address to you. You may perhaps be ready to object,

1. "That family prayer is not in so many words commanded in scripture; and
therefore however expedient in some cases, it cannot be so universal and so
important a duty, as we represent it."

I answer plainly, that it is strongly recommended in scripture, and
consequentially commanded; as there are precepts, which plainly include, though
they do not particularly express it. And I appeal to yourself in this matter.
When God is represented as giving this reason to his angels for a particular
favor to be bestowed on Abraham because be knew, that be would command his
children and household to keep the way of the Lord, that he might obtain the
blessing promised; did he not intend to declare his approbation of the care he
took to support religion in his family? And can it be supported in a total
neglect of prayer? Again, do you not in your conscience think, that the spirit
of God meant, that we should take Joshua for an example, when he tells us that
he resolved and publicly declared the resolution, that he and his house would
serve the Lord; which must express a religious care of his family too? Do you
not believe, that this blessed spirit meant it a commendation of Job that he
offered-sacrifices for all his children; sacrifices, undoubtedly attended with
prayers; when he feared lest the gaity of their hearts in their successive
feasting might have betrayed them into some moral evil? And was it not to do an
honor to David, that the Scripture informs us, that he we^^ home to bless his
household; that is, to perform ^ me solemn act of domestic worship when he had
been spending the whole day in public devotions; What think you of the example
of Daniel who prayed in his house, with his windows open toward Jerusalem, and
would rather run the risque of being cast into the den of Lions, and being torn
in pieces by those cruel beasts, than he would either omit or conceal it? And
do you think, that when our blessed Lord, whose whole life was employed in
religious services, so frequently took his disciples apart to pray with them,
that he did not intend this as an example to us, of praying with those under
our special care or in other words, with the members of our own family, who are
most immediately so? Or can you by any imaginable artifice delude yourself so
far as to think, that when we are solemnly charged and commanded to pray with
all prayer and supplication, this kind of prayer is not included in that
apostolical injunction.

On the whole, the question lies in a very little room. -- Have I proved by
what I have said before, that family prayer is a reasonable thing? That it has
a tendency to promote the honor of God, and the interest of religion, and your
own salvation, with that of those who are committed to your care? If you are
really convinced of this, then all the general precepts which require the love
of God and your neighbor, all that recommend a regard to the interest of
Christ, and a concern for our own everlasting happiness, bind it in this
connection as certainly upon us, as if it had been commanded in words as
express as those, in which we are required to enter into our closets, and there
to pray to our father which is in secret.

And I will farther add, that if the care of family religion be (as I suppose
every man's conscience will secretly testify that it is) a proper part of
religious education, then all those many passages of scripture which recommend
this, must in all reason be understood as including that. But perhaps you may
be ready to plead,

2. "That it is generally neglected."

Yet scarce can you have made or thought of this objection, but you will see at
the first glance, that this must turn upon yourself, rather than on the whole
appeal favorable to your cause. It is the reproach of our age, if it be indeed
generally neglected. And if it be generally excluded from the families of the
rich and the great (who too frequently set the fashion, where they are most apt
to set it wrong) let it rather awaken a generous indignation in our breast, to
think that it is so excluded. At least, let it awaken a holy zeal to exert
ourselves so much the more, as it is certain that no association in vice can
secure those that join in it: for it is expressly said, though hand join in
hand, the wicked shall not be unpunished. So will your obedience be the more
acceptable, in proportion to the degree in which it is singular. Were there not
one praying family in the whole nation, in the whole world, methinks it should
instigate you to the practice rather than tempt you to the neglect, and you
should press on as ambitious of the glory of leading the way, for what could be
a nobler object of ambition, than to be pointed out by the blessed God himself,
as Job was; of whom he said, with a kind of triumph, have thou considered my
servant Job, that there is none like him in the land, or even on the earth? But
blessed by God, this supposed universal neglect is far from being the case. Let
it however rejoice us, if God may say, "There are such and such families,
distinguishable from those in the neighborhood on this account; as prevalent as
the neglect of family prayer is, they have the resolution to practice it, and
like my servant Daniel fear not the reproach and contempt which profane and
ungodly men may cast upon them, if they may but honor me and engage my favor, I
know them; I h^arken and hear, and a book of remembrance is written before me
for them that fear me, and think on my name." Nor should you urge,

3. "That you have so much business of another kind, as not to be able to
attend to this."

I might cut the objection short at once, by applying to your conscience,
whether you have not time for many other things which you know to be of less
importance. How many hours in a week do you find for amusement, while you have
none for devotion in your family? And do you indeed hold the blessing of God so
very cheap, and think it a matter of so little importance, that you conclude
your business must succeed the worse, if a few minutes were daily taken
solemnly to seek it together? Let me rather admonish you, that the greater your
business is, the more need you have to pray earnestly, that your hearts may not
be engrossed by it. And I would beg leave further to remind you, that if your
hurry of business were indeed so great as the objection supposes (which I
believe is seldom the case) prudence alone might suggest, that you should
endeavor to contract it. For there are certain boundaries, beyond which a wise
and faithful care cannot extend; and as an attempt to go beyond these
boundaries has generally its foundation in avarice, it often has its ends in
poverty and ruin. But if you were ever so secure of succeeding for this world,
how dear might you and your children pay for that success, if all the blessed
consequences of family religion, for time and for eternity, were to be given up
as the price of that very small part of your gains, which is owing to the
minutes you take from these exercises, that you may give them to the world? For
you plainly perceive the question is only about them, and by no means about a
strenuous application to the proper duties of your secular calling through the
day. And if you will be rich upon such profane terms, as are here supposed (for
truly I can call them no better than profane) you will probably plunge yourself
into final perdition, and may in the mean time pierce yourself through with
many sorrows; while religious families learn by blessed experience, that the
blessing of the Lord, which they are so often imploring together makes rich,
and adds no sorrow with it; or that a little with the fear of the Lord is
better than great treasure, with that intermingled trouble, which in the
neglect of God must necessarily be expected. But I conclude that yet more will
be objecting,

4. "That they want ability for a work of this kind."

To this I must in the first place reply, that where the hearts is rightly
disposed, it does not require any uncommon abilities, to discharge family
worship in a decent and edifying ma^^ner. The heart of a wise man and good man
i^ this respect teaches his mouth, and adds knowledge to his lips; and out
of the fullness of it, when it is indeed full of pious affections, the mouth
will naturally speak. And if it speak naturally, and in the man properly, it is
enough. -- There is no need at all of speaking elegantly. The plainest and
simplest language, in addresses to the Majesty of heaven, appears to me far
preferable to labored, pompous and artificial expressions. Plain short
sentences, uttered just as they rise in the mind, will be best understood by
them that join with you. And it should on such occasions be our endeavor, to
let ourselves down, as much as possible, to the understanding of the least and
meanest of them. And this will in itself be more pleasing to God, than any
thing which should proceed from ostentation and parade.

I must also desire you to consider, how many Helps you may easily procure. The
Scripture is a large and noble magazine of the most proper sentiments, and most
expressive language; which, if your will attend to with a becoming regard, will
soon furnish you for every good word and work, and most apparently for this.
And besides this, we have in our language a great variety of excellent forms of
prayer, for families as well as for private persons; which you may use, at
least at first, with great profit. And if it be too laborious to you to learn
them by heart, or if having learnt them you dare not trust your memory, what
should forbid your reading them reverently and devoutly? I hope I shall give no
offense to any good christian by saying, but on this occasion I should offend
my conscience by not saying, that I have long thought an irreconcilable
aversion to forms of prayer, even of human composition, as vain a superstition,
as a passionate attachment to them. And if any had rather, that a family should
be prayerless, than that a well chosen form should be gravely and solemnly read
in it, I think he judges as absurdly, as if he would rather see them starving
to death, than fed out of a dish whose materials or shape are disagreeable to
him. The main thing is, that God be reverently and sincerely adored, that
suitable blessings, temporal and spiritual, be sought from him for ourselves
and others, and cordial thanksgivings returned to him for the various gifts of
his continual bounty; And if this be done, the circumstances of doing it,
though I cannot think them quite indifferent, are comparatively of small
importance. I know by sure experience, in a great variety of instances, that it
is very possible for christians of no extraordinary genius, and with a very low
education, to acquit themselves honorably in prayer without the assistance of
forms: And they who at first need them may, and probably, if they seriously set
about it would soon outgrow that need. But if they did not, God might be
glorified, and families edified, by the continued use of such helps. And on the
whole, if it be indeed come to this, that you would rather sacrifice all the
benefits of family prayer, than submit to the trouble of reading, or appointing
another to read, a well composed address, which perhaps, with a small portion
of scripture before it might not take up one quarter of an hour's time, indeed,
you must be condemned by God, and your own conscience. In such a view both must
testify, that it is neither want of leisure, nor want of ability, that prevents
your discharging your duty, but a stupid indifference about it, or rather a
wretched aversion to it; the natural consequence of which might, if a little
reflected upon, be sufficient to throw the most careless and arrogant sinner
into an awful alarm, if not a trembling consternation.

I apprehend, that the most plausible objections have now been canvassed; for I
suppose, few will be so weak and cowardly as to plead,

5. "That their domestics will not submit, to the introduction of such orders
as these."

But as it may be secretly thought of, where it would not be pleaded,
especially where these duties have unhappily been omitted when families were
first formed, and in their most flexible and pliant state, I will bestow a few
words on this head.

And here I must desire, that you would not rashly conclude this to be the
case, with respect to your own. Do you think so unkindly of your domestics, if
they be not extremely wicked indeed, as to imagine they would be secretly
discontented with spending a little time daily in hearing the word of God, and
being present at your domestic devotion; much less should you allow yourself to
think, till it appears in fact, that they will have the arrogance openly to
dispute so reasonable a determination as this. Perhaps on the contrary, they
are even now secretly wishing that God would put it into your heart to make the
attempt; and thinking with a kind of tender regret, "Why are we denied such a
blessing, when the members of this and that family in the neighborhood are
favored with it?"

But if it be indeed as you suppose, that they would think of it with a secret
aversion and come into it with apparent reluctance, if they can be induced to
come into it at all; you would do well to reflect, whether this profaneness and
perverseness may not in a great measure at (...), be owing to that very neglect
which I am now pressing you to reform? Which if it be, it ought certainly to
convince you in the most powerful and effectual manner, of the necessity of
endeavoring to repair as soon as possible the mischief already done. And if
there be really an opposition, you ought to let any in whom you discover it,
know, that your measures are fixed, and that you cannot and will not resign
that just authority, which the laws of God and man give you in your own house,
to the petulancy of their humor, or the impiety of their unhappy temper. --
Make the trial whether they will dare to break with you, rather than submit to
so easy a condition, as that of being present at your hours of family worship.
If it be a servant that disputes it, you will no doubt think it a great
blessing to your family to rid it of so detestable a member, in that relation.
And if it be a child, grown up to years that should be years of discretion,
that sets himself against this reformation (and it is not possible that any
others should oppose you) though it is certain, that such a son of Belial be,
he must be a great grief to your heart, you will be delivered from a great deal
of distress which the sight of his wickedness must daily give you, by refusing
him a place in your own family, which he would only disgrace and corrupt, and
leaving him to practice those irregularities and scandals which always go along
with such a presumptuous contempt of religion, any where else than under your
own roof.

I can think of but one objection more, and that is,

6. "That you may not know how to introduce a practice which you have so long
neglected."

But this is an objection so very soon removed, that I hope if nothing else lie
in the way, your family will not continue another week in the unhappy
circumstances in which your negligence has hitherto kept it. I were unworthy
the name of a minister of the gospel, if, whatever my other engagements are, I
were not willing to give you my utmost assistance, as soon as possible, in so
good a work as the reformation of this great and lamentable evil. Far from
thinking it a trouble to visit you and spend an hour with you on such an
occasion; who would not esteem it a refreshment, and a blessing, to come and
inform your domestics, when gathered together for this purpose, how wise and
happy a resolution you had taken, to represent the reason they have to rejoice
in it, and to bless God who had inspired you with it? And how sweet a work
would it be to perform it, as for the first time imploring the blessings of
Providence and grace on you and yours, and entreating those assistances of his
holy Spirit, which may qualify you more abundantly for discharging your
peculiar part in it, and may render it the successful means of planting, or of
supporting and animating a principle of true religion in every soul under your
care? Nor would the joy and delight be confined, to the minutes spent with you
at such a season: It would be carried home to the study, and to the house of
God: And the very remembrance of it would for years to come, encourage to other
attempts of usefulness, and strengthen our hands in the work of the Lord.

And oh my dear friend, whoever you are, be not ashamed, that a minister should
on this occasion tell your children and servants, that you are sensible of your
former neglect, and are determined in the strength of God to practice a duty,
which it has indeed been criminal hitherto to omit. This is a mean and unworthy
shame, and would prevent our reforming evils which are indeed shameful. It will
be a glory to you, to be willing and solicitous to revive languishing religion;
a glory to give to other families an example which, if they have the wisdom and
courage to follow it, will undoubtedly bring them down a rich variety of
blessings on themselves, and if followed by considerable numbers, on the
public. At least, it will be an honor to you in the sight of men, and what is
(...) more, in the sight of God, to have (...) the generous effort; and not to
make the guilty neglect of former years, an excuse for (...) to neglect, what
it rather (...) argument immediately to (...).

But I (...) means insist upon it, (...) be introduced into your family in the
(...) manner I have recommended, use your own judgment, and purs^e your own
inclination; so that it be but effectually and immediately done. You may
perhaps think it convenient to call them together, and read over this letter to
them; telling them at the conclusion, that your are in your conscience
convinced there is reason in it which cannot be answered, and that therefore
you are resolved to act agreeably to it. You may then proceed to read a portion
of scripture and to pray with them in such a manner as you may think most
expedient. But in whatever manner it be done, you will remember, that it must
be with reverence and solemnity, and with unfeigned fervor of devotion, as in
the sight of the heart-^ouching God. -- And you will remember, that when once
introduced, it must be resolutely and constantly carried on; for to cast out
this heavenly guest, will in some degree be more shameful, than not to admit
it. But I hope, sweet experience of the pleasure of these duties will be
instead of a thousand arguments, to engage your adherence to them. May God give
you resolution immediately to make the attempt! and may he assist and accept
you, and scatter down every desirable blessing of providence and of grace, on
you and yours! (...) this day (for I hope it will (...) very day) may become
memorable in your lives, as a season from whence you may dare a prosperity and
a joy hitherto unknown, how happy lo^ver you may have been in former years: For
very imperfect, I am sure, must that domestic happiness be, in which domestic
religion has no part.

How shall I congratulate myself, if inconsequence of the representation and
address I have now been making to you, I may be the blessed instrument in the
divine hand of inspiring you with such a resolution! What an additional bond
will then be added to our friendship, while God continues us together in life!
Yea, what an everlast^^g Bond of a nobler friendship, in a future state; where
it will be, before the throne of God my joy to have given such admonitions as
these, and yours faithfully and obediently to have received them!

But if after all, you will not be persuaded, but will hearken to the voice of
(...), and sloth and irr^^^^ion, in defiance (...) many awakening and (...),
you must answer (...) If your children and serv^^^^ (...) the neglect of God,
and pierce (...) with those sorrows, which (...) such children, are like to
(...) raise profane and (...) they prove the curse of their (...) as the
torment and ruin of those must (...) related to them; the guilt is in past
yours, and (I repeat it aga^^ you must answer it to God at the great day, that
you have omitted the proper and appointed method of preventing such fatal
evils. In the mean time, you must answer the omission to your own conscience
which probably has not been easy in former days, and in future days may be yet
(...) quiet. Yes, sir, the memory of this address may continue to torment you,
if it cannot reform you: And if you do not (...) house of God, as well as
exclude God and his wor^^ trom your own house, you will meet with new wounds;
(...) new exhortations and admonitions will arm reflection with new reproaches.
And in this uncomfortable manner you will probably go on, till what his been
the grief and shame ^f your life, becomes the afflict on of your dying bed; nor
dare I presume to assure you, that God will answer your last cries for pardon.
The ^est you can expect under the consciousness of this guilt is, (...) pass
trembling to your final down; But whatever that doom be, you must acquit your
minister who (...) given you this faithful warning; and this letter^
transcribed as it were in the records of the divine Omniscience, shall testify
that a master of so great importance has not been wholly neglected, has no
been coldly and slightly ^^ged by,

Dear Sir, your affectionate friend, and faithful servant in our common Lord,
P. DODDRIDGE.


