A SERMON, DELIVERED Before the CIVIL and MILITARY Officers, the Members of
FRANKLIN and ST. PAUL's Lodges, and a large and respectable number of the
Citizens of MONTGOMERY COUNTY, and others, IN THE CHURCH AT FORT PLAIN, ON
JANUARY 28th, 1800. IN CONSEQUENCE OF THE DEATH OF Lieutenant General George
Washington.

BY JOHN FREDERICK ERNST, GOSPEL MINISTER AT COOPERSTOWN.

[ Published at the Request of the Hearers.]

COOPERSTOWN: PRINTED BY ELIHU PHINNEY. -- MD,CCC.

THE following Discourse was not intended for publication at the time it was
delivered: But as a considerable number of respectable hearers present wished
to see it published, thereby to convey to their posterity a lasting Monument of
the excellence of their beloved WASHINGTON, it is cheerfully submitted to the
Press, with only a few additions which time and inclemency of season on that
day compelled to omit. That it may deeply impress on the mind of those who
heard it, and them who may read it, the memory of HIM whose death occasioned
it, and with that memory a fervent desire to imitate his virtues, is the
sincere wish of

THE AUTHOR.
Cooperstown, February 4th, 1800.
A SERMON, etc.
DEUTERONOMY, 34, 5.10. SO MOSES THE SERVANT OF THE LORD DIED -- AND THERE
AROSE NOT A PROPHET SINCE IN ISRAEL LIKE UNTO MOSES.


Much respected Hearers, And Brethren of the Masonic Order!
BY your special desire have I appeared among you this day, to assist in paying
funeral honors to our deceased illustrious General GEORGE WASHINGTON! For whose
loss not only the Fraternity in general, with every individual member of this
ancient and venerable order must feel the most profound grief; but for whom a
NATION weeps. -- A loss, of which we are sensible -- lively sensible -- but
which to repair we are totally unable. All in our power to do, is, to recall to
our minds all the good a merciful GOD has bestowed through HIM on our Nation;
and to tell our children, that they may relate to their children the imitable
character of WASHINGTON THE GREAT, in whom we have found talents very rarely
united, abilities only for us united: displaying HIM on the resplendent canopy
of the shining hosts of ancient and modern Sages, Legislators and Heroes to be
a Star of the first magnitude.

To honor with solemn ceremonies the names and the lives of great national
Benefactors, has, notwithstanding the illiberal epithets of Envy and Malice,
ever been deemed one of the first duties; and to commemorate deeds of high
desert, has been the supreme; delight of Nations. Sacred Writ furnishes us with
several instances of the practice 2. Chron. 16, 14.
and the propriety. The Psalmist says: "The righteous shall be in everlasting
remembrance." Ps. 112, 6.
And St. Paul enjoins it as a divine precept "to render honor to whom honor is
due." Romans 13.7.
In the Book of Ecclesiasticus Chap. 44=50.
we find the praises of more than a score of Worthies recorded, among which,
MOSES is one most renowned. The Penman previous to his panegyrics made the
following introduction: Let us now praise famous Men, and our Fathers that
begat us. The Lord had wrought great glory by them through his great power from
the beginning. Such as did bear rule in their kingdoms, men renowned for their
power, giving counsel by their understanding, and declaring Prophecies: Leaders
of the people by their counsels, and by their knowledge of learning meet for
the people, wise and eloquent in their instructions. All these were honored in
their generations, and were the glory of their times. They have left a name
behind them that their praises might be reported -- and their glory shall not
be blotted out. Their bodies are buried in peace, but their name lives for
evermore -- the people will tell of their wisdom and the congregation will show
forth their praise. And after relating the excellencies o^ Enoch, Noah,
Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, he mentioned Moses, saying: And the Lord brought out
of Jacob a merciful man, which found favor in the sight of all flesh, even
Moses, beloved of God and Men, whose memorial is blessed. He made him like to
the glorious saints and magnified him, so that his enemies stood in fear of
him. By his words he caused wonders to cease, and he made him glorious in the
sight of Kings and gave him a commandment for his people, and showed him part
of his glory. He sanctified him in his faithfulness and meekness, and chose him
out of all men. He made him to hear his voice, and brought him into the dark
cloud, and gave him commandments before his face; even the law of life and
knowledge, that he might teach Jacob his covenant and Israel his judgments.

SUCH is the Eulogy of Moses the servant of the Lord, of whom it is said in our
Text: "And there arose not a Prophet since in Israel like unto Moses." Cannot
this with great propriety be said of the illustrious deceased General? Who can
deny it* I trust not to overstrain the chords in saying: that as the
application of the one part of our text is lamentably true, that WASHINGTON the
servant of the Lord died; so it will readily be admitted on all sides, that the
other is equally applicable -- there shall not arise a man like unto Lieut.
GENERAL WASHINGTON under similar circumstances in America. Both the memorials
of ^hese illustrious Chiefs are blessed. -- There is an Analogy -- and, this
Analogy is peculiarly striking. --

THE striking Analogy in the memorial of MOSES, the first Conductor of the
Jewish Nation, and in the memorial of Lieut. General GEORGE WASHINGTON, the
first Leader and Father of the American Nation: the One, as recorded in Sacred
Writ -- -- the Other engraven as an evidence in the hearts of Americans in
general and his Masonic Brethren in particular, is therefore our present theme.

THIS Analogy we undertake to consider: I. IN a remote manner. II. As more
proximate.


I. THE distant Analogy between Moses and Genesis WASHINGTON is worthy our
consideration. First, with respect to their native countries and fatality of
their progenitors.

MOSES, born in Goshen, one of the best provinces under Egyptian government,
renowned for its fertility and richness of soil; from an honorable lineage,
whose Ancestors in a particular covenant with the Most High, moved thither by
invitation and divine confirmation, to secure themselves against the
devastation of famine, and of which family, Levi, son to Patriarch Jacob, and
great-grand father to Moses is noted for his resolution in the affair with
Shechem.

GENERAL GEORGE WASHINGTON, born in the ci-devant British colony of Virginia,
well known for its profusion and wealth, from a respectable parentage, who
emigrated from Britain, supposed not so much driven by necessity, like many of
the first Colonists, as from views to enjoy on this side the Atlantic, greater
advantages both civil and religious. Be this as it will, we may rest assured
that divine Providence, having once decreed for wise and happy purposes this
extensive Continent to be an assylum, could inspire with sufficient motives and
produce causes for emigration in the minds of the needy, or the wealthy, or the
oppressed. However, it may not be amiss here to remark: that both our
Conductors drew their first breath in countries, where their Ancestors first
enjoyed perfect rational liberty and every blessing connected therewith, in
which countries tyranny and oppression did afterward become to them
insupportable.

THIS remote Analogy we consider farther with regard to their Education. It
often happens, that whom the Lord designates for great purposes, he will have
previously fitted, and not suffer him to be destitute of proper means. But it
may also be asserted, that many a man could have become more useful to himself
and his country, had his natural talents properly and timely been cultivated,
and not remained in a total state of nature by the inattention or avarice of
parents and guardians. -- Moses, we know, received his education by a
particular providence at Court, and became learned not only in all the wisdom
of the Egyptians and all the arts and sciences peculiar to them, but also in
the knowledge of the SUPREME BEING, which made him so mighty in words and
fitted him to become the Deliverer of his Brethren. -- Our illustrious Chief
also had received an education, which not only well acquainted him with the
situation, extent, laws, government, liberty and importance of his country with
the advantages and disadvantages arising from a colonial dependence on
Great Britain, and which prepared him for a Warrior, a Statesman, and what is
more, a Father of regenerated America -- -- but which, early and lastingly
impressed on his mind the truth of that religion, which by a faithful
observance of its divine precepts, "is profitable unto all things, and has the
promise of the life that now is, and of that which is to come."

THE parity of their first heroic exploits is lastly to be considered in this
remote analogy, which proved to be an indication of a happy issue favorable to
their respective Nations. Moses, at the age of forty, partly by natural
affection and inclination, that he might learn the state of his Brethren and
help them as occasion should offer itself; and partly by divine impulse, and
with desig^, that he might give some manifestation to them, that he was raised
and sent of God to deliver them, smote an Egyptian, who did oppress a Hebrew,
one of his Brethren. But this he did not in a malicious anger, but by his
divine and special vocation to be the RULER and DELIVERER of Israel. Which call
of his, howsoever manifested, whether by his father, as Josephus says, or
immediately to himself, was evident to his own conscience, and this he gave as
a signal to make it evident to his Brethren, but, they understood not. -- Now,
beloved Hearers and Masonic Brethren! Turn with me your minds to the environs
of the Ohio, and there behold the first heroic exploit of our deceased General:
when not yet in the meridian of his life, and in the service of his country, he
signalized his intrepidity and skill by rescuing the remains of an ambushed and
defeated army, headed by the unfortunate Braddok, when pressed by the
conquering savages and their as savage Allies. Did he not then display such
military talents and courage in his gallant maneuvering, as drew deservedly the
attention even of OLD WARRIORS on Him, who was then in a comparative view but a
Novice in the art? Was not this the earnest of his bravery and heroism given to
his country, which afterward was fully displayed in so many brilliant actions
for its salvation -- -- and which, after an elapse of near a score of years,
was not extinguished from the memory of that first assembly of Patriots, who
consulted on measures suitable to oppose the overbearing insults of proud
Albion? Certainly it was! -- We now advance to the second and more interesting
head of our discourse and consider

II. THIS Analogy between Moses and Lieut. General WASHINGTON, as more
proximate.

WITHOUT pointing particularly at the exterior similitude in their statures,
the one possessed of considerable stoutness of body with an august and graceful
countenance, the other appearing not less majestic in his external form and
dignified in his deportment, we shall turn to the nearer resemblance of their
SUBLIME CHARACTER, which here justly takes the lead.

SACRED Writ informs us, that Moses, instructed in the knowledge of the true
God, grew in faith and in piety to him. Religion truly exercised and combined
with natural talents, showed its benign influence over Moses. He was according
to the description given by Jesus the son of Sirach Ecclesiasticus 45.
a merciful Man. In the orginal he is termed andra cleous, a man of a
compassionate, longsuffering, forbearing, patient, mild tempered disposition --
not hasty to revenge. He was calm but firm in his proceedings. His
faithfulness, of which the Lord himself bore testimony, was accompanied with an
uncommon degree of meekness: which displayed itself particularly at the time
when Aaron and Miriam assumed an unwarranted freedom to talk against him. Numb.
12, 1.
His integrity in the cause and his zeal for the welfare of his brethren was
sufficiently evident, but above all, disinterestedness gave an uncommon luster
to all his transactions. Before the face of the Lord could he testify against
the malevolence of those in rebellion with Korah, who wrongfully charged him
with craving a supreme authority over the people: "LORD!" said he, "I have not
taken one Ass from them, neither have I hurt one of them." This is the
miniature character of the man of whom our text says: "And there arose not a
prophet since in Israel like unto Moses," and of whom testimony is born, "that
the Lord has sanctified him in his faithfulness and meekness, and chose him
out of ALL MEN, (especially from out of the Jewish Nation) to be an instrument
in the hand of the Lord, to deliver his people from oppression and bondage. --
And now, let us advert also to the character of the MAN, whom the LORD had
chosen out of ALL MEN to be instrumental in delivering these UNITED STATES OF
AMERICA from a foreign oppressive yoke.

GENERAL WASHINGTON, who had faith in God and was pious. HE, well instructed in
the christian system, clave to it with all his heart. HE was aware of the
necessity of divine ordinances, and not careless or above using them repeatedly
in the Congregation of the Lord. HE was pious. Brethren of Masonic Order!
HEARERS! "He that has an ear among you let him hear," understand and take it
to heart: our justly lamented WASHINGTON, the HERO -- the LEGISLATOR -- the
FATHER of his Country was a CHRISTIAN, and -- was PIOUS!!! A rare example in
the present day -- especially among the great and the strong of the earth, when
pure revealed religion and the sacred duties enjoined by it, are ridiculed and
deemed as unbecoming good education -- as superfluous for present and future
happiness. His piety was, as it always is, the never failing fountain from
which a stream of other essential virtues flowed: Justice and Humanity,
Temperance and Charity, Mercy and Humility, Sincerity with Uniformity, Modesty
and Stedfastness were the issue. He possessed a mind clear and penetrating; a
judgment sound and strong; a mien dignified and commanding; for deliberation,
calmness and temper; in maturely formed resolutions, firmness and perseverance
invincible; in the execution of the great charge his country had commissioned
him with, strict and faithful; acting for the prosperity of America with
incorruptible integrity and unwearied patriotism. He was merciful in the full
sense of the word, commiserating with his fellow soldiers, sparing the effusion
of human blood both in war and in sedition -- forbearing with his adversaries
-- not given to revenge himself. And, who can accuse him justly of ambition, or
of selfishness, so common to Conquerors? Not even Calumny itself! He avoided
honors justly bestowed on him, rather than sought them. At the return of peace
he quieted the minds of the discontented and the factious -- surrendered his
authority into the hands from which he had received it; examplarily teaching a
beholding world, that true greatness is found only in humility and self denial.
For, the satisfaction he had in the satisfaction of his fellow-citizens with
his conduct, was the greatest emolument and compensation he wished to receive
from a grateful country, for all his services during the contest. The greatness
of his disinterested mind has since his death displayed itself more
perspicuous, not only to an admiring world, but to his mourning country, in a
section of his last will, wherein we find that he had declined to accept of a
handsome present, voted him by the Legislature of Virginia, in 1785, as an
evidence of its approbation of the services he had rendered the public during
the revolution, amounting to the value of about L 7250 sterling, because
inconsistent with a principle he had adopted and had never departed from --
namely: not to receive peculiar compensation for any services he could render
his country in its arduous struggle with Great Britain for its rights; and
because he had evaded similar propositions from other States in the Union --
unless the said Legislature should permit him to appropriate the said interest
to public uses. Of which interest he has bequeathed L.5000 sterling as a fund
to the establishment of a UNIVERSITY in a central part of the United States, in
order to cultivate the arts and sciences, and to remove local attachments and
state prejudices from our national councils, which too often become pregnant
with mischievous consequences.
And since, he abandoned arbitrary power and the seducing principle of self
interest. His example herein furnishes an instructive and lasting monument to
all, who in future shall be called to the command of our army, or fill the
presidential chair. In the humble and endearing scenes of private life, he was
not less imitable: He was condescending to his equals -- kind to his inferiors
-- tender to her, who was the partner of his love; in short, his public virtues
were illuminated by the beams of his private character.

THESE characteristic qualities as an effluxion from piety, were not bestowed
and supported by the gracious Father of lights to remain unemployed. For, God
who gives to some men an uncommon share of talents, also makes opportunity for
their display to HIS glory and the common good. As it was with the Deliverer of
Israel, so we find it to be the case with the Deliverer of America. And this
leads us next to consider: This proximate analogy in their official actions,
whereby they were signalized and made glorious.

THE son of Sirach's Eulogy on Moses enumerates several, and some can most
easily be applied to our illustrious Chief by the weakest capacity. Time and
season will not permit us to dwell on these interesting subjects, therefore we
shall only remark on them as in passing by. On the whole we have to state, that
these official great actions of Moses, were, according to sacred record, the
effect of his Faith in God, and in the surety of his vocation and appointment
from God, who, not without great reason had revealed himself to him, as the God
of Abraham, of Isaac and of Jacob. Which faith under many and great oppositions
was variously exercised in obedience to this God, by the use of the prescribed
means, which, though seemingly weak and inadequate for carnal reason, were
nevertheless sufficient for the completion of the divine purposes. Now, as the
deliverance of Israel through Moses, so was the deliverance of America, an act
of faith accompanied with the prudent use of means, in our beloved GENERAL,
whereby he in the course of our revolutionary war, by being frequently placed
in the most perplexed situation and embarrassing circumstances -- betrayed by
some and deserted by others; exposed to every difficulty originating from
scanty resources, unequipped and undisciplined troops and a formidable foe;
yet, with a great and unshaken mind surmounting the whole, was magnified and
made glorious. We shall, in representing this striking similarity, only touch
facts.

THE Lord, said the son of Sirach, magnified Moses, so, that his enemies stood
in fear of him. The Lord also magnified his servant WASHINGTON in the same
manner. The heights near Boston, where his presence inspired firmness to an
undisciplined courageous Yeomanry, are witnesses -- THERE he kept a powerful
and well provided enemy in awe. Long Island, York-Island and New Jersey, can
bear testimony, where he was engaged with superior and well disciplined armies;
where he, but with a handful of brave Warriors, checked formidable hostile
legions, conducted by an experienced chief. Who remembers not his presence
having been a terror to his enemies almost every where? The environs of
Brandywine, the fields of Germantown, the hills of Whitemarsh, the camp at
Valley-Forge and the plains of Monmouth can give satisfactory evidence. And, as
Moses was magnified by the Lord in conducting the host of Israel through the
Red Sea, (under no small exercise of Faith) in a dreadful stormy night, thereby
forwarding the utter destruction of his enemies, who securely followed them; so
was General WASHINGTON in conducting our thinned, worn down and almost
dispirited remnant of patriots, under cover of a dreadful, stormy, wintry night
over the Delaware, which, furiously floating with ice forbade human approach,
into the fields of Trenton, there and in the plains of Princetown conquering
and pursuing a secure enemy and opening to America the road to Fortune. He, who
had commanded Moses at the Red Sea, had also inspired WASHINGTON on the banks
of the Delaware with this memorable maneuver, and -- GAVE HIM SUCCESS.

We read further: that Moses by his words caused wonders to cease. The 8th, 9th
and 10th Chapters of Exodus inform us, that these words were cries and
entreaties to the Lord to be merciful, even to his enemies. Now, can it readily
be supposed that General WASHINGTON, who knew his own and his country's
critical situation -- who loved religion and his country -- who as a Christian
knew his privilege and the command to exercise it -- who, at the cessation of
hostilities after an eight years struggle with oppression, issued his general
orders to the Army "to render thanks to Almighty God for all his mercies,
particularly for his overruling the wrath of Men to his own glory and causing
the rage of war to cease among the nations," omitted prayer? -- That himself
should not have addressed the Throne of grace, to turn the hearts of his
country's enemies and incline them to peace, and to grant such other blessings
at the reception of which his rejoicing heart felt the warmest gratitude? --
No, it cannot reasonably be supposed. An unnecessary or unasked-for gift lays
proud human nature not easily under great and open acknowledgments to the giver.

WE are further informed, that the LORD made Moses glorious in the sight of
Kings, Five which were conquered, are mentioned particularly: The Kings of
Egypt and of Bashan -- the Kings of the Amalekites, the Amonites and the
Midianites. The great fame of our venerable Chief not only reached distant
nations of Indians in America, but slew across the Atlantic, and we know he did
become glorious in the sight of Kings and Princes, partly by victories over --
or by treaties with them.

WE also read, that Moses established laws and statutes in Israel, that his
nation might know the covenant with God and his judgments. -- And, that he on
the resignation of his Office and before he went to sleep with his fathers,
showed Israel their true interest in setting before them life and death, good
and evil, in either worshipping or abandoning that God, who with such a
powerful arm had delivered and brought them so nigh the enjoyment of their
temporal felicity, closing his farewell address with exhorting them, to set
their hearts unto all the words of his testimony. Now, that our WASHINGTON was
not only a Hero and a Conqueror, but the Sage, the Legislator, the Adviser, the
Admonisher and the Father of his Country, will, I hope, never be forgotten by
our latest posterity. Did he not like unto Moses, before he quitted the
Presidential chair, make his nation, his children, the people of these States
acquainted with their true situation, interest and duty? Read his Bequest to
the nation! -- Meditate on his Legacy! -- Let your children study it in their
schools, seminaries and universities! -- Did he not therein in the most
forcible manner inculcate real religion as the basis of all prosperity -- --
that religion of which his great heart was fully persuaded and therewith
embellished, I mean the religion of JESUS CHRIST? Permit me a small quotation;
let it sink deep into your hearts as the words of a dying father! Of all the
dispositions and habits which lead to political prosperity, RELIGION and
MORALITY ARE INDISPENSABLE SUPPORTS. In vain would that man claim the tribute
of patriotism, who should labor to subvert these great pillars of human
happiness, the firmest props of the duties of Men and Citizens. The mere
Politician, equally with the pious Man ought to respect and to cherish them. A
volume could not trace all their connections with private and public felicity.
Let it be simply asked: where is the security for property, for reputation, for
life, if the sense of religious obligation desert the oaths, which are the
instruments of investigation in Courts of Justice? And let us with caution
indulge the supposition, that morality can be maintained without religion.
Whatever may be conceded to the influence of refined education on minds of
peculiar structure; reason and experience both forbid us to expect that
national morality can prevail in exclusion of religious principle." The whole
of this valuable Legacy of good advice, which he had bequeathed on his
departure from public life -- the result of long experience, and expressed in
the language of firmness and paternal affection, should, as we have no doubt it
will, be engraven deeply on the minds of his fellow-citizens, and transmitted
with their sanctioning approbation to their posterity.

THE third and last proximate Analogy between our two Heroes consists in the
high estimation in which both were held. Our sublime writer says: Moses was
beloved of God and Men.

THE LORD evinced his high love and esteem for Moses: in choosing him out of
ALL Men to be his servant and investing him for the conduct of his people with
such high authority and power; in admitting him as a Mediator between HIMSELF
and the people and granting his intercessions; in exalting him before his
enemies; in protecting him against the rebellious clamors of mutineering clubs;
in making Moses like to the glorious saints; developing HIMSELF to him; showing
him part of HIS glory, at the burning bush and on the mount in the dark cloud;
making him to hear and to understand HIS voice; speaking to him face to face
and revealing HIS GREAT and TERRIBLE NAME to him. -- What he there saw, heard,
understood, and foretasted is inexpressible, but can I presume, without further
explanation be sufficiently understood by such of my audience, who really have
come from natural darkness to the divine light; who have been admitted to
behold the sublime mysteries in the inner Courts; and who, as humble,
christian-minded, exalted, well-informed and genuine Brethren can best
understand and thereof partake.

THE Lord evinced his great regard further for Moses: for in the last moments
of his life he suffered him not to languish under a long preceding illness,
but on the sure and irrevocable notice of his approaching dissolution, he, in
the close intimacy existing between his God and himself, surrendered with calm
resignation his soul into the kind and powerful hands of his Creator. -- And
what is more extraordinary: the LORD himself buried Moses, and his sepulcher
was never discovered by any Man. Thus loved and esteemed the Lord his servant
Moses! And thus did the Lord signalize in some degree the deceased General, our
illustrious Chief. He had found grace before HIM -- HE chose him out of the
tribes of America, to become its political Savior -- -- HE endowed him with
the spirit of wisdom and the love of piety; HE enabled him with that
circumspection of conduct, that dignity of character and majestic glory, for
which he is so universally famed; He clothed him with authority and power; He
exalted him before, and protected him against the snares, the plots, the
calumnies, the hidden designs of his avowed and secret enemies; HE made him
become acquainted with the LAW OF LIFE AND THE KNOWLEDGE OF HIS GREAT AND
TERRIBLE NAME; HE also favored him with a short sickness, and, painful as it
was, he was strengthened therein not to utter a sigh or a groan, but with
undisturbed serenity rendered his spirit to HIM who gave it existence, and
which, as we have ground to believe, was received in the mansions of peace.
Thus he closed his course -- forty-five years whereof were well spent in his
country's service -- for which the Lord caused his Memory to be exceedingly
venerated in his death. His Sepulcher is known to us and will be to our
posterity: not to idolize, but to remember and imitate him in all his public
and private virtues, and to cast into oblivion all foibles and errors incident
to human nature.

MOSES was also beloved of men. Though there were among the host of Israel
some, who always murmured and found fault with him, yet the nation at large
entertained the highest sense of esteem for him, which it evinced after his
decease by instituting a solemn and public mourning for him for THIRTY days.
Jews, Mahometans and Christians to this day look jointly on him with reverence
as a Sage, a Legislator, an intimate Friend of the MOST-HIGH, and as an
instrument of God to impart Wisdom and Truth to an idolatrous and ignorant
world. With respect to our venerable Chief, who was first in war, first in
peace, and whose blessed Memorial is deeply engraven in the hearts of all true
Americans in general, and his Masonic Brethren in particular -- notwithstanding
the reiterated grumblings of a set of men, actuated by the spirit of Korah,
Dathan and Abiram; who being even jealous and fearful of their own shadow, are
constantly repining and displeased with every measure tending to good order and
government either in Church or State. Which contemporary with him all around
this inhabitable globe, who has seen or heard of the graceful gifts,
extraordinary talents and the humble exercise of them, that does not entertain
a favorable idea of him and admires him as a wisely chosen instrument in the
hands of an all ruling providence to bestow blessings on the American Nation?
Who is he, I ask, that will not in public or private shed a tear for the MAN,
the FATHER, whom America has lost -- FOR WHOM OUR NATION WEEPS??? And now, my
hearers! after having delineated with all possible conciseness the remote as
well as proximate analogy proposed, let us draw to a conclusion.

WHILE, feeling the heart-rending stroke, we may in justice drop a christian
^ear, yet permit me to remind you ALL of a duty we owe to GOD, to our COUNTRY
and to OURSELVES. -- Suffer me to admonish YOU to a sincere discharge thereof.
-- To acquit ourselves of the first: let us give thanks to the SUPREME BEING
for having thus blessed us with a Savior of our Country in the illustrious
person of GEORGE WASHINGTON, furnished with such distinguished talents for
repressing oppression; for not suffering Him to fall by the sword of the enemy
or the poignard of the mercenary; for having blessed His plans both in the
field and cabinet; for having graciously spared Him so long unto us; for having
given Him grace, timely to consider and duly to prepare for "setting his house
in order" before his approaching dissolution. Let us praise the GREAT JEHOVAH,
THE LORD GOD OF HOSTS, that he has given us some sure ground to hope, that our
beloved Chief was also duly prepared for those mansions, which for their light
want neither SUN, MOON OR STARS -- where trouble and strife cease and all tears
are wiped away -- wherein the Kings of the earth do bring their honor and
glory, and where all those holy Heroes, who had gotten the victory over the
beast, and over his image, and over his mark, are singing the song of Moses the
servant of God, and the song of the Lamb.

WITH regard to the discharge of our second duty which we owe to our Country:
let us not only keep in constant memory the patriotic and really excellent
advice contained in the farewell-address cited above, but also endeavor
punctually to follow the same. Let us truly revere and cherish revealed
religion, and not think it nonsense to believe -- or dishonor to profess and
educate our children in it. -- Let us be united and firm in support of the
government of our own choice, rather zealously to petition HEAVEN to grant
wisdom and energy to our ruling powers, than unwisely and unjustly to censure,
to imprecate and to calumniate them; since it does not in the least tend to our
national honor, and it is totally impossible to find perfection in
imperfection. Let us carefully beware of foreign gods, foreign influence, and
foreign luxury and depravity, as sure means to destroy a nation. Let us
industriously mind our own business, be frugal and keep in peace, as far as in
us lies, with all the world: in order that our commerce may flourish, and
every citizen may live happy under his own vine and figtree at home.

RESPECTING the acquittal of the last duty, which we owe to ourselves and which
consists in the prolongation of our life in this present, and the insurance of
the enjoyment thereof without misery and pain in a future state, permit the
exhortation: let us fear the Lord, hate sin, embrace the all-sufficient
righteousness of our blessed Redeemer JESUS CHRIST; endeavor constantly to
imitate HIM as our great and infallible pattern in obedience, love and humility
toward God, and in rectitude toward our neighbor -- constantly soliciting
divine assistance and attending on all gospel-institutions as means proper to
obtain the desired end. This duty well exercised is profitable unto all things
and has the promise of present and future happiness. That it is possible for
men to be rich, live in exalted stations and withal love religion and exercise
its duties, our deceased venerable Chief has evinced -- Let us therefore copy
occasionally from his public and private virtues, and his piety as well in the
legislation, the cabinet and the field, as in private life. This, and this
alone will make us happy individually, and as a Nation.

BRETHREN of Masonic order! permit a few words especially to enter your
listening ears, and to sink deep into your affected hearts. In the deceased
General, for the honor of whom you assembled today in this temple, you have
lost a Brother, a very bright (if not the brightest) ornament of your
respectable fraternity. GRIEVE! LAMENT! LET TEARS OF SORROW STREAM DOWN YOUR
CHEEKS and mingle with the mouldering ashes of HIM who was the glory of your
order! -- At the same time suppose his liberated spirit addressing you thus: MY
BELOVED BRETHREN! Cease to lament our separation. -- Reverence Religion in
Masonry and exalt Masonry in the exercise of pure Religion. -- Avoid modern
Philosophy as undermining the basis of your order. -- Practice universal
benevolence and brotherly-love. -- Be studious in the arts and sciences and
patronise them. -- Let rational liberty, order and harmony be inseparable
companions. Exclude party-spirit, envy, strife and politics from your Lodges,
and let them only be sacred to their primitive institution: to humanize mankind
in an agreeable manner and to prepare them for an acquaintance with the
precepts, mysteries, privileges, blessings and comforts of Christianity. Let
every other excess be banished therefrom and guarded against. Be careful in the
choice of Officers and the admittance of new Members. Be Masons, worthy Masons,
well qualified Masons in thought, word and deed! And so let your light shine to
those, said to be, yet in the dark, and, often on your own account, prejudiced
against your order, until by the pleasure of OUR GREAT-MASTER JESUS CHRIST, ye
shall be raised and exalted into the celestial Lodge, where all strife and
jarring ceases, and ALL is peace, harmony, order and praise.

AMEN.
SELECTED POETRY.
COLUMBIA's SONS may now lament,
Their Spear is broke, their Bow unbent;
WASHINGTON lies among the dead,
His life, but not his glory fled.
Oh! join in grief each living soul,
Your mighty, mighty loss condole:
The World's great friend, his Country's head,
The noble WASHINGTON is dead!
Who now shall guide the Bark of state;
Who now shall wield the Sword of fate:
To guard our lives and liberty --
Since WASHINGTON no more can be?
Most mighty God! allay our fears,
And pity much a world in tears;
As thou in former time have done:
O send another WASHINGTON!
If ever our Land again must bleed,
And such another SAVIOR need:
Repeat thy gift in our distress,
A WASHINGTON, mankind to bless!
THE END.

