A SERMON, DELIVERED DEC. 29, 1799.

AT THE SECOND PARISH IN CAMBRIDGE, BEING THE LORD's DAY, IMMEDIATELY FOLLOWING
THE MELANCHOLY INTELLIGENCE OF THE DEATH OF General George Washington, LATE
PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA.

BY THADEUS FISKE, PASTOR OF THE SECOND CHURCH IN CAMBRIDGE.

BOSTON, PRINTED BY JAMES CUTLER, AT HIS PRINTING-OFFICE, QUAKER-STREET. --
1800.

TO the Inhabitants of the Second Parish in Cambridge, who requested a Copy of
the following Discourse for the Press:
GENTLEMEN,
Prompted solely by the conviction, that a laudable desire to retain, in your
families, some small token of respect, commemorative of our late beloved
WASHINGTON, has induced you to solicit the publication of the following
performance -- I am therefore constrained to comply with your request.

Your friend, THE AUTHOR.
Cambridge, Jan. 10, 1800.
A SERMON, ON THE DEATH OF General George Washington.
DEUTERONOMY, xxxiv. 8. "AND THE CHILDREN OF ISRAEL WEPT FOR MOSES IN THE
PLAINS OF MOAB."
TO bestow a respectful tribute on departed worth, and to cherish the precious
memory of our greatest human benefactor, is the urgent duty, which our grateful
and afflicted hearts now dictate and impel us to perform. The melancholy
tidings of the death of Washington, which were announced to us, the last week,
call us to take a part in the affliction so universally felt and deplored.

WHILE we, with these emblems of mourning, THE pulpit was clad in the vesture
of mourning. This early notice taken by the inhabitants, of the death of the
beloved WASHINGTON, is an honorable testimony of their respect to his memory.
pay a respectful tribute to his memory, and embalm him in our hearts, it
becomes us suitably to notice and improve this dispensation of Divine
Providence so afflictive, and so fruitful of instruction to us all. To evince
the sorrow we feel, in this distressing event, and our readiness to contribute
what is in our power, in honoring the memory and perpetuating the example of
this most estimable and amiable man, we shall improve and apply the words
before us.

IN all ages of the world, monuments of gratitude and same have been raised,
and funeral honors paid, to the memory of great and good men. But no one, I
presume, can be found in the records of profane history, who has been more
truly great and good, and more deserving such honorable tribute, than our late
much loved WASHINGTON.

ALL, who have had ears to hear, eyes to see, understandings to comprehend, or
honesty to confess, must acknowledge and admire the extraordinary talents, the
great achievements, the brilliant virtues and the benevolent services, of the
deliverer and guide of this American Nation. And if the children of Isreal had
occasion to deplore the loss of Moses, well may America weep for the death of
her WASHINGTON.

THE text intimates the duty of paying a just tribute to character: of suitably
mourning, the loss of the wise and good. The words express the weeping and
mourning, which the children of Israel manifested for the loss of their
illustrious leader. The life of Moses was continued useful and important to
them even to its last hour; when he died his eye was not dim, nor his natural
force abated.

HE was raised up, to be the instrument of their deliverance from Egyptian
bondage, and the appointed medium of their blessings, as the favorite people of
God, and of their preservation as a nation. And as a General, Politician and
Lawgiver, the world had never beheld his equal. With the enemies, they were
called to encounter; in their unparalleled journey through the dreary desert;
and in the administration of their laws and government, we see Moses at their
head. However various their success, he was a sharer with them. He partook in
their misfortunes as well as in their victories; in their distresses, as well
as in their joyous intervals; in their alternate periods of depression and
elevation; and was with them through the whole series of adverse and prosperous
events, that successively awaited them, from Egypt to Jordan, and on him
devolved the responsibility of a most sacred and important trust. And when he
had faithfully and successfully discharged his duty, and as an instrument in
the hands of Jehovah, had dispensed incalculable good to his countrymen, he was
taken from them, at a moment, they were to enjoy the promised and procured
inheritance. -- And well might they weep for him. The remembrance of his
eminent services, and the consideration of the privileges and blessings he had
been instrumental in procuring for them, uniting therewith, the thought of the
loss of their guide, must have greatly increased the affliction of a
separation. He had become endeared to them, by every tie of obligation and
gratitude, and their attachment to him was interwoven with the first affections
of their hearts. Though his departure by death was an event, they had been
taught to expect; yet when they were called to realize the separation, they
were greatly afflicted, they wept.

MOSES had been forewarned of his approaching end; though he had lived to see
his people entering on the enjoyment of their inheritance; yet it was the
decree of God, that he should not live to enjoy the inheritance with them. The
period of his dissolution now drawing nigh, and desirous of taking his leave of
them, in a manner corresponding with a life that had been devoted to their
welfare, he assembled them in the plains of Moab, and there enumerated the many
signal interpositions of Providence in their behalf. He also reminded them of
their laws and peculiar duties, and encouraged them to perseverance and
fidelity, with the assurance, "that if they kept God's commandments, blessings
would be showered down upon them, but if they neglected them, calamities would
befall them." Having thus performed the various offices of his great trust, and
having prepared for his nation, some important counsels and instructions for
their future conduct, as the best legacy he could leave, he then took a solemn
and affecting farewell of them. He then retired to the Mount, from whence he
could view the promised land and the countries round about. Uniting with his
delightful view, the consideration of having conducted his countrymen to the
enjoyment of their inheritance, he must have enjoyed a noble, a rich reward for
all his cares and labor. "He then resigned his soul into the hands of angels,
waiting to convey it to the heavenly Canaan."

And the Children of Israel wept for Moses, in the Plains of Moab. Such were
the peculiar and affecting circumstances, which occasioned these words; words,
which the sacred historian has recorded as commemorative of the affectionate
tribute of a grateful people, and the funeral honors paid by them, to the
memory of their guide and benefactor.

IN this transient view of the character in which Moses was appointed to act
and conduct as the deliverer and leader of his nation, we see a striking
resemblance to the part, which Washington has performed, in behalf of this
American Israel. In having such a man as our deliverer, our guide and our head,
is an exclusive privilege, which we can glory in, as the Children of Israel
did, "above all the other nations of the earth." As the deliverer and political
savior of our nation, he has been the same to us, as Moses was to the Children
of Israel. He was early raised up, by Divine Providence, to espouse the cause
of freedom, to infuse into our breasts the invincible love of our country -- to
unite us in its defense, and to become the great instrument of delivering us
from oppression and bondage, and of giving us liberty and independence. And
will it be too much for me to say, that the American nation, with their
Washington, emancipated and made free and happy by him, shall be handed down to
distant posterity, and perpetuated with as much fame and glory, in the annals
of profane history, as the Children of Israel, with their Moses, are celebrated
in the sacred writings.

VAIN and fruitless would be the attempt to exhibit a just delineation of
Washington's character. In drawing it off, much of the original would be lost.

SUCH an assemblage of talents and virtues, such a coincidence of circumstances
and events so wisely managed, such peculiar opportunities so usefully improved,
accompanied with such invariable integrity, uprightness and purity of conduct,
all issuing in such happy success and unclouded glory -- but rarely fall to the
lot of man, and seldom found united in the human character.

WHETHER we view him in the field, as the man of war, in the cabinet, as the
counselor, in the presidential chair as our head, or in the private walks of
life, as a citizen, our admiration is equally excited.

To determine true worth of character, however, we endeavor to ascertain
principles and motives, as well as to notice great actions, and beneficial
services. In this point of view, the character of Washington will bear the
closest examination. Religious principle, guiding disinterested benevolence and
true patriotism, constitutes an important, and may I not say, the leading
trait, in his character. As the joint influence of these, is the foundation of
every thing great and good in man; so it is the basis on which the dignified
and illustrious character of Washington was raised. It rendered the commanding
and influential exercise of his wonderful talents, still more commanding and
influential. Without religious principle, great abilities and peculiar
opportunities are always liable to be perverted to purposes of mischief; nor is
there any safety in committing power and trust to their management. But where
religious principle is established and in operation, there we may confidently
look for the most useful improvement of every talent, and the strictest
fidelity in the discharge of every duty. The commanding and directing energy of
this principle, holds a distinguished place in the splendid character of
Washington, and may be compared to that of the Sun in the center of the system,
whose essential and constant emanations impart a benign influence, resplendent
luster and glory to the whole. In him, we behold the rare union and display of
unexampled calmness and magnanimity; of deep penetration and sound judgment; of
undaunted intrepidity and exemplary prudence; of invincible perseverance and
watchful circumspection, in the execution of measures the wisest and best,
controuled and guided by a prevailing principle of piety and disinterested
benevolence. We behold him, making subservient to his noble designs, the
complete government of all his passions, and every resource within the compass
of his comprehensive, dispassionate and discerning mind; and devoting himself
to his God, to the welfare of his country, and to the good of mankind. Some
have performed important public services, done great exploits, and made
themselves celebrated, from motives of interest, pride and ambition. Honor,
power, and extension of dominion, were their governing objects. But characters
formed from such views, are seldom maintained or supported long; the disclosure
of their ignoble and interested designs, sooner or later, becomes a great
drawback on their real worth and fame, and tarnishes all their glory.

EXTRAORDINARY talents, profound penetration, distinguished improvements,
wealth, honor, power, or the glory of conquest, do not of themselves decide
the true characters of men, nor render them the benefactors of mankind. The
end, to which such peculiar advantages and opportunities are applied, must be
taken into consideration. Their true estimate is formed, from the principles
and motives which actuate and govern them; from the objects they have in view;
and from the good they actually intend, and are instrumental in dispensing to
mankind, by their talents, opportunities and conduct.

SOME, by seizing a fortunate coincidence of events, and the opportunities of
the moment, have put themselves at the head of revolutions, from selfish and
personal views, to elevate themselves to conspicuous stations, and not from any
regard to the cause they espouse, nor to the good of mankind. Such popular
leaders, void of religion, true patriotism or humanity, have spread devastation
and carnage far and wide, waded through seas of blood, to the eminence they
sought, and have made, not merely those they subdued, but even those they led,
the enslaved tributaries to their sensuality and power. Others also there have
been, who performed extraordinary services for their fellow men, and then have
exacted extraordinary compensation, either by actaual demands, or by making use
of their power for the sordid purposes of their own aggrandizement.

WHAT an interesting contrast to the characters of such pretended patriots, is
that of Washington! How insignificant do they become, by the enviable
comparison! He transcends them, as the reality does the name, or the substance
the shadow.

IN this point of view, how vastly does he surpass even an Alexander and a
Pompey, whose names are so celebrated in the annals of history. He resisted the
strongest temptations and allurements, that power and elevated station could
possibly offer. An opportunity occurred, at the close of the revolutionary war,
which put his integrity and patriotism to the greatest test. It evinced, beyond
suspicion, the purity of his principles and motives. The impoverished state of
the country, occasioned by the contest, rendered it impracticable to make that
immediate compensation, which the services of the brave officers and soldiers
deserved; dissatisfaction consequently arose, and a proposition was made, not
to disband till their demands were satisfactorily requited. That the
revolutionary army were prevailed on, peaceably to disband and retire, is to be
attributed principally to the persuasive solicitations of General Washington.
Enjoying the unbounded confidence of the people, whom he had delivered, and
having, at pleasure, the entire control and direction of the views of the
revolutionary army, Washington was presented with the opportunity, accompanied
by every allurement, to make himself Sovereign of Empire, without even the
appearance of usurpation. The disposal of his country was then completely in
his power. Others, whose military career had not been so glorious, and whose
temptations were not so fascinating, have, at such a moment, usurped the reins
of government, assumed the right of requital and established their own power
and authority.

BUT power, in the hands of Washington, was safe He could employ it for no
other purpose, but to defend the rights and liberties he had vindicated; he
could devote it only to the welfare of his country.

How nobly great does he appear, in rising superior to such temptations!
Displaying such an example of piety, self-government, integrity, patriotism and
benevolence, his character stands unrivalled. After he had conquered his enemy,
he could gain a still greater victory, by conquering himself, and not
permitting those passions of human nature, which so commonly stain the
characters of conquerors and heroes, to have the least influence over him. He
thereby acquired additional glory to his character, in having exemplified the
truth, that He that is slow to anger is better than the mighty, and be that
rules his spirit, than he that takes a city.

WITH a dignity and nobleness of mind, better conceived than described, he
returned the power and commission, with which he had been entrusted; declining
compensation for any part of his services, he retired, "refulgent in glory," to
the private walks of life, a citizen with other citizens; and converting his
military implements to the uses of husbandry, he cherished the hope that he
should have no occasion to learn war any more.

WHILE, my brethren, we are thus viewing the principles and motives, which so
evidently governed our beloved Washington, and which greatly enhance the worth
of his illustrious character; do not those peculiar sensations return, which
were excited in many of your breasts toward him, from the beginning to the
close of the war? To whom, but to him, were your expectations directed, in the
doubtful events of the year 1775? Amid the despondency occasioned by the loss
of the brave General Warren, who was killed in the battle of Bunker Hill,
Washington's appointment and acceptance of Commander in Chief, revived and
sustained the hopes of America.
Amidst the various success that attended the whole contest, through the course
of seven years, was not the preservation of the invaluable life of your Leader,
the object of your unremitting solicitude and your most earnest prayer? That he
jeoparded his life in the fields of battle, for the salvation of his country;
that he performed many warlike achievements; that he defeated all the designs
of a formidable foe: and completely rescued and established your rights, are
circumstances known and familiar to you.

AND verily he was raised up, by the providence of God, to be our deliverer and
leader: and in calling to mind the many important events, that have taken
place, for twenty-five years past, events that have contributed to lay the
foundation and finish the superstructure of the American Republic, Washington
is the first and principal personage that meets our view, and claims our
gratitude. "Our guide in war, our head in peace."

AND what* my brethren, but a true and ardent love of country induced him to be
among the first, in the vindication of our liberties, and the foremost to meet
a powerful enemy, with unequal, and then unorganized troops, amidst countless
discouragements, difficulties and dangers; and to forego thereby, the ease and
enjoyment, which opulence and the tranquil abode of private life, were
calculated to bestow? -- But especially having accomplished our independence
and peace, covered with glory and gray in service, what, but the welfare of his
country, and that love for it, which still glowed in his breast, could have
recalled him, once and again, He was twice chosen President -- first in 1789,
and re-elected in 1793.
from his peaceful retreat, to accept the Presidency of our confederate
Republic, and to sustain the weight and unusual cares of government, in a most
critical and difficult juncture of affairs. During his administration, war with
the Indians broke out; and also new difficulties arose in consequence of the
European contest. In regard to the former, his measures were effectual to the
restoration of peace: and to the latter, in taking a position of neutrality,
his conduct was judicious and pacific.
And when, by his wisdom, prudence and example, he had aided the establishment
and guided the operation of our National Government, he once more retired to
the shades of Mount Vernon, and there held himself in readiness, at his
country's call, to assist in times of difficulty and threatened danger. He had
accepted the appointment of Commander in Chief of the Armies of America --
declining, at the same time, any pecuniary compensation for his service. In
this office, he closed his life.
In his farewell address to his countrymen, he seemed impressed with the idea,
that his death must take place before many years -- that "he must shortly be
consigned to the mansions of rest" -- and he expressed a wish to close his life
in that retirement, which had always been the favorite spot of his residence.
His farewell was accompanied, like that of Moses to the Children of Israel,
with the best legacy that "the father of his country could leave." It contains
such counsel and advice, as cannot be read too often, nor treasured up and
practiced with too much care. "They are the advice and disinterested warnings
of a parting friend, who could have no personal motives to bias his counsel."
In that valuable instruction and advice, Washington though dead yet speaks.
Yes -- though dead, he lives in his fame, in his example, in his virtues, and
in the grateful remembrance of his country.

WASHINGTON, as in his life, so in the hour of his death, somewhat resembled
the celebrated leader of Israel. Like Moses, his eye was not dim, nor his
natural force abated. His body and mind were unimpaired by service or by age;
his life was important and useful to its last hour; and the Mount to which he
had retired, became the place of his death and burial. He died at Mount Vernon,
the celebrated seat of his residence, situated on the river Potomack in
Virginia. The disease, which arrested him, was an inflammatory fore throat, and
which, in the course of twenty four hours, terminated his life, on the 14th
Dec. 1799, AEt. 68.

He was a native of America, and born in Westmoreland county, in Virginia, Feb.
22, 1732.




IT becomes us, my hearers, to cherish his precious memory with gratitude and
affection, and to conduct ourselves in a manner, that would comport with his
wishes, was his life spared and continued to us. Could we -- But alas!
Washington is dead! What unusual sadness has it already spread through every
heart! What gloom, over every countenance! What mourning, throughout our land!
My father! The chariot of Israel, and the horsemen thereof!

ILLUSTRIOUS shade! If the country, thou have saved, has still any share in thy
regard, or in any way can yet receive thy care or influence, let all her
councils, measures and conduct be such as thy wisdom would dictate, and thy
prudence guide. She now offers thee, the last tribute of honor and gratitude,
for thy long incessant toil, care and labor. Though we can no more repair to
thee, for guidance in the hour of danger, nor thou -- come to our relief, "to
snatch us from impending fate," to save our land from servitude, to lead our
armies to victory, and by thy skilful hand to conduct our nation in the
ascending grades of prosperity and glory; yet the sons of America will never
cease to revere thy memory, to preserve the grateful recollection of thy
benevolent and heroic deeds, to imitate thy virtues and to perpetuate thy
character and achievements from generation to generation!

THE past subject, in connection with this melancholy event, teaches us that
the death of great and good men is an occasion of deep mourning and lamentation
to mankind, but especially to the people, to whom such characters were more
immediately useful and important.

THE Children of Israel mourned for their guide, they wept for Moses in the
plains of Moab. And great was the loss which they deplored. Scarcely less
sorrowful is the occasion, or less afflictive the death now felt and deplored
by this American Israel. The Children of Columbia now weep for Washington in
the plains of America. Nor is it a loss to America only, but to the world: his
name is gone forth into all the civilized nations of the earth. Such instances
of pre-eminent virtue and patriotism, but rarely bless the world. What an
inestimable treasure, to a nation, are such talents -- such experience -- such
a heart -- as Washington's! What a resource -- what a safeguard -- in all
seasons of national perplexity and danger! The privation of such a character,
is a loss incalculable!

WHILE we deplore his death, let us be thankful that he has been continued so
long to us, and that so many blessings have been dispensed to us through his
instrumentality. And as we have heretofore regarded the continuance of his
life, as a token of divine favor toward us; so we are now reminded, that his
removal from us is an evidence of divine displeasure. The removal of so good,
so great and so important a character is a frown of Heaven, on the nation, an
awful reproof for its ingratitude and wickedness. Depriving a people of their
guides, is withdrawing the instruments of their protection and prosperity, and
consequently preparing them for the divine judgments which are about to be
executed upon them. Such was God's procedure with his ancient people, when they
rebelled against him, as we are assured by the words of the prophet. Behold,
the Lord, the Lord of hosts does take away from Judah and Jerusalem, the stay
and the staff, the mighty man and the man of war, the judge and the prophet,
the prudent, the ancient, the honorable man and the counselor.

WHEN the stations and places of such characters are made destitute, where
shall we find others to fill them. There are no more Washington's in America --
no -- nor on the earth. He that wounds alone can heal, he that has made the
breach alone can repair.

2d. WE are also taught, my brethren, that there is no defense or security
against the great and universal destroyer, death. Amidst the vigorous exercise
and extensive usefulness of the greatest talents of the greatest men, and in
the splendour of their glory, death approaches, spreads its awful ravages, and
closes the scene.

How many wise and good, have been swept away with the preceding generations!
Many within our own recollection, whose departure from the world was an
irreparable loss! Communities have been deprived of their civil and moral
guides; and nations, of their wise men and rulers. The shields of the earth,
and the benefactors of mankind, must did, like other men -- there is no
discharge -- Verily man at his best estate is altogether vanity.

SOON, my hearers, we shall all be transmitted to the world of spirits. We must
stand in our lot, not only in this world, but also in the world to come. Let it
then be our great concern, in our several stations and character in life, to
act our part well on the theater of the world, that; at last, we may be
approved of God, and found of our Judge in peace. And when the great drama of
life shall close, may we unite with the spirits of the just made perfect, and
come to Zion with songs and everlasting joys upon our heads.

FINIS

