DESULTORY REFLECTIONS ON THE POLITICAL ASPECTS OF PUBLIC AFFAIRS IN THE UNITED
STATES OF AMERICA.

PART II.

And I looked, and behold a pale Horse: and his name that sat on him was Death,
and Hell followed with him. NEW YORK: PRINTED FOR THE AUTHOR, BY G. AND R.
WAIT, AND PUBLISHED BY J. W. FENNO, NO. 141, HANOVER SQUARE. 1800.

IT is the curse of the Age in which our Lot has been cast, that not only men
in general think less of those concerns which belong to their permanent
tranquillity, than of the carking cares of gain: but, that a very large portion
of society think not of them at all.

HENCE it arises, that the public concerns are swayed by characters and by
circumstances, grovelling and insignificant; that the most abject classes of
society, give law to their masters; and that a progressive decline, marks, in
painful traces, the funereal progress of our political career. We seem to have
abandoned ourselves to the lethargy of the Sloth, and to have crept up the Tree
of Apathy, where every murmur of every breeze excites a narrow and chilling
dread lest our repose be for a moment annoyed. Our fears, our alarms, are all
the emotions of an abject cowardice, impelled by strong circumstance to blink
at danger, and then slinking into the former state of sluggishness 'till again
roused by new excitements, fruitless of all useful effect as the former. One
call to action succeeds another in ineffectual round, for the last leaves us
where we were found by the first.

FROM visionary dreams, from fantastic prognostications and golden hopes, we
were roused by the phrenzy of the French Revolutionists, through the
instrumentality of their Agent, Genet. A miracle, the forbearance of
Robespierre, extricated us most unfortunately from a dilemma, which it was
hoped would terminate in a declaration of war on the part of that extraordinary
monster. But the whim of Robespierre, and our ill stars conjoined, cut us off
from a contingency so devoutly to be wished: a contingency which must
inevitably have precluded all those unhappy calamities which have since been
brought upon the country. But, this danger evaded, we slept again, assumed the
wreath of Meconium, and abandoned ourselves in such confidence to repose, as if
security and thoughtlessness were the only attributes with which we were
endowed, the only characteristics of our natures.

THE conceptions of illustrious men, of the nature of this extraordinary
crisis, presented an almost infinite variety. Perhaps, at this period, when
from the long-past extinction of all passions connected with the point of time,
there is the better chance for temperate judgment; it may be concluded, that
the fever of liberty and equality raged too hotly in the veins of the people to
admit the only measure which, in the eye of wisdom, could have been deemed
expedient, or adequate to the exigencies of that pregnant crisis: it may be
concluded, that the murder of the Monarch, with all its attendant circumstances
of horror, at a time when Illuminism, and the invasions of barbarians, So the
Romans denominated all Foreigners.
had not steeled our sinews to the emotions of humanity, perhaps alone enabled
the Administration of that day to carry into effect, even the Proclamation of
Neutrality. Carried into effect, indeed, it never was; but it was borne, it was
suffered to be promulged, with however great murmur, with however bitter
execrations. Influenced by these considerations, which, it seems probable, an
impartial posterity will recognize as unequivocal facts, this Act will justly
be regarded as one of the most luminous points in the character of its great
Author.

FROM the torpor which ensued upon the turbulence and conspiracies of Genet, we
were again goaded into momentary "sensibility" by new turbulences and new
conspiracies, which being overcome, like the former, by our singularly good or
ill fortune, were eventually succeeded by actual hostilities and a declaration
of war. A declaration of war against the Government, by the Minister at our
Court, and his Administration at home, and by the actual commencement of
unequivocal hostilities upon the people, under the orders of the latter.

AFTER two years' hostilities, waged with remorseless persecution and cruelty,
after innumerable flagellations of our defenseless people, and numerous
murders, after the loss of a thousand valuable merchantmen, and the extinction
of that Character, under the auspices of which alone we could have acted with
effect, and after the Government had kneeled again and gain, in the dirt, to
lick the dust at the feet of low-bred upstarts, the people rose, and demanded
war. A new system was put in force, and how wonderful, and how glorious were
its effects, until our Evil Genius administered a new potion of Mandragora,
lulled the very soul of the country to sleep, and sunk every energy into a
state of inexorable somnolency.

As we have slept, and idly dreamed of peace, and repose and security, and
Republican millenarianism, new perils have sprung up from the fertile hot-bed
of faction; and watered by the genial dews of demagogy, and cherished by the
benignant sun of Philosophism, have taken deep root, to bring forth fruit
abundantly.

As we have slept, we have been impassively borne along to the verge of a
crisis, on the turn of which hangs no less a point than the fate of the whole
community: and we are arrived nearly to the decision, without even a random
effort to stay the plague which impends.

As we have slept, amidst the delusions of commissioners, assurances,
negociations, and words and sounds and schemes, without meaning, and without
other effect than to prolong our torpidity, the machinations of the servants of
the enemy, have advanced to a violent probability of success, in their long
contemplated project of obtaining possession of the Government of the country.
A catastrophe at even the possibility of which, who is so infatuated as not to
tremble?

BUT the success of Faction, in forcing down its Candidate upon the Public, is,
as I promise myself hereaster to make apparent, but an insignificant means to a
vast end.

THE universal end of Jacobinism, is the the overthrow of whatever good exists.
With one consent, its disciples are, and have been, and ever will be, ready to
exclaim, -- Whatever is, is WRONG. Vide Pursuits of Literature.
They are the footpads and the highwaymen of society, with whose existence, law
and order and system are altogether incompatible; the scorpions, and adders of
mankind, whose mortal venom "holds such enmity with blood of man, that swift as
quicksilver it courses through the natural gates and alleys of the body, and
with a sudden vigor, it does posset and curd, like eager droppings into milk,
the thin and wholesome blood." Such is the general character of Jacobinism: Its
special attributes and tendencies, vary with times, localities, and
temperaments. The Jacobinism, or Anti-Foederalism, or True Americanism, or
(according to the last distinction which it has assumed) the Republicanism of
America, took its origin at the establishment of the present Constitution of
the United States, impropoperly denominated Foederal.

THE Anti-Foederalists (the undoubted Jacobins of that day and of this)
declared the Government contemplated by their political opponents, to be
monstrous See the Independent Gazetteer, and the other Anti-Foederal newspapers
of that day, passim.
and impracticable, and advocated a form of simple confederation in its stead.

THIS faction misrepresented in toto, the nature and form of the contemplated
Institution; since the Constitution of the United States possesses no one
feature of a Foederal Government. On the contrary, it was the misery which the
people had encountered under their Foederal Government, which induced the
abolition of that form and establishment of the present.

THE Constitution of the United States, in its original form, (I mean, as it
was eventually adopted) contains in no instance any acknowledgment of the
supremacy, of the local Governments. They are therein repeatedly and expressly
recognized as fiefs of the general supremacy, and as such are by that
instrument holden to numerous feudal duties; but they are never recognized as
paramount sovereignties, nor even as co-estates; So preposterous an idea never
could arise in any other than the present ridiculous era.

IN order to show, more clearly, that the prevailing conceptions concerning the
nature of the American Government are erroneous, it is necessary to advert to
the causes which gave birth to its establishment.

IN the course of this examination, it will as I think, very clearly appear,
that the men denominated Jacobins, are the real Foederalists of the present
day; and that the Constitutionalists, or friends to their country, and its
Government, as at first established, are unwittingly playing into the hands of
their enemies, by contributing to the perpetration of a delusion, under color
of which the Faction are advancing into the seats of power.

THE cabalistic denomination of this sect, as well as any set of principles, by
which they may affect at seasons to be governed, ought not to obtain the
serious currency which they have at all times done. It is of no consequence,
under what mask an assassin approaches us so that we recognize him an assassin:
fair words, smooth pretensions, and hypocritical denominations, charm not the
enmity of faction, and ought never to lull our apprehensions, or to divert our
views from its invariable end. The Anti-Foederalist of 1789, opposed the
Government because he thought it conducive to the happiness of the country, and
the Jacobin or soi-disant Republican of the present day, acts precisely on the
same principles. In the eye of reflection, the characters are completely
identified.

THE condition of the country from the treaty of peace in 1783, to the year
1787, presented so melancholy a succession of disasters, of every kind, as to
produce an universal voice for a new Constitution. Under the Foederal
Government, the people saw their trade declining almost to nonentity; they saw
all public confidence and all credit between man and man at an end, and they
one and all despaired of any favorable change under so untoward a system. They
saw their Confederation wholly inadequate to the protection of its subjects,
who were in great numbers Taken by an insolent foe
And sold to slavery without redemption thence.
While the fire of revolt and rebellion had burst the cobweb barrier which
restrained it, and threatened to devastate the prostrate land. With one
consent, it was resolved to abolish that system so fertile in miseries,
whatever other might be substituted.

IN fixing on a substitute, it was very obvious that vast difficulties were to
be encountered; by many they were feared even to be insurmountable.

THERE were to be conciliated, the greatest variety of jarring passions,
principles and interests, that ever fell to the lot of men to encounter.

"IT was obviously impracticable," as the Convention who formed the
Constitution, observe, "to secure all rights of Independent Sovereignty to
each, and yet provide for the interest and safety of all." Therefore, "in all
our deliberations," continue they, "we kept steadily in our view, that which
appears to us the greatest interest of every true American, the CONSOLIDATION
of our Union, in which is involved our Prosperity, Felicity, Safety, perhaps
our National Existence."

SUCH were the views which prevailed over the establishment of the Constitution
of the United States. It was essentially and entirely an act of CONSOLIDATION,
taking place of the act of Foederation, which had died of inanition.

WHILE these, the only proper and legitimate conceptions of the nature of that
Instrument, obtained, an uninterrupted tide of prosperity distinguished the
public fortunes. Nor was it till that fatal breach was made in this barrier
round the public weal, by which the States were made paramount Sovereignties,
that faction ever attained that daring height which is almost instantly
assumed. No longer was there wanting to the Jacobins a point of rallying, no
longer had any one to exclaim with Archimedes, (...) their indispensable
passion for revolutionary movements, was confirmed on the most important basis,
by this establishment of its practicability, and of the long desired means to
their end.

WHILE there was but one Government in the country; while the States were
regarded but as so many Lieutenancies, or subordinate divisions, suffered to
exist in their ancient form, instead of being constituted counties, only from
deference to prejudice; while, in fact, there was but one rallying point, and
of course an unity of action, and an entirety of organization; the people
revolted at the projects of revolutionizers when they dared, which indeed was
then seldom, to carry their views, openly, to that extent. But, no sooner, was
the foundation of the Constitution subverted, and the Governments of the
country multiplied to seventeen or eighteen, than Faction immediately laid its
axe at the root of the Constitution of the United States, and employed all its
efforts to bring about the substitution of the State Governments in its stead;
in other words, to revive the old Confederation. This proposition is to be
found in very distinct terms in the writings of several of the party, and
particularly in a work published at the southward, called "The Prospect before
us."

This end they hope and mean to obtain through the instrumentality of the
Candidate whom they are seeking to exalt to the Chief Magistracy. His opinions
on the subject are before the world. These have essentially varied at different
times, according to the different currents of public sentiment, of which he
has ever been a most obsequious slave. At first, though he had thrown whatever
influence he possessed into the scale of opposition to the New Constitution, he
yet affected, in public, to be an admirer of that Instrument, to which he took
no other exception than at the omission to incorporate with it, a bill of
rights.

BUT when we receive his opinion of the Constitution, through a medium exempt
from this servile influence, we find it of a very different cast. When in the
warmth of confidence, he writes of it what he thinks, we find him stigmatising
that form, as the form of the odious Constitution of England. Its ties which he
considers as Lilliputian "we" says he, "shall break."

IT is become a question, then, whether the Constitution of the United States
shall stand, or whether we will quietly behold it subverted, and the organized
anarchy of Federalism substituted. This is the simple point of contest between
the two parties. We have most foolishly put it at issue; and it is with God
only to grant us "a good deliverance."

IF the preceding views be correct, it is obvious that the distinctive
appellations of the parties in this country are improper and absurd. It is true
that mankind in all ages have been little influenced by reflection in this
regard; having in many instances adopted cabalistic distinctions from accident
and often from the most ludicrous whim. Yet I think it as well at least to wear
a characteristic name as an unmeaning one, and better even an unmeaning one,
than that which conveys a false meaning.

THE Foederalists it is to be assumed, desire that the Constitution of the
United States may exist in its original, integral state of supremacy; that it
may be in all cases, the Supreme Law of the Land, unaffected by the clashing of
Local Interests, and uncontrouled by the operations of subordinate powers. They
are Constitutionalists, Americans, loyal to their country and to one another.

THE Democrats desire that the Constitution of the United States should be
"disannulled" -- they desire that condition of things, in which the total
absence of order, may give "passage free" to the personal violences of their
malignant passions, and to their thirst for power and for gold. They would
revive the Confederation, and are indisputably Foederalists, without having
Foederalism or any other object really at heart, any further than as a means of
aggrandisement, a step by which to ascend the height of power.

WHAT is Foederalism? This is an enquiry peculiarly necessary, notwithstanding
the term has been in so common use for so many years. It may be denominated The
State of Nature applied to Governments; and this perhaps is the ground of
preference with those who call themselves Republicans, as they are ever ready
to exclaim, with the illegitimate villain of Shakespeare,

Thou, Nature, art our Goddess! to thy law Our services are bound. BUT their
Goddess of Nature is a New Deity and of the Modern Pantheon; and she resembles
the image of a celebrated tyrant, in the remorseless cruelties and persecutions
which she has inflicted on mankind, under the fair semblance of mildness and
philanthropy.

Foederalism, or the quality of attachment to a Foederal form of Government, is
surely the most trivial distinctive title of a party that was ever yet assumed:
a man may be a Foederalist and Royalist, a Foederalist and Republican, or a
Foederalist and an enemy to either Royalty or Republicanism. There is no
inconsistency in these characters, as has been exemplified in fact and
experience. The consequence has been that the political adversaries of the men
styling themselves Foederalists, have robbed them of their distinctive
appellation, and they now act without any name, as they have long done without
any fixed or defined principles either of morals or polities: As the Cuckoo
creeps into the nest of a certain foolish bird, and ejects it and its offspring.

IN the distinctive appellations of parties in every age, we discern some
meaning, some connection, more or less remote, between the name and qualities
of some certain kind. This is obviously necessary, to prevent the dilemma
alluded to above. It will be said that Foederalism denotes attachment to the
Foederal Government, meaning the government of this country, and that, reaching
this end, it is sufficiently definite. The object to be defined, viz.
attachment to the Government, is surely simple enough; but if, in attempting to
define a definite object, a term so indefinite is made use of, as to be liable
not only to perversions but misconstructions, the simplicity of the object
itself is rendered of no avail; it might as well have been complex and abstruse.

THE Constitutionalist denominates himself a Foederalist, and pronounces the
attributes of Foederalism to be these or those. The Republican as loudly
proclaims himself a Foederalist also, but his picture of the attributes of
Foederalism is diametrically the reverse of the other. So opposite are the
representations and the views of these two Foederalists, that the latter would
(in the words of Mr. John Adams) incontinently "fine, imprison and hang his own
brother" if a person of the former persuasion. The truth is, that the former,
if he be a man of either sense or honesty, is not a Foederalist. No man can be
a real friend to the Government of the United States, and a Foederalist, in the
sense in which the term is applied.

TO decide with more precision this question, it is worth while to attempt to
attain a right understanding of the force and meaning of the term Foederal, in
its fullest extent. The unequivocal derivation of the term, goes far to decide
every question of its signification, and Foederation (a new root of the word,
of American growth) may be asserted to extend no farther than to denote a
league or covenant. Now a league or covenant may take place, either between
individuals or bodies politic. The account of the combat between the Horatii
and Curiatii, begins " Foedere icto, trigemini arma capiunt," and Otway makes
his hero declare himself the " covenanted foe of Venice." By construction,
however, and by long usage, the application of the term Foederation has been
restricted, and it may be said at present to apply only to leagues or covenants
between States. And as we have never known the term to be applied to denote
leagues or covenants between separate or independent States, it must be further
restricted to leagues or covenants or associations of different States forming
one Nation.

NOW a league, whether between separate Nations, or different States of the
same Nation is a temporary arrangement for the purpose of meeting some great
emergency. uch was the league of the Grecian States against Philip, such also
was was the league of the American States against Great Britain. As long as the
league, commonly called the Old Confederation lasted, the United States were a
Federation. But their federalism merged in the Constitution of the United
States.

FOEDERALISM, therefore, is a league between different States of the same
Nation, (as England, Scotland and Ireland) for temporary purposes: it is the
Interregnum of Governments not Monarchical: and it always implies the absence
of settled Government.

I AM well aware that these uncontrovertible truths will encounter vehement
resistance from various classes of men. Those, who, ostentatious of their
supposed political orthodoxy, carry their bawling Foederalism not only into the
market place, but actually to market, will with much zeal protest against these
opinions, so fatal to the craft by which they have their wealth. Nor will there
be wanting the acrimonious taunts and jeers of those inclement spirits, who
realizing these truths, dread from their prevalence the defeat of their
projects and the downfall of their power.

BUT truth will march onwards in her career, however interested ignorance and
malice may oppose. While it may be allowed us to speak, we will with loud voice
proclaim those truths which we deem to be useful; nor will their tendency to
conciliate the applause or provoke the ill will of the malignant and venomous
sectaries of blind and brutal violence be at all enquired into.

WHILE, yet there is life, and while yet living, we have hope, it shall be
endeavored by active exertions to prolong that life, by exciting that hope to
energetic action. To the friends of Government, it seems time to apply every
effort that may tend to rouse them, to a sense of those dangers which surround
them, of those conspiracies which are unremittingly urged against their peace.

TOWARD the remedy of an evil, toward defense against any danger, it is a
potent advance, that we acquire a knowledge of its nature and extent. It is in
this view that I have endeavored to indicate what seem palpable to me, as the
lines of direction which the Jacobin faction have already taken, in their
progress toward their vast and destructive end.

HAVING sufficiently shown, by induction, that the purpose of abolishing the
Constitution of the United States and of Foederalizing the country, is
contemplated by the Jeffersonian party, it is worth while to enquire into the
consequences of a successful issue to their Foederalizing project.

THE inseparable concomitant of the abolition of the present form of
Government, is the annihilation of its debt, should it even survive, which is
doubtful, the election of Mr. J. The distress, the horrors attendant on the
overthrow of the public credit, what mind is so callous to view with unconcern.
Thus will your hearts, if they be made of penetrable stuff, be rent, with the
sharp pangs of ancient gentlemen, a long train, worn down with sorrows and
distresses, and decayed to a dependence on the pittance of their stake in the
common fortune of the land -- thus will your hearts, if not estranged from
every touch of pity, bleed at the unutterable woes of widows and orphans,
stripped of the hardly-saved relics of happier days, or the acquisitions of
long and painful toil; -- thus, if the emotions of humanity be not expunged
from your system, if your attributes be not denaturalized, and all the milk of
human kindness turned to corroding gall, thus will your most poignant emotions
rise, at the sight of maimed veterans stripped of the scanty means that kept
their honorable scars from mendicancy, perishing in starvation, or bearing
their mouthed wounds to challenge pity of the pityless. Gesrorn, like
Pappenheim, -- they will say Ille et nefasto nos posuit die, opprobrium pagi.

SUCH will be the dawn of the Sun of Foederalism: the malignant splendours of
its advance toward a meridian must fructify every innoculation and graft of
evil, that can disgust the wise or distress the good.

THE Constitution overthrown, and the debt abrogated, the new organization,
under the Foederal Form, with perhaps so much of the French system engrafted
thereon, as to provide some Consulates for the Chief and his Compeers, succeeds
to that system under which we once had every the fairest chance of prosperity
and happiness.

THE History of Foederalism, through every age, is one continued record of
wretchedness and affliction. Calculated only for those great emergencies during
which, the minds of men are super-naturally strained to a sort of ardor
bordering on fury, if it be continued after that fury has declined, and the
nerves have relaxed into their natural state of organization, such continuance
is unvaryingly followed by consequences of the most deplorable and often fatal
nature. Seldom, indeed, have Confederacies of States, upon a similar footing to
ours, frequent as they have been, terminated so successfully as in our case.
Strangers to any unity of action, their devoted members have often fallen the
miserable prey of corruption, and cabal.

EVEN from the imperfect and indistinct accounts which have been transmitted us
of the fortunes of the ancient Confederacies, we may gather a summary of
wretchedness more voluminous than the annals of unmixed Governments through
long ages. Instances unceasingly recur to our exasperated observation, of
revolts, riots and massacres; of corruption, treasons and speculations in
Flour, of the most atrocious nature. The rebellion of the members against the
body is continually acted over again, and we observe nothing settled but the
propensity to disturbance, nothing permanent but riot and ruin. At every step
multiplied evidences crowd on us, of the impossibility of either natural or
civil equality; for the struggling equals are each incessantly aspiring to
elevation, nor is any one ever content even with a benefit, unless it has had a
larger share than the rest in producing it. The folly which induces men to
reject the deductions of judgment from experience, here meets its destined
expiation; the vanity of human nature here atones in misery, its weak and
despicable passion; here it receives impressive lessons, written by the hand of
violence in characters of blood.

THESE multiplied disorders and distresses of Foederal Institutions, seem to
have encountered sufficient good sense in their day, to have produced the
repudiation of such projects. Through many ages Foederalism was unknown. As the
state of society changed from the stillness of more general dynasties to
smaller divisions, and the migrations of whose nations altered by the influence
of an altered soil and climate, formed various new nations, the subdivisions
gave rise to wars of civilization against civilization, and the common cause of
opposition to barbarism, was sunk in subordinate hostilities. The confederacies
of Germany, Switzerland, Holland and others of less importance, then arose.
They arose, and more particularly the two last, in an exactly similar manner to
that of the United States. The passion of mankind for change had burst forth in
its full vigor, and from a state of subjection to one universal sovereignty,
men seemed to have become only anxious to multiply new sovereignties and to
found new nations. It was a change for the better in almost every respect; it
was favorable to civilization, freedom and science. It was above all
favorable to civil liberty, as it founded and confirmed a powerful balance,
admirably fortified against the encroachments of violent ambition; a balance
now effectually broken.

THE Confederacies of modern times, exhibit a picture still more deplorable
than those of the ancients, because our opportunities of observation being more
immediate are more intimately employed. Here we observe in specification, those
minutiae of misery which a remote transmission had excluded from our view. Here
we observe fraud, violence and corruption en gros et en detail. In these vast
Gymnasia, crowded with zealots infuriated to insanity, and with bigots
infatuated to phrenzy, a continuous succession passes of every species of
contention and strife that can annoy men's present repose, or cut off their
hope of future comfort. Nor are these the worst aspects of confederate forms.
Venality, and of course corruption, appear here to have reigned in full vigor.
Not only individuals, but whole bodies have been bought and sold, with a
profligacy unparalleled in other history. A low and deadly jealousy perpetually
urges to multiplied embarrassments, and cuts off every shadow of harmony, while
ambition inflates every evil propensity to the utmost pitch of malice. Hence
faction tears unceasingly, the quivering limbs of the victim, and it knows no
intervals of repose from either present misery, or certain apprehension. A
struggle for predominance generally commences at an early period, between the
different members, and this struggle never fails to display all the worst
passions of human nature in their worst forms. These struggles terminate in the
preponderance of some one State, more fortunate than the rest, and they must be
content to submit, in a condition bordering o servility, to its imperious
mandates: as in the instance of Berne in the Swiss Cantons, and of Holland in
the Seven Provinces.

So abhorrent is equality to every impulse of human nature, that men are not
only found restive under the application of this principle to them as
individuals, but still more so in their political relations. Providence has
wisely ordained a chain of grades and subordinacies, from the peasant to the
peer, from the monarch to the collected majesty of all monarchs. It is the
frequent office of philosophical arrogance to attempt the disarrangement of
this beautiful system, by interposing the stumbling blocks and the foolishness
of infidelity, and the vile conceptions of mortal vanity. To the voice of
philosophers, men have delighted more to listen than to the voice of that
wisdom which is from on high: but as they have delighted to drink at the
polluted streams of Sophistry rather than at the pure fountains of life, they
have drank deep damnation to themselves and their posterity: as they have
swerved from those maxims by which society had been wont to be held together --
sanctified in their origin, and embalmed in every heart by their beneficent
effects, men have unvaryingly fallen off to that state in which the remembrance
of refinement and the influence of system exist but in projects for
denaturalizing mankind, and burying every wonted regulation of society under a
mass of chaotic jargon.

GOVERNMENT is an entire thing: it is a system of influence, penetrating the
obscurity of modest virtue, and the den of the the lurking conspirator, --
encouraging and cheering, and praising and rewarding and promoting and blessing
whatsoever things of goodness and of fair report come in contact with it; and
stamping its seal of reprobation or of excommunication upon every nascent
principle of evil. A well ordered State is a flourishing Oak -- the
Constitution is its Trunk -- its various ministers are the ramifications --
each forming after its capacity, a proper conduit, through which circulates the
bounteous stream of the parent trunk, to the leaves and foliages; which like
the diversified actors on the great theater of life are perpetually coming on
and going off, while the mutual dependence is admirably subserved by the
superior permanency of the intermediate branches. The leaves periodically
wither -- but the trunk and its branches survive in unimpaired vigor and
glory: the hand of violence may prune it of its branches -- the dependant
leaves then perish by the stroke; yet the Tree is still a Tree: but the blow
which levels the trunk annihilates the whole together.

THE venerable parent Trunk, every half-lunatic quack and subaltern juggler,
thinks he may now subject to his delirious incantatations. No unhappy metal
has been ever more tortured with fire, or the violence of iron, by
crack-brained Chemists, hunting the Philosopher's Stone, than has the
Constitution of almost every State, by the Talgols, Sidrophels and Wackums of
the present age. They keep in the center of the country, a vast Cauldron, which
momentarily receives supplies from a thousand contributary spells, in which are
brewed together every possible ingredient of annoyance and mischief. When the
charm is firm and good, it is their way to souse the unhappy victim into the
fatal vortex. It expires in their hands, and in the act of bubbling over the
dragons' scales, and wolves' teeth, and fenny snakes, and tygers' chaudrons,
and adders' forks, and blind worms' stings, which now with Double, double toil
and trouble
Out of cauldron boil and bubble.


WITH infuriate and idiotic air, another description of beings exhibit an
instrument with which they are desirous to divide the trunk into a multitude of
equal parts, in order that it may the better accommodate their passion for
variety by growing in new, various and excentric forms; and to gratify this
propensity to change and novelty, are very content to risk its life.

IT is time, in the idea of Burke, to consecrate the State. It is time to
bestow on it whatever degree of venerability and sanctity it is capable of
receiving, that the hand of innovation may be cast into the fire, as the hand
of sacrilege and patricide. We have sailed round the world of novelty without
making any discovery worth retaining, except that our discoveries are
worthless. We have touched on island after island, we have discovered new
rocks, new quicksands and new shoals, but we have discovered no new continent
-- we are yet afloat on a wide and procellose ocean. In a tone of much
earnestness, and very serious anxiety, I would repeat the interrogation and
exhortation of Horace O Navis, referent in mare te novi Fluctus? o quid agis?
fortiter occupa Portum. It is indeed time to haul up the vessel, and to repair
the ravages of tempests and whirlwinds; to secure a competent rudder, to repair
the sails, and even the keel; instead of painting and patching over her
defects, by arts which cannot content the wary, who confide nothing in gilded
baubles.

POSTERITY will scarce believe, that with so many fatal examples before their
eyes, and after the bloody tragedy of Foederalism acted in France, under their
immediate observation, a race of men could have been found, sufficiently stupid
and sufficiently infatuated, to wish for a repetition of the project Yet such
is the fact, and that man must be blind as ignorance itself, who does not
perceive an intention to revive the system of Confederation, in the opinions
and practices of the Democrats.

IT is this intention, evidently tantamount to an entire revolution, that the
preceding pages are designed to expose, and if possible to defeat.

FINIS

