AN Eulogy moralized, ON THE ILLUSTRIOUS CHARACTER OF THE LATE General George
Washington, Who died on Saturday, the 14th day of December, 1799. Delivered at
GLOUCESTER, on the 22d of February, 1800 -- in compliance with the
recommendations of Congress, the Legislature of this Commonwealth, and the
unanimous vote of the town aforesaid.

BY ELI FORBES, A. M. Pastor of the first Church in said town. Now made public
at the desire of the hearers.

TO WHICH IS ADDED, General WASHINGTON's affectionate address to the United
States, declining their future suffrages for the Presidency.

The righteous shall be had in everlasting remembrance.

DAVID. For us he lived, and for us he died.

WATTS. Printed at Newburyport, by EDMUND M. BLUNT. 1800.

AN Eulogy moralized.
THIS anniversary, we used to celebrate with joy, as the Birth Day of one of
the greatest and best men; but our joy is turned into sorrow: -- instead of the
emblems of joy and festivity, we are shrouded with the insignia of sorrow and
heartfelt grief: -- for this great and good man is no more! -- His death,
which took place on the 14th of last December, has inervated and paralized all
the springs of hilarity, which were set in motion at the remembrance of his
birthday, which (allowing for the alteration of style) took place on the 22d
of February, 1732.

BUT why! why should his death eclipse all the joy of his natal day? for does
not the wise king say, that a good name is better than precious ointment, and
the day of ones death is better than the day of ones birth? Ecc. vii. 1.
-- And who says the contrary? Certainly, the fragrancy of a good name, justly
acquired, is more extensively diffused, more beneficial in its influence, and
more permanent in its duration: -- It will live in the page of history, and
continue to shed its benign influence to unborn generations, when the most
precious ointment shall lose all its perfume, and its subtle effluviae will
evaporate into empty air.

"SURELY the righteous shall be had in everlasting re^embrance." Therefore the
day of a good man's death is ^etter for himself, than the day of his birth.

AT his birth he sets out upon a very precarious journey, with no certain
objects in view, is attended on the way with sin and sorrow: "for man who is
born of a woman is ^f few days and full of trouble." At death he obtains the
object of his desires; escapes from sin and sorrow, and en^ers upon a life of
immortal joy and triumph.

MAN is born a frail dying creature, but at death he rises unto perfection, and
puts on the lucid-robes of immortality, and mortality is swallowed up of life.

FOR these and many other reasons, the death of a good man may be said to be
better than his birth. Why then ^o we mourn and lament the death of our beloved
General? Who has justly acquired a name "which is better than pre^ious
ointment; a name which is better than that of sons ^r daughters," The answer is
easy. -- It is not on his ac^ount that we mourn: we hail him honored and happy
^eyond expression: But we are met, not merely to recog^ize his birth, but to
pay a debt of gratitude we owe to God -- to departed merit -- and to ourselves
and posterity which became due at his death. To God, we owe our ^nfeigned
gratitude and thankfulness for this invaluable gift. He formed him with all
those athletic powers of body which enabled him to endure hardships as a good
soldier, and with those well proportioned limbs, and expressive fea^ures, which
commanded respect and esteem. He inspired him with all that wisdom and courage
which enabled him to foresee, face and conquer, or to escape from those
difficulties and dangers he could not overcome. He adorned and enriched him
with all those illustrious virtues which made him outshine all his co-patriots
both in the field and in the cabinet -- at the head of a brave army, or as the
first magistrate in the chair of state. For it is thine O God to give both
riches and honor, and in thine hand is power and might, and it is in thine hand
to make great and to give strength unto all." Let therefore the tear of
ingenuous sorrow which has bedewed the cheek of millions, be mixed with the
tear of gratitude to God for such a seasonable, such an accomplished instrument
of his glory and our salvation.

HE was but the instrument, and his wise and energetic administrations was the
channel, through which flowed to us, the greatest and the choicest national
blessings "from the Father of Lights, from whom comes down every good and
perfect gift." Gratitude to the Father of the universe has a just claim upon
us, for this tribute of respect which we this day pay to the memory of the "man
whom he delights to honor."

IT is a debt due to departed merit, which can in no way be paid so well, as by
the spontaneous effusions of sincere sorrow; -- by strictly adhering to his
wise counsels, and by immitating his amiable and illustrious virtues.

IT is a rate thing to see true greatness and real goodness blended in one
character: -- We have heard of great men, an Alexander, a Caesar, a Pompey, a
Lewis and a Frederic: and from the bustle and noise which they made, and the
devastations and slaughter which they spread, they, with others of similar
characters were called great but without an abuse of language they could not be
called good: -- For whether they meditated peace or war -- the tranquillity or
disturbance of the world -- whether they sought the prosperity or devastation
of countries; whether they govern nations* or command armies, still interest,
ambition or revenge, were their leading-motives; and while they ruled or
tyranized over millions they had no rule over their own passions, and they set
no bounds to their ambition and avarice.

BUT rare as it is for great men to be good, we have one instance at least and
we hope we have many, but the great abilities of the good man whose death we
this day lament, was combined and adorned with eminent virtues.

WE saw him early rise to eminence by the joint display, of both great
abilities and illustrious virtues. We saw him rise and shine the Patriot, the
Hero and the Saint. At the head of a victorious army, at the helm of
government, and in the humble retreats of rural life.

THOUGH surrounded with all the fascinating alurements of ambition, interest,
sensuality and licentiousness, covered with glory, invested with power, and
abounding in wealth; yet foregoing all selfish and mercenary views, he
maintained that absolute self-government as gave him a just claim to the
character of the pious, benevolent, just, meek, temperate, and good man.

WE have seen him, unappalled in the midst of great dangers and embarrassments;
extricating himself and his faithful bands or constituents, "without having
recourse to mean compliances, or dishonorable expedients."

THIS favorite son of fortune was unaffected with her capricious favors or
frowns: -- He was undismayed at the most formidable aspects, uncontaminated
amidst the strongest temptations -- "No bribe could seduce him, no terror could
overawe him." He acknowleded God in all his way, and looked to him to direct
his steps for him; and ever approved himself to God, and to his own conscience
as in the sight of God; -- In comparison with this, it was with him "a small
thing to be judged by men's judgments." But it was his great concern to be
found faithful to that Being, who had entrusted him with so many talents, "that
he might give up his account with joy." And agreeable to that religion which he
publicly professed, he was benevolent to all men kind and faithful to his
friends, generous to his enemies compassionate to the poor and distressed.

NEVER perhaps was there a severer conflict between the softer passions of the
man and the christian, and the sterne^ virtues of the judge and the commander
in chief, when by the defection and treachery of Arnold, imperious necessit^
directed his trembling hand to sign the warrant which consigned the hapless,
but young and generous And^^ to an ignominious death; while his heart melted
into benevolence and pity, he did justice and loved mercy; could keep the
balance of his spirit in the most trying scenes. -- He appeared insensible to
the little ill-offices, which unprovoked malice or envy employed to blot his
character, or to the uncandid censures which little minds passed upon a partial
view of his public conduct; but he was all sensibility, activity and zeal in
whatever concerned the public welfare.

HE, (as one observes) both in his public and private walks, "supported dignity
without pride, humility without meanness, justice without partiality or
severity, liberality without profusion, courage without rashness or
presumption; and with a nice sense of propriety he always did every thing in
the best manner and time." Such a character is a phenomenon in our degenerate
world; but such a phenomenon Almighty God, has caused to appear in our
Hemisphere, and by its benign influence has blessed, honored and distinguished
us as a nation above all modern nations besides.

I CAN say as a learned writer on this occasion said. -- I never met in any
volume of ancient or modern history, or even in the fictions of romance a
single character so exempt from every spot of vice, from every shade of
weakness or indiscretion, or so complete in the abilities of the general, in
the talents of the statesman -- so uniform and replete in the virtues of the
citizen and the christian.

BUT he is no more! -- Shall we not lament such a loss! -- Is there not a debt
due to such departed merit! -- If I should attempt to trace the series of
events of a seven or eight years war, and delineate the martial skill of this
great commander, this man of war, I should attempt what is beyond my power
(...) accomplish, and it would require much more time than we have at present
to spare* This must be le^ to the faithful pen of the historian -- to the just
paintings of the poet in his heroic verse, and to the sculptured marble pillar
erected to his honor by the hand of a grateful people -- Let it suffice to say
-- His military virtues astonished all Europe -- baffled the ablest Generals --
compelled the veteran troops of Great Britain to submit to his superior
talents, and constrained her Parliament to acknowledge the Independence of
America, and concede to such articles of peace as placed the liberties of our
nation on the most respectable and permanent basis.

WE saw our WASHINGTON not a mere soldier, like other great warriors, grasping
at empire by the destruction of foreign nations, or aspiring to a civic crown,
through seas of blood and slaughter; but the greater warrior who could blend
the feelings of the citizen with those of the soldier, and temper the ambition
of the conqueror with the humility and meekness of the Christian: -- Such a
rare combination of talents and virtues, admirably formed him for command and
entitled him to the first distinction in the list of military fame.

He shone equally in the chair of state at the head of the national council, as
he did at the head of the combined armies of America. And justly estimating the
invaluable blessings which had been earned by blood, and acquired by the
dangers of military life, he watched over them with more than parental care --
no ruler ever did, or could have adopted wiser maxims, or have taken more
prudent measures, to prevent the evil consequence of undue foreign influence or
domestic faction and maintain the peace and independence of America. -- And
what gave a dignified luster to all his talents and virtues was, that he united
piety and morality in his whole deportment; for whatever were his talents, or
whatever were his virtues, he consecrated them all to his God and his country.
Not like the impious philosophers and disorganizers of the present day; -- He
made no separation between the duties we owe to God and the duties we owe to
our fellow men, or to society at large. He was not too wise to be above the
instruction of divine wisdom, nor so inconscious of guilt as to despise the
redemption of the Cross, but devoutly attended upon the institutions of Jesus.

THESE are some of the out-lines of this great and good man's character whose
death we this day lament; and I appeal to you again to say whether such
departed merit does not justify these extraordinary effusions of grief. For
great and good as he was, He is gone -- for ever gone -- "The Lord the arbiter
of life has removed him into darkness -- He changed his countenance and sent
him away: -- strength and agility, military skill and fortitude, prudence and
penetration, piety and morality -- could not obtain for him a discharge in this
war. For behold! the Lord, the Lord of hosts does take away the mighty man, the
man of war, the prudent and the ancient, the honorable man and the counselor,
and we must be still and know that it is God who has done it."

BUT this public and ingenuous grief is a tribute we thi^ day owe to ourselves
and posterity.

IT is, my friends, of great importance that we mour^ as we ought, not for him
of whom the world was no longe^ worthy, but for ourselves and for our children;
-- for it wa^ for us, that he was formed, by the great Father of our spirits,
to move in a sphere of the first magnitude here below till he had obtained to
full orbed glory, and touched the highest point of human greatness; -- It was
for us be fought it was for us he lived, and it was, in one sense, for us h^
died; that by the virtues of his life, and by the pious fortitude of his dying
behavior, he might teach us how t^ live and how to die; -- how like him we
might fill our respective spheres with light and truth, "in simplicity an^
godly sincerity," and at the close of life, rise superior t^ death the last
enemy, and like Him, come off more tha^ conquerors, and bear away the crown of
glory.

FOR us and our country we have abundant reason t^ weep and mourn, and with
Elisha to exclaim "My Father my Father! the chariot of America and the horsemen
there of." To us the loss is incalculable, at this eventful day when the
hurricanes of revolution shake all Europe -- when the name of liberty, the
rights of men, and the nature o^ good government, are misunderstood by some,
and greatl^ abused by others: -- Though we own that our governmen^ for the
present, rests in the hands of faithful and good men yet our beloved WASHINGTON
was the pillar of fire b^ night, and the luminous cloud by day, to direct its
administrations. What may ensue upon the loss of such a guid^ ^e cannot tell.
We know that it has been the method of Divine Providence, when the judgments of
God are ^mpending over a sinful people, to remove from among them the favorites
of Heaven, who stand in the gap, and ^y their wisdom, counsel and prayers
warded off the blow. The righteous are taken away from the evil to come:
Noth^ng is more seasonable for, or interesting to us, than that ^his melancholy
event should excite in us sincere repentance, and work in us a thorough
amendment of life, "so that ^niquity may not be our ruin."

WE learn from this awful providence, that we must not ^ut our trust in
princes, nor in any of the sons of men; but that we must transfer our humble
trust and confidence to that God who is the absolute sovereign of the universe;
and ^ho superintends all human affairs: -- And while we con^^der that all the
commotions and revolutions, in any coun^^y, with all their hidden springs and
causes are under the ^ontroling, restraining and directing providence of God,
^e cannot but see, nay feel, how much it concerns us, both ^s individuals and
as a nation, that we are in favor of this ^mnipotent Ruler. If we remain a
sinful people, we must ^xpect some way or another to feel the effects of divine
an^er: -- And God has many more ways to manifest his dis^leasure than by the
death of great and good men "though ^hey are the shields of the earth;" and
their removal may ^pen the floodgates of divine wrath. A people, therefore,
from whom such characters are removed, should prepare to meet God in the way of
his judgments.

BEFORE the breach is healed or we had dried up our tea^s at the grave of our
good and beloved Governor SUMNER, the tear fountain is broached anew by the
death of our well-beloved General WASHINGTON.

ALTHOUGH we, for the present, are blessed with good rulers, both in Congress
and in this Commonwealth, and have one at the head of the united federal
government as discerning in times and seasons as his predecessor, yet it is not
certain we always shall have; for as all the abilities of good rulers are from
God, so He has threatened to withold from a sinful people those invaluable
blessings, "causing the wisdom of the wise to perish, and the understanding of
the prudent to be hid." The consequence is, intestine broils -- the violence of
party faction, anarchy, confusion and every evil work: -- A greater calamity
can scarcely fall to the lot of any one nation. And among the many blessings
which have flowed to, and enriched the United States through the medium of a
WASHINGTON; one of the first magnitude is, a preservation from this dreadful
calamity. -- With what pains did he labor night and day, to guard the political
ship, of which he was the pilot, that he might preserve her from being dashed
on the rocks of party faction, or swallowed up in the vortex of foreign
intrigue. How apprehensive he was of danger in these respects, appears in the
strongest colors, in that almost divinely inspired valedictory Address which
he has left as a precious leg^^y to the people of his late charge: -- No dying
father enjoined love and union upon his children with more tender solicitude,
affectionate earnestness and pathetic anxiety. Having mentioned this Address, I
need say no more nor can I say any thing so pertinent, or binding on all, or
which would so clearly and so forcibly point out and injoin the duty we owe to
ourselves and posterity on this melancholy occasion. -- And the best evidence
we can give of our sincerity in paying this public tribute, will be our paying
a sacred regard to his wise counsels, his salutary instructions and his
friendly advice exhibited in that address: -- Read it, my friends, heartily,
digest it thoroughly, and practice it religiously: -- Were we to do this as a
nation, it would not be in the power of earth or hell, or both combined, to
interrupt our peace, impede our prosperity, or obstruct our national honor and
happiness. Was I to extract from it, I should not know where to begin nor where
to end, every sentence being fraught with so much good sense, wisdom and
philanthropy, as to merit equal attention; or should I essay an abridgment, I
should only mutilate and injure the whole: Therefore could I be heard by all
the United States, I would strongly recommend this as the first of human
composition, in which union, peace and piety, are the three central points at
which all the rays of this compendium of wisdom, truth and goodness meet. --
Union among ourselves, peace with all nations, but alliance with none, piety of
heart and morality of life form the paladium of our political safety and
prosperity. And as Moses, the Washington of Israel, said, so may we say, "this
is our life, our wisdom and understanding in the sight of all the nations, who
shall hear of these statutes and shall say, surely this great nation is a wise
and understanding people. What nation is there so great and who has God so nigh
unto them."

Now the father of his country is gone! this patriotic instructor is forever
gone! And is it not a debt we owe (...) ourselves and posterity, that his sage
advice, his patern^^ counsels and instructions should return with redoubled
force upon every reflecting mind of a bereaved nation, and be esteemed as
"apples of gold in pictures of silver."

ON the principles of pure and undefiled religion as its sure basis, we have
every reason to believe that his ow^ great character, his illustrious virtues
and his extensive usefulness was built: no other foundation could sustain so
noble, so refined and so finished a structure; especially since he exemplified
in his own life what he has recommended to the observation of others.

MY hearers, it is a duty we owe to ourselves and posterity, that with hearts
glowing with gratitude, we bow the knee in humble thankfulness to God, for all
that peace and prosperity, He has conferred upon our nation and land, through
the instrumentality of its founder, friend and benefactor, and that he has left
us as his falling mantle, the example of his wisdom, virtue and patriotism.

WHAT more important favor could we receive from the Father of Lights, than a
person of such a character to fill the chair of state and to preside over a
nation born of his labors and cares, and nourished by his fostering hand till
she had acquired a considerable degree of strength and stability, exulting in
the quiet possession of freedom and independence? the rectitude of whose
measures, the wisdom of whose counsels, and whose firm, prudent and energetic
administrations formed a complete model for his successor.

NAY, we may all learn from the manner in which he presided in his public and
domestic offices, how we should preside in our respective departments through
life, and maintain a becoming dignity, order, peace, integrity and economy in
our families and society.

THEN may we hope that God would continue to bless us with a long succession of
good rulers, and in the path of peace and piety we shall finally meet our
ascended father with all the faithful, in those blissful mansions where the
spirits of just men are made perfect.

I MUST conclude, not because I have exhausted my subject, but because it is
too tender to pursue any further.

COME then, my fellow mourners -- let us unite with weeping millions and pay on
this natal day the tribute we owe to God -- to the memory of departed merit and
to ourselves and posterity. We have lost the father of our country, which calls
for the filial tear from every true American.

COME then, ye war-worn soldiers, who fought under his banner! Your general is
no more! He has resigned his commission -- He has dropped his sword -- and all
that was mortal of him, submitted to the stroke of death, and rests in the bed
of dust. But he conquered when he fell, and triumphed over death the last
enemy, who alone could overcome him, and has, we trust, received the crown of
glory, which fades not away -- Follow, my fellow soldiers, your triumphant
leader that you may finally receive with him the palm of victory.

COME all ye gentlemen of the sword, with all your brave military bands, come,
drop a tear at the remembrance of him, who has done the greatest honor to the
military character, next to him, who styles himself the Lord of hosts and the
God of armies: -- Come ye of the masonic fraternity -- heave the deep sigh at
the loss of your grand master, your elder brother -- you loved him as you ought
to, the pain of parting is keen, but you must balance your grief, with the
joyful hope that he is gone to the Father, there to form a brotherhood which
can never be dissolved.

WEEP ye daughters of America for him who has, not like Saul, merely clothed
you with scarlet and with gewgaws of fashion, as he did the daughters of
Israel, but for him who has clothed you with the garment of salvation and the
robes of freedom, and shielded your defenseless innocence from brutal violence;
your bosoms are too sensible not to feel tenderly wounded by such a stroke --
"Oh! embalm his memory with your softest tears." -- Weep all ye who saw his
lovely face when he made his paternal visit to these northern states; you saw
his graceful bow, you saw his majestic countenance, softened into christian
meekness, and adorned with the smiles of approbation and love -- but you will
see his face no more -- it is shrouded in the shades of death at the humble
foot of Mount Vernon: -- Having made an imaginary journey to the Mount, step in
to the deserted dome -- search for the widowed partner of all his honors, cares
and joys -- you will find her weeded in her gloomy apartment: -- Console her
wounded heart, and mix your sympathetic tears with that briny flood which
overwhelms her soul: -- Your tender breasts are better attuned to feel a
woman's woe than ours; -- lead her to the fountain of divine consolation, and
kindly wipe away the falling tear from a sister's weeping eye, and bid her be
of good cheer, "for Jesus said weep not." Nay, weep ye children of our bowels,
for your father, your political father and ours is dead! He lived, he fought
and governed for you, and has snatched you from the arms of oppression; -- He
freed and saved you from the chains of slavery, and has secured to you, the
fair inheritance of your Fathers, that of Liberty and Right, that you may
henceforth without fear, love and serve the God of your Fathers all the days of
your lives. But he is gone! forever gone! -- you will never see your benefactor
-- you will never have an opportunity to make your bow of gratitude, nor lisp
his praise before him: -- Let his memory be ever dear to you, and let his name
be wrote on your young and pliant hearts, and remember next to God and the
Redeemer, you are indebted to him for the richest temporal blessings, which you
must thankfully receive, carefully improve and piously preserve, to your
children, and they to theirs, to the latest posterity -- and join with us and
say, "O Lord of hosts while we bemoan
"The great, the good, the brave,
"Look down from thy celestial throne
"To comfort and to save;
"Be thou our God and guardian still,
"For us thy power display;
"Thy vast designs, begun, fulfill,
"And wipe our tears away,"


THE Address, OF THE LATE General George Washington, TO THE PEOPLE OF THE
UNITED STATES.
FRIENDS AND FELLOW-CITIZENS,
THE period for a new election of a Citizen to administer the executive
government of the United States, being not far distant, and the time actually
arrived when your thoughts must be employed in designating the person, who is
to be clothed with that important trust, it appears to me proper, especially as
it may conduce to a more distinct expression of the public voice, that I should
now apprise you of the resolution I have formed, to decline being considered
among the number of those out of whom a choice is to be made.

I BEG you, at the same time, to do me the justice to be assured, that this
resolution has not been taken, without a strict regard to all the
considerations appertaining to the relation which binds a dutiful citizen to
his country; and that, in withdrawing the tender of service which silence in my
situation might imp^y, I am influenced by no diminution of zeal for your future
interest; no deficiency of grateful respect for your past kindness: But am
supported by a full conviction that the step is compatible with both.

THE acceptance of, and continuance hitherto in the office to which your
suffrages have twice called me, have been a uniform sacrifice of inclination to
the opinion of duty, and to a defference for what appeared to be your desire. I
constantly hoped that it would have been much earlier in my power, consistently
with motives which I was not at liberty to disregard, to return to that
retirement from which I had been reluctantly drawn. The strength of my
inclination to do this, previous to the last election, had even led to the
preparation of an address to declare it to you; but mature reflection on the
then perplexed and critical posture of affairs with foreign nations, and the
unanimous advice of persons entitled to my confidence, impelled me to abandon
the idea.

I REJOICE, that the state of your concerns external as well as internal, no
longer renders the pursuit of inclination incompatible with the sentiment of
duty o^ propriety: And am persuaded whatever partiality may be retained for my
services, that in the present circumstances of our country, you will not
disapprove my determination to retire.

THE impressions with which I first undertook the arduous trust, were explained
on the proper occasion. In the discharge of this trust, I will only say, that I
have with good intentions, contributed toward the organization and
administration of the government, the best exertions of which a very fallible
judgment was capable. Not unconscious, in the outset, of the inferiority of my
qualifications, experience in my own eyes, perhaps still more in the eyes of
others, has strengthened the motives to diffidence of myself; and every day the
increasing weight of years admonishes m^ more and more, that the shade of
retirement is as necessary to me, as it will be welcome. Satisfied, that if any
circumstances have given peculiar value to my services, they were temporary, I
have the consolation to believe, that while choice and prudence invite me to
quit the political scene, patriotism does not forbid it.

IN looking forward to the moment, which is intended to terminate the career of
my public life, my feelings do not permit me to suspend the deep acknowledgment
o^ that debt of gratitude, which I owe to my beloved country for the many
honors it has conferred upon me; stil^ more for the steadfast confidence with
which it has supported me; and for the opportunities I have thence enjoyed of
manifesting my inviolable attachment by service* faithful and persevering,
though in usefulness unequal to my zeal. If benefits have resulted to our
country from these services, let it always be remembered to our praise and as
an instructive example in our annals, that under circumstances in which the
passions, agitated in every direction, were liable to mislead, amidst
appearances sometime dubious, vicissitudes of fortune, often discouraging in
situations, in which not unfrequently want of success has countenanced the
spirit of criticism -- the constancy of you^ support was the essential prop of
the efforts, and a guarantee of the plans by which they were effected.
Profoundl^ penetrated with this idea I shall carry it with me to m^ grave, as a
strong encitement to unceasing vows, tha^ Heaven may continue to you the
choicest tokens of its beneficence -- that your union and brotherly affestion
may b^ perpetual -- that the free constitution, which is the work of your
hands, may be sacredly maintained -- that its administration in every
department may be stamped with wisdom and virtue -- that in fine, the happiness
of the people of these States, under the auspices of liberty, may be made
complete, by so careful a preservation and so prudent a use of this blessing,
as will acquire to them the glory of recommending it to the applause, the
affection, and adoption of every nation which is yet a stranger to it.

HERE perhaps, I ought to stop. But solicitude for your welfare, which cannot
end but with my life, and the apprehension of danger natural to that
solicitude, urge me on an occasion like the present, to offer to your solemn
contemplation, and to recommend to your frequent review, some sentiments which
are the result of much reflection, of no inconsiderable observation, and which
appear to me all important to the permanency of your felicity as a people.
These will be offered to you with the more freedom, as you can only feel in
them the disinterested warnings of a parting friend, who can possibly have no
personal motive to bias his counsel. Nor can I forget, as an encouragement to
it, your indulgent reception of my sentiments on ^ former and not dissimilar
occasion.

INTERWOVEN as is the love of liberty with every ligament of your hearts, no
recommendation of mine is ne^essary to fortify or confirm the attachment.

THE unity of Government which constitutes you one people, is also now dear to
you. It is justly so; for it is a main pillar in the edifice of your real
Independence, the support of your tranquillity at home, your peace abroad; of
your safety; of your prosperity; of that very liberty which you so highly
prize. But, as it is easy to foresee, that from different causes and from
different quarters, much pains will be taken, many artifices employed, to
weaken in your minds the conviction of this truth, as this is the point in your
political fortress, against which the batteries of internal and external
enemies will be most constantly and actively (though often covertly and
insidiously) directed, it is of infinite moment that you should properly
estimate the immense value of your National Union, to your collective and
individual happiness; that you should cherish a cordial, habitual and
immovable attachment to it; accustoming yourselves to think and speak of it as
of the palladium of your political safety and prosperity, watching for its
preservation with jealous anxiety; discountenancing whatever may suggest even a
suspicion that it can in any event be abandoned; and indignantly frowning upon
the first dawning of every attempt to alienate any portion of our country from
the rest, or to enfeeble the sacred ties which now link together the various
parts.

FOR this you have every inducement of sympathy and interest. Citizens, by
birth or choice, of a common country, that country has a right to concentrate
your affections. The name of American, which belongs to you in your national
capacity, must always exalt the just pride of patriotism, more than any
appellation derived from local discriminations. With slight shades of
difference you have the same religion, manners, habits and political
principles. You have in a common cause fought and triumphed together; the
Independence and Liberty you possess are the work of joint councils, and joint
efforts, of common dangers, sufferings and successes.

BUT these considerations however powerfully they address themselves to your
sensibility, are greatly outweighed by those which apply more immediately to
your interest. Here every portion of our country finds the most commanding
motives for carefully guarding and preserving the union of the whole.

THE North in an unrestrained intercourse with the South, protected by the
equal laws of a common government, finds in the production of the latter, great
additional resources of maritime and commercial enterprise, and precious
materials of manufacturing industry. The South in the same intercourse,
benefitting by the agency of the North, sees its agriculture grow, and its
commerce expand. Turning partly into its own channels the seamen of the North,
it finds its particular navigation invigorated -- and while it contributes, in
different ways, to nourish and increase the general mass of the national
navigation, it looks forward to the protection of a maritime strength, to which
itself is unequally adapted. The East in a like intercourse with the West,
already finds, and in the progressive improvement of interior communications,
by land and water, will more and more find a valuable vent for the commodities
which it brings from abroad, or manufactures at home. The West derives from the
East supplies requisite to its growth and comfort -- and what is perhaps of
still greater consequence, it must of necessity owe the secure enjoyment of
indispensable outlets for its own productions to the weight, influence, and the
future maritime strength of the Atlantic side of the union, directed by an
indissoluble community of interest as one nation. Any other tenure by which the
West can hold this essential advantage whether derived from its own separate
strength, or from an apostate and unnatural connection with any foreign power,
must be intrinsically precarious.

WHILE then every part of our country thus feels an immediate and particular
interest in union, all the parts combined cannot fail to find in the united
mass of means and efforts, greater strength, greater resource, proportionably
greater security, from external danger, a less frequent interruption of their
peace by foreign nations; and what is of inestimable value! they must derive
from union an exemption from those broils and wars between themselves, which so
frequently afflict neighboring countries, not tied together by the same
government; which their own rivalships alone would be sufficient to produce,
but which opposite foreign alliances, attachments and intrigues would stimulate
and imbitter. -- Hence likewise they will avoid the necessity of those
overgrown military establishments, which under any form of government are
inauspicious to liberty, and which are to be regarded as particularly hostile
to Republican Liberty: In this sense it is, that your union ought to be
considered as a main prop of your liberty, and that the love of the one ought
to endear to you the preservation of the other.

THESE considerations speak a persuasive language to every reflecting and
virtuous mind, and exhibit the continuance of the UNION as a primary object of
a patriotic desire. Is there a doubt, whether a common government can embrace
so large a sphere? -- Let experience solve it. To listen to mere speculation in
such a case were criminal. We are authorized to hope that a proper organization
of the whole, with the auxiliary agency of governments for the respective
subdivisions, will afford a happy issue to the experiment. It is well worth a
fair and a full experiment. With such powerful and obvious motives to the
union, affecting all parts of our country, while experiment shall not have
demonstrated its impracticability, there will always be reason to distruct the
patriotism of those, who in any quarter may endeavor to weaken its bands.

In contemplating the causes which may disturb our union, it occurs as matter
of serious concern, that any ground should be furnished for characterising
parties, by Geographical discriminations -- Northern and Southern -- Atlantic
and Western; whence designing men may endeavor to excite a belief, that there
is real difference of local interest and views. One of the expedients of party
to acquire influence within particular districts, is to misrepresent the
opinions and aims of other districts. You cannot shield yourself too much
against the jealousies and heart burnings which spring from these
misrepresentations; they tend to render alien to each other those who ought to
be bound together by fraternal affection. The inhabitants of our western
country have lately had a useful lesson on his head: They have seen, in the
negotiation by the Executive, and in the unanimous ratification by the Senate,
of the treaty with Spain, and in the universal satisfaction at that event
throughout the United States, a decisive proof how unfounded were the
suspicious (...) general government and in the Atlantic States unfriendly to
their interests in regard to the Missisippi; they have been witnesses to the
formation of two treaties, that with Great Britain and that with Spain, which
secure to them every thing they could desire, in respect to our foreign
relations, toward confirming their prosperity. Will it not be their wisdom to
rely for the preservation of these advantages on the UNION by which they were
procured? Will they not henceforth be deaf to those advisers, if such they are,
who would sever them from their brethren, and connect them with aliens?

To the efficacy and permanency of your union, a government for the whole is
indispensable. No alliances, however strict between the parts can be an
adequate substitute; they will inevitably experience the infractions and
interruptions which all alliances in all times have experienced -- Sensible of
this momentous truth, you have improved upon your first essay, by the adoption
of a constitution of government better calculated than your former for an
intimate union, and for the efficacious management of your common concerns.
This government, the offspring of your own choice, uninfluenced and unawed,
adopted upon full investigation and mature deliberation, completely free in its
principles, in the distribution of its powers, uniting security with energy,
and containing within itself a provision for its own amendment, has a just
claim to your confidence and your support. Respect for its authority,
compliance with its laws, acquiescence in its measures, are duties enjoined by
the fundamental maxims of true liberty. The basis of our political systems is
the right of the people to make and to alter their constitutions of government.
But the constitution which at any time exists, until changed by an explicit and
authentic act of the whole people, is sacredly obligatory upon all. The very
idea of the power and the right of the people to establish government,
presupposes the duty of every individual to obey the established government.

ALL obstructions to the execution of the laws, all combinations and
associations, under whatever plausible character, with the real design to
direct, control, counteract or awe the regular deliberation and action of the
constituted authorities, are destructive of this fundamental principle, and of
fatal tendency. They serve to organize faction, to give it an artificial and
extraordinary force -- to put in the place of the delegated will of the nation,
the will of a party, often a small but artful and enterprising minority of the
community; and according to the alternate triumphs of different parties, to
make the public administration the mirror of the ill concerted and incongruous
projects of faction rather than the organ of consistent and wholesome plans
digested by common councils and modified by mutual interests.

HOWEVER combinations or associations of the above description, may now and
then answer popular ends, they are likely in the course of time and things, to
become potent engines, by which cunning, ambitious and unprincipled men, will
be enabled to subvert the power of the people, and to usurp for themselves the
reins of government; destroying afterward the very engines which have lifted
them ^o unjust dominion.

TOWARD the preservation of your government, and ^he permanency of your
present happy state, it is requisite not only that you steadily discountenance
irregular opposition to its acknowledged authority, but also that you resist
with care, the spirit of innovation upon its principles, however specious the
pretext. One method of assault may be to effect, in the forms of the
constitution, alterations, which will impair the energy of the system, and thus
to undermine what cannot be directly overthrown. In all the changes to which
you may be invited, remember that time and habit are at least as necessary to
fix the true character of government, as of other human institutions; that
experience is the surest standard, by which to test the real tendency of the
existing constitution of a country -- that facility in changes upon the credit
of mere hypothesis and opinion, exposes to perpetual change, from the endless
variety of hypothesis and opinion; and remember, especially, that for the
efficient management of your common interest, in a country so extensive as
ours, a government of as much vigor as is consistent with the perfect security
of liberty is indispensable. Liberty itself will find in such a government,
with powers properly distributed and adjusted, its surest guardian. It is,
indeed, little else than a name, where the government is too feeble to
withstand the enterprises of faction, to confine each member of the society
within the limits prescribed by the laws, and to maintain all in the secure and
tranqui^ enjoyment of the rights of person and property.

I HAVE already intimated to you, the danger of partie^ in the state, with
particular reference to the founding o^ them on geographical discriminations.
Let me now tak^ a more comprehensive view and warn you in the most solemn
manner against the baneful effects of a spirit of party, generally.

THIS spirit, unfortunately, is inseparable from our nature, having its root in
the strongest passions of the human mind. It exists under different shapes in
all governments -- more or less stifled, controuled, or repressed; but in those
of the popular form, it is seen in its greatest rankness and is truly their
worst enemy.

THE alternate domination of one faction over another, sharpened by the spirit
of revenge, natural to party dissension, which in different ages and countries
has perpetrated the most horrid enormities, is itself a frightful despotism --
But this leads at length to a more formal and permanent despotism. The
disorders and miseries, which result, gradually incline the minds of men to
seek security and repose ^n the absolute power of an individual; and sooner or
later ^he chief of some prevailing faction, more able or more for^unate than
his competitors, turns this disposition to the ^urposes of his own elevation,
on the ruins of Public Lib^rty.

WITHOUT looking forward to an extremity of this ^ind (which nevertheless ought
not to be entirely out of ^^ght) the common and continual mischiefs of the
spirit of ^arty are sufficient to make it the interest and duty of a ^ise
people to discourage and restrain it.

IT serves always to distract the Public Councils and en^eble the Public
Administration. It agitates the commu^ity with ill-founded jealousies and false
alarms; kindles the ^nimosity of one part against another, foments occasionally
^ot and insurrection. It opens the door to foreign influ^nce and corruption,
which find a facilitated access to the ^overnment itself through the channels
of party passions. ^hus the policy and will of one country are subjected to ^^e
policy and will of another.

THERE is an opinion that parties in free countries are useful checks upon the
administration of the government, and serve to keep alive the spirit of
Liberty. -- This within certain limits is probably true, and in governments of
a monarchial cast, patriotism may look with indulgence, if not with favor upon
the spirit of party. But in those of the popular character, in governments
purely elective, it is a spirit not to be encouraged. -- From their natural
tendency it is certain there will always be enough of that spirit for every
salutary purpose. And there being constant danger of excess, the effort ought
to be by force of public opinion ^o mitigate and assuage it. A fire not to be
quenched; it demands uniform vigilance to prevent its bursting into a flame,
least instead of warming it should consume.

IT is important likewise, that the habits of thinking in a free country,
should inspire caution in those entrusted with its administration, to confine
themselves within their respective constitutional spheres, avoiding in the
exercise of the powers of one department to encroach upon another. The spirit
of encroachment tends to consolidate the powers of all the departments in one,
and thus to create, whatever the form of government, a real despotism. A just
estimate of that love of power, and proneness to abuse it, which predominates
in the human heart is sufficient to satisfy us of the truth of this position.
The necessity of reciprocal checks in the exercise of the political power; by
dividing and distributing it into different depositories, and constituting each
the guardian of the public weal against invasions by the others, has been
evinced by experiments ancient and modern; some of them in our country and
under our own eyes. To preserve them must be as necessary as to institute them.
If, in the opinion of the people, the distribution or modification of the
constitutional powers be in any particular wrong, let it be corrected by an
amendment in the way which the constitution designates -- But let there be no
change by usurpation; for though this, in one instance, may be the instrument
of good, it is the customary weapon by which free governments are destroyed --
The precedent must always greatly overbalance in permanent evil any partial or
transient benefit which the use can at any time yield.

OF all the dispositions and habits which lead to political prosperity,
Religion and Morality are indispensable supports. In vain would that man claim
the tribute of patriotism, who would labor to subvert these great pillars of
human happiness, these firmest props of the duties of men and citizens. The
mere politician, equally with the pious man, ought to respect and to cherish
them. -- A volume could not trace all their connections with private and public
felicity. Let it simply be asked, where is the security for property, for
reputation, for life, if the sense of religious obligation desert the oaths
which are the instruments of investigation in Courts of Justice? -- And let us
with caution indulge the supposition, that morality can be maintained without
religion. Whatever may be conceded of the influence of refined education on
minds of peculiar structure, ^eason and experience both forbid us to expect
that national morality can prevail in exclusion of religious principles.

IT is substantially true, that virtue or morality is a ne^essary spring of
popular government. The rule indeed extends with more or less force to every
species of free government. Who that is a sincere friend to it can look with
indiffere^^e upon attempts to shake the foundation of the fabric?

PROMOTE, then, as an object of primary importance, institutions for the
general diffusion of knowledge. In proportion as the structure of a government
gives force to public opinion, it is essential that public opinion should be
enlightened.

As a very important source of strength and security, cherish public credit --
One method of preserving it is to use it as sparingly as possible; avoiding
occasions of expense by cultivating peace, but remembering also that timely
disbursements to prepare for dangers, frequently prevent much greater
disbursements to repel it. Avoiding likewise the accumulation of debt, not only
by shunning occasions of expense, but by vigorous exertions in time of peace to
discharge the debts which unavoidable wars may have occasioned, not
ungenerously throwing upon posterity the burden which we ourselves ought to
bear. The execution of these maxims belongs to your representatives, but it is
necessary that public opinion should cooperate. To facilitate to them the
performance of their duty, it is essential that you should practically bear in
mind that toward the payment of debts there must be revenue -- that to have
revenue there must be taxes -- and none can be devised which are not more or
less inconvenient and unpleasant -- that the intrinsic embarrassment
inseparable from the selection of the proper objects (which is always a choice
of difficulties) -- ought to be a decisive motive for a candid construction of
the conduct of the government in making it, and for a spirit of acquiescence in
the measures for obtaining revenue which the public exigencies may at any time
dictate.

OBSERVE good faith and justice toward all nations -- cultivate peace and
harmony with all -- Religion and morality enjoins this conduct; and can it be,
that good policy does not equally enjoin it? It will be worthy of a free,
enlightened, and (at no distant period) a great nation, to give to mankind the
magnanimous and too novel example of a people always guided by an exalted
justice and benevolence. Who can doubt that in the course of time and things,
the fruits of such a plan would richly repay any temporary advantages which
might be lost by a steady adherence to it? Can it be, that Providence has not
connected the permanent felicity of a nation with Virtue? The experiment, at
least, is recommended by every sentiment which enobles human nature. Alas! is
it rendered impossible by its vices?

IN the execution of such a plan, nothing is more essential than that
permanent, inveterate antipathies against particular nations, and passionate
attachments for others should be excluded; and that in the place of them, just
and amicable feelings toward all should be cultivated. -- The nation, which
indulges toward another an habitual hatred, or an habitual fondness, is in
some degree a slave. It is a slave to its animosity or to its affection, either
of which is sufficient to lead it astray from its duty and its interest.
Antipathy in one nation against another disposes each more readily to offer
insult and injury, to lay hold of slight causes of umbrage, and to be haughty
and intractable, when accidental or trifling occasions of dispute occur.

HENCE frequent collisions, obstinate, envenomed and bloody contests. The
nation, prompted by ill will and resentment, sometimes impels to war the
government, contrary to the best calculations of policy. The government
sometimes participates in the national propensity, and adopts through passion
what reason would reject; at other times, it makes the animosity of the nation
subservient to projects of hostility instigated by pride, ambition and other
sinister and pernicious motives. The peace often, sometimes perhaps the
liberty, of nations has been the victim.

So likewise, a passionate attachment of one nation for another induces a
variety of evils. Sympathy for the favorite nations facilitating the illusion
of an imaginary common interest, in cases where no common interest exists, and
infusing into one the enmities of the other, betrays the former into a
participation in the quarrels and wars of the latter, without adequate
inducement or justification. It leads also concessions to the favorite nation
of privileges denied to others which is apt doubly to injure the nation making
the concessions; by unnecessarily parting with what ought to have been
retained; and by exciting jealousy, ill will, a disposition to retaliate, in
the parties from whom equal privileges are witheld: -- And it gives to
ambitious, corrupted or deluded citizens (who devote themselves to the favorite
nation) facility to betray, or sacrifice the interests of their own country,
without odium, sometimes even with popularity; gilding with the appearances of
a virtuous sense of obligation, a commendable deference for public opinion, o^
a laudable zeal for public good, the base or foolish compliances of ambition,
corruption, or infatuation. As avenues to foreign influence in innumerable
ways, such attachment^ are particularly alarming to the truly enlightened and
independent patriot. How many opportunities do they afford to tamper with
domestic factions, to practice the arts of seduction, to mislead public
opinion, to influence or awe the public councils; such an attachment of a small
or weak toward a great and powerful nation, dooms the former to be the
satllite of the latter.

AGAINST the insidious wiles of foreign influence (I conjure you to believe me,
fellow citizens) the jealousy of a free people ought to be constantly awake;
since history and experience prove that foreign influence is one of the most
baneful foes of republican government. -- But that jealousy to be useful must
be impartial; else it becomes the instrument of the very influence to be
avoided, instead of a defense against it. Excessive partiality for one foreign
nation, and excessive dislike of another, cause those whom they actuate to see
danger only on one side, and serve to veil and even second the arts of
influence on the other. Real patriots who may resist the intrigues of the
favorite, are liable to become suspected and odious; while its tools and dupes
usurp the applause and confidence of the people, to surrender their interests.

THE great rule of conduct for us in regard to foreign nations is, in extending
our commercial relations, to have with them as little political connection as
possible. So far as we have already formed engagements, let them be fulfilled
with perfect good faith. Here let us stop.

Europe has a set of primary interests, which to us have none or a very remote
relation. Hence she must be engaged in frequent controversies, the causes of
which are essentially foreign to our concerns. Hence therefore, it must be
unwise in us to implicate ourselves, by artificial ties, in the ordinary
vicissitudes of her politics, or the ordinary combinations and collisions of
her friendships, or enmities.

OUR detached situation, invites and enables us to pursue a different course.
If we remain one people under an efficient government, the period is not far
off, when we may defy material injury from external annoyance; when we may take
such an attitude as will cause the neutrality we may at any time resolve upon,
to be scrupulously respected; when belligerent nations, under the impossibility
of making acquisitions upon us will not lightly hazard the giving us
provocation; when we may choose peace or war, as our interests, guided by
justice, shall counsel.

WHY forego the advantages of so peculiar a situation? Why quit our own to
stand upon foreign ground? Why, by interweaving our destiny with that of any
part of Europe, entangle our peace and prosperity in the toils of European
ambition, rivalship, interest, humor or caprice?

IT IS our true policy to steer clear of permanent alliances, with any portion
of the foreign world; so far, I mean, as we are now at liberty to do it: for
let me not be understood as capable of patronizing infidelity to existing
engagements. I hold the maxim no less applicable to public than to private
affairs, that honesty is always the best policy. I repeat it therefore, let
those engagements be observed in their genuine sense. But in my opinion, it is
unnecessary and would be unwise to extend them.

TAKING care always to keep ourselves, by suitable establishments, on a
respectable defensive posture, we may safely trust to temporary alliances for
extraordinary emergencies.

HARMONY, liberal intercourse with all nations, are recommended by policy,
humanity and interest. But eve^ our commercial policy should hold an equal and
impartia^ hand; neither sending or granting exclusive favors or preferences --
consulting the natural course of things; diffusin^ and diversifying by gentle
means the streams of commerce but forcing nothing; establishing, with powers so
disposed in order to give trade a stable course to define the rights (...) our
merchants* and to enable the government to suppo^^ (...) them; conventional
rules of intercourse, the best that present circumstances and mutual opinion
will permit, but temporary, and liable to be from time to time abandoned or
varied as experience or circumstances shall dictate; constantly keeping in
view, that it is folly in one nation to look for disinterested favors from
another: that it must pay with a portion of its independence for whatever it
may accept under that character; that by such acceptance, it may place itself
in the condition of having given equivalents for nominal favors, and yet of
being reproached with ingratitude for not giving more. There can be no greater
error than to expect, or calculate upon real favors from nation to nation. It Is
an illusion which experience must cure, which a just pride ought to discard.

In offering to you, my countrymen, these counsels of an old affectionate
friend, I dare not hope they will make the strong and lasting impression I
could wish -- that they will control the usual current of the passions, or
prevent our nation from running the course which has hitherto marked ^he
destiny of nations: But if I may even flatter myself, that they may be
productive of some partial benefits, some ^ccasional good; that they may now
and then recur to moderate the fury of party spirit, to warn against the
mis^hiefs of foreign intrigue, to guard against the impostures ^f pretended
patriotism; this hope will be a full recomense for the solicitude for your
welfare, by which they ^ave been dictated.

How far in the discharge of my official duties, I have ^een guided by the
principles which have been delineated, ^e public records and other evidences of
my conduct must ^itness to you and to the world. To myself, the assurance of my
own conscience is, that I have at least believed myself to be guided by them.

IN relation to the still subsisting war in Europe, my Proclamation of the 22d
April, 1795, is the index to my plan. Sanctioned by your approving voice, and
by that of your representatives in both Houses of Congress, the spirit of that
measure has continually governed me, uninfluenced by any attempts to deter or
divert me from it.

AFTER deliberate examination, with the aid of the best lights I could obtain,
I was well satisfied that our country, under all the circumstances of the case,
had a right to take and was bound in duty and interest to take a neutral
position. Having taken it, I determined, as far as should depend on me, to
maintain it with moderation.

THE considerations which respect the right to hold this conduct, it is not
necessary on this occasion to detail. I will only observe, that according to my
understanding o^ the matter, that right, so far from being denied by any o^ the
Belligerent Powers, has been virtually admitted by all.

THE duty of holding a neutral conduct may be inferred without any thing more,
from the obligation which justice and humanity impose on every nation, in cases
in which i^ is free to act, to maintain inviolate the relations of peace and
amity toward other nations.

THE inducements of interest for observing that conduct will best be referred
to your own reflections and experience With me, a predominant motive has been
to endeavor to gain time to our country to settle and mature its yet recen^
institutions, and to progress without interruption, to tha^ degree of strength
and consistency, which is necessary t^ give it, humanly speaking, the command
of its own fortunes

THOUGH in reviewing the incidents of my administration, I am unconscious of
intentional error: I am nevertheless too sensible of my defects not to think it
probable that I have committed many errors. Whatever they may be, I fervently
beseech the Almighty to avert or mitigate the evils to which they may tend. I
shall also carry with me the hope that my country will never cease to view them
with indulgence; and that after forty-five years of my life dedicated to its
service, with an upright zeal, the faults of incompetent abilities will be
consigned to oblivion, as myself must soon be to the mansions of rest.

RELYING on its kindness in this as in other things, and actuated by that
fervent love toward it, which is so natural to a man who views in it the
native soil of himself and his progenitors for several generations; I
anticipate with pleasing expectation that retreat, in which I promise myself to
realize, without alloy, the sweet enjoyment of partaking in the midst of my
fellow-citizens, the benign influence of good ^aws under a free government --
the ever favorite object of my heart, and the happy reward as I trust, of our
mutual cares, labors and dangers.

George Washington.
United States, 17th September, 1796.
ERRATA -- Page 5, line 15 from top, for was read were -- p. ^, l. 15 from top,
for was read were.


