RULES OF DISCIPLINE, AND CHRISTIAN ADVICES, OF THE YEARLY MEETING OF FRIENDS
FOR THE STATE OF NEW YORK AND PARTS ADJACENT. Agreed on by said Meeting, held
in New York, in the Fifth Month, 1800.

NEW YORK: PRINTED BY ISAAC COLLINS, No. 189, PEARL-STREET. 1800.

INTRODUCTION.
WHEN it pleased the Lord to manifest the glorious dispensation of his blessed
Son our Savior, apostles were called and sent forth in his service; and many
believed in his name.

And in the early times of Christianity, it was found necessary for the
apostles and believers to meet often together, for the comfort, consolation and
help, one of another; where, pursuant to the glorious design of the Gospel,
which breathes Peace on Earth, and Good Will toward men, love and charity
greatly abounded; and a care arose for the establishment and preservation of
the church, that all might be of one mind, and walk by the same rule, as became
the followers of their holy Lord and Lawgiver. And as this love and charity,
the essence of pure and undefiled religion, was abode in, those meetings were
owned, and witnessed to be times of refreshment from the holy Head of the
Church.

But in succession of time, the simplicity and good purposes of those meetings
were greatly lost, by reason of the declension and falling away of the
professed Christian Churches; and a particular denomination of men, for worldly
and carnal ends, assuming an authority and exercising lordship over the flock.
Yet after a long and dark night of apostasy, it pleased the Lord to bring many
from under that darkness which had overspread the professors of the Christian
religion; and of latter days to gather a people more fully into a state of
Gospel freedom, whereby our predecessors witnessed the prevalence of that
primitive Love and Good Will, and were led by Holy direction, to the
establishment of meetings for the like good purposes as in primitive times; and
for the more regular and orderly proceeding in those so established for the
discipline of the Church, they are subordinate one to another, as preparative,
consisting of friends belonging to one or more meetings for worship; monthly,
consisting of so many preparatives as may conveniently compose the same;
quarterly, consisting of so many monthly meetings as may be judged most
suitable; yearly, consisting of so many quarterly meetings as may most usefully
meet together once a year, for the superintending care and health of the body.

And in order that these purposes may be more fully answered, the following
rules and regulations are, on due consideration, recommended to the observance
of friends, overseers and meetings. And in the exercise of which, care,
persuasion and gentle dealing, ought to be our practice, laboring in love and
meekness, to bring such as transgress to a sense of their error. But if any, by
our Christian endeavors, cannot be reclaimed, the extent of our judgment and
procedure is, the disowning such to be of our communion. And as this authority
and practice is Christian, so is it laudable and reasonable in society: and as
it is attended to, in uprightness and singleness of heart, will tend to promote
the good and welfare of the Church, and to unite in a care and concern for the
oversight one of another, that all may endeavor to walk decently, humbly, and
honestly, and be of one mind, as becomes the servants and followers of our Holy
Lord and Lawgiver, and to practice that commendable order, ever necessary in
the Christian Church, agreeable to that injunction of our blessed Lord, Matt.
xviii. 15, 16, 17. Moreover, if thy brother shall trespass against thee, go and
tell him his fault between thee and him alone; if he shall hear thee, thou have
gained thy brother; but if he will not hear thee, then take with thee one or
two more, that in the mouth of two or three witnesses, every word may be
established; and if he shall neglect to hear them, tell it unto the church; but
if he neglect to hear the church, let him be unto thee as an heathen man, and a
publican.

Also the expressions of that eminent apostle Paul, in his epistle to the
Philippians, iv. 8. Finally, brethren, whatsoever things are true, whatsoever
things are honest, whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are pure,
whatsoever things are lovely, whatsoever things are of good report, if there be
any virtue, and if there be any praise, think on these things. Now, whatsoever
appears in any contrary to these, may in general be said to come under the
notice of friends, overseers, and meetings.

And as it has been experienced, that in those meetings great comfort and
satisfaction have been received and enjoyed, when the members have attended
them in awe, humility and love, with no other view than the honor of God, and
the help and assistance one of another, this meeting does, in brotherly love,
exhort all friends carefully to gather in uprightness and singleness of heart,
suitable to our calling, and the dignity of that Power which will preside and
govern in all our meetings, as we meekly abide under its holy influence. This
will divest us of partiality and stiffness of opinion, and all high thoughts of
ourselves, and lead into patience, and condescension, according to that
declaration of our blessed Lord, He that is greatest among you, shall be your
servant.

IT is to be observed, that the dates at the end of some of the minutes and
advices denote the years in which they were issued by the yearly meeting.

The book is printed with blank pages for the purpose of making future
additions, which are to be inserted in the manner and in the page in which they
will be directed to be placed by the yearly meeting. No other additions are to
be made.

And in order to avoid the frequent repetition of the words he, she, or they,
in the following work, the word he, only is sometimes made use of, which is
meant to apply to either men or women, as the case may be.

CONTENTS.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS and testifications, Page 39 Appeals, Page 43 Apprentices, Page
81 Books, Page 87 Burials, Page 117 Certificates, Page 55 Civil government,
Page 91 Children, Page 81 Dealing with offenders, Page 25 Differences and
arbitrations, Page 31 Diversions, Page 101 Defamation and detraction, Page 37
Days and times, Page 73 Distilled spirits, etc. Page 105 Donations, Page 113
Elders, Page 19 Gaming, Page 101 Meetings for worship, Page 1 -- for
discipline, Page 5 -- of ministers and elders, Page 131 -- for sufferings, Page
137 Ministry Page 12 Meeting Houses and ground, Page 141 Marriages, Page 45
Memorials, Page 119 Overseers, Page 22 Oaths, Page 95 Poor, Page 77 Plainness,
Page 69 Priests wages or hireling ministry, Page 97 Queries, Page 121 Requests
to be received into membership, Page 65 Removals, Page 55 Scandal (public)
Page 89 Slavery, Page 111 Schools, Page 83 Sufferings, Page 99 Subscriptions,
Page 113 Scriptures of the Old and New Testament, Page 85 Taverns, Page 103
Trade and commerce, Page 59 Women's meetings, Page 127 War, Page 93 Wills, Page
115
MEETINGS FOR WORSHIP.
THAT all friends duly and seasonably attend their meetings established for the
solemn purpose of publicly performing true and acceptable worship to the
Father of Spirits; and carefully avoid suffering any slight pretense or worldly
business to occasion our absence from those on the middle of the week; or on
trivial occasions leave our children and dependants behind, engaged in our
domestic concerns; awfully keeping in remembrance, that the solemn enquiry will
be made, What have thou done with those lambs committed to thy care. Happy then
for those who feel the supporting evidence, that they have endeavored in
preference to all other concerns for their children, and those placed under
their care, to train them up in the nurture and admonition of the Lord.

And when assembled, let us be diligent in waiting upon the Lord with fervent
desires, that we may be favored with the enjoyment of his life-giving
presence; that so we may be preserved from wandering thoughts, and from a
drowsy and lukewarm spirit; and may demonstrate that we do indeed worship the
Father in spirit. Thus, by our pious example, tenderhearted enquirers may be
encouraged, to come and partake in our solemn assemblies of that inward and
spiritual refreshment, which is at times graciously imparted to the souls of
the humbly devoted: some of whom have to acknowledge, that faithfulness in thus
devoting time, in the attendance of meetings, tends greatly to strengthen in
coming up with more propriety in the duties we owe to God, to our families, and
to mankind.

And let those who frequently neglect, or do not seasonably attend our
religious meetings, or go out and in unnecessarily, or otherwise disturb the
meeting, be seasonably cautioned and admonished: And parents, masters, and
mistresses, are exhorted to have a godly care over their children and families
in those respects.

And when any so manifest their want of love to God, and the unity of the
brethren, as to continue in the apparent neglect of attending our religious
meetings, and disregard the repeated advice and endeavors of friends to stir
them up to this incumbent duty, they are to be dealt with, by the monthly
meeting to which they belong, even to disownment, if after continued tender
labor, the case may appear to the meeting to require it.

MEETINGS FOR DISCIPLINE.
AND as to the establishment and order of meetings -- That no quarterly meeting
be set up or discontinued, but by the yearly meeting* no monthly meeting, but
by the quarterly; no preparative or meeting for worship, but by the monthly
meeting, having the approbation of the quarter.

The preparative meeting to keep a record, but not have authority to receive or
disown any member, that authority being only in the monthly, quarterly and
yearly meetings.

These meetings are subordinate and accountable thus: The preparative to the
monthly; the monthly to the quarterly; and the quarterly to the yearly meeting:
So that if at any time the yearly meeting be dissatisfied with the proceedings
of any of the said meetings, or the quarterly with the proceedings of any of
the monthly meetings, or the monthly with the proceedings of any of its
preparative meetings, such meetings are directed to render a satisfactory
account when required.

And if any quarterly meeting have occasion for, and request the records or
minutes of another quarterly meeting, or one monthly meeting those of another,
it is directed, that copies of such minutes or records be accordingly
communicated to the meeting so requesting.

That there be at least two, or a sufficient number of friends appointed by
each monthly meeting to attend the service of the quarterly meeting to which
they belong, and to present, on behalf and by order of the respective monthly
meeting, what shall by the said meeting be given in charge, which should be in
writing; and that there be for the like service, at least four friends
appointed by each quarterly meeting, to attend the yearly meeting, in manner as
above mentioned; and the names of the friends thus appointed, are to be entered
on the records of the meeting they are appointed to attend, and the same method
to be observed by the quarterly and yearly meeting of ministers and elders.

That full endeavors be used in every monthly meeting, to end all business
that arises therein, or is brought thereto, with care and dispatch; but if they
find any business, or matter, too weighty or difficult for them to determine,
they may move the same to the next quarterly meeting, and in like manner, after
due care and endeavors are used to end any matter, the quarterly meeting may
remove the same to the next yearly meeting, except in such cases where an
individual member may be concerned, or whose right to an appeal may be
affected, in such instances if a monthly meeting finds a difficulty too great
for them to determine, they may inform the quarterly meeting, that a subject is
before them in which they desire assistance, and the quarter is then to appoint
some Friends to set with and assist the monthly meeting in the case, and report
their attendance only, the merits of the case not to be hinted at, either in
the report, or in the application of the monthly meeting. Thus will the right
of appeal to the quarter be preserved, and the like steps may be taken in such
other cases as the monthly meeting may judge proper and necessary.

And as inconveniences have happened, where friends whose duty it is, or who
have been appointed to attend monthly, quarterly, or yearly meetings, or to
other services, in, or on behalf of any of said meetings, have delayed, or
neglected seasonably attending thereto, it is earnestly desired and advised,
that all friends do carefully attend such meetings and services. And when any
friends attend any of said meetings of business, that they do not withdraw or
leave the same, until the business is finished, unless they first give the
meeting a satisfactory reason for so doing. And when any, being appointed to
services as above, are prevented attending thereto, by sickness, or other
extraordinary occasions, that they render an account thereof to the meeting.

That committees of meetings, enter seasonably and unitedly on the business of
their appointment, and agree on a report, to be made by one of their number,
the others likewise standing to show their concurrence, which nevertheless may
be in writing, where the case appears to the meeting to require it; and when
they report the business not accomplished, that they offer reasons therefore,
that the meeting may be satisfied there has been no unprofitable delay.

That the business from preparative to monthly, and from monthly to quarterly
meetings, be read in the respective meetings to which they are forwarded,
together with the minutes of the preceding monthly or quarterly, and the
extracts from superior meetings, at the opening of each meeting.

That minutes or due entries be made, in every monthly and quarterly meeting,
of all such matters as come before them and are determined, or that are or may
be removed to the quarterly or yearly meeting;

And that the minutes and reports which go from inferior to superior meetings,
be signed by their respective clerks.

Where any are under dealing, they are not to be permitted to sit in any of our
meetings for discipline, except desired by such meeting.

That each monthly meeting appoint a Treasurer, and have a collection
quarterly, to provide for the relief of the necessitous, and other purposes of
the meeting.

Every particular meeting for worship should be a preparative meeting, where
there is a probability of their being reputably supported.

And in cases where it may appear to be not quite safe for a preparative
meeting to be held, and yet a meeting for worship is allowed, it is the sense
of this meeting, that in such cases, it will generally be advisable, and tend
to the help and strength of the members constituting the same, that a
preparative meeting be also allowed, under the particular superintendance of a
suitable committee of men and women friends, to sit with them in conducting the
business thereof (as often as well may be) and which ought to be at least once
in three months.

That such business as comes from persons not of our society, be brought to the
preparative meeting by the overseers.

And it is the earnest desire of this meeting, that our quarterly meetings, in
their collective capacity, wait for the arising of the Spirit of Truth, whereby
they may be enabled to administer such advice and assistance to the monthly
meetings as circumstances may from time to time call for, in order that our
Christian Discipline may be supported agreeably to the design of its
institution: That the necessity of a more close attention to the tenor and
spirit thereof, may be impressed on our monthly meetings, on whose care and
concern for the support and maintenance of the wholesome regulations therein
recommended, for general use and practice, much depends. It is therefore
earnestly desired, that this watchful care may be maintained, lest a gradual
sliding therefrom take place, and weakness ensue. -- Y. M. 1789.

Our quarterly, monthly and preparative meetings are advised to be careful how
they employ, in the service of society, such as give way to sleeping in
meetings.

It is further earnestly desired, that representatives weightily consider the
importance of their appointment, and endeavor to keep under a lively sense of
the interesting concerns which have exercised the yearly meeting, and thereby
be enabled to accompany them to our subordinate meetings, with such remarks as
truth may authorize. Y. M. 1790.

With solicitude of heart we desire to impress the minds of all concerned and
active members in their several meetings, to consider the need there is of
faithfulness on their parts, in discharging the trust committed to them, with
great diligence and circumspection; for our minds have been seized with
jealousy, lest those who should stand as watchmen on the walls, are too much
concerned to seek their own things, and not the things that are Jesus Christ's;
hence weakness ensues, and, instead of watching and caring for the flock, we
fear some of those may become as stumbling blocks in the way of others.

An exercising concern has also been witnessed, lest the progress of truth in
our religious society be hindered, through unsavory and injudicious
appointments to services in the church; it is therefore earnestly requested,
that friends be weighty in their nomination, as the right maintaining our
Christian Discipline, in its various branches, very much depends on a solemn
attention to the pointings of best wisdom therein. Y. M. 1792.

MINISTRY, And traveling in that Service.
WHEN any friend comes forth in the ministry, and the preparative meeting of
ministers and elders, are united in believing it right to propose to the
monthly meeting the consideration of admitting such friend a member of their
meeting, they are to inform the quarterly meeting of ministers and elders
thereof, and if that meeting concur in prospect, they are to return information
to the select preparative meeting, who are then to propose to the monthly
meeting the consideration of the subject; and if the monthly meeting, after due
and weighty consideration, and the necessary and particular attention of a
committee appointed thereto, do unite in recommending such friend to the
meeting of ministers and elders as a minister, they are to inform the said
preparative meeting of ministers and elders thereof; and such friend is then to
be considered a member of such meeting, and information thereof is to be
forwarded to the quarterly meeting of ministers and elders; previous to which
recommendation of the monthly meeting, no friend is to travel abroad in the
ministry, or appoint meetings.

But it is not hereby intended to debar a friend not thus recommended, who has
the unity and concurrence of the concerned part of the meeting to which he
belongs, from accompanying, in a small prospect, a recommended minister, when
traveling in the ministry, or in an extensive prospect, where a monthly
meeting is easy with such young minister's proceeding therein, carefully
avoiding in a minute given to such, mentioning any thing relative to their
public appearance.

And when any approved minister finds his or her mind engaged to travel in
truth's service, they are to acquaint the monthly meeting to which they belong
thereof, for their advice and approbation, which may be sufficient when such
prospect is only to meetings within the quarter to which such minister belongs;
unless such meetings are remote, and in such cases a minute of such concurrence
ought to be obtained; and in some cases where only a few meetings in the
quarter is intended, and not far from home, the advice and concurrence of some
of the elders collectively may be sufficient; but if to other parts of the
yearly meeting, a certificate or minute of the monthly meeting is to be
obtained, unless the intended visit be only to a few meetings in another
quarter, in which case a discretionary care is to be exercised by monthly
meetings, when such cases come before them.

But if the prospect extends to a pretty general visit of the meetings, either
in the compass of Rhode Island yearly meeting, or southward or westward further
than the Jersies, or to any extensive visit amongst those not of our society,
it is expedient* and it is believed will tend to the encouragement and
preservation of the individuals who go forth in this weighty service, to lay
the concern before the quarterly meeting, with the certificate of the monthly,
for their sympathy and concurrence, and that if obtained, to be expressed by an
endorsement on the certificate, and signed by the clerk; unless some peculiar
circumstances should induce the monthly meeting to judge that manifest
inconveniency would result from waiting the meeting of the quarter.

And in cases where the intended visit is to parts beyond sea -- As the most
weighty, clear, and deliberate evidence should be obtained in the undertaking,
it is concluded that such concern, with the certificate of the monthly and
endorsement of the quarterly meeting, should be laid before the yearly meeting
of ministers and elders, for their approbation, and if obtained, a certificate
thereof be signed by the clerk.

And with respect to visiting families -- although it is a service, that, when
performed under right direction, frequently proves usefully instructive and
beneficial, yet it requires deliberate and weighty consideration; therefore,
for the encouragement and strengthening ministers in right movements therein,
it is advised, that those who feel it a duty to make a pretty general visit of
this kind, even in the monthly meeting to which they belong, that they have the
concurrence thereof, and if the prospect extends to the families in another
monthly meeting, the concurrence to be expressed by minute.

And when any woman friend in the ministry has a concern to travel in that
service, she is to open the same in the women's meeting; and when that meeting
is so far united therewith as to approve its being laid before the men's
meeting, the friend is then to be encouraged to open the same before said
meeting for their sympathy and concurrence; and when approved, a certificate
expressive thereof is to be prepared and signed by both meetings. And it is
believed that it will afford strength and encouragement to men friends who
travel in truth's service, to have the unity and concurrence of the women's
meeting therein, and that manifested by their certificate, being signed by
their clerk, or by the members more at large, as the case may require.

It is also desired, that friends be careful not to receive friends traveling
in the ministry without certificates, or other necessary recommendation. And
that monthly meetings take care, that certificates or minutes given to any
friend be, upon the return of such friend, seasonably returned.

None are to take upon them publicly to oppose any ministering friend, whether
recommended or not, whilst in the unity of the body; or in time of prayer keep
on the hat, or show any remarkable dislike: but if any think they have ought
against what was delivered, they are to speak to them privately, and in doing
which, it is advised as a safe step, where it can consistently be done, that
the dissatisfaction be previously opened to one or more of the elders, in order
for their advice and assistance. But as it is possible, that cases may occur,
in which such an improper use may be made of this tender care toward those of
the ministry, that by some unauthorized public appearance, the solemnity of
the meeting may materially suffer; it is therefore judged advisable that a
discretionary care be vested in ministers and elders, in cases where it appears
there is a necessity for it, tenderly to intimate a desire for the preservation
of quiet, and that a suitable opportunity be taken by the elders with such
person who has thus given occasion of concern, and advice and counsel be
given, as may appear necessary. And in this and other cases where ministers
give cause of uneasiness or dissatisfaction to friends, it is desired that
elders take due care to admonish and advise such seasonably, and if their
advice has not the desired effect, that they lay the case before the
preparative meeting of ministers and elders, in order that further care, advice
and caution may, in the wisdom of truth, be extended; but if the friend should
continue in public appearance to dissatisfaction, such friend, who so disturbs
the solemnity of meetings for worship, should be dealt with, and if not brought
to regard the advice of his or her friends, the monthly meeting is to proceed
to disown such, if the state of the case appears to require it.

As friends, and the meetings belonging to this yearly meeting, are widely
extended, and occasions offer for committees of the yearly meeting to visit the
meetings in the different quarters, and that some friend of the ministry on
such appointments, may, when remote from home, have a prospect of religious
duty to appoint some meetings in particular places, it is therefore concluded
that in such cases, such friend have liberty to disclose the concern to friends
of the committee who are in company, and such ministers and elders, or other
concerned friends as are in the neighborhood where they are, and with their
concurrence, proceed in appointing a few meetings agreeable to such prospect.

ELDERS.
IT is desired that the subject of appointing elders engage the weighty care
and attention of the preparative meeting of ministers and elders; and when they
apprehend a friend so far advanced in religious experience, and qualified for
the weighty trust of an elder in the church, that it may be safe and useful for
such friend to be appointed to that station, that they propose the same to the
consideration of the monthly meeting, and, if approved by said meeting, such
friend to be considered a member of the meeting of ministers and elders, and
the quarterly meeting of ministers and elders is to be informed of such
appointment through the said preparative meeting.

A renewed consideration of the subject respecting elders removing, and
retaining their station as elders in the monthly meeting to which they remove,
again engaged the solid attention of the meeting, and, after a deliberate
review of the subject, it is the judgment of this meeting, that the right of
appointing in that case should not in future continue a friend in that station
on his removing into the compass of another monthly meeting. Y. M. 1789.

And it is the desire of this meeting, that preparative meetings of ministers
and elders have a watchful care over the members of their meeting. And if it
should so fall out that any one of them should give cause to believe it
advisable for such to be released from their stations, they are, after
discharging a brotherly care therein, to put the case in a way to come before
the monthly meeting, in order that he or she may be released from being members
of the meeting of ministers and elders, if the monthly meeting should see it
right.

OVERSEERS.
THAT each monthly meeting choose two or more concerned and judicious men, and
two or more women friends, to be overseers in each preparative meeting; which
overseers are to render an account of their service to the monthly meeting
whenever thereunto required. This choice to be made from time to time as
monthly meetings may think best.

And although it is a duty incumbent on every faithful member in society, where
any disorder or unbecoming practice comes to their knowledge, to advise,
admonish or deal with such as are guilty thereof; yet that the same be not
overlooked or neglected, it ought to be more particularly the business of
overseers.

The subject relative to the appointment of overseers engaged the attention of
this meeting, and the solid consideration thereof resulted, in earnestly
recommending to our monthly meetings, a weighty and due attention to the
pointings of wisdom, in the choice of friends to this important service in the
church, that it may be placed on those whose careful concern for the support of
our christian testimony, in its various branches, may tend to the preservation
of good order. 1790.

DEALING WITH OFFENDERS.
IT is the advice of this meeting, that in speaking to, or dealing with any, it
be done in a christian spirit, in the persuasive language of love and
tenderness; laboring in meekness to lay the evil before the offenders, to
bring them to a sense of it in themselves, and to promote their right
restoration. And although such as transgress, or lose their hold of truth, are
apt to oppose or be testy, while they are in that condition, yet we ought
patiently and meekly to instruct and advise them, so that we may not only have
the reward of peace in ourselves, but that it may so affect the spirits of
those spoken to, as that they may be sensible we have only performed a
christian duty, and an office of brotherly love toward them. After which
tender dealing, if any reject the admonition, counsel and advice given them,
the overseers are to acquaint the preparative meeting thereof in order, if
needful, that the same may be laid before the monthly meeting, that further
care may be taken with such according to our established rules; of which notice
should be previously given to the persons so dealt with, when that can
reasonably be done.

And in all cases where it appears to a monthly meeting, that the necessary
labor has been bestowed on an offending member, and it appears right to
disown such member, they are first to be informed hereof by an appointment of
some friends who are to take a suitable opportunity solidly to state the
grounds of such conclusion, and thereby open the way for such friend to review
his situation, the steps that have been taken in the case, and of communicating
any observations that he may be desirous to offer; and if any such observations
should appear to the committee sufficiently interesting to obtain the attention
and care of the meeting, they are to state them in their report, and further
proceedings are to be at the discretion of the monthly meeting.

And when any member is disowned, such are to be informed thereof, and of their
privilege of appealing, and a copy of the testification or minute of denial, as
the case may be, offered to the person disowned. And let the friends appointed
in this service also take a suitable opportunity for a solid interview, that
may evidence that the meeting's movements have been induced by a desire for the
religious welfare of the individual, and the support of our christian testimony.

For the maintaining of our testimony against the nature and spirit of war, as
well as matters which are publicly known to be inconsistent or scandalous --
That when any, being guilty of such things, abscond or depart from amongst us,
so as to deprive friends of opportunity to discharge the care they might
otherwise do, that testimonies against such persons, and their reproachful or
inconsistent conduct be issued, declaring that they manifest by their deeds
they are gone out from us, and therefore nor proper to be owned, until they
condemn their deviations to satisfaction.

Where any person or persons commit any offense within a monthly meeting
wherein they reside, but are not properly members by the rules of settlement,
such persons shall, by the monthly meeting where the offense is committed, be
dealt with, if said meeting is satisfied the individual is a member; and if it
be of such a nature as requires a denial, unless satisfaction is given, the
said meeting shall disown such person or persons, and on repentance receive
such into unity again, which shall not entitle to membership in the monthly
meeting so having dealt with them -- but the meeting of which they were members
before such dealing, and the monthly meeting which has disowned such friend or
friends, shall immediately give notice of the denial or acceptance to the
meeting where such person does belong.

DIFFERENCES AND ARBITRATIONS.
WHERE any differences arise between any friends about their interest, claims,
or properties in worldly affairs, it is the sense and judgment of this meeting,
that according to the ancient, comely, and christian practice, that at no time
brother go to law with brother, except upon apparent and urgent necessity, as
is hereafter limited and expressed; but, that all friends proceed in the
following manner, viz. the party thinking he has reason of complaint, is
himself calmly and friendly to speak, or, if he live at a distance too great to
do it in person, write to the party, by whom he thinks himself injured, or to
be in danger of suffering in his just right, and endeavor, by gentle means in
a brotherly manner, to obtain his right, but if that does not prevail, then let
him, or, if they live at a distance as aforesaid, some friend whom he may write
to, and empower on his behalf, take one or more of the overseers, or other
judicious friends, and in like manner make his claim or demand; which friends
so accompanying the complainant, are to use their endeavors, and give their
utmost assistance, to have the matter justly and expeditiously ended, either by
the parties, or the immediate assistance of those friends, who, if the matter
appear plain and easy, or to be an uncontested debt, against which no
reasonable objection is made by the debtor, are to advise the party complained
of to make satisfaction, without carrying the matter further, either to
arbitrators or the meeting: but if there do appear to be either unsettled
differences in accounts, or reason of debate, then if they cannot persuade the
determination thereof by the parties themselves, or procure the same by their
advice and assistance, they are to advise the parties to choose arbitrators for
the settlement thereof; but if they cannot be so prevailed on, such refusal
ought to be represented to the preparative meeting by the overseers, or the
complainant, if neglected, of which the other party is to have notice; and if
the parties cannot by the meeting's care, be brought to an agreement, or to
refer the subject to arbitration, the complaint shall be carried from the
preparative to the monthly meeting, with previous notice thereof to the party
complained of, where the first enquiry should be, whether the above gospel
order has been duly observed; if not, the complainant is to be referred back
thereto, and no notice thereof taken on minute: but if it has, the monthly
meeting is to appoint some friends to have a conference with the parties, and
consider whether the subject is attended with such circumstances as to justify
the monthly meeting in advising it to be left to arbitration, and if the
friends report that it so appears to them, and the monthly meeting concur
therewith, -- let the parties be advised to submit the subject to arbitration:
and if either of the parties refuse to comply therewith, or decline nominating
or choosing arbitrators, the meeting, after laboring with the party so
neglecting, should testify their disunion with such offender. And where a
subject of difference has been submitted to arbitration, either by consent of
parties, or been prevailed on by a monthly meeting so to do, the award ought to
be final, unless where it appears notoriously evident they have materially
erred in their judgment or proceedings, or have not given sufficient
opportunity of producing such evidence as was necessary in the case; and where
this appears clear to the monthly meeting, they are to inform the quarter that
they have a case before them in which they desire assistance, and the quarter
is then to appoint some friends to sit with and assist the monthly meeting in
the case; and if it should appear on consideration, that there is cause for
dissatisfaction, a rehearing is to be granted by the same or other arbitrators,
and their award to be final.

And where arbitrators are chosen in any case, they ought as speedily as may
be, to appoint time and place, and duly attend the business, by giving the
parties and their witnesses a full and fair hearing, in the presence of each
other, using all caution and care to avoid unnecessary delay, and to make the
determination within the time appointed.

And whereas there may be some circumstances, even in disputed matters, wherein
the foregoing wholesome method of proceeding cannot consistently be complied
with; such as, first, the party absconding or leaving the country, with design
to defraud his or her creditors; or, secondly, when the time it might take up
in going through the meeting might be a manifest damage to the creditor or
claimant, as in cases of apparent danger of bankruptcy, and the party being
overloaded with debts, and other creditors generally coming on; or, third, that
there may be danger of future damage to such as submit thereto, as in the case
of executors, administrators, trustees, or friends who stand as security for
those who are not members in society with us; it may therefore be necessary,
and it is advised that the monthly meeting in these cases do hold excused such
as shall appear to them to be really necessitated to proceed at law, with this
caution, that the parties on both sides behave toward each other, in brotherly
love, decency and moderation, without anger or animosity, which will be as a
becoming testimony, even in courts, and show that nothing but the nature of the
case and our common station with our neighbors, under the laws of the land,
bring any of us there.

If any person in membership with us shall arrest or sue at law any other
friend, without proceeding in the manner herein before prescribed, such person
does therein deviate from the profession we make, and ought to be dealt with
for the same, and, unless he give satisfaction, be disowned.

It is advised, that persons differing about worldly affairs do as little as
may be choose ministering friends as arbitrators.

And as it is our duty to seek peace with all men, and to avoid giving
provocation or just offense to any -- It is advised that friends do not go to
law with others not of our profession, without due consideration or good
grounds, having first, in a friendly way, showed his opponent the justness of
his cause, and having offered, if it can be done with safety, if the other make
any reasonable objection to his claim, to put the matter to a neighbourly
reference.

So also that friends give no just occasion to such to go to law with them, but
carefully comply with their promises and contracts; and where they have any
reason for objecting to the demand, that they show a readiness to settle it
peaceably between themselves, or to submit to reference where it can be done
with safety.

DEFAMATION AND DETRACTION.
WHERE any are guilty of tattling, tale-bearing, reproaching, backbiting, or
speaking evil of their neighbors, or busily meddling where not concerned, with
the affairs of others, the tendency of which being to raise strife and discord,
or cause disesteem among brethren or neighbors, they are to be suitably dealt
with, even to disownment, if the nature of the case should require it.

And it is the desire and advice of this meeting, that in all cases friends be
careful in their conduct and converse among men, to act with due
circumspection, that neither in word nor deed they do any thing to the hurt or
reproach one of another. And if any friend hear of any scandalous words or
actions of another, that he as much as in him lies stop such report by
discountenancing or dealing with the reporters, showing the evil and injustice
thereof, and then without further spreading of it, go to the friend whom it
concerns, or advise him thereof, to the end such may clear themselves if
innocent, or condemn the same if guilty; and if one or the other is not done,
that friend ought to advise the overseers of the meeting to which the party
belongs thereof, that he or she may be dealt with consistent with our
discipline.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS AND TESTIFICATIONS.
IT is concluded, that acknowledgments in all cases be offered to the meeting
by whom the person was disowned, and where the records thereof are kept; and if
the person so acknowledging, resides in the compass of another monthly meeting,
and so far remote as to render it difficult for the meeting, by whom disowned,
to visit the acknowledger by their own appointment, that they by writing
request such monthly meeting to visit the person on their behalf, and when
prepared, inform the requesting monthly meeting their sense of the situation of
such acknowledger, who are then to attend to the subject, and proceed in
resulting the case, as truth may point out; and when such person is restored to
membership, that the monthly meeting receiving, place him or her under the care
of the monthly meeting where their residence is, either by their certificate,
or minute of recommendation.

That all testifications and acknowledgments be entered on the minutes of the
monthly meeting; which minutes should in all cases contain a clear explicit
narrative, so as to keep the merits of the case on record.

It is concluded, that monthly meetings do not read publicly acknowledgments
from persons who have been publicly disowned, unless in cases of public
scandal, and in these cases the public reading to take place only in instances
where a monthly meeting may judge that our testimony or the individual may
sustain an injury by the omission. 1794.

Resulted as the sense and judgment of this meeting, that testifications
against persons disowned for offenses against the church only, be not in future
publicly read. 1799.

That acknowledgments from persons disowned be read in the preparative meeting,
and if no evident impropriety appears to their going forward to the monthly
meeting, that they be sent with the minutes of the preparative; and that
persons offering acknowledgments to monthly meetings, attend such meeting at
the reading thereof, where they reasonably can, in order that friends may be
the better qualified to judge of the offering, and then, at the meeting's
request, withdraw before the matter is spoken to; and the reading
acknowledgments to be in the early part of the meeting.

That no preparative meeting or overseers judge of any such acknowledgment, so
as to prevent its going to the monthly meeting, though either may be at liberty
to observe to the person any manifest obstruction: but if such person still
remains desirous that the acknowledgment should be laid before the monthly
meeting, that it be admitted to go in the manner before directed.

APPEALS.
IF any are dissatisfied with, or think themselves aggrieved by the testimony
or judgment of a monthly meeting against them, they have liberty at the same,
or the next, or the third monthly meeting, but not after, to notify their
intentions of making application to the next quarterly meeting; which
notification the said monthly meeting should enter on their minutes, and
appoint four or more friends to take a copy of the meeting's records, signed by
the clerk, in the case, and therewith attend the said quarterly meeting, and
there, on the monthly meeting's behalf, show their reasons for what is done, as
the case may require, submitting the same to the said quarterly meeting; and
then the quarterly meeting is to determine the same as they, in the wisdom of
truth, may see most just: and if the appellant should be dissatisfied with the
determination of the quarterly meeting, and do notify at the same or the next
quarterly meeting, but not after, an intention of making application for a
hearing at the next yearly meeting, then the quarterly meeting in like manner
to make entry thereof, and appoint four or six friends to attend the yearly
meeting with the records of both the quarterly and monthly meeting in the case,
signed as aforesaid, where the same is to be finally determined.

MARRIAGES.
CONCERNING the manner of proceeding in marriage, it is advised, that no young
persons, who have parents or guardians, make proposals of marriage with each
other, until the consent of such parents or guardians be obtained.

That all, according to our usual custom, do offer or propose their marriage to
two monthly meetings, and that the second time be to the next successive
meeting, unless sickness or other material cause prevent. At the first meeting,
if no reason appear to the contrary, the appearance would be minuted, and
inquiry made concerning consent of parents or guardians, if either have any,
which consent ought always to be signified by such parents or guardians to the
monthly meeting, either personally or in writing; and if the man belong to the
same meeting, two friends are to be then appointed to inquire into his
clearness for proceeding in such marriage; and if there is issue by a former
husband, to see that the children's rights are duly attended to, and make
report to the next meeting. And the proper care is previously to be taken by
women friends concerning the woman. And if either of the parties be from
another country, or belong to another monthly meeting, let inquiry be then
made, for a certificate from such meeting, and where none is produced, let the
parties be informed, that the marriage cannot pass, or be allowed without one,
which shall certify their clearness from all others in respect of marriage, or
any other engagement that way. But if the meeting he belongs to be within such
distance as that it may probably be obtained, so as to be produced at the next
meeting, and there appears no objection, nor any thing else to obstruct, it may
then pass for the first time. -- At the second meeting, if what is above
expressed be done, and all appear clear, let an entry be made of their second
appearance, and what more is usual and necessary, and the couple left at their
liberty to accomplish their marriage according to the order used among friends,
but not on the monthly meeting day, or the first day of the week.

It it further pressed and advised, that the said marriage be accomplished
decently, gravely and weightily; and that the parties themselves, their
parents, and others concerned, do take care, at the houses, or places where
they go or are after the meeting is over, that no reproach arise, or occasion
of offense be given, by any intemperance, or immoderate feasting or drinking,
or by any unseemly or wanton discourse or actions; but that all behave with
such modesty and sobriety as becomes a people fearing God: and in order
thereto, and for the assistance of those immediately concerned, let there be
two men and two women friends appointed by the monthly meeting, to attend the
marriage both at the meeting and place of entertainment after, who are to take
care, as much as in them lies, that all be done, and all behave, as is above
advised; and that the company retire in seasonable time. And if by them, or any
other friend, any thing to the contrary is observed, they ought, as speedily as
they conveniently can, to take such aside, who make any breach upon good order,
and, in brotherly love, tenderly admonish them to a better behavior. And that
the said friends do make report to the next monthly meeting, whether this
advice, concerning decency and order, has been observed; and take care that
the marriage certificate be handed for recording.

And when any shall or do marry out of the unity of friends, by any other
method than the before directed and orderly way used amongst; us, they are to
be dealt with, and, unless they give satisfaction, be disowned.

When overseers, or other friends, know that any intend to offer proposals of
marriage to the monthly meeting, which is manifest to them cannot pass, either
for want of a certificate, or any other apparent cause, they ought to advise
them not to give themselves or the meeting unnecessary trouble, yet not so as
to prevent or forbid them, if the parties continue desirous notwithstanding to
lay their proposals before the meeting.

And it is advised, that such men and women friends as do make suit, or concern
themselves in proposals of marriage to one another, do not dwell together in
the same house and family, from the time of making such proposals, or offers
toward it, until their marriage is accomplished. And if they persist in so
doing, after being advised against it by the overseers, that they be dealt with
as disorderly persons.

And it is concluded, that no friend in future attend the marriages of those
that go out from us, as it is a strengthening them in that disorder; nor any
marriage accomplished by a priest or magistrate, or any other person; and if
any should transgress herein, that they be dealt with accordingly.

And when it is discovered, that any keep company on account of marriage with
one not a member of our society, or where conduct gives reason to apprehend,
that a connection of that kind is forming, it is earnestly desired, and should
be considered the duty of overseers and other concerned friends, as soon as may
be, in a gentle tender manner, to endeavor to dissuade such therefrom, by
pointing out the inconsistency, danger and disadvantage of such connection; and
when any do so far disregard the tender labor and care of their friends, as to
go out in marriage with such, and the monthly meeting is satisfactorily
informed, that the necessary care has been seasonably taken, such ought to be
disowned without further labor, -- unless it should appear by the report of
the committee to inform such of the conclusion of the meeting to disown them,
that there is a disposition of mind that appears to them deserving of further
care and attention, in which case the same care is to be observed as is
directed respecting disowning members under the head Dealing with Offenders.
But in cases where it may appear, that this necessary, seasonable and tender
care has not been extended, monthly meetings ought to labor with such as with
offenders in other cases.

And when any who have married out, do, from a religious sensibility, witness
an exercise of mind, that induces a desire for reconciliation with the body,
let no discouragements be given, by the requisition of unnecessary expressions
in an acknowledgment, that would not accord with that tender regard for the
preservation of harmony, so precious and necessary to be preserved between
husband and wife.

And it is concluded, if any first cousins join in marriage, they are to be
disowned without dealing; yet overseers and other concerned friends ought to
consider it their duty, when they hear of any such keeping company on that
account, or of a conduct likely to lead thereto, timely to treat with them, and
endeavor to convince them of the inconsistency of such marriages, and the
danger there is in going counter to the solid sense and judgment of the body.

And when overseers, and other concerned friends, know or hear of any keeping
company on account of marriage, that are of a degree of kindred nearer than
second cousins, but not so near as first cousins, usually termed first and
second cousins, it ought to be considered their duty to caution and advise
against it, in the manner directed respecting such who keep company with those
who are not members of our society, and they are to be dealt with in like
manner if they proceed to marry.

This meeting, being tender in respect to marriages, advises that no misconduct
be brought forward against any person at the time of their proposing their
marriage, or till the marriage is accomplished, as it is out of order, and
ought to be discouraged; but this is not to affect the report respecting the
clearness from others on account of marriage.

It is advised, that no widower or widow make or admit proposals of marriage
within one year after the decease of husband or wife; an earlier procedure
therein being thought over hasty and unbecoming. And no monthly meeting ought
to permit any marriage to be proposed in said meeting sooner than a year after
the death of husband or wife.

Form of Marriage Certificate.
Whereas A. B. son of C. D. and E. his wife, of (...) and county (...) in the
state of New York, and F. G. daughter of H. I. and J. his wife, of, etc. in the
state aforesaid, having declared their intentions of marriage with each other
before two monthly meetings of the people called Quakers, held at (...) in the
state aforesaid, they having consent of parents and parties concerned, and
nothing appearing to obstruct, their said proposals were allowed of the
meeting: Now these are to certify all whom it may concern, that, for the full
accomplishment of their said intentions this (...) day of (...) month, in the
year (...) they the said A. B. and F. G. appeared in a public meeting of said
people at (...) aforesaid, and he the said A. B. taking the said F. G. by the
hand, did, in a solemn manner, openly declare, that he took her to be his wife,
promising, through divine assistance, to be unto her a faithful and loving
husband until death separates them, or words to that effect; and then the said
F. G. did, in like manner, declare, that she took the said A. B. to be her
husband, promising, through divine assistance, to be unto him a faithful and
loving wife until death separates them, or words to that import; and moreover
they the said A. B. and F. G. she according to the custom of marriage assuming
the name of her husband, as a further confirmation thereof, did then to these
presents set their hands; and we whose names are hereunto subscribed, being
present at the solemnization of said marriage and subscription, have, as
witnesses thereunto, set our hands the day and year above written.

REMOVALS AND CERTIFICATES.
FOR the preservation of friends from wounding themselves and families, or the
body, by injudicious removals, we do advise, that, when any friends have
thoughts of removing, they be careful not to let wrong motives influence their
conclusions; but in a timely manner, (that is, before such steps are taken as
may close the way to their taking the advice of their friends) acquaint the
monthly meeting whereto they belong, or at least the overseers of the
preparative meeting, and such other friends as the overseers may ask to unite
with them in counsel in the case, in order for their brotherly advice on the
propriety of such their proposed removal; for want of which, some have suffered
loss, both in their temporal and spiritual concerns, and we believe thereby
hurt the youth of their families. And if no material objection appear against
it, they ought to have a certificate of their life, conversation and
circumstances, according to truth and justice, to be produced to the monthly
meeting where they are going to reside. And the inquiry respecting outward
affairs being settled, ought not to be confined to the monthly meeting in which
the person proposing to remove resides, if there is reason to believe they are
not settled in other places. And elders, overseers, and other concerned
friends, when they hear of any friend inclining to remove, are to consider it
as their duty, in brotherly love, to advise such to observe the foregoing
directions.

And when a certificate of removal, from one monthly meeting to another, is
received by the meeting to which it is directed, the friend or friends
recommended thereby, shall be deemed members of the meeting removed to.

And when apprentices, or persons under age, are placed in the compass of
another monthly meeting, that removal certificates be forwarded for such.

No friend is to gain a settlement by marriage certificate or other
recommendation, unless their removal be expressed therein.

And that all certificates of removal brought by any friend, intending to
reside amongst us, be lodged in the monthly meeting where the same is accepted.
And that every meeting keep records of all certificates which they give out.

TRADE AND COMMERCE.
IT is evident, that the spirit of truth, where it is received, and given way
to, brings into such a liberty and freedom of spirit, that those who keep under
the influence of it, are not in bondage to the spirit of this world; an
attention to the precious influence thereof, occasioned our primitive friends
to be remarkable for their uprightness and honesty in their commerce and
converse, and very exact in performing their promises, without evasive excuses.

And a concern is witnessed, that friends be earnestly engaged to seek after
divine counsel in all their movements; their temporal concerns will thereby be
circumscribed within the bounds of safety; a want of a due and watchful care
therein, has been the cause of many being drawn from the limits of truth, into
a worldly spirit and disposition, which has tended to disqualify them for
those services in society they were graciously designed for, and they have
gradually become barren, and unfruitful of good, and pierced themselves through
with many sorrows.

It is therefore advised, that friends be very cautious and guarded, how they
go from such honest and lawful employments as they well understand, and are
able to manage. And that they endeavor to content themselves with such a plain
way of living, as is most agreeable to the self-denying principle of truth
which we profess, and which is most conducive to that tranquillity of mind
requisite to a religious conduct through this world.

It is, therefore, earnestly recommended to those who engage in commerce
particularly, and in all other concerns, closely to attend to the guidance of
the precious principle of light and truth in the heart, that they may witness
their views, and movements, circumscribed, and their minds guarded against an
inordinate pursuit after the accumulation of wealth; against unduly entering
into concerns, that depend much upon the uncertain probabilities of hazardous
enterprises; and more especially against launching into business upon such
credit, as their profession of the truth may have given them, and more at the
hazard of others property than their own. And that all friends be careful of
entering into hasty engagements; but when they give their words, that they as
carefully abide by and perform them, to the utmost of their power, the
reputation truth gives them being otherwise wounded.

And let all amongst us be cautioned, to consider well the ground on which they
become endorsers, or joint-securities, lest, for want of due consideration, any
involve themselves and families into ruinous circumstances, and risk their own
peace of mind. And if any amongst us find themselves embarrassed, and not
likely to be able to comply with their contracts, it is advised, that such
disclose their circumstances to some judicious friends, and, if it appears
necessary, call their creditors together, and seasonably state their situation,
and then be particular in such situations, to take the counsel of the
overseers, and such other judicious friends as they may think proper to call
in, relative to a settlement of their affairs, agreeable to the principles of
justice and equity.

It is also advised, that overseers counsel such as give occasion to suspect,
that they are so declining in their worldly circumstances, as to be likely to
bring reproach on our christian profession, by falling short of honestly
discharging their contracts, to the injury of their just creditors. And that
all concerned in trade, keep their accounts in such a clear and accurate
manner, that, in cases of failure, their creditors may see how the deficiency
has happened. Those friends who may be appointed by monthly meetings to visit
those who have failed, should always make due inquiry how they have acted in
the above respects, and report to the monthly meeting.

And it is also advised, that friends be cautious how they receive collections
or bequests, for the use of the poor or other purposes of society, of persons
who have fallen short of the payment of their just debts, though legally
discharged by the voluntary act of their creditors; for until such persons have
satisfied their creditors, their possessions cannot in equity be called their
own. And when any failures of this kind do occur, and such decline making
farther payments toward the remaining balances of their just debts, when of
ability so to do, monthly meetings should be informed thereof, and inquire into
the cause, and if after a tender and brotherly examination, it should appear,
that their circumstances are such as to render it clearly advisable, that a
farther payment should be offered to the creditors; or that a state of the
debtor's affairs should be laid before the creditors, and submitted to them,
whether a farther payment should be made at that time, or referred to a farther
day, let advice to the individual be given accordingly. And where monthly
meetings discover, in any who have fallen short of the payment of their just
debts, a conduct, attended with circumstances, that bring a reproach on our
religious society, such offenders should, after due labor extended, be
testified against, unless they condemn their misconduct in a satisfactory
manner. And it is advised, that where friends accept the office of trustee or
assignee, they be active in collecting the effects of the estate, and punctual
in making speedy distribution

The danger and inconveniences which have frequently arose from partnerships in
trade between friends and others who are not members of our society, having in
diverse instances been very apparent, and apprehending some have sustained a
loss in their religious progress by a connection of that kind, we feel
desirous, that, when any in profession with us are about forming connections in
business, they may duly consider the subject, and keep in view the propriety
and greater safety of confining their prospects to those who are in membership
with us. And when any do engage, and become a partner in commercial concerns
with those not of our society, and it should so happen, through a failure of
engagements, or payment of just debts in season, on the part of the said
partnership, as to give reasonable occasion for a legal procedure at law, that,
in that case, a creditor, who may be a member of our society, may be at liberty
to proceed accordingly -- it appearing to us very improper that the due course
of justice should be obstructed by any of our members connecting themselves
with those not in profession with us.

REQUESTS To be received into Membership.
UNITEDLY resulted, that requests from such as desire to be received into
membership be introduced by the overseers, and read in the preparative meeting;
and if no evident impropriety appears to their going forward to the monthly
meeting, that they be sent with the minutes of the preparative. That no
preparative meeting or overseers judge of any such request, so as to prevent
its going to the monthly meeting; though either may be at liberty to observe to
the person any manifest obstruction; but if such person still remains desirous
that the request should be laid before the monthly meeting, that it be admitted
to go in the manner before directed. 1789. And when a monthly meeting is
satisfied that the motives to such request are sincere, and also of the fitness
of such requester to become a member of our society, a minute should then be
made of the acceptance of such into membership, and two friends appointed to
acquaint the person thereof, in a suitable manner.

It is concluded to be the duty of monthly meetings, to receive children that
are young, whose parents are members and they not, on the application of their
parents, unless some obstacle sufficient to justify a refusal should appear to
the meeting. And as children who are descended from parents, the one a member
and the other not, are not considered members of our society, monthly meetings
are in this case also, with the restrictions mentioned above, to receive such
children, on the request of the parent that is a member, in which case our
monthly meetings are to pay a due respect to the other parent, and to that
parent's willingness that the child should be educated conformable to our
religious profession.

PLAINNESS.
ADVISED, that all friends keep themselves, and those under their tuition, out
of the world's corrupt language, manners, vain and needless things and
fashions, in apparel, buildings, and furniture of houses, some of which are
indecent and unbecoming. And that they avoid the immoderate or vain use of
lawful things, which, though innocent in themselves, may thereby become
hurtful: avoid also such kind of stuffs, colors and dress, as are calculated
more to please a vain and wanton, or proud mind, than for their real
usefulness. And let tradesmen and others, members of our religious society, be
admonished accordingly, that they may not make themselves accessory to these
evils; for we ought in all things to take up the daily cross of Christ, minding
the grace of God which brings salvation, and teaches to deny all ungodliness,
and worldly lusts, and to live soberly, righteously and godly in this present
world, that we may adorn the gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ; so shall we feel
his blessing, and may be instrumental in his hand for the good of others.

And whereas we have with deep concern observed, that there is a great
declension from that simplicity in speech, behavior, and apparel, which our
worthy predecessors were led into; and as we find by experience, that the same
spirit of truth, which led our ancients to lay aside every thing unbecoming the
followers of Christ, will still lead in the same path all who submit to its
guidance, we earnestly entreat all friends to watch over themselves in these
respects.

Let not any such as degenerate in these respects excuse their own weakness,
under a pretense of the misconduct of some who have appeared outwardly plain --
an objection of very little weight; for did they rightly consider, they would
clearly see, that the very reasons why deceivers sometimes put on plain
apparel, is because true men have been accustomed to wear it. We also tenderly
advise, that friends take heed, that they use plainness of speech without
respect of persons, in all their converse among men; and not balk their
testimony by a cowardly compliance, varying their language according to their
company, a practice of very ill example to our observing youth, and rendering
those who use it contemptible, and looked upon as a kind of hypocrites, even by
those with whom they so comply.

When any so far depart from that simplicity and plainness which truth leads
into, as to copy after, and run into the vain and extravagant fashions of the
world, either in speech, behavior, apparel, or furniture of their houses, or
in other respects, it is desired and advised, that friends, from time to time,
as such things appear, be stirred up in the wisdom of truth, to take due and
prudent care therein; and if any, by continuing in such practices, reject the
advice and labor of their friends, -- let such cases be brought forward to the
monthly meeting for further care and proceeding, as may appear necessary for
the support of our Christian testimony.

DAYS AND TIMES.
ADVISED, that friends keep to their wonted example and testimony against the
superstitious observation of days, and to the simplicity of truth, and our
ancient testimony, in calling the days and months by scripture names and not by
heathen. E. D.

And that the importance of that christian testimony, borne by our predecessors
in this case, may be the more clearly discerned, the following is recommended
to serious consideration:

A brief account of the origin of the names of some months of the year, and of
all the days of the week, now customarily and commonly used.
I. January was so called from Janus, an ancient king of Italy, whom heathenish
superstition had deified, to whom a temple was built and this month dedicated.

II. February was so called from Februa, a word denoting purgation by
sacrifices; it being usual in this month for the priests of the heathen god Pan
to offer sacrifices, and perform certain rites, conducing, as was supposed, to
the cleansing or purgation of the people.

III. March was so denominated from Mars, feigned to be the god of war, whom
Romulus, founder of the Roman empire, pretended to be his father.

IV. April is generally supposed to derive its name from the Greek appellation
of Venus, an imaginary goddess, worshipped by the Romans.

V. May is said to have been so called from Maia, the mother of Mercury,
another of their pretended ethnic deities, to whom in this month they paid
their devotions.

VI. June is said to take its name from Juno, one of the supposed goddesses of
the heathen.

VII. July, so called from Julius Caesar, one of the Roman emperors, who gave
his name to this month, which before was called Quintilis or the fifth.

VIII. August, so named in honor of Augustus Caesar, another of the Roman
emperors; this month before was called Sextilis or the sixth.

The other four months, namely, September, October, November and December,
still retain their numerical Latin names, which, according to the late
regulation of the calendar, will for the future be improperly applied. However,
from the continued use of them hitherto, as well as from the practice of the
Jews before the Babylonish captivity, it seems highly probable that the
method of distinguishing the months by their numerical order only, was the most
ancient, as it is the most plain, simple and rational.

As the idolatrous Romans thus gave names to several of the months, in honor
of their pretended deities: so the like idolatry prevailing among our Saxon
ancestors, induced them to call the days of the week by the name of the idol
which on that day they peculiarly worshipped. -- Hence,

The first day of the week they called Sunday, from their accustomary adoration
of the sun on that day.

The second day of the week they called Monday, from their usual custom of
worshipping the moon on that day.

The third day of the week they named Tuesday, in honor of one of their idols
called Tuisco.

The fourth day of the week was called Wednesday, from the appellation of
Woden, another of their idols.

The fifth day of the week was called Thursday, from the name of an idol called
Thor, to whom they paid their devotion on that day.

The sixth day of the week was termed Friday, from the name of Friga, an
imaginary goddess, by them worshipped.

The seventh day they styled Saturday, as is supposed from Saturn, or Seater,
by them then worshipped.

Seeing, therefore, that these appellations and names of days, months and
times, are of an idolatrous or superstitious original, contrary to the divine
command, make no mention of the names of other gods, neither let it be heard
out of thy mouth, Exodus xxiii. 13, -- the practice of good and holy men in
former ages, and repugnant to the christian testimony, borne by our faithful
friends and predecessors in the truth, for the sake of which they patiently
endured many revilings; let neither the reproach of singularity, nor the
specious reasonings of such as would evade the cross of Christ, turn any aside
from the simplicity of the gospel, nor discourage from keeping to the language
of truth, in denominating the months and days according to the plain and
scriptural way of expression, thereby following the example of our worthy
elders, and coming up in a noble and honorable testimony against those and all
other remains of idolatry and superstition. E. D.

Neither can we conform to the custom of illuminating our houses, or doing any
act as a mark of rejoicing for victory in war -- or in other respects comply
with the ordinances of man relative to fast-days, or those appointed for
public thanksgiving or rejoicing.

POOR.
AS one of the first great causes, which engaged our ancient friends to the
orderly establishing our Christian discipline, was the care of the poor, it is
the advice and direction of this meeting, that all poor friends amongst us be
taken due care of, according to friends ancient practice; that their cases, and
the cases of such as may be likely to require assistance, be, from time to
time, duly inspected, and they advised, relieved, and assisted in such business
as they are capable of; and that two or more suitable men friends, and the like
number of women friends in each monthly meeting, be appointed to have the care
of the poor, whose business and duty it should be to visit, inspect, and
relieve them.

And it is desired, that friends and meetings extend due care in affording the
necessary school learning to the children of the poor, and others alluded to in
the foregoing paragraph.

Yearly Meeting, 1796. The following report is received from the friends
thereto appointed.
In attending to the subject of our appointment, our minds are sensibly
affected with sympathy, and with a full persuasion that an increase of care is
greatly necessary; and that there is occasion, not only to renew the
recommendation of this meeting some years since respecting quarterly
collections, but that it be earnestly enjoined on each monthly meeting, to
attend closely to those collections, with a liberality that will keep it in a
situation suitable to the necessary expenses that may arise, and thereby avoid
the painful necessity of resorting to a particular personal subscription,
either for the relief of the poor or otherwise: -- that each monthly meeting be
desired to appoint a few judicious friends, a standing committee, to have the
direction and disposing of the money so raised; and that the treasurer of each
monthly meeting be directed to pay to them, or their order, such moneys as they
shall judge right to call for. This, we apprehend, will remove one cause of
concern. And the committee are united in believing, that the situation and
peculiar circumstances of some of our monthly meetings are such, as do occasion
the necessary expenses of Society to fall so disproportionately heavy as to
claim a brotherly sympathy, and therefore suggest the propriety of the yearly
meeting recommending this subject to the superintendance of our meeting for
sufferings; and that it be recommended to their care, to extend advice and
assistance in such cases as may appear to them advisable, and agreeable to the
present prospect that opens on this affecting occasion -- Not only a brotherly
care, but a safety will appear herein, when it is recollected that the
committee annually appointed to settle the treasurer's accounts will have an
opportunity to point out any injudicious appropriations.

The report received the solid deliberation of the meeting, and a free
communication of sentiments evidenced a full united concurrence with the report
of the committee -- and it is earnestly recommended to the care and attention
of our monthly meetings, and our meeting for sufferings is desired to keep the
subject under their care and superintendance, and to call on the treasurer of
this meeting, from time to time, for such sums as may appear to them necessary
to carry the brotherly views of this meeting into effect.

The above minute is not to be understood as contemplating the ordinary relief
of the poor, but only the disproportionate expenses that some, more especially
remote monthly meetings, may be put to by extra services in lengthy journies or
otherwise.

CHILDREN, Placing them out, and taking Apprentices.
WHEN any parents or guardians are disposed to put out a child, it ought to be
placed with a member in society with us unless, after due inquiry, no suitable
place can be found; that then application be made to the monthly meeting to
which they belong for advice, who are to appoint a committee to consider the
same; and if, after due attention thereto, they should find a place where the
tuition of the child may be reserved to such parent or guardian, that they may
be educated agreeable to our discipline, that then the monthly meeting act in
such case as may appear to them best; and when any parents or guardians do act
contrary hereto, that they be dealt with as those who refuse the advice, and
disregard the unity of the body.

Advised that all friends, who take apprentices, or other children under their
care, seek for and give a preference to our own members, and be moderate in
their terms, that so the children of the poorer sort, in an especial manner,
may be brought up to such trades and business as may, with a blessing on their
prudence and industry, procure them a comfortable livelihood. 1788.

And that friends take due care to instruct all children placed under their
care in school-learning, to fit them for business.

SCHOOLS.
THE establishment of suitable schools, for the right education of our youth,
being a subject considered so important, that a weighty and close attention
thereto has been from time to time pressingly recommended to all our
subordinate meetings, that the rising generation may be placed under the
tuition of those, not only qualified to instruct them in school-learning, but
such as will cooperate with friends in their religious endeavors to excite a
love of virtue, and example them in a conduct consistent with our holy
profession; and in order thereto, particular directions were given in the year
1791, that preparative meetings should open subscriptions for permanent school
(...), to be placed under the care of committees of each meeting, with the form
of a plan for the more orderly conducting of the school: and being now
renewedly impressed with the importance of the subject, it is pressingly
recommended to our preparative meetings, to pay close attention thereto,
agreeable to the advices that have been from time to time communicated by this
meeting -- and that our members do not place their children under the tuition
of irreligious tutors. And it is advised, that friends do not place them with
such tutors as are not members of our society, without previously consulting
the preparative meeting, or its committee thereon.

SCRIPTURES Of the Old and New Testament.
WE earnestly recommend to all friends, especially elders in the church, and
heads of families, that they would, both by example and advice, endeavor to
impress on the minds of the younger rank, a due regard and esteem for those
excellent writings, the scriptures of the Old and New Testament, and advise
them to a frequent reading and meditating therein, and, at proper seasons, give
the youth to understand, that the same good experience of the work of
sanctification, through the operation of the spirit of truth, which they
clearly bear testimony to, is to be witnessed by believers in all generations,
as well as by those in the first ages of christianity, on which occasions some
account of our experience may be helpful to them; and this may be the means,
under the divine blessing, of leading their minds into a firm belief of the
Christian doctrine in general, and in particular the necessity of the aid and
help of the holy spirit in the hearts of men, abundantly testified of in that
most excellent book the Bible.

BOOKS.
THIS meeting does earnestly exhort all parents, heads of families, and
guardians of minors, that they be exemplary themselves, and prevent, as much as
in them lies, their children, and others in their service, and under their care
and tuition, from having or reading books and papers tending to prejudice the
profession of the Christian religion; lest their infant and feeble minds should
be vitiated thereby, and a foundation laid for the greatest evils. And being
sorrowfully affected, under a consideration of the hurtful tendency of reading
plays, romances, novels, and other pernicious books, it is earnestly
recommended, to every member of our religious society, to discourage and
suppress the same; and particularly to caution printers and booksellers, under
our name, against printing, selling, or lending such books; entreating them to
avoid a practice, for the sake of gain, so inconsistent with the purity of the
Christian religion. And friends are desired to be careful in the choice of
books, in which their children and families read, seeing there are many, under
the specious titles of promoting religion and morality, containing sentiments
repugnant to the truth in Christ Jesus.

Where any print or publish any books or writings, tending to raise contention,
or occasion breach of unity, among brethren or neighbors, or that have not
first had the approbation of the meeting for sufferings, advice to such should
be speedily given, and, after being suitably dealt with, unless they give
satisfaction, should be disowned.

PUBLIC SCANDAL.
WHERE any in profession with us are guilty of any gross or notorious crimes,
or such other disorderly and indecent practices, as shall occasion public
scandal, such should be speedily dealt with; and if not brought to such a sense
of their misconduct as to condemn the same to satisfaction, that they be
publicly testified against. And in all cases where an acknowledgment is
accepted for an offense of public scandal, from a member who has not been
disowned therefore, that it be publicly read.

CIVIL GOVERNMENT.
ADVISED, to walk wisely and circumspectly toward all men, in the peaceable
spirit of the gospel, avoiding all just occasion of offense to those in
government, or giving way to any controversies or heats relative thereto,
bearing in mind the spirituality of our profession, that, by living near the
divine principle of truth, our testimony thereto may be preferred to every
temporal consideration; and that the offices of profit and honor in government
may neither be sought after nor accepted by any of us.

But if any should so far disregard the unity of the body, as to accept any
post of profit and honor in government, that such should not be employed in
any service of the church, or their collections received.

Advised, that friends be careful not to be in any respect concerned in illegal
trade; and that in our dealings or conversation, we do not in any way encourage
the practice in others.

WAR.
AS the spirit of the gospel breathes peace on earth, and good will to men; and
as we have uniformly believed it our indispensible duty to bear a faithful
testimony, for the Prince of Peace, we affectionately desire, that all friends
be watchfully careful to keep to the peaceable principle professed by us as a
people, and, upon all occassions, demean ourselves in a Christian and peaceable
manner, thereby demonstrating to the world, that we are uniform in practice and
principle. And it is desired, that friends be careful not to unite with any who
make warlike preparations, offensive or defensive, in any way tending to
strengthen them, or encourage them therein, or of engaging in any trade or
business, tending to promote war, or suffering motives of worldly advantage, to
induce them to ship, or order their goods shipped in armed vessels, or as
underwriters, to take a risk, at a reduced premium, in consequence of a vessel
being armed in a warlike manner, which will lead to consider the difficulties
in which a concern in this branch of business may involve such as may be
engaged therein, with respect to supporting our testimony against war.

But if any are so unmindful of our Christian testimony against war, as to bear
arms, or actively comply with any military service, or are concerned in warlike
preparations, either offensive or defensive, by sea or land, or pay any fine,
penalty, or tax* in lieu of personal service, for carrying on war, or deal in
prize goods, either directly or indirectly, advice to such ought to be speedily
given, and after being suitably labored with, unless they are reclaimed, and
give satisfaction should be disowned.

OATHS.
ADVISED, that our Christian testimony against oaths be faithfully maintained;
and where any shall so far disregard our testimony herein, as in any case to
take or administer an oath, let such be dealt with; and unless they give
suitable satisfaction, that they be disowned.

PRIESTS WAGES, OR HIRELING MINISTRY.
LET us keep in remembrance, that it is under the immediate teaching and
influence of the holy spirit, that all acceptable worship is performed, and all
true gospel ministry supplied; that this powerful influence, in vessels
prepared by the divine hand, is the essential qualification to that work; that
as the gift is divine, the service is freely and faithfully to be discharged,
without any view to reward from man.

It is therefore earnestly recommended to friends in their several meetings,
where there are any that balk the testimony of truth, by paying the hireling
priests, to labor in true love and tenderness, to convince them of their
error; and if their endeavors prove ineffectual, it is the sense of this
meeting, that such persons, persisting in their unfaithfulness, and opposition
to the sense of the body, the monthly meeting should proceed to testify against
their conduct.

SUFFERINGS.
AS it sometimes falls to our lot to suffer in support of our Christian
testimony, we tenderly advise and exhort all friends, that when any
requisitions or demands are made which appear repugnant thereto, they do not,
through any contrivance or indirect means, seek to evade the (...), but that
they cheerfully suffer for the support and exaltation of this noble testimony,
not doubting but he who judges righteously will reward those who faithfully
suffer for his cause; and when any are thus called to suffer, that they
endeavor to demonstrate a spirit of meekness and patience therein, agreeable
to the excellent example of our blessed Savior, it being by such a temper and
conduct only, that we can contribute to the advancement of truth, or find true
peace in ourselves. That friends keep a true account of their sufferings, both
as to the sum, the time when, for what, and by whom, that they may be brought
forward, but that they first be carefully inspected by a committee of the
monthly meeting, and afterward that the amount, and on what occasion, come
through the monthly and quarterly to the yearly meeting; and that the monthly
meeting keep a record thereof in a book for that purpose.

GAMING AND DIVERSIONS.
ADVISED, that a watchful care be taken, to prevent any of our members from
going to, or being any way concerned in stage plays, lotteries, music, and
dancing, frequenting taverns unnecessarily, or attending places of diversion;
and that such also be dealt with as run races on horseback or on foot, lay
wagers, or use any kind of gaming, or vain sports, or pastimes: for our time
swiftly passes away, and our pleasure and delight ought to be in the law of
the Lord.

And if any who are concerned in, or indulge themselves in any of these evils,
cannot, after a time of waiting and kind treatment in the spirit of restoring
love, be brought to a due sense of their misconduct therein, monthly meetings
should testify their disunion with them. And it is advised, that none practice
smoking tobacco indecently, or too publicly, as in streets, high roads, or
other places of public and promiscuous resort.

TAVERNS.
WE entreat our young friends with readiness to receive and observe the loving,
wholesome admonition of their parents and friends, and carefully to avoid all
evil company and communication which corrupt good manners, and that these, as
well as those of riper age, avoid resorting to taverns and places of
entertainment when necessary business does not call them there, lest they
should not only be subjected to the temptation of drinking to excess, the
dismal effects of which in many we see and lament, but thereby an opportunity
is offered for men of corrupt minds to sow the evil seeds of loose principles,
to the calling in question the great truths of religion set forth in the
scriptures of truth, and striking at the foundation of godliness and holy
living, the ensnaring consequences whereof we desire all may lay to heart in
time; and in order that those who are unhappily taken in these snares may be
induced to break off before it is too late, it is our desire that the elders
and other concerned friends may show a disposition to engage them in their
company, and treat them with freedom and kindness, which will very much make
way for such advice as they may have to communicate to them. But if after all
this labor no fruits of amendment appear, then proceed to a regular discharge
of duty by dealing with them according to gospel order. Extract from P. D.

DISTILLED SPIRITS AND SPIRITUOUS LIQUORS.
IN attending to the state of things as brought up from the several quarters,
it was cause of close exercise to find, that any among us should yet give way
to the excessive use of spirituous liquors; and the meeting being led to
consider the importation and sale of that article as contributing to the
encouragement and increase of this mighty evil, we therefore earnestly
recommend to the quarterly and monthly meetings, to give serious and close
attention to this important subject; that concerned friends be exemplary in
this respect, and requested to advise our members against being concerned in
importing or selling of distilled spirituous liquors, or the distillation of
them; and that they be watchfully cautious how they encourage in others a
traffic so pernicious to our fellow men. Y. M. 1785.

And although we have comfortable cause to believe the advice issued some time
since by this meeting concerning a commerce in, and the unnecessary use of,
distilled spirituous liquors, has had place in the minds of many, evidenced by
a decline of the commerce and use of that article among us; yet, from the
reports, there is ground to fear some have been and others are in danger of
going back again; and it being an article so exceedingly destructive to the
essential welfare of mankind, it is painfully affecting that any in profession
with us should, for the sake of gain, contribute to so great an evil; we
therefore think it best to signify that it is contrary to the advice and
judgment of this meeting, that any of our members should continue to traffic
therein; and we request our quarterly and monthly meetings carefully to watch
over their respective members, and see how far this, and the advice in 1785 on
this subject, is observed; and that an account thereof come up to next yearly
meeting. 1788.

Although it appears by the accounts, that our advice and counsel, respecting
the use of and commerce in distilled spirits, have obtained considerable
attention in each quarter; yet we find there still remains a number in the
practice of trafficking in that article, but that diverse of them give
encouragement to hope they will decline the business; and that no friend is in
the practice of distilling those liquors: and the subject coming weightily
under a renewed consideration, it is the earnest desire of this meeting, that
our advice and judgment expressed last year may be renewedly adverted to, and
that our monthly meetings appoint committees to assist the overseers in
laboring with such amongst us, who still continue to traffic in the
pernicious article of distilled spirits, and that a report thereon be brought
forward next year. 1789.

By reports from our quarters it appears, that our members are clear of
trafficking in distilled spirits, except four, and one of those under dealing
for other misconduct. The continued attention of our monthly meetings is
desired to this subject, that those who still disregard the labor bestowed,
from a concern attending this yearly meeting, may be tenderly dealt with by the
monthly meetings to which they belong; and if not brought to such a sense of
their misconduct as to refrain from that traffic, they are to be disowned.
1792.

It is earnestly advised, that none accustom themselves to vain and idle
company, sipping and tippling of drams and strong drink; for though such who
use that evil practice may not suddenly beome drunken to the greatest degree,
yet they often thereby become like ground fitted for the seeds of the greatest
transgressions, and some who have had the good example of virtuous parents,
have, from small beginnings in corners, arrived to a shameful excess, to the
ruin of themselves, the great injury of their families, and the scandal of our
holy profession.

And it having been observed, that a pernicious custom has prevailed of giving
rum and other strong liquors to excite people to bid at vendues to advance the
price, which, besides the injustice of the artifice, leads to intemperance and
disorder; it is therefore the sense of this meeting to caution friends against
the same. And if any under our profession do fall into this evil practice, by
giving or taking drams or other strong liquors at vendues, or any noisy
revelling gathering, they should be speedily dealt with as disorderly persons.

And it is advised, that all be guarded against the unnecessary use of
distilled spirits at all times, and exemplary in avoiding the use of them in
harvests or other places of labor; and that none who are in trade make a
practice of handing it, or suffer it to be handed, to their customers or others
who may come to their shops.

SLAVERY.
NO friend is to import, buy, or sell negroes or other slaves; or hire any that
are held in bondage; or take any that are young, or others, by indenture or
otherwise, unless they are first set free. Any friend, disregarding the advice
above expressed, after deliberate dealing with, except satisfaction be given,
is to be disowned.

And where friends have any who are young under their care, that they treat
them in a Christian manner, endeavor to inculcate morality in them, and to
make them acquainted with the principles of truth, and give them useful and
necessary learning to fit them for business. Also friends are desired to be
careful to avoid, as much as may be, the doing any act, whereby the right of
slavery is acknowledged; but this is not meant to extend to acts of benevolence
toward that people.

DONATIONS AND SUBSCRIPTIONS.
EXECUTORS and trustees concerned in wills and settlements, are advised to take
especial care, that they faithfully discharge their respective trusts according
to the intent of the donors or testators, and that meetings take due care that
charitable gifts, legacies or bequests, intended and given for the use of the
poor, or other purposes of the society, be not appropriated or converted to any
other uses than such as the donors or testators have directed, and enjoined by
legal settlement, will or testament.

WILLS.
WE think it proper to recommend, that friends make their wills in time of
health, and that they be careful to renew them as often as occasion requires,
and therein to direct their substance so as in justice and wisdom may be to
their satisfaction and peace, and to the promotion of harmony in their
families. Making such wills in due time may prevent the subject claiming
attention and care on a sick bed, when the mind should not be diverted from a
solemn consideration of the approaching awful period of life.

And let all be careful in whom they place the confidential trust of
executorship, as much may depend thereon, not only respecting a due care of the
property they leave, but also respecting that deeply interesting point, the
education and welfare of such of their children as may be left in their
minority.

And it is recommended, that in draughting wills, persons be employed that have
knowledge relative thereto, and are of good repute; and that those who become
executors or administrators take especial care, that they faithfully and
seasonably discharge their respective trusts relative thereto.

BURIALS.
WHEREAS at some burials, when people come from far, there may be occasion for
some refreshment; yet it is advised, that it be done with moderation, avoiding
that indecent and unbecoming practice of using spirituous liquors; and that the
behavior of all friends be with such gravity and sobriety as becomes the
occasion; and if any appear otherwise, let such be reproved and dealt with as
is advised in case of misbehaviour at marriages.

And it is advised, that friends carefully keep to the time appointed for
burials, and not wait for such as may come unseasonably; and that none erect
grave or tomb stones.

And in order that burials be orderly and decently accomplished, agreeably to
the above directions, as well as for the assistance of those immediately
concerned, monthly meetings are directed to appoint some solid friends to
attend thereat.

MEMORIALS.
ON consideration of the mode for examining of memorials or testimonies,
forwarded by monthly meetings, respecting deceased friends, previous to their
being read in the yearly meeting, it is concluded that quarterly meetings
forward them timely to the meeting for sufferings for inspection and
consideration, before they are forwarded to the yearly meeting, that the
necessity of appointing a committee thereon, during the sitting of the yearly
meeting, may be avoided.

QUERIES.
AGREED, that the twelve following queries be distinctly read, and deliberately
considered, in each preparative and monthly meeting preceding each quarterly
meeting; at which time friends may have the opportunity of making such
observations as may tend to excite to vigilance and care in the diligent
exercise of our Christian discipline; and promote an united labor for the good
of the church. And in order to convey a general account of the state of friends
in such cases as may be most immediately necessary to the quarterly meetings,
full and explicit answers be given by the preparative meeting, preceding the
monthly meeting that precedes the quarter, to the first, second, eighth, tenth
and twelfth, three times in the year: and those answers sent from the
preparative to the monthly meeting, are to be digested in the monthly meeting
and sent to the quarter. And once in the year, that is to say, at the
preparative and monthly meetings, before the quarterly meetings, next preceding
the yearly meeting, that the said twelve queries be in like manner read and
considered, and each of them particularly and distinctly answered, and
forwarded as above directed, in order to convey to the yearly meeting a clear
account of the state of said meetings.

Query I. Are friends careful to attend all our meetings for religious worship
and discipline; is the hour observed; and are they clear of sleeping, and all
other unbecoming behavior therein?

II. Are love and unity maintained as becomes brethren; are friends clear of
tale-bearing, backbiting and spreading evil reports; and when differences
arise, are endeavors used speedily to end them?

III. Are friends careful to keep themselves, their own, and other friends
children under their care, in plainness of speech, behavior and apparel; to
the frequent reading the holy scriptures, and to guard against reading
pernicious books, and the corrupt conversation of the world; and to extend a
due care in these respects toward others under their tuition? -- and friends
are advised to be careful when they are about taking such into their families,
that they be those that are likely to take their advice in these respects.

IV. Do friends avoid the unnecessary use of spirituous liquors, frequenting of
taverns, and attending places of diversion; and keep in moderation and
temperance on account of marriages, births and burials?

V. Are the necessities of the poor, and the circumstances of such as may
appear likely to require assistance, duly inspected, is relief reasonably
afforded them, are they advised and assisted in such business as they are
capable of, and do their children freely partake of learning to fit them for
business?

VI. Are friends children placed amongst friends; and are all children under
our care instructed in school learning to fit them for business?

VII. Do any young persons make proposals of marriage without consent of
parents or guardians; or do any keep company with those not of our society on
that account; do parents connive at their children keeping company with such;
and do any attend the marriages of those that go out from us, or marriages
accomplished by priest or magistrate; or make proposals of marriage too early
after the decease of husband or wife; and are not the rights of children by
former marriages neglected?

VIII. Are friends clear of taking oaths, paying priests wages, bearing arms,
and other military services; and of being concerned in illegal trade,
lotteries, or dealing in prize goods?

IX. Are friends careful to make their wills seasonably; and are public gifts
and legacies applied to the uses intended by the givers?

X. Are there any deficient in performing their promises, or paying their just
debts, or that launch into business beyond their ability to manage as becomes
our religious profession; and are such as give reasonable grounds for fear, on
those accounts, timely labored with for their preservation and recovery?

XI. Are there any removed without certificates, or come amongst us, who have
not produced any?

XII. Is care taken seasonably to deal with offenders in the spirit of
meekness, and agreeable to our discipline?

And it is the sense of this meeting, that the following recommendation be read
once a year in the preparative, monthly and quarterly meetings, preceding the
yearly meeting.

It is recommended, that all contention and personal reflections be kept out of
our meetings, and that friends be careful to keep out of heats, and doubtful
disputations, in the ordering or managing the affairs of truth; but that the
same be conducted in the peaceable spirit and wisdom of Jesus, with decency,
forbearance and love to each other.

I. What ministers and elders deceased, and when and what memorials concerning
any deceased friend worthy of being preserved?

II. What new meeting houses built, or new meeting settled?

III. What convincement since last year, and where in each quarter?

IV. Are the queries recommended by this meeting to the quarterly, monthly and
preparative meetings, read in each; and are the reports made in this meeting
founded thereon?

WOMEN's MEETINGS.
FORASMUCH as our women's meetings for discipline were set up and established
in the wisdom of truth, and by long experience have been found of manifest
advantage, not only to our society in general, but to the youth of their own
sex in particular; it is therefore earnestly desired, that, in all their
meetings, they may wait for, and feel after the arising of the pure influence
of the spirit of truth, that they may be thereby qualified to come up in a
faithful discharge of duty in that part of the discipline of the church,
properly claiming their attention and care; and to act in all cases necessary
for the preservation of good order; to treat with disorderly members of their
own sex, and requesters, as the case may require; yet not so as to receive or
disown any without the concurrence of the men's meeting; and when they have so
far proceeded in any case, that requires the concurrence of the men's meeting,
as to apprehend no further service by its longer continuance amongst them, they
are to lay the same in an explicit manner before the men's meeting, who are to
enter it clearly on their minutes, and, if nothing appears to obstruct their
concurrence, that the women be informed thereof; but if the men should
apprehend a service from farther endeavors, particularly in the case of an
offender, either on an acknowledgment or otherwise, or request from a person to
be received into membership, that they then appoint a committee to unite with
an appointment from the women's meeting, to the consideration of the subject,
and to give such farther attention thereto as may tend to bring the men and
women's meetings to a united judgment, which, after being come to, the women
are to inform the individual thereof, and if the case requires a public
testification, the men are to make an appointment of two friends to assist in
preparing the same, and to publish it agreeable to our discipline. And when any
woman friend removes from one monthly meeting to another, and a certificate
becomes necessary, they are to appoint a committee to make the necessary
inquiry, and prepare an essay for that purpose, and when approved, to be laid
before the men's meeting for their concurrence, and if approved by them, to be
signed by the clerk of both meetings. And when the certificate is to include
one or more males, as may be the case in the removal of families, then the men
and women are to join in the inquiry, and in preparing the essay, and when
approved by the men's meeting, they are to hand it to the women, and after
being concurred with by them, to be signed as before directed, by the clerk of
each meeting -- and that all certificates received for women friends be laid
before the men's meeting before they are accepted.

MEETINGS OF MINISTERS AND ELDERS.
AS much depends on the example and conduct of ministers and elders, meetings
have been established among them, for the purpose of inspecting into the state
of that part of the body, whether all are preserved in an exemplary walking
answerable to their station, and where advice, caution and encouragement may be
administered for the help and strengthening one of another, as in the wisdom of
truth may appear necessary; for the more proper and useful proceeding wherein,
the following queries are recommended to be read and answered therein:

I. Are ministers and elders diligent in attending meetings for worship and
discipline, and careful in bringing their families with them?

II. Are they careful to labor honestly to maintain our Christian discipline
in every part, and not screen their own families from the operation thereof?

III. Are ministers careful to minister in the ability which truth gives; to
avoid tones, unbecoming gestures, and enlarging their testimonies so far as to
become burdensome?

IV. Are the elders careful to encourage those who are young in the ministry in
the right line, and discourage a forward spirit in any who run into words
without life and power?

V. Are there any who travel abroad and appoint meetings that are not
recommended as ministers; or do any recommended ministers appoint meetings
contrary to our discipline?

VI. Are ministers and elders in love and unity one with another, and with the
meetings whereunto they belong?

And let ministers and elders dwell in that life which gives ability to labor
successfully in the church of Christ.

Which meetings are to be held in the following manner, viz.

The ministers and elders of each monthly meeting, are to meet once in three
months, and, after some time spent in solid retirement, to proceed to read and
prepare answers to the queries, suitable to the state of the members thereof;
from which preparative meeting a suitable number of friends are to be appointed
as representatives to attend the quarterly meeting of ministers and elders with
said answers, and such other business as the preparative meeting may direct.
The quarterly is composed of all the preparative meetings of ministers and
elders within the quarter, where the queries, with the answers from the
preparatives, are to be read, and the import of those answers to be entered on
their minutes, and a copy thereof sent by their representatives to the yearly
meeting of ministers and elders, containing a just account of the state of the
meetings from which they are sent; by which an opportunity may be given for
suitable advice to be administered by that meeting, which is held on the
seventh day of the week preceding the yearly meeting of discipline, beginning
at the tenth hour; where a suitable number of elders are to be appointed, to
the oversight of the meetings for worship during the yearly meeting, to advise
as they find occasion, and make such report to the adjournments of the meeting
as they may see necessary; and the like appointment to be made by the quarterly
meetings of ministers and elders, to the oversight of the public meetings
during the time of the quarterly meetings.

And said meetings of ministers and elders are not in anywise to interfere with
any part of the exercise of the discipline of the church belonging to the
yearly, or any subordinate meeting for discipline.

And as the fountain of all good is, from time to time, opening among us the
spring of living ministry, it is greatly desired, that ministers and elders may
so dwell under the divine influence, as to be able to discover, what offering
in come from the right spring, and what do nor, and thereby be qualified to be
as nursing fathers, and nursing mothers, to such that are young in the
ministry; and may with all ^^re and diligence advise, caution and encourage,
with gentleness and wisdom, as occasion may require.

MEETING FOR SUFFERINGS.
THE meeting for sufferings was appointed by the yearly meeting in 1758, and
the year following the subject more fully engaging attention, the meeting for
sufferings was establishment, and the services thereof more fully stated, as
appears by the following minute, viz.

The meeting for sufferings are to take under their consideration the cases of
any of our brethren who are subjected to sufferings for the testimony of truth,
and represent such cases as they may think proper to those in authority, in
order to obtain redress; to pay attention to any bills that may be brought
forward in the legislature that may likely affect our religious testimony, and
to make application when they may judge proper. The said meeting for sufferings
is to be considered as representatives on behalf of the yearly meeting, and to
appear in any matter where the interest and reputation of truth may render it
necessary; and as there may be sometimes a necessary expense attending the
transaction of some part of their business, the treasurer is requested to
furnish the said meeting with money necessary for such services. 1759.

It is concluded, that the meeting for sufferings have liberty to take into
consideration the purchasing and distributing some useful books amongst friends
and others, and act in matters of that nature according as to them may appear
most likely to promote the principles of truth, and our Christian testimony.
1783.

This meeting constitutes the meeting for sufferings overseers of the press,
and enjoins it upon them to take the necessary care in all matters relating
thereto, which may concern the society; and that they annually lay their
minutes and proceedings before the yearly meeting. 1784.

It appears by the minutes of the yearly meeting in 1799, that a new
appointment of the meeting for sufferings took place, to be constituted in the
following manner, viz. That the yearly meeting appoint twenty-four friends for
that purpose, and that each quarter appoint four; that those appointed in the
quarterly meeting of Westbury and Purchase, unite with those appointed by the
yearly meeting in constituting the meeting for sufferings; and that those
appointed by the quarterly meetings of Nine-Partners and Easton, be considered
as corresponding members with the said meeting, and to attend as members
thereof, as often as their distant situation may permit, and to them appears
right and consistent; and that they pay particular attention to matters that
may be of a suffering nature, or concern the meeting for sufferings; to give
timely notice of all such cases to that meetings; and that in all matters of
moment, one or more of their number attend the meeting for sufferings
therewith, if reasonably in their power. And the said meeting for sufferings
are requested to attend to the business which may come before them agreeable to
former instructions, and the principles upon which that meeting was founded --
To meet at the time and place the late meeting for sufferings adjourned to, and
to take up and pursue the business left on the minutes of that meeting.

MEETING HOUSES AND GROUND.
IT is recommended to the quarterly and monthly meetings to make timely and
careful inspection into the situation of the titles of meeting houses,
burial-ground, and other estates which have been vested in trustees, and by
them held for the use and benefit of the society at large, or of any of those
meetings, so that, if it should appear needful by the death of any such
trustees or otherwise, due and seasonable care may be taken to appoint some
others to the trust, that friends may avoid future difficulties, and the risk
of being deprived of such estates. And it is further recommended, that
quarterly and monthly meetings respectively, as the case may require, keep
exact records of all such trusts and conveyances; and also that a clear and
regular account be kept by each respective meeting of the place where, and the
persons with whom the papers, minutes and records, belonging to our religious
society, are from time to time deposited, wherein due care should be taken to
lodge them with suitable friends. P. D.


