LETTER FROM ALEXANDER HAMILTON, CONCERNING THE PUBLIC CONDUCT AND CHARACTER OF
JOHN ADAMS, Esquire. PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES.

NEW YORK: Printed for JOHN LANG, by GEORGE F. HOPKINS. 1800.

[ Copy-right secured.]

LETTER.
SIR,
SOME of the warm personal friends of Mr. ADAMS are taking unwearied pains to
disparage the motives of those Federalists, who advocate the equal support of
Genesis PINCKNEY, at the approaching election of President and Vice President.
They are exhibited under a variety of aspects equally derogatory. Sometimes
they are versatile, factious spirits, who cannot be long satisfied with any
chief, however meritorious: -- Sometimes they are ambitious spirits, who can be
contented with no man that will not submit to be governed by them: -- Sometimes
they are intriguing partisans of Great Britain, who, devoted to the advancement
of her views, are incensed against Mr. ADAMS for the independent impartiality
of his conduct.

IN addition to a full share of the obloquy vented against this description of
persons collectively, peculiar accusations have been devised, to swell the
catalogue of my demerits. Among these, the resentment of disappointed ambition,
forms a prominent feature. It is pretended, that had the President, upon the
demise of General WASHINGTON, appointed me Commander in Chief, he would have
been, in my estimation, all that is wise, and good and great.

IT is necessary, for the public cause, to repel these slanders; by stating the
real views of the persons who are calumniated, and the reasons of their conduct.

IN executing this task, with particular reference to myself, I ought to
premise, that the ground upon which I stand, is different from that of most of
those who are confounded with me as in pursuit of the same plan. While our
object is common, our motives are variously dissimilar. A part, well affected
to Mr. ADAMS, have no other wish than to take a double chance against Mr.
JEFFERSON. Another part, feeling a diminution of confidence in him, still hope
that the general tenor of his conduct will be essentially right. Few go as far
in their objections as I do. Not denying to Mr. ADAMS patriotism and integrity,
and even talents of a certain kind, I should be deficient in candor, were I to
conceal the conviction, that he does not possess the talents adapted to the
Administration of Government, and that there are great and intrinsic defects in
his character, which unfit him for the office of Chief Magistrate.

TO give a correct idea of the circumstances which have gradually produced this
conviction, it may be useful to retrospect to an early period.

I WAS one of that numerous class who had conceived a high veneration for Mr.
ADAMS, on account of the part he acted in the first stages of our revolution.
My imagination had exalted him to a high eminence, as a man of patriotic, bold,
profound, and comprehensive mind. But in the progress of the war, opinions were
ascribed to him, which brought into question, with me, the solidity of his
understanding. He was represented to be of the number of those who favored the
enlistment of our troops annually, or for short periods, rather than for the
term of the war; a blind and infatuated policy, directly contrary to the urgent
recommendation of General WASHINGTON, and which had nearly proved the ruin of
our cause. He was also said to have advocated the project of appointing yearly
a new Commander of the Army; a project which, in any service, is likely to be
attended with more evils than benefits; but which, in ours, at the period in
question, was chimerical, from the want of persons qualified to succeed, and
pernicious, from the peculiar fitness of the officer first appointed, to
strengthen, by personal influence, the too feeble cords which bound to the
service, an ill-paid, ill-clothed, and undisciplined soldiery.

IT is impossible for me to assert, at this distant day, that these suggestions
were brought home to Mr. ADAMS in such a manner as to ascertain their
genuineness; but I distinctly remember their existence, and my conclusion from
them; which was, that, if true, they proved this gentleman to be infected with
some visionary notions, and that he was far less able in the practice, than in
the theory, of politics. I remember also, that they had the effect of inducing
me to qualify the admiration which I had once entertained for him, and to
reserve for opportunities of future scrutiny, a definitive opinion of the true
standard of his character.

IN this disposition I was, when just before the close of the war, I became a
member of Congress.

THE situation in which I found myself there, was far from being inauspicious
to a favorable estimate of Mr. ADAMS.

UPON my first going into Congress, I discovered symptoms of a party already
formed, too well disposed to subject the interests of the United States to the
management of France. Though I felt, in common with those who had participated
in our Revolution, a lively sentiment of good will toward a power, whose
cooperation, however it was and ought to have been dictated by its own
interest, had been extremely useful to us, and had been afforded in a liberal
and handsome manner; yet, tenacious of the real independence of our country,
and dreading the preponderance of foreign influence, as the natural disease of
popular government, I was struck with disgust at the appearance, in the very
cradle of our Republic, of a party actuated by an undue complaisance to foreign
power; and I resolved at once to resist this bias in our affairs: a resolution,
which has been the chief cause of the persecution I have endured in the
subsequent stages of my political life.

AMONG the fruits of the bias I have mentioned, were the celebrated
instructions to our Commissioners, for treating of peace with Great Britain;
which, not only as to final measures, but also as to preliminary and
intermediate negociations, placed them in a state of dependence on the French
ministry, humiliating to themselves, and unsafe for the interests of the
country. This was the more exceptionable, as there was cause to suspect, that
in regard to the two cardinal points of the fisheries and the navigation of the
Missisippi, the policy of the cabinet of Versailles did not accord with the
wishes of the United States.

THE Commissioners, of whom Mr. ADAMS was one, had the fortitude to break
through the fetters which were laid upon them by those instructions; and there
is reason to believe, that by doing it, they both accelerated the peace with
Great Britain, and improved the terms, while they preserved our faith with
France.

YET a serious attempt was made to obtain from Congress a formal censure of
their conduct. The attempt failed, and instead of censure, the praise was
bestowed which was justly due to the accomplishment of a treaty advantageous to
this country, beyond the most sanguine expectation. In this result, my efforts
were heartily united.

THE principal merit of the negotiation with Great Britain, in some quarters,
has been bestowed upon Mr. ADAMS; but it is certainly the right of Mr. JAY, who
took a lead in the several steps of the transaction, no less honorable to his
talents than to his firmness. The merit, nevertheless, of a full and decisive
cooperation, is justly due to Mr. ADAMS.

IT will readily be seen, that such a course of things was calculated to
impress me with a disposition friendly to Mr. ADAMS. I certainly felt it, and
gave him much of my consideration and esteem.

BUT this did not hinder me from making careful observations upon his several
communications, and endeavoring to derive from them an accurate idea of his
talents and character. This scrutiny enhanced my esteem in the main for his
moral qualifications, but lessened my respect for his intellectual endowments.
I then adopted an opinion, which all my subsequent experience has confirmed,
that he is a man of an imagination sublimated and eccentric; propitious neither
to the regular display of sound judgment, nor to steady perseverance in a
systematic plan of conduct; and I began to perceive what has been since too
manifest, that to this defect are added the unfortunate foibles of a vanity
without bounds, and a jealousy capable of discoloring every object.

STRONG evidence of some traits of this character, is to be found in a Journal
of Mr. ADAMS, which was sent by the then Secretary of Foreign Affairs to
Congress. The reading of this Journal, extremely embarrassed his friends,
especially the delegates of Massachusetts; who, more than once, interrupted it,
and at last, succeeded in putting a stop to it, on the suggestion that it bore
the marks of a private and confidential paper, which, by some mistake, had
gotten into its present situation, and never could have been designed as a
public document for the inspection of Congress. The good humor of that body
yielded to the suggestion.

THE particulars of this Journal cannot be expected to have remained in my
memory -- but I recollect one which may serve as a sample. Being among the
guests invited to dine with the Count de Vergennes, Minister for Foreign
Affairs, Mr. ADAMS thought fit to give a specimen of American politeness, by
conducting Madame de Vergennes to dinner; in the way, she was pleased to make
retribution in the current coin of French politeness -- by saying to him,
Monsieur Adams, vous etes le Washington de negotiation. Mr. ADAMS, you are the
WASHINGTON of negotiation.
Stating the incident, he makes this comment upon it: These people have a very
pretty knack of paying compliments. He might have added, they have also a very
dexterous knack of disguising a sarcasm.

THE opinion, however, which I have avowed, did not prevent my entering
cordially into the plan of supporting Mr. ADAMS for the office of
Vice President, under the new Constitution. I still thought that he had high
claims upon the public gratitude, and possessed a substantial worth of
character, which might atone for some great defects. In addition to this, it
was well known, that he was a favorite of New England, and it was obvious that
his union with General WASHINGTON would tend to give the government, in its
outset, all the strength which it could derive from the character of the two
principal magistrates.

BUT it was deemed an essential point of caution to take care, that accident or
an intrigue of the opposers of the Government, should not raise Mr. ADAMS,
instead of General WASHINGTON, to the first place. This, every friend of the
Government would have considered as a disastrous event; as well because it
would have displayed a capricious operation of the system in elevating to the
first station, a man intended for the second; as because it was conceived that
the incomparably superior weight and transcendant popularity of Genesis
WASHINGTON, rendered his presence at the head of the Government in its first
organization, a matter of primary and indispensable importance. It was
therefore agreed that a few votes should be diverted from Mr. ADAMS to other
persons, so as to insure to General WASHINGTON a plurality.

GREAT was my astonishment, and equally great my regret, when, afterward, I
learned from persons of unquestionable veracity, that Mr. ADAMS had complained
of unfair treatment, in not having been permitted to take an equal chance with
General WASHINGTON, by leaving the votes to an uninfluenced current.

THE extreme egotism of the temper, which could blind a man to considerations
so obvious as those that had recommended the course pursued, cannot be enforced
by my comment. It exceeded all that I had imagined, and showed, in too strong a
light, that the vanity which I have ascribed to him, existed to a degree that
rendered it more than a harmless foible.

MR. ADAMS was elected Vice President. His public conduct, in that station, was
satisfactory to the friends of the Government, though they were now and then
alarmed by appearances of some eccentric tendencies.

I^ is, in particular, a tribute due from me, to acknowledge, that Mr. ADAMS,
being in quality of Vice President, ex officio, one of the Trustees of the
Sinking Fund, I experienced from him the most complete support; which was the
more gratifying to me, as I had to struggle against the systematic opposition
of Mr. JEFFERSON, seconded occasionally by Mr. RANDOLPH. Though it would be an
ill compliment to Mr. ADAMS, not to presume that the support which he gave me,
was the dictate of his sense of the public interest; yet, so cordial and useful
a cooperation, at a moment when I was assailed with all the weapons of party
rancor, won from me an unfeigned return of the most amicable sentiments.

I LOST no opportunity of combating the prejudices industriously propagated
against him by his political enemies; and, for a considerable t^^e, went quite
as far as candor would permit, to extenuate the failings which more and more
alarmed and dissatisfied his friends.

THE epoch at length arrived, when the retreat of General WASHINGTON made it
necessary to fix upon a successor. By this time, men of principal influence in
the Federal Party, whose situation had led them to an intimate acquaintance
with Mr. ADAMS's character, began to entertain serious doubts about his fitness
for the station; yet, his pretensions, in several respects, were so strong,
that after mature reflection, they thought it better to indulge their hopes
than to listen to their fears. To this conclusion, the desire of preserving
harmony in the Federal Party, was a weighty inducement. Accordingly it was
determined to support Mr. ADAMS for the Chief Magistracy.

IT was evidently of much consequence to endeavor to have an eminent Federalist
Vice President. Mr. THOMAS PINCKNEY, of South Carolina, was selected for this
purpose. This gentleman, too little known in the North, had (...) his life time
distinguished in the South, for the mild^^^^ and amiableness of his manners,
the rectitude and purity of his morals, and the soundness and correctness of
his understanding, accompanied by a habitual discretion and self-command, which
has often occasioned a parallel to be drawn between him and the venerated
WASHINGTON. In addition to these recommendations, he had been, during a
critical period, our Minister at the Court of London, and recently Envoy
Extraordinary to the Court of Spain; and in both these trusts, he had acquitted
himself to the satisfaction of all parties. With the Court of Spain he had
effected a Treaty, which removed all the thorny subjects of contention, that
had so long threatened the peace of the two countries, and stipulated for the
United States, on their Southern frontier, and on the Missisippi, advantages of
real magnitude and importance.

WELL-INFORMED men knew that the event of the Election was extremely
problematical; and, while the friends of Mr. JEFFERSON predicted his success
with sanguine confidence, his opposers feared that he might have at least an
equal chance with any Federal Candidate.

TO exclude him, was deemed, by the Federalists, a primary object. Those of
them who possessed the best means of judging, were of opinion that it was far
less important, whether Mr. ADAMS or Mr. PINCKNEY was the successful Candidate,
than that Mr. JEFFERSON should not be the person; and on this princip^^* (...)
was understood among them, that the two first menti^^^^ gentlemen should be
equally supported; leaving to casual accessions of votes in favor of the one or
the other, to turn the scale between them.

(...) plan I united with good faith; in the resolution, (...) scrupulously
adhered, of giving to each Candidate (...) ^upport. This was done, wherever my
influence (...); as was more particularly manifested in the State of New York,
where all the Electors were my warm personal or political friends, and all gave
a concurrent vote for the two Federal Candidates.

IT is true that a faithful execution of this plan would have given Mr.
PINCKNEY a somewhat better chance than Mr. ADAMS; nor shall it be concealed,
that an issue favorable to the former would not have been disagreeable to me;
as indeed I declared at the time, in the circles of my confidential friends. I
appeal particularly to Lt. Governor VAN RENSSELAER and R. TROUP, Esquire.
My position was, that if chance should decide in favor of Mr. PINCKNEY, it
probably would not be a misfortune; since he, to every essential qualification
for the office, added a temper far more discreet and conciliatory than that of
Mr. ADAMS.

THIS disposition, on my part, at that juncture, proves, at least, that my
disapprobation of Mr. ADAMS has not originated in the disappointment, to which
it has been uncandidly attributed. No private motive could then have entered
into it. Not the least collision or misunderstanding had ever happened between
that gentleman and myself -- on the contrary, as I have already stated, I had
reason individually to be pleased with him.

NO: The considerations which had reconciled me to the success of Mr. PINCKNEY,
were of a nature exclusively public. They resulted from the disgusting egotism,
the distempered jealousy, and the (...) indiscretion of Mr. ADAMS's temper,
joined to so^^ doubts of the correctness of his maxims of Administration.
Though in matters of Finance he had acted with the Federal Party; yet he had*
more than once, broached theories at variance with (...). And in conversation,
he repeatedly made (...) in the field of foreign politics, which alarmed (...)
of the prevailing system.

THE plan of giving equal support to the two (...) Candidates, was not pursued.
Personal attachment for Mr. ADAMS, especially in the New England States, caused
a number of the votes to be withheld from Mr. PINCKNEY, and thrown away. The
result was, that Mr. ADAMS was elected President by a majority of two votes,
and Mr. JEFFERSON Vice President.

THIS issue demonstrated the wisdom of the plan which had been abandoned, and
how greatly, in departing from it, the cause had been sacrificed to the man.
But for a sort of miracle, the departure would have made Mr. JEFFERSON
President. In each of the States of Pennsylvania, Virginia and North Carolina,
Mr. ADAMS had one vote. In the two latter States, the one vote was as much
against the stream of popular prejudice, as it was against the opinions of the
other Electors. The firmness of the individuals who separated from their
colleagues, was so extraordinary, as to have been contrary to all probable
calculation. Had only one of them thrown his vote into the other scale, there
would have been an equality, and no election. Had two done it, the choice would
have fallen upon Mr. JEFFERSON.

No one, sincere in the opinion that this gentleman was an ineligible and
dangerous Candidate, can hesitate in pronouncing, that in dropping Mr.
PINCKNEY, too much was put at hazard; and that those who promoted the other
course, acted with prudence and propriety.

(...) is a fact, which ought not to be forgotten, that Mr. (...)* who had
evinced discontent, because he had not (...) to take an equal chance with
General WASH^^^^^^ was enraged with all those who had thought that (...)
^^NCKNEY ought to have had an equal chance with him. (...) there is perfect
consistency. The same turn of temper is the solution of the displeasure in both
cases.

IT is to this circumstance of the equal support of Mr. PINCKNEY, that we are
in a great measure to refer the serious scism which has since grown up in the
Federal Party.

MR. ADAMS never could forgive the men who had been engaged in the plan; though
it embraced some of his most partial admirers. He has discovered bitter
animosity against several of them. Against me, his rage has been so vehement,
as to have caused him more than once, to forget the decorum, which, in his
situation, ought to have been an inviolable law. It will not appear an
exaggeration to those who have studied his character, to suppose that he is
capable of being alienated from a system to which he has been attached, because
it is upheld by men whom he hates. How large a share this may have had in some
recent aberrations, cannot easily be determined.

OCCURRENCES which have either happened or come to light since the election of
Mr. ADAMS to the Presidency, confirming my unfavorable forebodings of his
character, have given new and decisive energy, in my mind, to the sentiment of
his unfitness for the station.

THE letter which has just appeared in the public prints, written by him, while
Vice President, to TENCH COXE, is of itself conclusive evidence of the justness
of this sentiment. It is impossible to speak of this transaction in terms
suited to its nature, without losing sight that Mr. ADAMS is President of the
United States.

THIS letter avows the suspicion, that the (...) Mr. PINCKNEY to the Court of
London, had been (...) or promoted by British Influence. And consideri^^ (...)
with which the story of the Duke of Leeds is to (...) fair to consider that
circumstance as the principal, if (...) sole, ground of the odious and
degrading suspicion.

LET any man of candor or knowledge of the world, pronounce on this species of
evidence.

IT happened unfortunately for the PINCKNEYS, that, while boys, and long before
our revolution, they went to school with a British Duke, who was afterward
Minister of the British Government for the foreign department. This indiscreet
Duke, perhaps for no better reason than the desire of saying something to a
parting American Minister, and the want of something better to say, divulges to
him the dangerous secret, that the two PINCKNEYS had been his class-mates, and
goes the alarming length of making enquiry about their health. From this, it is
sagaciously inferred, that these gentlemen have "many powerful old friends in
England;" and from this again, that the Duke of Leeds (of course of the number
of these old friends) had procured by intrigue the appointment of one of his
class-mates to the Court of London; or, in the language of the letter, that
much British influence had been exerted in the appointment.

IN the school of jealousy, stimulated by ill will, logic like this may pass
for substantial; but what is it in the school of reason and justice?

THOUGH this contaminating connection of the PINCKNEYS with the Duke of Leeds,
in their juvenile years, did not hinder them from fighting for the independence
of their native country throughout our revolution; yet the supposition is, that
the instant the war was terminated, it transformed them from the soldiers of
liberty into the tools of the British Monarchy.

BUT the hostility of the PINCKNEYS to Mr. ADAMS, evi^enced by their "long
intrigue" against him, of which he speaks in the letter, is perhaps intended as
a still stronger proof of their devotion to Great Britain -- the argument may
be thus understood. Mr. ADAMS is the bulwark of his country against foreign
influence -- The batteries of every foreign power, desirous of acquiring an
ascendant in our affairs, are of consequence always open against him -- and,
the presumption therefore must be, that every citizen who is his enemy, is the
confederate of one or another of those foreign powers.

LET us, without contesting this argument of self-love, examine into the facts
upon which its applicability must depend.

THE evidence of "the long intrigue" seems to be, that the family of the
PINCKNEY's contributed to limit the duration of Mr. ADAMS's commission to the
Court of London to the term of three years, in order to make way for some of
themselves to succeed him. This, it must be confessed, was a long-sighted
calculation in a government like ours.

A SUMMARY of the transaction, will be the best comment on the inference which
has been drawn.

THE resolution of Congress by which Mr, ADAMS's commission was limited, was a
general one, applying to the Commissions of all Ministers to foreign Courts.
When it was proposed and adopted, it is certain that neither of the two
PINCKNEY's was a member of Congress; and it is believed that they were both at
Charleston, in South Carolina, their usual place of abode, more than eight
hundred miles distant from the seat of Government.

BUT they had, it seems, a cousin, Mr. CHARLES PINCKNEY, who was in Congress;
and this cousin it was who moved the restrictive resolution. Let us enquire who
seconded and who voted for it.

IT was seconded by Mr. HOWELL, a member from Rhode Island, the very person who
nominated Mr. Adams as Minister to Great Britain, and was voted for by the four
Eastern States, with New York, New Jersey, Maryland and South Carolina. Mr.
GERRY, always a zealous partisan of Mr. ADAMS, was among the supporters of the
resolution. To make out this to be a machination of the two PINCKNEYS, many
things must be affirmed: -- First, that their cousin CHARLES is always
subservient to their views (which would equally prove that they have long been,
and still are, opposers of the Federal Administration:) -- Second, that this
cunning wight had been able to draw the four Eastern States into his plot, as
well as New York, New Jersey, Maryland, and South Carolina: -- Third, that the
PINCKNEYS could foresee, at the distance of three years, the existence of a
state of things which would enable them to reap the fruit of their contrivance.

WOULD not the circumstances better warrant the suspicion that the resolution
was a contrivance of the friends of Mr. ADAMS, to facilitate in some way his
election, and that Mr. PINCKNEY was their coadjutor, rather than their prompter?

BUT the truth most probably is, that the measure was a mere precaution to
bring under frequent review the propriety of continuing a Minister at a
particular Court, and to facilitate the removal of a disagreeable one, without
the harshness of formally displacing him. In a policy of this sort, the
cautious maxims of New England would very naturally have taken a lead.

THUS in the very grounds of the suspicion, as far as they appear, we find its
refutation. The complete futility of it will now be illustrated by additional
circumstances.

IT is a fact, that the rigor with which the war was prosecuted by the British
armies in our Southern quarter, had produced among the friends of our
Revolution there, more animosity against the British Government, than in the
other parts of the United States: and it is a matter of notoriety, in the same
quarter, that this disposition was conspicuous among the PINCKNEYS, and their
connections. It may be added, that they were likewise known to have been
attached to the French Revolution, and to have continued so, till long after
the appointment of Mr. THOMAS PINCKNEY to the Court of London.

THESE propensities of the gentlemen, were certainly not such as to make them
favorites of Great Britain, or the appointment of one of them to that Court, an
object of particular solicitude.

AS far as appeared at the time, the idea of nominating Mr. THOMAS PINCKNEY,
originated with the then President himself: but whatever may have been its
source, it is certain that it met the approbation of the whole Admistration,
Mr. JEFFERSON included. This fact alone, will go far to refute the surmise of a
British agency in the appointment.

SUPPOSING, that, contrary to all probability, Great Britain had really taken
some unaccountable fancy for Mr. PINCKNEY, upon whom was her influence exerted?

HAD the virtuous, circumspect Washington been ensnared in her insidious toils?
Had she found means for once to soften the stern, inflexible hostility of
JEFFERSON? Had RANDOLPH been won by her meretricious caresses? Had KNOX, the
uniform friend of Mr. ADAMS, been corrupted by her seducing wiles? Or was it
all the dark work of the alien Secretary of the Treasury? Was it this arch
juggler, who debauched the principles, or transformed the prejudices, of Mr.
PINCKNEY; who persuaded the British Government to adopt him as a pliant
instrument; who artfully induced the President to propose him as of his own
selection; who lulled the zealous vigilance of JEFFERSON and RANDOLPH, and
surprised the unsuspecting frankness of KNOX?

BUT when the thing had been accomplished, no matter by what means, it was
surely to have been expected that the man of its choice would have been treated
at the Court of London with distinguished regard, and that his conduct toward
that Court would have been marked, if not by some improper compliances, at
least by some displays of extraordinary complaisance.

YET, strange as it may appear, upon Mr. ADAMS's hypothesis, it might be
proved, if requisite, that neither the one nor the other took place. It might
be proved that, far from Mr. PINCKNEY's having experienced any flattering
distinctions, incidents not pleasant to his feelings, had occurred, and that in
the discharge of his official functions, he had advanced pretensions in favor
of the United States, from which, with the approbation of the then Secretary of
State, Mr. JEFFERSON, he was instructed to desist.

WHAT will Mr. ADAMS or his friends reply to all these facts? How will he be
excused for indulging and declaring, on grounds so frivolous, a suspicion so
derogatory, of a man so meritorious -- of a man who has acted in a manner so
unexceptionable?

BUT a more serious question remains: How will Mr. ADAMS answer to the
Government and to his Country, for having thus wantonly given the sanction of
his opinion to the worst of the aspersions which the enemies of the
Administration have impudently thrown upon it? Can we be surprised that such a
torrent of slander was poured out against it, when a man, the second in
official rank, the second in the favor of the friends of the Government,
stooped to become himself one of its calumniators? -- It is peculiarly unlucky
for Mr. ADAMS in this affair, that he is known to have desired, at the time,
the appointment which was given to Mr. PINCKNEY. The President declined the
measure, thinking that it was compatible neither with the spirit of the
constitution nor with the dignity of the Government, to designate the
Vice President to such a station.

THIS letter, better than volumes, developes the true, the unfortunate
character of Mr. ADAMS.

THE remaining causes of dissatisfaction with him respect his conduct in the
office of President; which, in my opinion, has been a heterogeneous compound of
right and wrong, of wisdom and error.

THE outset was distinguished by a speech which his friends lamented as
temporising. It had the air of a lure for the favor of his opponents at the
expense of his sincerity; but being of an equivocal complexion, to which no
precise design can be annexed, it is barely mentioned as a circumstance, which,
in conjunction with others of a more positive tint, may serve to explain
character.

IT is in regard to our foreign relations, that the public measures of Mr.
ADAMS first attract criticism.

IT will be recollected that General PINCKNEY, the brother of THOMAS, and the
gentleman now supported together with Mr. ADAMS, had been deputed by President
WASHINGTON, as successor to Mr. MONROE, and had been refused to be received by
the French Government in his quality of Minister Plenipotentiary.

THIS, among those of the well-informed, who felt a just sensibility for the
honor of their country, excited much disgust and resentment. But the
Opposition-Party, ever too ready to justify the French Government at the
expense of their own, vindicated or apologized for the ill treatment: and the
mass of the community, though displeased with it, did not appear to feel the
full force of the indignity.

AS a final effort for accommodation, and as a mean, in case of failure, of
enlightening and combining public opinion, it was resolved to make another, and
a more solemn, experiment, in the form of a commission of three.

THIS measure (with some objections to the detail) was approved by all parties;
by the Antifederalists, because they thought no evil so great as the rupture
with France; by the Federalists, because it was their system to avoid war with
every power, if it could be done without the sacrifice of essential interests
or absolute humiliation.

EVEN such of them who conceived that the insults of the French Government, and
the manifestation of its ill will, had already gone far enough to call for
measures of vigor; perceiving that the nation was not generally penetrated with
the same conviction, and would not support with zeal measures of that nature,
unless their necessity was rendered still more apparent, acquiesced in the
expediency of another mission. They hoped that it would serve either to compose
the differences which existed, or to make the necessity of resistance to the
violence of France, palpable to every good citizen.

THE expediency of the step was suggested to Mr. ADAMS, through a Federal
channel, a considerable time before he determined to take it. He hesitated
whether it could be done after the rejection of General PINCKNEY, without
national debasement. The doubt was an honorable one; it was afterward very
properly surrendered to the cogent reasons which pleaded for a further
experiment.

THE event of this experiment is fresh in our recollection. Our Envoys, like
our Minister, were rejected. Tribute was demanded as a preliminary to
negotiation. To their immortal honor, though France at the time was proudly
triumphant, they repelled the disgraceful pretension. Americans will never
forget that General PINCKNEY was a member, and an efficient member, of this
Commission.

THIS conduct of the French Government, in which it is difficult to say,
whether despotic insolence or unblushing corruption was most ^rominent,
electrified the American people with a becoming indignation. In vain the
partisans of France attempted to extenuate. The public voice was distinct and
audible. The nation, disdaining so foul an overture, was ready to encounter the
worst consequences of resistance.

WITHOUT imitating the flatterers of Mr. ADAMS, who, in derogation from the
intrinsic force of circumstances, and from the magnanimity of the nation,
ascribe to him the whole merits of producing the spirit which appeared in the
community, it shall with cheerfulness be acknowledged, that he took upon the
occasion a manly and courageous lead -- that he did all in his power to rouse
the pride of the nation -- to inspire it with a just sense of the injuries and
outrages which it had experienced, and to dispose it to a firm and magnanimous
resistance; and that his efforts contributed materially to the end.

THE friends of the Government were not agreed as to ulterior measures. Some
were for immediate and unqualified war; others for a more mitigated course; the
dissolution of treaties, preparation of force by land and sea, partial
hostilities of a defensive tendency; leaving to France the option of seeking
accommodation, or proceeding to open war. The latter course prevailed.

THOUGH not as bold and energetic as the other; yet, considering the prosperous
state of French affairs, when it was adopted, and how many nations had been
appalled and prostrated by the French Power -- the conduct pursued bore
sufficiently the marks of courage and elevation to raise the national character
to an exalted height throughout Europe.

MUCH is it to be deplored that we should have been precipitated from this
proud eminence without necesity, without temptation.

THE latter conduct of the President forms a painful contrast to his
commencement. Its effects have been directly the reverse. It has sunk the tone
of the public mind -- it has impaired the confidence of the friends of the
Government in the Executive Chief -- it has distracted public opinion -- it has
unnerved the public councils -- it has sown the seeds of discord at home, and
lowered the reputation of the Government abroad. -- The circumstances which
preceded, aggravate the disagreeableness of the results. They prove that the
injudicious things which have been acted, were not the effects of any regular
plan, but the fortuitous emanations of momentary impulses.

THE session, which ensued the promulgation of the dispatches of our
Commissioners, was about to commence. Mr. ADAMS arrived at Philadelphia from
his seat at Quincey. The tone of his mind seemed to have been raised, rather
than depressed.

IT was suggested to him, that it might be expedient to insert in his Speech of
Congress, a sentimetnt of this import: That after the repeatedly rejected
advances of this country, its dignity required that it should be left with
France in future to make the first overture; that if, desirous of
reconciliation, she should evince the disposition by sending a Minister to this
Government, he would be received with the respect due to his character, and
treated with in the frankness of a sincere desire of accommodation.

THE suggestion was received in a manner both indignant and intemperate.

MR. ADAMS declared as a sentiment which he had adopted on mature reflection:
-- That if France should send a Minister tomorrow, he would order him back the
day after.

SO imprudent an idea was easily refuted. Little argument was requisite to show
that by a similar system of retaliation, when one Government in a particular
instance had refused the Envoy of another, nations might entail upon each other
perpetual hostility; mutually barring the avenues of explanation.

IN less than forty-eight hours from this extraordinary sally, the mind of Mr,
ADAMS underwent a total revolution -- he resolved not only to insert in his
speech the sentiment which had been proposed to him, but to go farther, and to
declare, that if France would give explicit assurances of receiving a Minister
from this country, with due respect, he would send one.

IN vain was this extension of the sentiment opposed by all his Ministers, as
being equally incompatible with good policy, and with the dignity of the nation
-- he obstinately persisted, and the pernicious declaration was introduced.

I CALL it pernicious, because it was the groundwork of the false steps which
have succeeded.

THE declaration recommended to the President was a prudent one.

THE measures of Congress, by their mitigated form, showed that an eye had been
still kept upon pacification. A numerous party were averse from war with France
at any rate. In the rest of the community, a strong preference of honorable
accommodation to final rupture was discernible, even amidst the effusions of
resentment.

THE charges which we had exhibited in the face of the world against the French
Government, were of a high and disgraceful complexion; they had been urged with
much point and emphasis.

TO give an opening to France, to make conciliatory propositions, some salve
for her pride was necessary. It was also necessary she should be assured that
she would not expose herself to an affront by a refusal to receive the agent
whom she might employ for that purpose. The declaration proposed fulfilled both
objects.

IT was likely to have another important advantage. It would be a new proof to
the American people of the moderate and pacific temper of their Government;
which would tend to preserve their confidence, and to dispose them more and
more to meet inevitable extremities with fortitude and without murmurs.

BUT the supplement to the declaration was a blameable excess. It was more than
sufficient for the ends to be answered. It waved the point of honor, which,
after two rejections of our Ministers, required that the next Mission between
the two countries, should proceed from France. After the mortifying
humiliations we had endured, the national dignity demanded that this point
should not be departed from without necessity. No such necessity could be
pretended to exist: moreover, another mission by us would naturally be regarded
as evidence of a disposition on our part to purchase the friendship of
revolutionary France, even at the expense of honor; an impression which could
hardly fail to injure our interests with other countries: and the measure would
involve the further inconvenience of transferring the negotiation from this
country, where our government could regulate it according to its own view of
exigencies, to France, where that advantage would be enjoyed by her Government,
and where the power of judging for us must be delegated to Commissioners; who,
acting under immense individual responsibility, at a distance too great for
consultation, would be apt to act with hesitancy and irresolution, whether the
policy of the case required concession or firmness. This was to place it too
much in the power of France to manage the progress of the negotiation according
to events.

IT has been said that Paris was wisely preferred as the place of negotiation,
because it served to avoid the caballings of a French Minister in this country.
But there is not enough in this argument to counterbalance the weighty
considerations on the other side. The intrigues of GENET and his successors
were perplexing to the Government, chiefly because they were too well seconded
by the prepossessions of the people. The great alteration in public opinion,
had put it completely in the power of our Executive to control the
machinations of any future public Agent of France. It ought also to be
remembered, that if France has not known agents, she never will be without
secret ones, and that her partisans among our citizens, can much better promote
her cause, than any Agents she can send. In fact, her Agents, by their
blunders, were in the event rather useful than pernicious to our affairs.

BUT is it likely that France would have sent a minister to this country? When
we find, that from calculations of policy she could brook the ignominy which
the publication of the dispatches of our commissioners was calculated to bring
upon her; and stifling her resentment, could invite the renewal of negotiation;
what room can there be to doubt, that the same calculations would have induced
her to send a minister to this country when an opening was given for it?

THE French minister for foreign relations, through the French Diplomatic Agent
at the Hague, had opened a communication with Mr. MURRAY, our Resident there,
for the purpose of reviving negotiation between the two countries. In this
manner, assurances were given that France was disposed to treat, and that a
Minister from us would be received and accredited. But they were accompanied
with intimations of the characters proper to be employed, and who would be
likely to succeed; which was exceptionable, both as it savored of the
pretension (justly censured by the President himself) of prescribing to other
Governments how they were to manage their own affairs; and as it might,
according to circumstances, be construed into a tacit condition of the promise
to receive a Minister. Overtures so circuitous aid informal, through a person
who was not the regular organ of the French government for making them, to a
person who was not the regular organ of the American government for receiving
them, might be a very fit mode of preparing the way for the like overtures in a
more authentic and obligatory shape: But they were a very inadequate basis for
the institution of a new Mission.

WHEN the President pledged himself in his speech to send a minister, if
satisfactory assurances of a proper reception were given, he must have been
understood to mean such as were direct and official, not such as were both
informal and destitute of a competent sanction.

YET upon this loose and vague foundation, Mr. ADAMS precipitately nominated
Mr. MURRAY as Envoy to the French Republic, without previous consultation with
any of his Ministers. The nomination itself was to each of them, even to the
Secretary of State, his Constitutional Counselor, in similar affairs, the
first notice of the project.

THUS was the measure wrong, both as to mode and substance.

A PRESIDENT is not bound to conform to the advice of his Ministers. He is even
under no positive injunction to ask or require it. But the Constitution
presumes that he will consult them; and the genius of our government and the
public good recommend the practice.

AS the President nominates his Ministers, and may displace them when he
pleases, it must be his own fault if he be not surrounded by men, who for
ability and integrity deserve his confidence. And if his ministers are of this
character, the consulting of them will always be likely to be useful to himself
and to the State. Let it even be supposed that he is a man of talents superior
to the collected talents of all his ministers, (which can seldom happen, as the
world has seen but few FREDERICKS) he may, nevertheless, often assist his
judgment by a comparison and collision of ideas. The greatest genius, hurried
away by the rapidity of its own conceptions, will occasionally overlook
obstacles which ordinary and more phlegmatic men will discover, and which, when
presented to his consideration, will be thought by himself decisive objections
to his plans.

WHEN, unhappily, an ordinary man dreams himself to be a FREDERICK, and through
vanity refrains from counselling with his constitutional advisers, he is very
apt to fall into the hands of miserable intriguers, with whom his self-love is
more at ease, and who without difficulty slide into his confidence, and by
flattery, govern him.

THE ablest men may profit by advice. Inferior men cannot dispense with it; and
if they do not get it through legitimate channels, it will find its way to
them, through such as are clandestine and impure.

VERY different from the practice of Mr. ADAMS was that of the modest and sage
WASHINGTON -- He consulted much, pondered much, resolved slowly, resolved
surely.

And as surely, Mr. ADAMS might have benefited by the advice of his ministers.

THE stately system of not consulting Ministers is likely to have a further
disadvantage. It will tend to exclude from places of primary trust, the men
most fit to occupy them.

FEW and feeble are the interested inducements to accept a place in our
Administration. Far from being lucrative, there is not one which will not
involve pecuniary sacrifice to every honest man of pre-eminent talents. And has
not experience shown, that he must be fortunate indeed, if even the successful
execution of his task can secure to him consideration and fame? Of a large
harvest of obloquy he is sure.

IF excluded from the counsels of the Executive Chief, his office must become
truly insignificant. What able and virtuous man will long consent to be so
miserable a pageant?

Every thing that tends to banish from the Administration able men, tends to
diminish the chances of able counsels. The probable operation of a system of
this kind, must be to consign places of the highest trust to incapable honest
men, whose inducement will be a livelihood, or to capable dishonest men, who
will seek indirect indemnifications for the deficiency of direct and fair
inducements.

THE precipitate nomination of Mr. MURRAY, brought Mr. ADAMS into an awkward
predicament.

HE found it necessary to change his plan in its progress, and instead of one,
to nominate three Envoys, and to superadd a promise, that, though appointed,
they should not leave the United States till further and more perfect
assurances were given by the French Governm^^^.

THIS remodification of the measure was a virtual acknowledgment that it had
been premature. How unseemly was this fluctuation in the Executive Chief. It
argued either instability of views, or want of sufficient consideration
beforehand. The one or the other, in an affair of so great moment, is a serious
reproach.

ADDITIONAL and more competent assurances were received; but before the Envoys
departed, intelligence arrived of a new Revolution in the French Government;
which, in violation of the Constitution, had expelled two of the Directory.

ANOTHER Revolution: Another Constitution overthrown: Surely here was reason
for a pause, at least till it was ascertained that the new Directory would
adhere to the engagement of its predecessors, and would not send back our
Envoys with disgrace.

IN the then posture of French affairs, which externally as well as internally,
were unprosperous, a pause was every way prudent. The recent Revolution was a
valid motive for it.

DEFINITIVE compacts between nations, called real Treaties, are binding,
notwithstanding Revolutions of Governments. But to apply the maxim to
Ministerial acts, preparatory only to negotiation, is to extend it too far; to
apply it to such acts of an unstable revolutionary Government (like that of
France at that time) is to abuse it.

HAD any policy of the moment demanded it, it would have been not at all
surprising to have seen the new Directory disavowing the assurance which had
been given, and imputing it as a crime to the Ex-Directors, on the pretense
that they had prostrated the dignity of the Republic by courting the renewal of
negotiation with a government, which had so grossly insulted it.

YET our Envoys were dispatched without a ratification of the assurance by the
new Directory, at the hazard of the interests and the honor of the country.

AGAIN, the dangerous and degrading system of not consulting Ministers, was
acted upon.

WHEN the news of the Revolution in the Directory arrived, Mr. ADAMS was at his
seat in Massachusetts. His Ministers addressed to him a joint letter,
communicating the intelligence, and submitting to his consideration, whether
that event ought not to suspend the projected mission. In a letter which he
afterward wrote from the same place, he directed the preparation of a draft of
instructions for the Envoys, and intimated that their departure would be
suspended for some time.

SHORTLY after he came to Trenton, where he adjusted with his Ministers the
tenor of the instructions to be given; but he observed a profound silence on
the question, whether it was expedient that the Mission should proceed. -- The
morning after the instructions were settled, he signified to the Secretary of
State that the Envoys were immediately to depart.

HE is reported to have assigned as the reason of his silence, that he knew the
opinions of his Ministers from their letter; that he had irrevocably adopted an
opposite one; and that he deemed it most delicate not to embarrass them by a
useless discussion.

BUT would it not have been more prudent to have kept his judgment in some
degree of suspense, till after an interview and discussion with his Ministers?
Ought he to have taken it for granted that the grounds of his opinion were so
infallible, that there was no possibility of arguments being used which were
sufficient to shake them? Ought he not to have recollected the sudden
revolution which his judgment had undergone in the beginning of the business,
and to have inferred from this, that it might have yielded in another instance
to better lights? Was it necessary for him, if he had had a conference with his
ministers, to have alarmed their delicacy, by prefacing the discussion with a
declaration that he had fixed an unalterable opinion? Did not the intimation
respecting a suspension of the departure of the Envoys, imply that this would
continue till there was a change of circumstances? Was it not a circumstance to
strengthen expectation in the Ministers, when consulted about the instructions,
that they would be heard as to the principal point, previous to a definitive
resolution?

GIVING Mr. ADAMS credit for sincerity, the desultoriness of his mind is
evinced by the very different grounds upon which, at different times, he has
defended the propriety of the mission.

SOMETIMES he has treated with ridicule the idea of its being a measure which
would terminate in peace; asserting that France would not accommodate, on terms
admissible by the United States, and that the effect to be expected from the
mission, was the demonstration of this truth, and the union of public opinion
on the necessity of war.

SOMETIMES, and most frequently, he has vindicated the measure as one
conformable with the general and strong wish of the country for peace, and as
likely to promote that desirable object.

IT is now earnestly to be hoped, that the final issue of the Mission, in an
honorable accommodation, may compensate for the sacrifice of consistency,
dignity, harmony and reputation, at which it has been undertaken.

BUT even in relation to the adjustment of differences with the French
Republic, the measure was injudicious. It was probable that it would delay,
rather than accelerate, such an adjustment.

THE situation of French affairs, at the time of the overtures for renewing the
negotiation, coincides with the solicitude which was manifested for that
object, to render it likely that, at this juncture, France really desired
accommodation. If this was so, it is presumeable (as observed in another place)
that, had not the declaration about sending a Minister to her intervened, she
would have sent one to us, with adequate powers and instructions. Toward a
Minister here, our Government might have acted such a part as would have
hastened a conclusion; and the Minister, conforming to the impressions of his
Government when he was sent, it is not improbable that a desirable arrangement
might sometime since have been effected.

INSTEAD of this, the mode pursued, naturally tended to delay. A lapse of time,
by changing the circumstances, is very apt to change the views of Governments.
The French Agents, charged with the negotiation at Paris, could find little
difficulty in protracting it till events (such as the fate of a campaign)
should be ascertained, as a guide to rise or fall in their pretensions. And in
this way, obstacles might supervene, which would not have existed in the
beginning, and which might render accommodation impracticable -- or practicable
only on terms injurious to our interests.

THUS, on every just calculation, whatever may be the issue, the measure, in
reference either to our internal or foreign affairs, even to our concerns with
France herself, was alike impolitic.

IT is sometimes defended by the argument, that when our Commissioners
departed, there were circumstances in the position of Europe which made a
general peace during the succeeding winter probable, and that it would have
been dangerous for this country, remote as it is from Europe, to have been
without agents on the spot authorized to settle its controversy with France, at
the same epoch. The country, it is said, might otherwise have been left in the
perilous situation of having a subsisting quarrel with France, after she had
disembarrassed herself of all her European enemies.

THE idea that a general peace was likely to happen during that winter, was, I
know, entertained by Mr. ADAMS himself; for, in a casual conversation at
Trenton, he expressed it to me, and I supported a different opinion. But waving
now a discussion of the point, and admitting that the expectation was
entertained on substantial grounds, though it has not been verified by
experience, still the argument deed from it is not valid.

THE expediency of the measure must be tested by the state of things when it
had its inception. At the time the foundation was laid for it by the speech,
when even the nomination of Mr. MURRAY took place, the affairs of France and of
her enemies, portended a result very inauspicious to her, and very different
from that of a general peace, on conditions which would leave her the
inclination or the power to prosecute hostilities against this country.

BUT even on the supposition of other prospects, Mr. ADAMS had the option of a
substitute far preferable to the expedient which he chose.

HE might secretly and confidentially have nominated one or more of our
Ministers actually abroad for the purpose of treating with France; with
eventual instructions predicated upon appearances of an approaching peace.

AN expedient of this sort, merely provisory, could have had none of the bad
effects of the other. If the secret was kept, it could have had no inconvenient
consequences; if divulged, it would have been deemed here and elsewhere, a
prudent precaution only, recommended by the distant situation of the country,
to meet future casualties, with which we might otherwise not have been able to
keep pace. To the enemies of France, it could have given no ill impression of
us; to France, no motive to forbear other conciliatory means, for one and the
same reason, namely, because the operation was to be eventual.

THERE are some collateral incidents connected with this business of the
Mission, which it may not be useless to mention, as they will serve still
farther to illustrate the extreme propensity of Mr. ADAMS's temper to jealousy.

IT happened that I arrived at Trenton a short time before the President --
Chief Justice ELSWORTH a short time after him. This was considered as evidence
of a combination between the heads of Departments, the Chief Justice and
myself, to endeavor to influence or counteract him in the affair of the Mission.

THE truth, nevertheless, most certainly is, that I went to Trenton with
General WILKINSON, pursuant to a preconcert with him of some weeks standing, to
accelerate, by personal conferences with the Secretary of War, the adoption and
execution of arrangements which had been planned between that General and
myself, for the future disposition of the Western Army; that when I left
New York upon this journey, I had no expectation, whatever, that the President
would come to Trenton, and that I did not stay at this place a day longer than
was indispensable to the object I have stated. General WILKINSON, if necessary,
might be appealed to, not only as knowing that this was a real and sincere
purpose of my journey, but as possessing satisfactory evidence, that in all
probability, I had no anticipation of the movement of the President.

AS to Chief Justice ELSWORTH, the design of his journey was understood to be
to meet his colleague, Governor DAVY, at the seat of the Government, where they
would be at the fountain head of information, and would obtain any lights or
explanations which they might suppose useful. This was manifestly a very
natural and innocent solution of the Chief Justice's visit, and I believe the
true one.

YET these simple occurrences were to the jealous mind of Mr. ADAMS,
"confirmations strong," of some mischievous plot against his independence.

THE circumstance, which next presents itself to examination, is the dismission
of the two Secretaries, PICKERING and M'HENRY. This circumstance, it is known,
occasioned much surprise, and a strong sensation to the disadvantage of Mr.
ADAMS.

IT happened at a peculiar juncture, immediately after the unfavorable turn of
the election in New York, and had much the air of an explosion of combustible
materials which had been long prepared, but which had been kept down by
prudential calculations respecting the effect of an explosion upon the friends
of those Ministers in the State of New York. Perhaps, when it was supposed that
nothing could be lost in this quarter, and that something might be gained
elsewhere by an atoning sacrifice of those Ministers, especially Mr. PICKERING,
who had been for some time particularly odious to the opposition party, it was
determined to proceed to extremities. This, as a mere conjecture, is offered
for as much as it may be worth.

ONE fact, however, is understood to be admitted, namely, that neither of the
dismissed Ministers had given any new or recent cause for their dismission.

A PRIMARY cause of the state of things which led to this event, is to be
traced to the ungovernable temper of Mr. ADAMS. It is a fact that he is often
liable to paroxisms of anger, which deprive him of self command, and produce
very outrageous behavior to those who approach him. Most, if not all his
Ministers, and several distinguished Members of the two Houses of Congress,
have been humiliated by the effects of these gusts of passion.

THIS violence, and the little consideration for them which was implied in
declining to consult them, had occasioned great dryness between the President
and his Ministers, except, I believe, the Secretary of the Navy.

THE neglect was of course most poignant to Mr. PICKERING, because it had
repeatedly operated in matters appertaining to his office. Nor was it in the
disposition of this respectable man, justly tenacious of his own dignity and
independence, to practice condescentions toward an imperious chief. Hence the
breach constantly grew wider and wider, till a separation took place.

THE manner of the dsimission was abrupt and uncourteous; ill suited to a man,
who, in different stations, had merited so much from his country.

ADMITTING that when the President and his Minister had gotten into a situation
thus unpleasant, a separation was unavoidable; still, as there was no surmise
of misconduct, the case required a frank politeness, not an uncouth austerity.

BUT the remark most interesting in this particular, to the character of the
President, is, that it was by his own fault that he was brought into a
situation which might oblige him to displace a Minister, whose moral worth has
his own suffrage, and whose abilities and services have that of the public.

THE dismission of this Minister was preceded by a very curious circumstance.
It was, without doubt, announced as a thing shortly to happen in an opposition
circle, before any friend of the Government had the slightest suspicion of it.
This circumstance, taken in connection with the period at which it happened,
naturally provokes the conjecture that there may have been some collateral
inducements to the step.

THE dismission of the Secretary at War took place about the same time. It was
declared in the sequel of a long conversation between the President and him, of
a nature to excite alternately pain and laughter; pain, for the weak and
excessive indiscretions of a Chief Magistrate of the United States; laughter at
the ludicrous topics which constituted charges against this officer.

A PROMINENT charge was, that the Secretary, in a Report to the House of
Representatives, had eulogized General Washington, and had attempted to
eulogize General Hamilton, which was adduced as one proof of a combination, in
which the Secretary was engaged, to depreciate and injure him, the President.

WONDERFUL! passing Wonderful! that an Eulogy of the dead patriot and hero, of
the admired and beloved WASHINGTON, consecrated in the affections and reverence
of his country, should, in any shape, be irksome to the ears of his successor!

SINGULAR, also, that an encomium on the officer, first in rank in the armies
of the United States, appointed and continued by Mr. ADAMS, should in his eyes
have been a crime in the head of the War Department, and that it should be
necessary, in order to avert his displeasure, to obliterate a compliment to
that officer from an official Report.

ANOTHER principal topic of accusation was, that the Secretary had, with the
other Ministers, signed the joint letter, which had been addressed to the
President respecting a suspension of the Mission to France. It was
osten^^tiously asked, how he or they should pretend to know any thing of
diplomatic affairs; and it was plainly intimated that it was presumption in
them to have intermeddled in such affairs.

A VARIETY of things equally frivolous and outre passed. By way of episode, it
fell to my lot to be distinguished by a torrent of gross personal abuse; and I
was accused of having contributed to the loss of the election in New York, out
of ill will to Mr. ADAMS: a notable expedient truly for giving vent to my ill
will. Who is so blind as not to see, that if actuated by such a motive, I
should have preferred by the success of the election, to have secured the
choice of electors for the State of New York, who would have been likely to
cooperate in the views by which I was governed?

TO those who have not had opportunities of closely inspecting the weaknesses
of Mr. ADAMS's character, the details of this extraordinary interview would
appear incredible* but to those who have had these opportunities, they would
not even furnish an occasion of surprise. But they would be, to all who knew
their truth, irrefragable proofs of his unfitness for the station of Chief
Magistrate.

ILL treatment of Mr. M'HENRY cannot fail to awaken the sympathy of every
person well acquainted with him. Sensible, judicious, well-informed, of an
integrity never ^^^^tioned, of a temper, which, though firm in the support of
principles, has too much moderation and amenity to offend by the manner of
doing it -- I dare pronounce that he never gave Mr. ADAMS cause to treat him,
as he did, with unkindness. If Mr. ADAMS thought that his execution of his
office indicated a want of the peculiar qualifications required for it, he
might have said so with gentleness, and he would have only exercised a
prerogative entrusted to him by the Constitution, to which no blame could have
attached; but it was unjustifiable to aggravate the deprivation of office by
humiliating censures and bitter reproaches.

THE last material occurrence in the administration of Mr. ADAMS, of which I
shall take notice, is the pardon of Fries, and other principals in the late
insurrection in Pennsylvania.

IT is a fact that a very refractory spirit has long existed in the Western
Counties of that State. Repeatedly have its own laws been opposed with
violence, and as often, according to my information, with impunity.

IT is also a fact, which every body knows, that the laws of the Union, in the
vital article of revenue, have been twice resisted in the same State by
combinations so extensive, and under circumstances so violent, as to have
called for the employment of military force; once under the former President,
and once under the actual President; which together cost the United States
nearly a million and a half of dollars.

IN the first instance it happened, that by the early submission of most of the
leaders, upon an invitation of the government, few offenders of any consequence
remained subject to prosecution. Of these, either from the humanity of the
juries or some deficiency in the evidence, not one was capitally convicted. Two
poor wretches only were sentenced to die, one of them little short of an idiot,
the other a miserable follower in the hindmost train of rebellion, both beings
so insignificant in all respects, that after the lenity shown to the chiefs,
justice would have worn the mien of ferocity, if she had raised her arm against
them. The sentiment that their punishment ought to be remitted was universal;
and the President, yielding to the special considerations, granted them pardons.

IN the last instance, some of the most important of the offenders were
capitally convicted -- one of them by the verdicts of two successive juries.
The general opinion of the friends of the Government demanded an example, as
indispensable to its security.

THE opinion was well founded. Two insurrections in the same State, the one
upon the heels of the other, demonstrated a spirit of insubordination or
disaffection which required a strong corrective. It is a disagreeable fact,
forming a weighty argument in the question, that a large part of the population
of Pennsylvania is of a composition which peculiarly fits it for the intrigues
of factious men, who may desire to disturb or overthrow the Government. And it
is an equally disagreeable fact, that disaffection to the national Government
is in no other State more general, more deeply rooted, or more envenomed.

THE late Governor MIFFLIN himself informed me that in the first case,
insurrection had been organized down to the very liberties of Philadelphia, and
that had not the Government anticipated it, a general explosion would speedily
have ensued.

IT ought to be added, that the impunity, so often experienced, had made it an
article in the creed of those who were actuated by the insurgent spirit, that
neither the General nor the State Government dared to inflict capital
punishment.

TO destroy this persuasion, to repress this dangerous spirit, it was essential
that a salutary rigor should have been exerted, and that those who were under
the influence of the one and the other should be taught that they were the
dupes of a fatal illusion.

OF this, Mr. ADAMS appeared so sensible, that while the trials were pending,
he more than once imprudently threw out, that the accused must found their
hopes of escape either in their innocence or in the lenity of the juries; since
from him, in case of conviction, they would have nothing to expect. And a very
short time before he pardoned them, he declared Of these two facts, my evidence
is inferior to that which supports the other allegations of this letter; yet it
is so strong that I feel myself warranted to state them.
with no small ostentation, that the mistaken clemency of WASHINGTON on the
former occasion, had been the cause of the second insurrection, and that he
would take care there should not be a third, by giving the laws their full
course against the convicted offenders.

YET he thought proper, as if distrusting the courts and officers of the United
States, to resort through the Attorney General to the counsel of the culprits,
for a statement of their cases; Of these two facts, my evidence is inferior to
that which supports the other allegations of this letter; yet it is so strong
that I feel myself warranted to state them.
in which was found, besides some objections of form, the novel doctrine,
disavowed by every page of our law books, that treason does not consist of
resistance by force to a public law; unless it be an act relative to the
militia, or other military force.

AND upon this, or upon some other ground, not easy to be comprehended, he of a
sudden departed from all his former declarations, and against the unanimous
advice of his Ministers, with the Attorney General, came to the resolution,
which he executed, of pardoning all those who had received sentence of death.

NO wonder that the public was thunderstruck at such a result -- that the
friends of the Government regarded it as a virtual deriliction -- it was
impossible to commit a greater error. The particular situation of Pennsylvania,
the singular posture of human affairs, in which there is so strong a tendency
to the disorganization of Government -- the turbulent and malignant humors
which exist, and are so industriously nourished throughout the United States;
every thing loudly demanded that the Executive should have acted with exemplary
vigor, and should have given a striking demonstration, that condign punishment
would be the lot of the violent opposers of the laws.

THE contrary course, which was pursued, is the most inexplicable part of Mr.
ADAMS's conduct. It shows him so much at variance with himself, as well as with
sound policy, that we are driven to seek a solution for it in some system of
concession to his political enemies; a system the most fatal for himself, and
for the cause of public order, of any that he could possibly devise. It is by
temporisings like these, that men at the head of affairs, lose the respect both
of friends and foes -- it is by temporisings like these, that in times of
fermentation and commotion, Governments are prostrated, which might easily have
been upheld by an erect and imposing attitude.

I HAVE now gone through the principal circumstances in Mr. ADAMS's conduct,
which have served to produce my disapprobation of him as Chief Magistrate. I
pledge my veracity and honor, that I have stated none which are not either
derived from my own knowledge, or from sources of information, in the highest
degree, worthy of credit.

I FREELY submit it, Sir, to your judgment, whether the grounds of the opinion
I have expressed, are not weighty; and whether they are not sufficient to
exculpate those Federalists, who favor the equal support of Mr. PINCKNEY, from
all blame, and myself in particular, from the unworthy imputation of being
influenced by private resentment.

AT the same time, I will admit, though it should detract from the force of my
representations, that I have causes of personal dissatisfaction with Mr. ADAMS.
It is not my practice to trouble others with my individual concerns; nor should
I do it at present, but for the suggestions which have been made. Even with
this incentive, I shall do it as little as possible.

THE circumstances of my late military situation, have much less to do with my
personal discontent than some others. In respect to them, I shall only say,
that I owed my appointment to the station and rank I held, to the express
stipulation of General WASHINGTON, when he accepted the command of the Army,
afterward peremptorily insisted upon by him, in opposition to the strong
wishes of the President; and that, though second in rank, I was not promoted to
the first place, when it became vacant, by the death of the Commander in Chief.
As to the former, I should have had no cause to complain, if there had not been
an apparent inconsistency in the measures of the President; if he had not
nominated me first on the list of Major Generals, and attempted afterward to
place me third in rank. -- As to the latter, the Chief Command, not being a
matter of routine, the not promoting me to it, cannot be deemed a wrong or
injury; yet certainly I could not see, in the omission, any proof of good will
or confidence -- nor of a disposition to console me for the persecutions which
I had incessantly endured. But I dismiss the subject, leaving to others to
judge of my pretensions to the promotion, and of the weight, if any, which they
ought to have had with the President.

ON other topics, my sensations are far less neutral. -- If, as I have been
assured from respectable authorities, Mr. ADAMS has repeatedly indulged himself
in virulent and indecent abuse of me; if he has denominated me a man destitute
of every moral principle; if he has stigmatized me as the leader of a British
Faction; then certainly I have right to think that I have been most cruelly and
wickedly traduced; then have I right to appeal to all those who have been
spectators of my public actions; to all who are acquainted with my private
character, in its various relations, whether such treatment of me, by Mr.
ADAMS, is of a nature to weaken or to strengthen his claim to the approbation
of wise and good men; then will I so far yield to the consciousness of what I
am, as to declare, that in the cardinal points of public and private rectitude,
above all, in pure and disinterested zeal for the interests and service of this
country -- I shrink not from a comparison with any arrogant pretender to
superior and exclusive merit.

HAVING been repeatedly informed, that Mr. ADAMS had delineated me as the
leader of a British Faction, and having understood that his partisans, to
counteract the influence of my opinion, were pressing the same charge against
me, I wrote him a letter on the subject, dated the first of August last. No
reply having been given by him to this letter, I, on the first of the present
month, wrote him another; of both which letters I send you copies.

OF the purity of my public conduct in this, as in other particulars, I may
defy the severest investigation.

NOT only is it impossible for any man to give color to this absurd charge, by
a particle of proof, or by any reasonable presumption; but I am able to show,
that my conduct has uniformly given the lie to it.

I NEVER advised any connection I mean a lasting connection. From what I
recollect of the train of my ideas, it is possible I may at some time have
suggested a temporary connection for the purpose of cooperating against
France, in the event of a definitive rupture; but of this I am not certain, as
I well remember that the expediency of the measure was always problematical in
my mind, and that I have occasionally discouraged it.
with Great Britain, other than a commercial one; and in this I never advocated
the giving to her any privilege or advantage which was not to be imparted to
other nations. With regard to her pretensions as a belligerent power in
relation to neutrals, my opinions, while in the Administration, to the best of
my recollection, coincided with those of Mr. JEFFERSON. When in the year 1793,
her depredations on our commerce discovered a hostile spirit, I recommended one
definitive effort to terminate differences by negotiation, to be followed, if
unsuccessful, by a declaration of war. I urged, in the most earnest manner, the
friends of the Administration, in both houses of Congress, to prepare by sea
and land for the alternative, to the utmost extent of our resources; and to an
extent far exceeding what any member of either party was found willing to go.
For ^his alternative, I became so firmly pledged to the friends and enemies of
the Administration, and especially to the President of the United States, in
writing as well as verbally, that I could not afterward have retracted without
a glaring and disgraceful inconsistency. And being thus pledged, I explicitly
gave it as my opinion to Mr. JAY, Envoy to Great Britain, that unless an
adjustment of the differences with her could be effected on solid terms, it
would be better to do nothing. When the treaty arrived, it was not without full
deliberation and some hesitation, that I resolved to support it. The articles
relative to the settlement of differences were upon the whole satisfactory; but
there were a few of the others which appeared to me of a different character.
The article respecting contraband, though conformable with the general law of
nations, was not in all its features such as could have been wished. The XXVtH
article, which gave asylum in our ports, under certain exceptions, to
privateers with their prizes, was in itself an ineligible one, being of a
nature to excite the discontent of nations against whom it should operate, and
deriving its justification from the example before set of an equivalent
stipulation in our Treaty with France. The XIIth article, was in my view
inadmissible. The enlightened negociator, not unconscious that some parts of
the Treaty were l^^^ well arranged than was to be desired, had himself
hesitated to sign: but he had resigned his scruples to the conviction that
nothing better could be effected, and that aggregately considered, the
instrument would be advantageous to the United States. On my part, the result
of mature reflection was, that as the subjects of controversy which had
threatened the peace of the two nations, and which implicated great interests
of this country, were in the essential points, well adj^^^ed, and as the other
articles would expire in twelve years after the ratification of the Treaty, it
would be wise and right to confirm the compact, with the exception of the XIIth
article. Nevertheless, when an account was received that the British cruizers
had seized provisions going to ports of the French dominions, not in fact
blockaded or besieged, I advised the President to ratify the Treaty
conditionally only, that is, with express instructions not to exchange
ratifications, unless the British Government would disavow a construction of
the instrument authorizing the practice and would discontinue it.

AFTER the rejection of Mr. PINCKNEY by the Government of France, immediately
after the installment of Mr. ADAMS as President, and long before the measure
was taken, I urged a member of Congress, then high in the confidence of the
President, to propose to him the immediate appointment of three Commissioners,
of whom Mr. Jefferson, or Mr. Madison to be one, to make another attempt to
negociate. And when afterward Commissioners were appointed, I expressly gave
it as my opinion, that indemnification for spoliations, should not be a sine
qua non of accommodation. In fine, I have been disposed to go greater lengths
to avoid rupture with France than with Great Britain; to make greater
sacrifices for reconciliation with the former than with the latter.

IN making this avowal, I owe it to my own character to say, that the
disposition I have confessed, did not proceed from predilection for France
(revolutionary France, after her early beginnings, has been slways to me an
object of horror) nor from the supposition that more was to be feared from
France, as an enemy, than from Great Britain, (I thought that the maritime
power of the latter, could do us most mischief) but from the persuasion that
the sentiments and prejudices of our country, would render war with France a
more unmanageable business, than war with Great Britain.

LET any fair man pronounce, whether the circumstances which have been
disclosed, bespeak the partisan of Great Britain, or the man exclusively
devoted to the interests of this country. Let any delicate man decide, whether
it must not be shocking to an ingenuous mind, to have to combat a slander so
vile, after having sacrificed the interests of his family, and devoted the best
part of his life to the service of that country, in counsel and in the field.

IT is time to conclude -- The statement, which has heen made, shows that Mr.
ADAMS has committed some positive and serious errors of Administration; that in
addition to these, he has certain fixed points of character which tend
naturally to the detriment of any cause of which he is the chief, of any
Administration of which he is the head; that by his ill humors and jealousies
he has already divided and distracted the supporters of the Government; that he
has furnished deadly weapons to its enemies by unfounded accusations, and has
weakened the force of its friends by decrying some of the most influential of
them to the utmost of his power; and let it be added, as the necessary effect
of such conduct, that he has made great progress in undermining the ground
which was gained for the government by his predecessor, and that there is real
cause to apprehend, it might totter, if not fall, under his future auspices. A
new government, constructed on free principles, is always weak, and must stand
in need of the props of a firm and good administration; till time shall have
rendered its authority venerable, and fortified it by habits of obedience.

YET with this opinion of Mr. ADAMS, I have finally resolved not to advise the
withholding from him a single vote. The body of Federalists, for want of
sufficient knowledge of facts, are not convinced of the expediency of
relinquishing him. It is even apparent, that a large proportion still retain
the attachment which was once a common sentiment. -- Those of them, therefore,
who are dissatisfied, as far as my information goes, are, generally speaking,
willing to forbear opposition, and to acquiesce in the equal support of Mr.
ADAMS with Mr, PINCKNEY, whom they prefer. Have they not a claim to equal
deference from those who continue attached to the former? Ought not these, in
candor, to admit the possibility that the friends who differ from them, act not
only from pure motives, but from cogent reasons? Ought they not, by a
cooperation in General PINCKNEY, to give a chance for what will be a safe
issue, supposing that they are right in their preference, and the best issue,
should they happen to be mistaken? Especially, since by doing this, they will
increase the probability of excluding a third candidate, of whose unfitness all
sincere federalists are convinced. If they do not pursue this course, they will
certainly incur an immense responsibility to their friends and to the
Government.

TO promote this cooperation, to defend my own character, to vindicate those
friends, who with myself have been unkindly aspersed, are the inducements for
writing this letter. Accordingly, it will be my endeavor to regulate the
communication of it in such a manner as will not be likely to deprive Mr. ADAMS
of a single vote. Indeed, it is much my wish that its circulation could forever
be confined within narrow limits. I am sensible of the inconveniences of giving
publicity to a similar developement of the character of the Chief Magistrate of
our country; and I lament the necessity of taking a step which will involve
that result. Yet to suppress truths, the disclosure of which is so interesting
to the public welfare as well as to the vindication of my friends and myself,
did not appear to me justifiable.

THE restraints, to which I submit, are a proof of my disposition to sacrifice
to the prepossessions of those, with whom I have heretofore thought and acted,
and from whom in the present question I am compelled to differ. To refrain from
a decided opposition to Mr. ADAMS's re-election has been reluctantly sanctioned
by my judgment; which has been not a little perplexed between the unqualified
conviction of his unfitness for the station contemplated, and a sense of the
great importance of cultivating harmony among the supporters of the Government;
on whose firm union hereafter will probably depend the preservation of order,
tranquillity, liberty, property; the security of every social and domestic
blessing.

New York, August 1, 1800. SIR,
IT has been repeatedly mentioned to me, that you have, on different occasions,
asserted the existence of a British Faction in this country; embracing a number
of leading or influential characters of the Federal Party, (as usually
denominated) and that you have sometimes named me, at others, plainly alluded
to me, as one of this description of persons. And I have likewise been assured,
that of late, some of your warm adherents for electioneering purposes, have
employed a corresponding language.

I MUST, Sir, take it for granted, that you cannot have made such assertions or
insinuations, without being willing to avow them, and to assign the reasons to
a Party who may conceive himself injured by them. I therefore trust, that you
will not deem it improper, that I apply directly to yourself to ascertain from
you, in reference to your own declarations, whether the information I have
received, has been correct or not; and if correct, what are the grounds upon
which you have founded the suggestion.

With Respect, I have the honor to be, Sir, Your obedient servant, A. H.
To JOHN ADAMS, ESQUIRE. President of the U. States.
New York, October 1, 1800. SIR,
THE time which has elapsed since my letter of the 1st of August was delivered
to you, precludes the further expectation of an answer.

FROM this silence, I will draw no inference; nor will I presume to judge of
the fitness of silence on such an occasion on the part of the Chief Magistrate
of a Republic, toward a Citizen, who, without a stain, has discharged so many
important public trusts.

BUT thus much I will affirm, that by (...) charge of the kind mentioned in my
former (...), may, at any time, have been made or insinuated against me, it is
a base, wicked and cruel calumny; destitute even of a plausible pretext, to
excuse the folly, or mask the depravity which must have dictated it.

With due Respect, I have the honor to be, Sir, Your obedient servant, A. H.
To JOHN ADAMS, ESQUIRE. President of the U. States.
FINIS.



