Mr. HART's DISCOURSE, OCCASIONED BY THE DEATH OF GENERAL WASHINGTON.

RELIGIOUS IMPROVEMENT OF THE DEATH OF GREAT MEN. A DISCOURSE, ADDRESSED TO THE
CONGREGATION IN THE NORTH SOCIETY IN PRESTON, ON LORD's DAY, DEC. 29, 1799,
OCCASIONED BY THE DEATH OF Genesis George Washington, ON THE 14 th DEC. 1799.

BY LEVI HEART, A. M. PASTOR OF THE NORTH CHURCH IN PRESTON.

-- "I sought for a man among them who should make up the hedge, and stand in
the gap before me, for the land, that I should not destroy it." -- EZEKIEL
xxii. 30. NORWICH: PRINTED BY THOMAS HUBBARD. 1800.

FUNERAL SERMON.
II. SAMUEL iii. 38. -- Know ye not that there is a prince, and a great man
fallen, this day, in Israel?
THESE words were spoken by king David, on occasion of the death of Abner, the
commander in chief of the armies of Israel.

The funeral solemnities being completed, the king's friends invited him to
partake of an entertainment. But he declined it with the solemnity of an oath,
on account of the afflictive event of the day, and hereby evinced that his
sorrow was deep and abiding. By far too much so, to be dissipated by the
formalities of the funeral; however decent and respectful to the dead.

Our text suggests a weighty reason for his conduct, and, implicitly, calls on
the nation at large, to mingle sorrows, and join in lamenting the common loss.

The likeness of that event to what now calls forth the general tear from every
part of the United States, is sufficiently obvious.

In attempting a religious improvement of this mournful occasion, the following
method is proposed I. We shall consider what constitutes human greatness, and
the means which produce it. II. Trace it to its Divine author. III. Consider
the ends of divine wisdom, in raising up great men. IV. Show how these singular
gifts of Heaven, should be received and improved. V. Apply the subject to the
present solemnity. VI. Suggest a few thoughts on the improvement to be made of
the death of the great man whom we, this day, lament.


I. We are to show what constitutes human greatness, and the means which
produce it.

In attending to this branch of our subject, it must be kept in mind, that
greatness, when applied to man, is not to be understood in an absolute, but in
a compartaive sense. Men who are great, when compared with most of their fellow
men, are little, in comparison with created beings of higher orders. -- How
little when compared with the boundless source of all created existences! In
this comparison, the most exalted creature, is like the small dust of the
balance. Yea even less than nothing and vanity!

With this, impressed on our hearts, we name the following things as
constituting human greatness, and comprising the most essential means to its
production.

In general it may be defined, a sufficiency for a course of great and good
actions, and the exhibition of them, through a series of trials and dangers. We
speak of great and good actions, because no character can be truly great,
whatever productions of power, and of understanding it may exhibit, if they are
not good. We contemplate, with aversion and terror, a Being possessed of great
abilities without the will to do good. Great qualities are in no view
desirable, excepting as the requisite means of producing extensive good, and,
consequently, they cease to be objects of esteem and admiration, when not thus
applied.

By good actions we mean those which are designed and adapted for the promotion
of human happiness, in subservience to the best interests of the moral system.
Not a single action, but a course of such actions, constitute a great
character. Because, one single action may have the semblance of a great
exertion of virtuous benevolence, to the imperfect and superficial view of man;
and may, however, be educed from principles which are wholly the reverse. But
this can, scarcely, be supposed, in the case of a course, or long continued
series of actions apparently great and good. We can, indeed, form no conception
of good actions, except from their apparent design and tendency.

Those actions which are apparently designed and adapted directly to promote
the happiness of a particular circle of rational beings, and to coincide with
that of universal existence, we pronounce to be good, and those of an opposite
tendency we consider as evil.

A distinction must be preserved in our minds between a good character, and one
which is great; a person of small abilities, in the most private walk of life,
may uniformly aim to do good, and may merit and possess the character of a good
man, with those who know him, but he will never be called great. -- Thus it
appears that to constitute a great man, there must be a sufficiency for a
course of great and good actions, and the exhibition of them, through a series
of trials and dangers. -- We mention this last circumstance because
perseverance in a course of good conduct through such a series, gives much
additional evidence of inward sincerity, and unshaken resolution.

A sufficiency for such a course of action is to be understood with the
limitation necessary, when applied to all created agents, who are equally, and
absolutely dependent on the will and power of the great Creator. By this
sufficiency, we therefore mean those abilities, means, opportunities, and
dispositions, which God bestows on those whom he designs to make truly great.

These things being premised, we proceed to name the following means, or
requisites of human greatness.

1. Good natural abilities are essential to the formation of a great character.
That the original capacities of men are extremely diverse, is obvious, however
this diversity is to be accounted for. It is immaterial, to our present
enquiry, whether it consists in the original constitution of different minds,
or is the result of connection with different bodies. That a wide and important
difference exists, will be admitted. Some men are evidently possessed of powers
adapted to important stations, and great actions. Such minds readily expand in
the field of knowledge, and have a happy talent in its application. -- Others
may, indeed, appear to have genius for learning, and become scientific men. But
the genius adapted to form a great man, pursues practical knowledge, and
applies it to great actions, and without an original capacity of this
description, all attempts for human greatness will be vain.

2. Good means for improvement are necessary to form a great man. The progress
of the mind, like that of animal and vegetable life, is effected by means.
Proper cultivation expands the mental powers and qualifies the man for great
and worthy exertions. Much is effected to this object by the wise lessons of
parental instruction, by lenient and steady government, and direction of the
unformed principles and manners of childhood and youth. -- The knowledge of
books, and men, is highly important, and especially the force of good example.
Without these and other similar means of improvement, the most promising
natural abilities may be buried in obscurity, and be lost to posterity, and to
the world.

An appeal to the state of individuals and of society, under the different
degrees of improvement will exhibit a distinction between the man of learning
and improvement, in cultivated society and the mere man of nature, the
untutored savage, in many respects not less striking, than between that savage
and the most sagacious of brute animals.

3. Another requisite to human greatness is a diligent and persevering
improvement of the means to excel.

Nothing is more evident than that the best abilities and means to form a great
man, will utterly fail, unless these abilities are exerted, and the means
improved.

The human mind is not possessed of original, or innate perceptions, knowledge
must be acquired. A superior capacity for its reception constitutes the primary
greatness of man; but that capacity unapplied will avail nothing, and means not
improved will leave the soul empty. The diligent hand makes rich, but idleness
brings poverty no less in respect to the improvements of the mind, than of
property. This is a stated law of our nature; established by its wise and
beneficent Author. Experience and observation agree with this remark; and the
general history of mankind is adapted to confirm it.

4. A noble ardor of mind for great and good actions. This is not to be found
in every wise man. A certain absence of the spirit of exertion, and an
immoderate love of ease and indulgence, have prevented many persons of
respectable abilities and improvements from effecting any thing considerable,
either great or good. Great minds, possessed of the ardor which has been
mentioned, are far from indifference in the tendency of their actions, and
their effects on society. -- Destitute of public affection, and governed by
private considerations, their apparent interests may interfere with that of the
public, and they may become its most dangerous enemies. But influenced by a
noble regard to the public, and placing their own felicity in the common good,
their ardent spirit of enterprise will be employed to promote it.

They embrace an object truly great, and of immense value. The mind is filled
with its weight and importance, and every power is employed to obtain it.

5. Opportunity and occasion for great and good actions must be given, to form
the character of a great man.

Without these the best abilities and improvements, connected with an ardent
desire to do good, might never effect any thing very interesting and important.

This observation will be illustrated and confirmed by reviewing the accounts
of Noah, Abraham, Joseph, Moses, David, Josiah, the apostle Paul, and other
worthies, in scripture history, and those of the famed sages, and other great
men, of ancient and modern times, in the writings of profane authors, or of
such as have appeared in our day.

The deluge, to which the old world was righteously doomed, gave opportunity
and occasion for those great and good actions in Noah, which have perpetuated
his name, and "by which he condemned the world, and became heir of the
righteousness which is by faith." And similar observations might be made in
regard to the rest. It is not improbable that abilities as great and hearts as
good may have existed in the private walks of life, which with equal advantages
and opportunities, would have merited equal rank in the annals of fame, with
those great men whom we justly celebrate.

Even our WASHINGTON, whom we place among the first in human greatness, had the
American revolutionary war, and consequent independence, not existed, would he
have merited or enjoyed that high distinction to which he now has an
indisputable claim!

6. Invincible fortitude and perseverance, are necessary to form a great
character.

In a course of great and good actions, there is much labor, vigilance and
care. There are many obstacles to be surmounted, difficulties, and dangers to
be encountered, and discouragements to be sustained. The prospect of success is
often clouded, and the best and most labored exertions for the public good are
misrepresented and censured.

In circumstances like these, men of but a common share of resolution and
firmness, will be discouraged, and never arrive to human greatness.

Hence the necessity of invincible fortitude and perseverance, to form a great
man -- The candidate for this must deliberately count the cost, at setting out,
and in view of the many discouragements in his way, must find that worth and
importance in the object of pursuit, which outweigh them all, and which
prepares him to sacrifice every thing for its sake. The man who places his
highest enjoyment in human happiness, and the highest perfection of the moral
system, and who rests in the unwavering faith of the universal and perfect
government of the exalted Redeemer, can feel commanding inducements to engage
in the most painful and hazardous enterprises, for the public good. Amidst the
uncertainties of futurity, in regard to himself, he is assured that, as it
respects the object of his chief concern, all will be ordered well, and the
final issue will be good. Hence, under the impression of the perfection of
divine superintendance, in application to all events, he is confident in God.
He resolves with deliberation, and executes with undaunted courage and
perseverance. -- From the established law of Heaven, such fortitude and
resolution make the fairest prospect of success. Other particulars might be
named, as influencing to form a great character, but they would be found to be
involved in those already mentioned, or connected with them.

To the superficial view of man, it is indeed requisite that, to form a great
character, a course of great and good actions should be crowned with success.
But this is not to judge from a direct view of the nature and tendency of
actions, but from other events, and those not certainly connected with the
actions. Also the ultimate and most important consequences of great and good
actions, are often beyond the extent of human view, and wrapped up in futurity.
Hence the judgment of the quality of actions, formed on their present and
visible consequences is very uncertain, and in many instances the events which
we consider as the consequences of particular actions, might, with more
justice, be educed from other, and very different causes.

These things being obvious, it follows that, however necessary for us it may
be to judge of characters, in part, by the apparent consequences of actions,
the rule is imperfect, and we are liable to err. -- To the all-seeing mind,
each action and character, in itself, is open to view, and the truly great man,
is clearly discerned and approved, according to the nature and tendency of his
actions, with whatever effects we may view them as connected. In the final
adjustment of things in the moral system, every great and good action and
character will appear in its true light, and the ultimate consequences of such
actions will appear to be good. Then the wise, and the righteous, all the great
and good, "shall shine forth as the son in the kingdom of their father."

II. Our next object is to trace human greatness to its divine Author.

The absolute dependence of creatures on their Creator, is so obvious to
reason, and that "every good gift comes down from the father of lights," is so
clearly taught in the holy scriptures, and is, on the whole, a truth so nearly
self evident, that it is difficult to render it plainer, or more certain by
argument. Insensibility of this truth is not the fault of the understanding,
but of the heart.

Human greatness we have shown to be the result of good natural abilities --
placed under good means for improvement -- a diligent and persevering use of
those means -- a noble ardor of mind for great and good actions -- opportunity
and occasion for their production -- and invincible fortitude and perseverance
in a course of such actions.

Is there any one of these which is not the gift of God? However manifest it is
that men are generally insensible of the invisible hand which supports them in
life, and might be addressed in the divine language to Cyrus, "I girded thee,
though thou have not known me." Yet few will question the truth of the
doctrine. A deep and abiding impression of it on our hearts is highly important
in the general concerns of human life, and especially in the formation of a
great and good character. Without this, all fancied human greatness will vanish
in the light of Divine truth, as the mist before the rising sun.

III. We proceed to consider the ends of Divine wisdom in raising up great men.

We may reasonably suppose that infinite wisdom has many particular objects to
accomplish by such events, beyond the extent of human comprehension. In the
divine operation, many ends are accomplished by one work, in ours, the reverse
is true. Many works are necessary for the accomplishment of one end. We
mention, however, the following particulars, as being evidently comprised in
the divine plan, in raising up great men.

1. The benefit of the subject. God is the father of the whole creation, "His
goodness is over all his works," "He does good to the evil and unthankful, He
causes his sun to rise, and his rain to descend, on the evil and the good." But
those on whom he has bestowed uncommon talents, and who faithfully improve
them, are the objects of his peculiar care. To these he gives the unrivalled
pleasure of doing good, and honors them with a great reward. He treats them as
his own children. He bestows on them the marks of his peculiar favor. He gives
them to see the fruit of their labor, in the felicity of his kingdom, and to be
still useful, and to rejoice forever in his love.

2. Another end of God, in raising up great men, is the good of society. From
the genuine consequences of the works of God, we may infer his designs, because
we know He is never disappointed. In every case, his council will stand, and he
will do all his pleasure.

But nothing is more evident than that under God, the interests of society are
preserved and advanced by the labors of great men, qualified, and promoted to
places of eminence, by God, for this end. Such preserve the state from
impending ruin, defend it from enemies, secure its interests, and advance its
prosperity. They are instrumental in giving complexion to the principles and
manners of the people at large, of bringing many blessings to their own
generation, and conveying them to the children of future times. "Woe to thee O
Land when thy king is a child, and thy princes eat in the morning. Blessed art
thou O land when thy king is the son of nobles, and thy princes eat in due
season, for strength and not for drunkenness."

3. The benefit of the church of God is another object of Divine wisdom, in
raising up great men. -- The truth and importance of this observation are
evident from the representations of holy scripture, importing that the complete
salvation of the redeemed church is a leading object in all divine operations,
and that Jesus Christ is exalted to be "head over all things to the church." --
It is evident from the history of the wise and good of all ages. These have
devoted their lives to serve the best interests of the church of God. For this,
Moses and Joshua, Samuel, and David, lived, labored and suffered. -- This has
engaged prophets, apostles, and righteous men of all ages, and nations. For
this, they have prayed, labored, and suffered, and given their names to
reproach, and their lives to death. -- We add

4. Great men are raised up for the purposes which have been named, that hereby
there might be a proper display of all divine perfections, through Jesus
Christ, in all worlds, throughout all ages, to the praise and glory of God,
forever. -- This is the apostolic doctrine to the church at Corinth, and, for
the same reason, to every christian church and individual.

"All things are for your sakes, that the abundant grace, through the
thanksgiving of many, might redound to the glory of God" -- In this we see a
concatenation of objects, the most desirable and important, in which also the
less is subordinate to the greater, in succession, and all absorbed in the
expression of Divine fullness, and the everlasting glory of God.

IV. Our next enquiry respects the manner in which a people should receive and
improve so singular a favor from God as the bestowment of great men.

1. We answer briefly, they should be received with unfeigned gratitude to God,
the giver. With expressions of such gratitude the scriptures abound, we adduce
but one. It is the thanksgiving of king David, near the close of life, in a
review of the great things which God had done for him and his people.

David blessed the Lord before all the congregation, and David said, blessed be
thou, Lord God of Israel, our father, forever and ever. Thine O Lord is the
greatness, and the power, and the glory, and the victory, and the majesty, for
all that is in the heaven and the earth is thine. Thine is the kingdom, O Lord,
and thou art exalted as head above all. Both riches and honor come of thee, and
thou reignest over all, and in thine hand is power and might, and in thine hand
it is to make great, and to give strength unto all. Now therefore, our God we
thank and praise thy glorious name. [1 Chronicles. XXIX. 10, 11, 12, 13.]

2. People to whom such men are given, should receive them as great blessings,
and respect and honor them accordingly.

They should second their exertions for the public good, by a prompt subjection
to their injunctions, as rulers and magistrates. By using their influence for
the promotion of order in society, and they should help them with their prayers
-- wisely improving the privileges they enjoy by their means: giving to God the
glory of his goodness in so great a blessing, teaching their children to
respect the interests of society, and to revere the rulers and the laws. -- And
lastly, they should hold such important characters, as the gift of God, and be
prepared to honor him by humble submission, when he shall see fit to remove
them.

V. We proceed to apply the subject to the present solemnity.

That a great man is fallen in our land, is the unanimous voice of that solemn
sadness which pervades the union.

To present him truly to the present, and future generations, will be the
honorable, but arduous task of the historian. The recollection, however, of the
following sketches, seems to be due to his memory at this time.

He was born on the 11th of February 1732. Though descended from respectable
parents, his same rests not on the merit of his progenitors. By the death of
his eldest brother, he came to the possession of the family estate, which was
ample, and might, perhaps, have influence to bring him more early into public
view. Having completed his education, under a domestic tutor, agreeably to the
custom in that part of the country. About the age of twenty-one, he was
entrusted with public business, by the government, important in its
consequences, and attended with much danger. This he executed to the
satisfaction of his employers. The following year (1754) he was appointed to
the command of a post, near the spot of ground where the town of Pittsburgh now
stands. Attacked in this position by a vastly superior force of the enemy,
after his ammunition was nearly exhausted, he extricated himself and his little
army, from this perilous situation, in a manner which did him great honor. --
In the year 1755, he marched with his regiment, under General Braddock, to
attack the French who had occupied the post just mentioned, and were in force,
and after the defeat and death of that unfortunate General, he saved the
remainder of the army, with great military address.

About this time he was marked out, in a public discourse, by something like a
prophetic spirit, as the future support, and savior of his country. See
President DAVIES' sermon on religion and patriotism, addressed to Capt.
OVERTON's Independent Company of Volunteers, Hanover county, Virginia, Aug. 17,
1755.


After the peace of 1763, the field for military achievments was not open. But
on the commencement of our troubles with Great Britain, he was a representative
in Congress in the year 1774, and 5, and when a decision of the dispute, by an
appeal to arms, became inevitable, he was appointed by congress to the chief
command of the forces raised, and to be raised, for our defense. The dignified
modesty with which he accepted this appointment, was a pledge of that fidelity,
wisdom and fortitude, which marked his official conduct through the war.

History will relate the events of this arduous conflict, and the numerous and
unequalled difficulties, hazards and discouragements, which he had to
encounter, and the unshaken fortitude with which he sustained them, till eight
revolving years of distress and slaughter, endured with unabating firmness by
our army, and our citizens, and the subjection of two British armies by our
forces, induced the government of Great Britain to despair of success, and
agree on terms of an honorable peace.

The treaty of peace being ratified, we next find our beloved General bidding
an affectionate farewell to his army, fraught with salutary and seasonable
counsels, which did great honor to his understanding, but still more to his
heart. Having disbanded the army, he appeared before the President of Congress,
in a full session of the members, and with a solemn and affectionate dignity,
which admits not of description, but which noble minds can feel, he resigned
his commission to the president; and retired, as a private man to his seat at
Mount Vernon, there designing to spend the remainder of his days in sweet
retirement, and the pure joys of domestic harmony.

The public exigencies however soon called him from his beloved retirement, and
we find him presiding in the convention of 1787, which formed the happy
constitution of our general government. When that constitution appeared and was
adopted, the eyes and hearts of the friends of order, through the union, were
fixed on WASHINGTON, to preside in the new government. He was accordingly
elected, without a dissenting voice. Having determined to accept the
appointment, he left his beloved retirement, in the spring of the year 1789,
and proceeded to New York, where Congress was convened. The expressions of
respect which were paid him by all classes, in the various places through which
he passed were unequalled. Among which those at the bridge of Trenton will be
long remembered.

When he arrived at New York, and offered himself to receive the legal
qualifications of his high office, the scene was unutterably moving. In an open
gallery, in the view of many thousands of admiring spectators, the President
advanced with a slow and solemn pace, laid his hand on the holy volume, and
swore to the faithful discharge of his high office, while the tears of
uncorrupted patriotism plentifully watered his venerable cheeks. A general
acclamation of the joyous spectators succeeded. Had not the irresistible flow
of the tender passions precluded utterance in many, it would have been
universal.

Having filled the office of President of the United States, for the
constitutional term of four years, he reluctantly accepted a second unanimous
election to the office, which he filled, (...) second time, with no less wisdom
and philanthropy than the first.

Previous to a third election, he published his resignation, his fixed purpose
of retirement, and last advice to the citizens of the United States, full of
patriotism, full of wisdom.

In 1798, the exigencies of the public calling for his aid, he was appointed,
by President Adams, to the command of the armies of the United States. Which
appointment he accepted, as he had all others, as a gratuitous service to his
country, and added another proof to the many already given, of the purity and
disinterestedness of his patriotism. The happy influence, on the public mind,
of this last testimony of affection to his country, is fresh in your memory.

With painful sensibility I close this narration with relating, that, on the
14th of December 1799, at 11 o'clock at night, after an illness of 24 hours
only, this man of incalculable worth, was removed from us forever. -- He died
as he had lived. -- He resigned his breath with the serenity becoming a great
and good man.

VI. It now remains that we suggest a few thoughts on the improvement to be
made of the mournful event we are contemplating.

1. We are called to humble thanksgiving to the God of grace who raised up this
great man in our land, at such a time, and endued him with those distinguished
accomplishments, which furnished him for the important part, he was called to
act, in the American revolutionary war, and in the subsequent events. -- That
wisdom more than human, and integrity incorruptible, marked his path, has been
often observed. It has been the opinion of many wise heathens, that eminently
wise and good men were the peculiar care of heaven. The holy scriptures
abundantly support this sentiment. -- In our WASHINGTON it is illustrated and
confirmed.

The preservation of a life so important, through so many dangers, to so late a
period, is a wonder of divine mercy to be ever remembered and gratefully
acknowledged. His influence on our army to prevent it from disbanding, in
seasons of extreme distress and irritation, and his successful exertions in the
introduction of that constitution of government, which is the salvation of our
country, as well as the wisdom, rectitude, and success, of his administration,
as President, were of God, and to Him be the glory.

Great will be the influence connected with the character and example of the
first President of the United States. What man of worth, and desirous of honest
same, who shall succeed him, will have the boldness to counteract the system of
administration which he adopted?

2. Let us submit with the deepest humility to the righteous stroke of God's
anger, in this mournful event.

God is righteous, He has punished us far less than our iniquities deserve. It
becomes us to accept the punishment of our sins, and by deep repentance, and
humble supplication, to seek his favor on our land, on our government, and
especially on the President of the United States. In celebrating the virtues
and achievments of WASHINGTON, we are not to be insensible, or unmindful of the
good hand of our God on us, in giving him a successor whose abilities and
virtues do honor to his office, and promise much good to the United States.

Let us unite in humble supplication to the throne of grace that much of the
spirit of Elijah may rest on Elisha, and that our union may be blessed with an
uninterrupted succession of Presidents, each of whom, in abilities, virtues,
fidelity and success, shall be a WASHINGTON.

3. We are loudly called to stand in our lot for the support of our happy
constitution, and the present wise and good administration of government.

Great are the prospects of the American Republic. But it has many adversaries
in its own bosom, and still more in Europe. French philosophy, atheism, and
disorganization, will exert their utmost, to effect the prostration of our
religion, and the demolition of our order and government.

Our Republic is yet new; it is far from having attained the stability of riper
years. And these sons of Zeruiah will be too hard for us, if we slumber over
the inestimable trust committed to us by Heaven.

Unless the Lord be on our side, when men of this description rise up against
us, they will swallow us up quick. But through him they shall be disappointed.
The snare shall be broken and our souls delivered. Let us ever commit the
United States to the guardianship of Him, who never slumbereth nor sleeps.
And let us diligently teach our children to fear and serve him, to imbibe the
principles of true religion, order, morality and good government; to practice
them all their days, and transmit them to their children, that the generations
to come, may be wise and happy; and that religion, and good order may flourish
in the American Republic to the latest posterity.

4. Our subject teaches us the vanity of man as mortal, and our great concern,
to be prepared for death and to meet the retributions of eternity.

If wisdom, honor, greatness and worth, united, will not deliver from death. If
there is no discharge in this war, we are taught not to "put our trust in
princes, nor in the son of man, in whom there is no help." But in the living
God. Let us commit ourselves, our families, and our country, to his gracious
protection and guidance. Let us serve our generation by the will of God. And
let us unite in thankful praises to the God of all grace, that although our
fathers are dead, and WASHINGTON, our friend, our protector is dead, yet Jesus
Christ our Almighty Redeemer still lives, and shall never die. But is the same
yesterday, and to day, and forever, -- AMEN.


