A SERMON, ON THE TRUE OBJECT AND NATURE OF Christian Worship; Delivered at the
Opening of the NEW JERUSALEM TEMPLE, IN THE CITY OF BALTIMORE. On Sunday, the
5th of January, 1800. BY The Rev. JOHN HARGROVE.

"But this I confess to thee, that after the way which they call heresy,
worship I the God of my fathers, believing all things which are written in the
law and in the prophets."

PAUL. BALTIMORE: Printed for the Acting Committee, of the New Church.

TO THE MEMBERS Of the New Jerusalem Church IN THE CITY OF BALTIMORE.
Dear Brethren,
AS your unanimous wish and liberal patronage ^ave brought the following
discourse before the ^ublic; and as I have for sometime past esteemed ^ou the
grand proximate medium of communicati^n, between the Divine Wisdom and my
rational ^owers; permit me to lay these " first fruits" of ^our kind attention,
at your feet: -- not for protec^ion, for the LORD JESUS will protect his own
^ruths; but, as a small thank-offering, as gratefully paid, as it is justly due.

The various and contending sects of former Christians have repeatedly and very
voluminously stated and explained their peculiar creeds before the public; and
contrasted them with others which they deemed erroneous, in order, doubtless, "
to give every man a reason of the hope that was in them:" -- I have now done no
more, nay not so much; as the following discourse is, but a very brief and
cursory, (and consequently a very imperfect) view of our peculiar faith,
respecting the object of our worship.

Nothing is more remote from my wishes the religious controversy, for, " where
contention (...) there is every evil work;" but should any zealo^ Chieftain,
jealous of the growing greatness of the New Church, and anxious to display his
prow^e^ in a Holy war, come forward, with all the might force of his veteran
legions, against this " Stripling," -- I care not; He will find it " hard to
ki^ against the pricks."

May the "ONLY wise God our Savior," Speedily triumph over all Idolatry and
Superstition, b^ causing the glorious light of the " Everlasting Gospel," to "
shine brighter and brighter unto the perfect day," -- is and ever shall be, the
fervent praye^ of, dear brethren, " your brother and companion i^ tribulation,"
and Servant in the genuine truths an^ unadulterated gospel of Christ.

JOHN HARGROVE.
Baltimore, Jan. 1800.
A SERMON.
Rev. 22 c. 9 v. -- WORSHIP GOD.


My Beloved and Respected Christian Brethren,
IT is with singular and solemn pleasure I now stand before you in this sacred
place: Called as I am by the Divine Providence, to assist to day in opening the
first religious Temple, that has ever been erected in these U. States, for the
worship of the Almighty in the sole and individual person of Jesus Christ.

The brief but comprehensive precept which forms the basis of my intended
discourse, manifestly involves the design and use of this, and every other
religious temple in the world; and is confessedly a subject of primary
importance, and indiscriminate application to every rational being in heaven
and earth.

The gloomy atheist indeed -- the silent language of whose heart, or public
language of whose lectures, is " There is no God," -- may attempt to deny its
sacred and awful importance; but, as such learned fools have sunk themselves on
the scale of existence below the degree of rationality; and as the divine
providence has never suffered such impious monsters to " increase and multiply"
on the earth, and pollute society with their horrid blasphemy; let us hope that
but few more of them will ever more disgrace the human nature, by appearing
amongst us in a human form.

I need not inform my respected hearers, who are conversant with their bibles,
that the emphatical text which I have now chosen to enlarge upon, was addressed
to the beloved St. John, by a glorious and dignified angel of heaven; who
though once a man on earth, now shone with such resplendent beatitude, that the
inspired evangelist himself mistook him for his adorable master, and fell at
his feet to worship him.

But as this act, however pure the motive, or zealous the performance, was
directed toward an improper object, the faithful delegate of heaven
immediately entered his solemn protest against it, by a " See thou do it not;"
whereby we are plainly informed, that all religious worship which is grounded
in superstition, or idolatry, cannot be truly acceptable to God, however
sincere or holy the worshiper may be.

It is a very remarkable fact, and merits our attention, that the Revelations
of St. John were rejected from the sacred canons, by those called the fathers
of the church, during the long period of the first three or four christian
centuries; though their divine authority, and peculiar excellency have long
since been universally admitted* ^y all the various and contending sects of
Christians now in the world.

This brief remark may assist to perceive, that these mysterious but divine
revelations, were more peculiarly designed for the instruction of future ages,
than for those already past; while at the same time it clearly evinces, that
the rejection of any particular book, or doctrine, (even by the generality of
the Christian church, and that for ages,) is no infallible proof against its
sacred and divine athuority.

Indeed the very contrary is a truth too notorious ^o be denied; that whenever
the " Sun of Righteousness," has shone upon the world with additional luster,
mankind in general have " Loved darkness rather than light, and rejected the
council of GOD against their own souls; so that -- Who has believed our
report," has been the constant lamentation of holy and inspired men, in every
age of the Church.

The most awful proof of the truth of this remark, that ever was exhibited, was
by the Jews at the first advent of our Lord; for notwithstanding he spoke as
never man spoke, so as to bring " Life and immortality to light;" yet, these
stubborn and self-righteous bigots, unwilling to relinquish their enormous
influence over the superstitious multitude, -- traduced the Lord of life, and
rejected all his sacred precepts, crying out, "He is a gluttonous man, and a
wine bibber, -- an enemy to Caesar, and to the law of Moses, -- He has a devil
and is mad, why hear ye him? away with him, -- crucify him, -- it is not fit
that he should live!"

From a conduct equally stubborn, criminal and fatal, -- " Good Lord deliver us.

This sudden ejaculation has been prompted by a deep and painful conviction,
founded, I presume on evangelical prophecy, that the second advent of our Lord,
as powerful and glorious as it is described, and expected to be, (and as it
will really be in a spiritual sense) will notwithstanding be as generally
rejected, or mistaken by the christian world, as his first coming was by the
Jews; and probably from similar motives, particularly from resting too much in
the mere literal sense of scripture, unexplained by doctrine.

This however will not be the case with those, who while they -- " Search the
scriptures;" attend to the import of our Lord's general comment upon them; to
wit. "The letter kills; -- and again, "The words that I speak unto you they
are spirit;" by which, he plainly intimated to the Jews, as far as their
inveterate prejudices, and contracted state of illumination would admit, that
many passages in the " law and the prophets," if taken in the mere LITERAL
sense, proclaimed war and death not only against the true principles of science
and reason* but also against all the glorious and adorable attribute^ of God!
Not so the genuine or spiritual sense of the WORD, as now in mercy revealed, in
the neglected but profound writings, of that rational philosopher and
enlightened seer, Emanuel Swedenborg.

This sense, by preserving the most respectful aspect toward all the divine
attributes, and cordially recognizing the true principles of science and
reason, rescues the holy word of inspiration, from the growing contempt to
which it would otherwise hereafter be evidently exposed: -- while at the same
time it opens an inestimable and inexhaustible fountain of true science, and
heavenly wisdom, which has been hidden from past ages, and generations.

But, waving all further introductory remarks, I would most respectfully
solicit your entire attention* while I enter more directly upon my subject --
"WORSHIP GOD."

And let every creature in heaven and earth say, Amen; -- for it is a heavenly
exhortation, and a heavenly employment;; and if performed aright, includes in
my opinion -- THE WHOLE DUTY OF MAN.

In order therefore to contribute my mite toward the right performance of this
all comprehensive duty, by the humble and sincere christian, I shall proceed to
a more particular consideration of the two grand propositions, or doctrinal
notes, which naturally flow from my subject. -- viz.

Of CHRISTIAN WORSHIP.
1st. The true Object and 2dly. The true Nature
But do I not already hear some secret murmurs, excited even in the breast of
genuine piety, and rea^y to break out against me in the following words:
^resumptious mortal! "Can thou by searching find ^t the Almighty to
perfection?" Thy temerity is as ^ain as it is irreverend: -- "Clouds and
darkness are covering to him." I would answer. These clouds which are the
literal sense of the holy word, are now, through the increasing influence of
the "SUN OF RIGHTEOUSNESS," on our scientific atmosphere, in ^ch a state of
rarefaction, as to become, to the man of the New Church, as a sacred mirror; --
reflecting ^ his rational faculty, " The Glory of God," -- or spi^tual sense of
the word; whereby a general, and ^ow necessary salvation will be effected in
the Chris^an world, from infidelity and superstition.

To the enlightened and reflecting Christian of the ^resent day, who is
familiar with the pages of ancient ^istory, it must appear extremely
astonishing to find ^at God should formerly suffer all nations to " walk ^
their own ways;" whereby, " they changed as it ^ere, the glory of the
incorruptible GOD, into an im^ge made like unto corruptible man; and to
fourfooted ^easts and creeping things:" The consequence of which was, that the
most preposterous ceremonies, and inhuman rites prevailed, not only amongst
sa^age nations, but even through the civilized and ^olish'd states of Greece
and Rome, at the very ze^ith of their scentific glory.

I should weary your patience at present, were I ^ven to call over the long
catalogue of heathen Gods and Godesses, with their reputed offspring or
Demi^ods which were formerly worshipped, as by law esta^lish'd: It is certain
however, that many actions as^ribed to these deities then, by their very
worshipers ^emselves, would now subject an American citizen, ^ven under our
mild republican laws, to the wheel^arrow, or the whipping-post.

" LORD, what is man," -- unenlightened by (...) heavenly rays of special
revelation?

The candid and intelligent historian will not ^^^get however, that all this
time the Jewish nati^^ were in possession of comparatively just and ration^^
conceptions of the Deity, nor will he contend th^^ these superior ideas were
derived from their sup^^eminent state of science or rationality, as it is w^^
known that the Jews were never very famous (...) either; but on the contrary,
from many documen^^ both sacred and profane which time has hand^^ down it
appears, that independent of the knowled^^ they obtained from the writings of
Moses and (...) Prophets, they were perhaps the most stupid and ^^norant class
of mankind. -- How came they then (...) possession of their superior knowledge
of the true o^ject of worship? the judicious and illuminated ^^jectors of
divine revelation will have to answer the question, or admit its force.

For I would appeal to the candor of these inge^^ous gentlemen, if in all the
celebrated volumes (...) heathen philosophy, they ever found such a lum^nous
and perfect display of the Eternity, Immens^^ and Infinity; the Unity,
Spirituality and Immut^bility; the Omnipotence, Omniscience and Om^^presence;
or of the infinite wisdom and goodness (...) the Deity, as is exhibited in the
books of Moses a^^ the Prophets; -- but much more so in the blessed a^^
glorious gospel of Jesus Christ.

But returning to my Christian brethren, I wou^^ say, in imitation of St. Paul,
" Behold the (genuin^ goodness and (apparent) severity of God!" -- To t^^ poor,
ignorant and newly emancipated Israelite^ "Goodness," in affording them through
a supe^natural medium, a more perfect and decisive direct^ry for their
religious worship and moral conduc^ than the bare study of the works of
creation cou^^ suggest; -- but to the haughty Gentiles (apparen^ ^everity," in
permitting them, while full of the ^de of science and self-derived
intelligence, to ^opt the most ridiculous ideas, and the most unna^al
ceremonies, respecting the deity and the wor^p he required of them.

And so prevalent is the contagion of error, especially when sanctioned by
popular prejudice or celebrated characters, that the Jews themselves were ^ore
than once immersed in the surrounding idola^y of their heathen neighbors, even
while they ^ld Moses and the Prophets in their hands!

It must also be conceded, that through the igno^nce, or wickedness of those
who have too long di^cted the helm of the Christian church, the scrip^res
themselves have been miserably adulterated ^d horr^dly profaned, -- until
their heavenly light ^s become as it were darkness; and their genuine ^ntents
or spiritual sense, as a "sealed book."

But "Glory unto God in the highest," he has at ^ngth prevailed over prejudice
and error, and open^ this book more interiorly than heretofore, by un^osing the
"seventh seal" thereof; whereby the ^tentive and judicious christian may from
hence^rth perceive, that, our Lord Jesus Christ alone, the only God of heaven
and earth -- "To whom ^e glory and majesty, dominion and power, both now and
ever." -- Amen.

Few of my present audience will be alarmed, I ^resume, at hearing me plainly
announce that Jesus Christ is God; and consequently a proper object ^ divine
worship; for thus far the modern trinitari^ns walk hand in hand with us; but
here we part; ^r as we have but one object of worship, we ^an no more believe
that there are three distinct ^ersons in that one object, than we can believe
that ^ere are three distinct persons in Jesus Christ; -- ^ough we may call him
the "Son of God;" the Son of Man;" or the "Son of Mary."

For, as the divine essence is indivisible, either (...) the fullness of the
Godhead dwells bodily in the so^ and individual person of Jesus Christ, or none
at al^ but if the former or affirmative doctrine be tru^ agreeably to St.
Paul's plain declaration, then would ask, what other Godhead beside, can dwell
(...) any other person distinct from Jesus Christ? T^ answer must be, none at
all; or else a plurality (...) Gods must be admitted.

"Search the scriptures," my beloved brethren and you will soon be convinced,
(if you lie open t^ conviction,) that this was "the faith once delivere^ to the
saints."

The limits of an evening lecture will not perm^ me to muster all the mighty
host of scripture evidences, which are ready, at a call, to support thi^ truly
important christian doctrine; -- a very few passages are all that is necessary
to summon, or all I wi^ intrude upon you; and I trust that, "in the mout^ of
two or three witnesses," so sacred and unequivoca^ this heavenly truth will be
for ever established.

The inspired Isaiah, in the 9th chapt. and 6th vers^ of his evangelical
prophecy, assures us, the expecte^ and holy child, or mesiah, should be called,
not only the "mighty God," but, THE EVERLASTING FATHER;" and also, "the prince
of peace," (or comforter.) This ancient and heaven inspired prophecy is now at
length fullfilled; and the fullfilment is highly deserving your most impartial
attention: -- "The New Jerusalem Church," and that church only, affirms and
maintains that Jesus, or this Holy Child, is indeed the very and "Everlasting
Father" of heaven; and also the "Prince of Peace" or "Holy Ghost."

In the 10th chapter and 30th v. of St. John's Gospel, our Lord ventured to tell
the Jews, that He and the Father were ONE; but the result of the declaration of
this naked or genuine truth, was, that they took up stones to stone him; hence
we find him replying to them in this same Gospel, "I have yet many things to
say unto you, but ye cannot bear them now."

And a few verses forward he added, "These things have I spoken unto you in
proverbs: the time comes, when I shall no more speak unto you in proverbs, but
I shall show you plainly of the father."

What he was willing then to "show them" respecting the "Father," we may learn
something of, if we attend to his reply to Phillip when he pressed him closely
upon this very subject -- "Have I been so long time with you, and yet have thou
not known me, Phillip? He that has seen me, has seen the Father? and how
say thou then, show us the Father"; from which it is plain to infer, that if
those who saw Jesus Christ saw the Father; or if by seeing Jesus Christ the
Father likewise was seen, -- then the Father and Jesus Christ is certainly and
indisputably ONE and the SAME person, and no more, agreeably to the grand and
distinguishing doctrine of the New Jerusalem Church.

I cannot forbear, (in justice to the subject) mentioning one passage more,
from the sacred oracles of truth.

In the 1st. chapt. of these heavenly revelations out of which I am furnished
with the ground of my present lecture, we find our Lord three different times
declaring from heaven to the beloved disciple and apostle St. John, that he was
the "ALPHA and OMEGA," the "first and the last," which undoubtedly must include
all persons, and principles that can possibly be conceived in the DEITY: To
cite any more scripture passages then, in proof that Jesus Christ is the Father
and Holy Ghost, or the "First and the last," persons (as they are called) in
the trinity, as well as the second, I judge superfluous.

It may not be superfluous however, to observe here, that it was from a deep
and impartial consideration of my present subject; and the great discordance of
the leading articles of my former faith, (and of the present prevailing faith
of the whole christian world) both with scripture, and reason, that I was led
to that important and unpopular step, which I took some time ago, in resigning
my official station and membership, in the Methodist E. Church.

The first and second of these articles I would beg leave to lay before you,
and briefly remark upon; and, I appeal to the "searcher of hearts," that I am
not led to this mode of proceeding from the most distant wish to offend any
here present; or to excite a controversy with such of my christian brethren,
who, in "simplicity and godly sincerity," still subscribe to these articles
alluded to; but from a hope, that while it may serve as a brief and general
apology for my own conduct, it may at the same time render some services to the
true interest of pure uncorrupted christianity.

In the Methodist E. Church, (and I believe in the Protestant E. Church) the
articles of faith respecting the Object of our worship read as follows:

"ART. I. There is but One living and true God, everlasting, without body or
parts, of infinite power, wisdom and goodness; the maker and preserver of all
things both visible and invisible. And in unity of this godhead there are three
persons, of one substance, power and eternity; the Father, the Son, and the
Holy Ghost.

"ART. II. The Son who is the word of the Father, the very and eternal God, of
one substance with the Father, took man's nature in the womb of the blessed
virgin; so that two whole and perfect natures, that is to say, the Godhead and
manhood, were joined together in One person, never to be divided, whereof is
one Christ, very god and very man, who truly suffered was crucified, dead and
buried, to reconcile his father to us, and to be a sacrifice not only for
original guilt, but also for actual sins of men."

NOW, the almost omnipotent, and almost miraculous prejudice of education, and
nothing less, prevents the sincere christian (as it did myself for many years)
from perceiving, that though these articles contain some truths, they contain
at the same time many gross and palpable errors: in which reason and common
sense have nothing to do; and by which some, if not all, the adorable and
essential attributes of God, (as before enumerated) are, flatly denied -- that
I say not blasphemed.

The power of expressing our thoughts to each other by human language, is
justly acknowledged to be one of the chief felicities, and characteristics of
man^ but in order to promote and perfectly accomplish this inestimable
privilege; and avoid all unintelligible jargon, it is absolutely requisite that
we attach to each word a positive and fixed meaning, expressive of the idea
which properly belongs to it: Thus for instance, when the scriptures inform us
that "God is a spirit," we readily conceive that he is an immaterial being; and
as the same scriptures emphatically call him holy; and the "Holy one of
Israel;" it is but just and logical to conclude that GOD, and the HOLY SPIRIT
or "Holy Ghost" imply ONE and the same person and no more: How then, in the
name of every thing rational, can this name or term, to wit, The Holy Spirit,
or Holy Ghost, which was evidently designed to express the whole essence or
integer of the Deity, be made use of with any degree of propriety to signify
only a fractional or third part of him? Can a part be equal to the whole? Or
rather can the whole be contained in a third part?

Again: In the preceding part of the First Art. referred to, it is asserted
that God is a being without "Body or Parts." Why then does the latter part of
the same article assure us, that he is divided into three distinct parts, or
persons?

would ask, if the Divine being is divisible, is (...) not material? if he has
NO body, how can he be su^stantial? and, if he has no PARTS, how can he B^ or
EXIST, at all? What difference can there be between saying God has NO BODY; and
flatly declarin^ that he is NOBODY? I cannot split this hair; an^ therefore, I
cannot perceive wherein this doctrine of God's having no body differs from
ATHEISM.

Surely every christian knows, or ought to know (with St. Paul,) that there are
not only bodies terre^trial, but bodies celestial also; and as it is plai^
there can be no body without its corresponding essence it must evidently
follow, there can be no essenc^ without its corresponding body: Material
essence have material bodies; and spiritual essences mu^ have spiritual bodies
also.

Another obvious discordance in these said article^ is, that they both maintain
and deny a trinity of persons in the Godhead; -- For whilst the First Articl^
asserts that "in unity of this Godhead there are thre^ persons," The Second
Article declares that, the whole and perfect nature of the Godhead, was unite^
to the whole and perfect nature of the manhood, i^ ONE person, to wit. Jesus
Christ -- never to be divided* Now as two opposite or contrary propositions
cannon both be true at the same time; I therefore conclude that only the latter
of these is true, and consequently the former false.

But what shall we think, or what shall we say respecting the latter part of
the 2d. article aforementioned, where it is plainly avowed, that the "very
God" was crucified -- died -- and was buried! And that, to "reconcile his
father," (who is said to be another different person) to us!!!

Here then we have represented to us, ONE divine person or God, dying -- to
reconcile another Divine person, or God, who certainly is supposed to be, not
only very angry but very mutable also.

Now to pass over the doctrine of a God dying and being buried, etc. I would
observe that the opinion of St, Paul on the subject is the very reverse of
this: for he says that "God was in Christ reconciling the world to himself;"
which clearly proves, that God was reconciled to all mankind; but that they
were not reconciled to him.

Indeed to suppose that God ever was, or can be angry, and then, anon
reconciled, through the entreaties of another person, different from himself,
which other person also is "very and eternal God," is, in my opinion, not only
a denial of the unity of God, but has a near affinity to down right blasphemy
against his divine love and his divine wisdom; for it is plain and certain,
that his infinite love must render him as incapable of wrath or anger toward
his own creatures, as his infinite wisdom renders him incapable of any change,
or alteration, in his own divine purposes and designs.

The foregoing observations on the true OBJECT of Christian worship, are, (in
my opinion) so conclusive and powerful against the modern and prevaling
doctrine of a trinity of persons in the Godhead; that there is no other way
left to elude their force; but by plainly declaring, that reason has nothing to
do in the investigation; and that its voice or dictates are not to be regarded
on the subject.

But my beloved and respected audience permit me to assure you, that it is a
heresy of the greatest magnitude and replete with the most dangerous
consequences to suppose, or maintain that Reason and Revelation, are at
variance with each other; for they are both, equally the voice of God, -- which
must be consistent with itself, whatever the voice of man may be.

The Socinian and the Deist, -- should there be any such here to day, will
doubtless agree to this last observation; but though these gentlemen are easily
convinced of the errors attached to the modern doctrine of the trinity, -- they
cannot yet subscribe to ours. -- The reason I presume is, because OUR peculiar
doctrine of the DIVINITY of the Lord Jesus Christ has not yet been properly
opened and explained to them; -- whereby they would clearly perceive, that Our
JESUS, and Their GOD are indeed the very same.

For as names cannot alter the nature of things, it is perfectly immaterial (in
my opinion) by what name we distinguish the Object of our worship, whether, (as
Pope says) "Jehovah, Jove, or Lord;" provided we attach to this One name all
the essential and incommunicable attributes of Deity.

Be it known then, to all whom it may concern, that the members of the Lord's
New Church, do not worship that natural body which was derived from Mary, and
the principles of this world, and which was crucified, etc. Because they do not
believe that this body ever was, or ever can be transmuted into, or commixed
with the Deity. No, this species of superstition and idolatry we leave, to
those who know no better.

The material superinduced body; or Son of Mary, together with whatsoever of
infirmity was therein derived, was indeed necessary to be assumed by the Lord
God for purposes of redemption, and manifestation, to men in this natural
world; but this mere Son of Mary, is not the true "Son of God," or savior of
the world. The Savior which We worship, is the Divine Wisdom, of the Divine
Love, who is indeed a Mediator, or a medium of access and communication,
between the Divine love or inmost principle of Deity, and created intelligences.

Not that we insinuate, that the Divine Wisdom, (which we also call, "The form
of God") can be, or ever was, separated from the Divine love, (which we also
call the essence or inmost principle of God;) except by way of manifestation:
but the Divine love we apprehend, is imperceptible to every created being, and
as unapproachable as a "consuming fire;" while the Divine Wisdom is perceptible
to every Angel in the heavens, but differently to each, according to their
individual states of illumination and affection.

To conclude this head of Doctrine then; we oppose the modern doctrine of a
trinity of persons in the Deity; but we do not deny the true Scripture doctrine
of a trinity of Principles in the Deity, even as there is in every individual
living man. Thus for instance, The Divine Love or inmost principle of Jehovah
corresponds to the Soul of man, and may by way of accommodation, be called the
Father. The Divine Wisdom or manifested form, of Deity, corresponds to the Body
of man and may by way of accommodation as aforesaid be called the SON; and the
Divine proceeding power likewise, from the Divine Wisdom of the Divine Love,
corresponds to the volitions or actions of man, and may with considerable
propriety be called the Holy Spirit, or Holy Ghost: -- All, together,
constituting but One glorious object of christian worship, -- who is, "Not
quite displayed to worlds above
Nor quite on earth concealed."


Submitting the foregoing remarks on the true Object of our worship, to your
serious and impartial consideration, I shall now proceed, to make a few
observations.

IIdly. On the true NATURE of Christian Worship.

On this head however I must be very brief, that I trespass not on the patience
of my attentive and respected hearers. And indeed, it appears to me that if the
true Object of worship be properly comprehended, we can be subject to no very
material error in the Nature and mode of the worship which we may be inclined
to offer unto him.

This remark cannot fail of being justified by all those who have made
themselves acquainted with the Theology of various ages and nations; and their
consequent modes or rites of religious worship; for it is certain that the
peculiar ideas of mankind, at all times, and in all places, gave a color or
form to their manner of worship; so that it has been more or less rational and
spiritual in exact proportion to the rationality, or spirituality of their
ideas respecting the Object of worship; and vice versa.

I would not insinuate however, from this remark, that the particular mode or
manner of our worshipping God, can justify or condemn, save or damn any one; for
if errors of faith or worship originate from prejudice of education, or other
unavoidable circumstances which are inseparably connected with certain local
situations; I doubt whether our persons would be brought into a state of
condemnation, were our worship directed to "four-footed beasts and creeping
things;" or even to devils!

Indeed the apostle Paul inform us in the 10th c. and 20th v. of his 1st.
epistle to the Corinthians, that the Heathens or Gentiles did sacrifice to
devils, not intentionally, I presume, but ignorantly; therefore amongst these
Gentile worshipers, a faithful "Centurion." and a just "Cornelius," were
recognized by a "faithful and just Creator;" who far from condemning them for
their inevitable errors of faith and worship, openly, and highly approved of
them both; distinguishing between, the worshiper, and the worship -- the
intention, and the act -- the head, and the heart.

Worship, then, may be said to consist of two different or distinct parts, the
one external, the other internal: The former is the body of worship* the latter
the soul. But, as the body without the spirit (or soul) is dead; so also is
external worship, when separated from internal; and as both soul and body must
be united to form or constitute a living man; so also external worship must be
united to in^ernal, to become truly acceptable to God, and profitable to the
worshiper, in furthering his regeneration.

Time will not permit me now to enter into a minute detail of all the various
actions, and attitudes, words and works which enter into; or fall under the
denomination of what may be called external worship; -- or the particular
dispositions and affections, antipathies and desires which are necessary to
constitute true and acceptable internal worship; let it suffice to observe,
that a very knave or hypocrite may perform all the former; while none but a
truly good person can possess the latter.

But though it is certain that goodness of heart alone, will render our persons
acceptable unto God, it does not follow that that alone, will render all our
actions so; -- else why should the angel say to St. John, even when the latter
was about to perform a religious act, and what he conceived to be his
indispensable duty, "See thou do it not."

In order therefore that our acts of worship, may be approved, as well as our
persons, by the Lord Jesus Christ our Savior and our God we must worship him
not only in Spirit, but in Truth also, that is, our worship must be not only
pious, but rational.

But this, I humbly presume is not the case, with such as direct their worship
to an angry, vengeful, changeful, partial BEING; who is subject to any
division, or sub-division into different persons.

If any person therefore, my beloved, (however sacred, dignified or popular his
character may be,) should by word or deed, "entice" you to the worship of such
"strange Gods," -- "See thou do it not;" -- on the contrary obey the law of
GOD, and "Stone him." I say, "Stone him," not with natural stones, however; but
with spiritual; with rational arguments, and truths of doctrine; derived from
the principles of science, and the authority of the holy scriptures.

But who can overcome "Goliath of Gath," whose stature is "six cubits and a
span?" Who can conquer prejudice of education, whose enormous growth is of many
ages? Oh! ye men of the New Church, "The battle is not yours but the Lords;"
therefore be not afraid, for the stripling David, (or New Jerusalem Doctrine)
though not yet crowned, shall, with a few "smooth stones of the brook;" (or
truths of science) slay the Goliath of Prejudice, and with his own sword, (or
the literal sense of the word,) cut off his head, -- while the sword shall be
preserved in the tents of David.

I must now conclude. -- My discourse has been sufficiently tedious; -- and
like the present state of our little Temple, plain and unadorned.

Indeed I had neither leisure nor ability to dress it in the tinselled and
flowing robes of rhetoric; -- and if I had both, it would only be as paint on a
glass window which obscures rather than admits the light; or like the glossy
basilisk whose very presence often times poisons the beholder; but logic is like
the "tree of life," whose very leaves are for the healing of our prejudiced and
disordered minds. I leave the application to God, and your own consciences;
For, "Paul may plant, and Apollos water;" but it is Jesus Christ alone that can
give the wished for increase of rational and spiritual conviction from what has
now been said, therefore.

To him be glory and majesty, dominion and power, both now and ever. -- Amen.

FINIS.

