AN ORATION ON THE DEATH OF GENESIS GEORGE WASHINGTON: DELIVERED IN THE DUTCH
CHURCH, IN NEW-BRUNSWICK, ON THE 22D OF FEBRUARY, 1800.

BY MAJOR GENERAL FREDERICK FRELINGHUYSEN,

PUBLISHED BY DESIRE.

NEW-BRUNSWICK, NEW JERSEY: PRINTED BY ABRAHAM BLAUVELT. 1800.

AN ORATION.
MY COUNTRYMEN AND FRIENDS,
SOLEMN! awfully solemn is the occasion, which this day assembles us. We come
not as heretofore, to commemorate the birth of a nation, or to celebrate the
victories of our country: -- we come not to proclaim the virtuous deeds of the
living patriot, or the warlike achievements of the existing hero: we come not
to rejoice; we come to mourn! to mourn departed worth, and to pay a tribute of
gratitude to unparalleled merit; merit, once on earth, but now removed.

How gladly, my countrymen, would I resign the task assigned me, into abler
hands; but who is equal to such a task! who can justly recount the praises of
the hero, the statesman, and the Christian, whose loss we lament* -- The
faithful page of history will make the attempt, and it will fail. The orator
and the poet will unite their efforts, and they will immortalize not half his
worth. In the hearts, in the grateful hearts of his beloved countrymen, it is
alone truly recorded; and who can express the feelings of those hearts, when
the sad tidings are announced that, WASHINGTON IS NO MORE!

IT has been the custom of most nations to celebrate the actions, and to
resound the praises of their renowned heroes and statesmen. They began it,
impelled by affection and sorrow; and they continued it from motives of duty
and interest. But never, in any country, did all these so evidently unite, to
call upon a people to deplore the loss, and to proclaim the virtues of an
illustrious character, as on this mournful occasion. If ever affection and
sorrow were sincere, such Americans, must be your affection and your sorrow for
the departed FATHER of your country. If ever duty prompted to a grateful
remembrance of past and signal services, or interest recommended for the
example of survivors to perpetuate the memory of great and virtuous actions,
this sorrowful moment affords the most striking instance.

I WILL not, my countrymen, attempt a formal eulogy on this great and good man,
beloved by his own country, and admired by all. For besides, that his character
is above all praise, should I attempt it, the abilities of my head (as a writer
expresses it) would too little conspire with the feelings of my heart. It will
be sufficient for our present purpose, in order to show the greatness of our
loss, to take a short and summary view of our hero's life, so nobly, so
patriotically spent for the public good.

AT a period, which others devote to mirth and dissipation, in his very youth,
he was called by his native colony to perilous and interesting services: and
such were the early talents and heroism which he displayed, that all men
foretold his future greatness if his life was prolonged; and such were the
extraordinary interpositions of Divine Providence in his favor on several
occasions, that devout men were inspired to predict, that he was preserved for
the future glory and defense of his country. He continued to be honored by
Virginia with important appointments, civil and military. He continued to do
much good; in war a hero, in peace a statesman and a farmer. A statesman,
studying the good of his country, and with his brother patriots, adopting
measures to promote it. A farmer, cultivating his lands, cultivating his mind,
and cultivating every social and domestic virtue. Heaven was preparing him for
more important scenes -- and thy blood stained soil, O Lexington! opened the
glorious drama. The contest between the colonies of America and their mother
country had now drawn to a crisis; and the hostile fleets, and hostile armies
of ill-advised Britain, had compelled the former to assert their rights, and to
repel force by force. But who shall lead the troops of freedom! By impulse more
than human, the American people cast their eyes upon the Cincinnatus of
Mount-Vernon, and he is elected the commander in chief of their armies.

His country calls. He hesitates not to resign the sweet delights of domestic
life, but with a modest diffidence in his talents, and an humble, but firm
reliance on the GOD of armies, he at once obeys her call. To detail the various
events of the bloody conflict, all of which, whether prosperous or adverse,
evinced the greatness of his soul and the wramth of his patriotism, cannot now
be expected; the historian will record them, and the present and future ages
will read and wonder. With an undisciplined army, almost without arms or
ammunition; his country without military resources; against an enemy, brave,
determined, and enured to war; and against a nation in the zenith of her power,
he nobly took the field. Under his auspices, order sprang out of disorder;
detachments of strangers were formed into a band of brothers, and the sons of
freedom spread their embattled ranks around him, as the rock of our strength,
and under God, our sure defense.

DURING the eventful contest, his patriotic care extended to every part of the
Union. Did danger assail the north, there was his Gates, and there his gallant
Lincoln; did hostile bands invade the south, there was his faithful Green; and
near their Chieftain's camp, there was the sword of the LORD, and of
WASHINGTON. There he protected us by day, and watched over us by night; there
he cheerfully offered his precious life to the fate of war -- and there he
caused the enemies of our freedom to feel "The keen rough searchings of a
patriot's steel."


Throughout the bloody conflict, his country's good was the pole star of all
his conduct. The voice of praise could not betray him into rashness, nor could
the malignant tongue of slander warp him from his duty. With the same steady
mind he advanced; with the same steady mind he retired; -- with the same firm
soul he fought the foe; with the same firm soul he declined the combat. When
victory held out to him her bleeding hand, he clasped it with serenity,
thanking his God. With calm composure he bore every adversity, resigned to the
will of Heaven. Possessing the full confidence of his country, the idol of his
army, and of all the militia, he was never elated. The admiration of the age
for military skill and heroic achievements, he never boasted. Though by his
arduous struggle in the cause of freedom, he had stamped an inestimable value
upon a soldier's name, the name of patriot was his great delight.

VARIOUS were the events of the important conflict; but Heaven at length
crowned his military labors with success. With all the joy which patriotism
could inspire, he saw the independence of his country established, and her
peace restored. The joy of ambition never entered his soul. Having received
from the United States in Congress assembled, the most pathetic acknowledgments
for his long and faithful services; having paid due honors to his comrades in
war, and leaving his country a legacy too valuable to be forgotten, he nobly
retired. The hero of America became the FARMER of Mount-Vernon. Methinks I see
the venerable patriot on his way; every where met, every where followed, every
where accompanied and surrounded by the affectionate wishes of a grateful
people. Happy man! glorious retinue! Haughty despots, attend! bow before him,
and learn how little you are. Ambition! for a moment stop thy pursuits, and if
thou can, learn what GREATNESS is.

BUT the important work which he had begun, the political happiness of his
country, was not yet completed. The confederation of the States, formed amidst
the noise of war and the din of arms, proved unequal to the purposes for which
it was designed. The band of union was incomplete, and the strength of the
nation could not be called into exertion. Rebellion began to rear its head.
Private and public credit were nearly destroyed; and America, though strong in
men and full of resources, presented to the world the picture of a feeble and
bankrupt people. His country called again; he again obeyed, and joined a band
of worthies in forming a constitution for these United States, founded on the
purest principles of political freedom, and calculated to make his country
great and happy.

To carry into effect this constitution, then became the all important work, on
which depended the happiness or misery of our country. Difficulties arising
from various causes, presented themselves to view. Discordant sentiments,
ambitious designs, and the intrigues of the enemies of our independence, were
all to be encountered. WASHINGTON lives! WASHINGTON lives! is again resounded
from north to south, from east to west and by the (...) voice of his grateful
country, he is elected chief magistrate of this rising empire.

LOADED with honors, and on the pinnacle of human glory; surrounded with
friends, and in full possession of all the blessings which affluence can
bestow, and of every social and domestic enjoyment, he again resolves to engage
in the toils, the dangers, and the anxieties of public life. Here let the
historian pause, and search for language to bestow due praise. It is the
brightest plume in all his reputation. There was no still voice to whisper in
his ear, HERO, THOU HAVE ENOUGH. There was no voice which dared to utter, HERO,
THE RISK IS TOO GREAT! The illustrious patriot could hear but one voice, the
sacred voice of his beloved country; to obey which, had been the delight of his
youth, and the sublime pleasure of his life.

BEHOLD him advancing to the arduous task, and recollect the feelings which
then agitated every American breast. Did not every bosom glow with gratitude,
and every heart expand with joy and confidence. See him engaged in the
solemnities of taking upon himself the important office. The hero of America
was not there; the patriot, and the Christian alone appeared. The persevering
patriot, again willing to devote his life, his fortune and his reputation to
the welfare of his country. The humble Christian looking up for aid to that
Almighty Being, under the shadow of whose goodness he had walked in safety, and
by the strength of whose arm, he had achieved happiness for his country, and
for himself immortal fame.

FOR eight long years, all of them anxious, and some of them extremely
portentous of evil, he presided over the important concerns of the union. With
unremitting care and attention; with unexampled wisdom and firmness, he
discharged the arduous trust. His country's good was again his only guide, and
its durable happiness his only wish. Superior to flattery, and unawed by
calumny, he pursued his course of well doing.

IT is impossible on this occasion, to detail the various measures which he
pursued during this interesting period -- let us select a few.

WHEN a daring rebellion against the laws, evidently instigated and designed to
prostrate our government, broke out in a neighboring State; with all the
tenderness and affection of a father, he endeavored to reclaim the
disobedient. His character now shone forth with more than usual splendour.
Whatever a sound head, or a benevolent heart could dictate to prevent the
effusion of human blood, was attempted; and as length, when all his kind and
paternal admonitions proved abortive, he in mercy, sent a force which forbade
resistance, and without the loss of a single life, order, and obedience to the
laws were happily restored: great was the disappointment of our enemies --
glorious the result to us.

DURING his administration, a still more serious danger was to be encountered;
a danger which threatened our peace, and the ruin of our commerce. It was a
time to try his soul, and his soul was tried. The American people having their
passions heated by the conduct of Great Britain, respecting the treaty of
peace; their former animosities not yet subsided, and their minds enraged by
the cruel and unjust depredations on their commerce, were ripe for a rupture;
and but for their WASHINGTON, would have rushed into the horrors of another
bloody contest with the English nation. He knew their feelings, and how little
many of them wished for peace and reconciliation. The incomparable patriot saw
their danger, and happy for America, he knew his duty. He stepped in between
the people and the precipice to which they had arrived, and by the wisdom,
moderation, and firmness of his conduct, he, without the desolations of war,
procured for his country, what the loss of thousands of lives, and millions of
treasure could but have effected -- honorable peace, future safety, and
complete justice.

BUT time will not permit me further to particularize his great and good
actions. It must again be left to the faithful historian, to record the various
efforts of his genius to promote our peace, our honor, and our safety. Let it
suffice at present to observe, that all the measures which he adopted or
recommended, either as to our internal or external relations, proved him the
friend and the father of his people; and that under his administration, these
United States rose to a height of prosperity, unequalled in the annals of
history; happy and free at home, honored and respected abroad. His country thus
flourishing under its excellent constitution, and under just and equal laws;
increasing in wealth and population beyond its most sanguine hopes; peace in
all our borders, and the cup of blessings overflowing in our habitations. The
illustrious patriot having again given us the most paternal advice for our
future conduct, and expressed the most affectionate wishes for our future
happiness, again retires, and is again followed by the blessings of a grateful
people, and the plaudits of an admiring world.

WITNESS for me, my countrymen; did not every American heart then bespeak for
him a rest from his public toils? did not every patriot pray, that to the
length of many years, might be added his so long wished for repose from public
cares?

BUT behold! new dangers arise, and his country calls again. Haughty, imperious
France, threatens our happy union with fatal divisions, and our government with
destruction. The despoiler of nations denounces our independence, and menaces
us with ruin. Like Holland shall ye be plundered! like Switzerland shall ye be
subdued! and like Venice will we bring you into market! was their language to
the American people.

As if the measure of his goodness could not be filled, the aged FATHER OF HIS
COUNTRY is roused by the indignity offered to his children. The ardor of the
soldier is not yet damped; the patriot's pulse still beats in unison with the
feelings of his insulted country. He again obeys her call, and is appointed
commander in chief of her armies. He again resolves to risque his life, and his
exalted reputation in the doubtful fields of war. Glorious man! who can do
justice to thy merit? who can find thy equal? Death! thou have made a blow
which thou can not repeat.

THIS, my countrymen, is a short, and as you all full well know, a very
imperfect picture of a life spent for your good, and always devoted to your
interest. But he is no more! Your illustrious general, your wise and patriotic
president, your constant and immovable friend, is gone to that bourne from
which there is no return. And this his natal day, heretofore a day of joy and
festivity, is changed into a day of mourning and bitter grief. Let us not, my
countrymen, on this afflictive occasion impiously say, that our God has
forsaken us at this eventful and perilous period; let us rather intermingle our
sorrows with the consolotary reflections, that his co-patriot Adams lives; that
he lives, and now presides with a mind capacious, and a heart sincere to serve
his country; that many worthies -- statesmen -- sages -- soldiers, still
remain; a list too long for this day's numbering. Their past exploits are
known, and their future conduct, under God, will promote our welfare.

BUT still we must recur to the melancholy truth, that WASHINGTON is no more.
In him all hearts were united, and in the day of danger he was himself a HOST.
He was the choicest gift that Heaven could have bestowed, and his loss is the
most grievous dispensation.

THEREFORE let all the people mourn! And thou dear partner of his life, his
cares, and his toils, let our tears assuage thy sorrows.

LET the friends of science, mourn! He was the patron of learning, and in
public and private life, endeavored to promote the increase of knowledge in
his country.

YE American farmers, mourn! The farmer of Mount-Vernon was your friend; to
promote the interests of agriculture, was an object of his peculiar attention.

YE merchants of America, mourn! To extend, promote, and protect your commerce,
employed his assiduous care.

YE ministers of the holy gospel, and all ye friends of religion, mourn! He was
your patron and your friend. Let infidels hear it and repent. The great, the
good, the illustrious WASHINGTON acknowledged his God in all his ways. The
political savior of his country, loved, worshipped and adored, the SAVIOR OF
THE WORLD.

YE venerable matrons, and ye gray haired fathers, mourn! When your sons shall
hereafter be called to risque their lives in their country's cause, you will no
longer exultingly say, WASHINGTON leads.

ALL ye sons and ye daughters of Columbia, mourn! when dangers from without, or
dangers from within shall hereafter assail us, we can no longer exultingly
exclaim, WASHINGTON lives.

YE soldiers of America, mourn! The soldier's pride, the soldier's boast, the
soldier's friend is gone.

YE veteran soldiers of America; ye who have fought under his banners, and
conquered by his side, I know not in what language to address you. Shall I call
to your remembrance the days when with all his country in his heart, he led you
forth into the crimson field of war? Recollect the persevering patriotism with
which he endured the toils, the hardships, and the dangers of the bloody
conflict; recollect the unceasing attention which he always paid to your
interest, and the unbounded affection with which he always honored you. He
called not on you to fight, to make an addition to the sable list of tyrants;
he called not on you to bleed, to increase the number of slaves. Under his
guidance you have reared a fabric of freedom, the most glorious the world has
ever beheld. Your amiable general; your beloved WASHINGTON is no more. My
honored friends my heart bloods for you; I will not tell you to mourn.

YE departed ghosts of heroes, who have nobly fallen in this your country's
cause; we envy you not this great addition to your happiness; receive your
illustrious leader; it is enough for you; but if ye can, give us the
consolation of a moment's grief for us.

YE angelic hosts -- but ye cannot weep. O! then pity a weeping nation.

BUT I forbear -- words are not necessary to excite our sorrow. Does not every
eye bespeak its grief, and every heart with rending anguish bemoan our loss.
Let us rather look around for some ray of comfort; and is there any comfort?
Yes my countrymen, there is: to live, to die, is the lot of human nature. "An
angel's arm could not have snatched him from the grave;" but O sweet
consolation, ten thousand angels cannot confine him there. Already his immortal
spirit has been conducted to the regions of joy, and at the sound of the
arch-angel's solemn trump, he will rise, cheerfully rise, to receive an ample
reward for all his virtuous deeds, in those realms of bliss, where rivers of
delight incessantly flow, and where there are pleasures for evermore.

AND here my countrymen, let us make a solemn pause. -- It has pleased the
Almighty Ruler of the universe, who does his will and pleasure in the armies of
heaven, and among the inhabitants of this earth, to bereave us of our dearest
friend; "the first in peace, the first in war, and the first in all our
hearts." Let us improve this painful calamity in such a manner, as to evince
the sincerity of our grief, and the reality of our sorrow. Let us emulate his
many virtues, and constantly set before us his bright example. We cannot all be
WASHINGTONS; he was the peculiar favorite of heaven; but we can all be
patriots, and all be Christians. Like him, let us love our country, and in our
different stations, exert ourselves to promote its welfare* While we lament a
WASHINGTON, dead; let us honor and support an ADAMS, living. Like him let us
love our God, and revere his holy law; by so doing, we shall truly honor his
memory, and prove to the world that our beloved WASHINGTON still lives; that he
lives in our hearts. Yes honored shade! thy name is there engraven, and while
gratitude remains on earth it shall live. We will tell our children, and they
shall tell their children, of all the good thou have done for us, for them, and
for the world. The aged parent shall recount thy heroic actions, and the
lisping babe shall repeat them. From generation to generation, every father
shall teach his son to venerate thy WORTH, and to honor thy TOMB.

END.
DISTRICT OF NEW JERSEY, TO WIT:
BE IT REMEMBERED, that on the sixth day of March, in the twenty fourth year of
the Independence of the United States of America, Abraham Blauvelt, of the said
district, has deposited in this office, the title of a book, the right whereof
he claims as proprietor, in the words following, to wit: An Oration on the
death of GENESIS GEORGE WASHINGTON: delivered in the Dutch Church, in
New-Brunswick, on the 22d of February, 1800: By Major General Frederick
Frelinghuysen. In conformity to the act of the Congress of the United States,
entitled, "An Act for the encouragement of learning, by securing the copies of
Maps, Charts and Books, to the authors and proprietors of such copies, during
the times therein mentioned."

ROBT. BOGGS, Clerk of the District of New Jersey.


