AN ORATION, PRONOUNCED BEFORE THE HONORABLE JUSTICES OF THE SUPREME JUDICIAL
COURT OF THE COMMONWEALTH OF MASSACHUSETTS; THE COUNSELORS AND BARRISTERS AT
LAW WITHIN THE COUNTY OF CUMBERLAND; AND THE CITIZENS OF PORTLAND AND ITS
VICINITY, IN THE DISTRICT OF MAINE; JULY 4 th. 1800: BEING THE TWENTY-FOURTH
ANNIVERSARY OF THE INDEPENDENCE OF THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA.

BY DAVID HALE, A. M. Late of the American Artillerists and Engineers.

FROM THE PRESS OF E. A. JENKS, PORTLAND: JULY, 1800.

ORATION.
RESPECTED AUDITORS, AND FELLOW-CITIZENS,
ON this auspicious anniversary, consecrated to the remembrance of those
arduous struggles, which were the purchase of your Independence -- a festival
forever endeared to every freeborn American, by the consideration of those
numerous and painful sacrifices, which were necessary to obtain that
independence; and of the state of servitude and debasement to which his country
was destined in the dark cabinet of her oppressor -- to be constituted the
organ, by which your minds are, for a few minutes, are to be recalled to a
contemplation of any of the events which gave birth to your national
sovereignty, or by which they are to review those of subsequent periods and of
the present era, is an honor; to which, neither by my profession, nor the
course of studies to which my attention has been principally directed, had I
courage to aspire. With what (...) prevailed upon myself to undertake the word
assigned me, by your committee, (...) I am to the practice of oratory, I need
only appeal to the sensations, which, I am persuaded, at this moment, pervade
each bosom, in this polite assembly, for complete illustration. This diffidence
had proved insuperable, but for the consideration of that candor, that
elevation of sentiment, which are so well known to characterize my indulgent
auditors.

The theme of Independence has been amply and eloquently discussed -- the bold
achievements, by which it was won, have been ingeniously recounted, both by
orators and poets unrivaled in the lists of fame -- the fair prospects of
future grandeur, opulence and refinement, to which, by an overruling
Providence, the American empire seems destined, have been portrayed in colors
the most animated and brilliant that creative fancy can devise: -- These
subjects have been echoed and re-echoed, with consummate art, on successive
anniversaries from that august moment, when a few heaven-born patriots,
animated by the ethereal essence of liberty, and conscious that they felt the
sentiments of the whole American people, dared nobly to declare to an
astonished world that themselves, that their country were free!

How feeble, how desperate then, my respected fellow citizens, must be the
efforts of a juvenile pen to represent to your minds, with any rational hope of
approbation, the dazzling scenes which preceded, accompanied and have since
followed, and the beneficial effects of which I trust will long continue to
follow the period, which we this day commemorate! Amid the glowing images with
which our subject every where abounds, how shall your orator select such only
as are appropriate to fill the pages of a hasty production? Shall he retrace
the indescribable calamities of an incipient revolutionary war? Shall he tell
you of a virtuous, but undisciplined yeomanry, goaded to resistance by the iron
rod of oppression, gloriously relinquishing their peaceful firesides, and
rallying round the standard of liberty in defense of their just rights? Would
you be again reminded of the almost numberless feats of unparalleled bravery
achieved by this same virtuous, but afterward disciplined and war-instructed
yeomanry? Will you for a moment contemplate the veteran legions of Britain,
confounded and dismayed, retreating with precipitation from their perilous
enterprise of Lexington before an army of husbandmen. Will you review the
ensanguined heights of Charlestown be crimsoned with the blood of an invading,
prostrate foe; while a sense of infringed rights inspired, in the breasts of
Americans, that undaunted heroism, which disdained to yield till the means of
further resistance were exhausted? Will you revert once more to that sublime
spectacle, when those vaunting myrmidons of tyranny, who but a twelve month
before were boasting with how inconsiderable a force the colonies might be
subjugated, now, dreading the provoked vengeance of an injured, an insulted
people, retired ingloriously from the fair domains of your capital? Or, passing
over events of less distinguished magnitude, will you again behold the
vanquished armies of Saratoga and Yorktown, in the sullen gloom of despair,
depositing their arms and proud ensigns of war, as trophies to that valor,
which they had dared to vilify?

These events, all important as they were at the time they transpired --
important as they still are in the most luminous pages of your history, and
which remote posterity will hear recounted with rapture, have nevertheless in
some measure ceased to dazzle. Their glory has been eclipsed by the novelty,
the brilliancy of subsequent occurrencies. Still however in glancing our eyes
over them, it becomes us, my fellow citizens, for a moment to pause, and in
silent, but devout adoration, to venerate the counsels and conduct of that
Omnipotent Architect, who, while he made the wrath of man to praise him, has,
by means so unheared of, erected a fair fabric of freedom on the ruins of
despotism!!

No sooner had your degraded antagonist -- no sooner had your traitorous ally
acknowledged ^our independence, than the resentful policy of the one, and the
intriguing artifice of the other, were industriously and most insidiously
employed to undermine the foundations of that independence. They viewed with
rival jealousy your increasing glory and importance. And each, emulous to
advance her own power and opulence at the expense of yours, was eager to
embrace any opportunity to effect her diabolical purposes. The one endeavored,
by the most consummate perfidy, to circumscribe your territorial limits -- to
abridge you of important local priviliges -- to foment divisions -- to
disseminate feuds. The other, in open defiance of her sacred stipulations,
retained possession of your fortresses: and eventually instigated the too
credulous savages to wield the hatchet on your defenseless frontiers.

(1) Amidst the perplexities occasioned by these vile machinations, it was also
discovered that the compact, which, in times of general emergency, had served
in some measure, to concentrate the energies of the nation, was, in itself,
radically defective. Power was wanting in the supreme council of state to
enforce its own decrees. In consequence of which, the most salutary measures,
by being but partially observed, proved abortive. Anarchy, with all her
frightful images began again to erect her daring front. -- Fraud, rapine and
oppression, tolerated by legal forms, stalked forth, with undaunted mein, in
one member of the confederacy: And in several others, the ineffable horrors of
civil war had already begun to rage!

At this eventful crisis the sublime counsels, inculcated by the pre-eminent
eloquence -- of that sage, who alone "united all hearts," whose life was
devoted to his country, and whose tomb is yet bedewed with her tears; your once
beloved, still revered, and long to be lamented WASHINGTON, recurred with
persuasive and convincive energy to the minds of your political fathers. The
propriety, as well as necessity of revising your national compact -- of
enlarging the powers therein delegated -- and of giving to it more consistency
and effect, was clearly felt and discerned. For this purpose, therefore, a
general convention of the States was by them recommended.

But scarce had that convention met and commenced their labors, when it was
discovered that, effectually to remedy the evils complained of, a new and more
systematic compact must be devised. Instead therefore of revising the articles
of confederation, a complete constitution of national government, as well as
union was proposed.

This constitution you have since seen adopted and finally ratified by
conventions of the several states. You have witnessed the purity of principle
on which it is founded by the salutary effects, which have flown from its
operation. -- You have beheld public credit, which for a long time subsequent
to the revolution, had waned to the lowest possible degree, and was on the
point of total evanescence, suddenly restored and established on a sure base.
You have seen agriculture rear her drooping head; and commerce unfurl her
whitening canvass in remotest regions of the globe.

These beatific effects you have witnessed emanating from the benign influence
of your constitution under successive administrations. Nor has the disaffection
of the prejudiced or misinformed among your own citizens, nor yet the more
deadly enmity of foreign rivals been able to obstruct their progress.

Where in the history of nations shall we look for a parallel? When has it been
recorded of a people, inhabiting a vast, but unsocial territory, of manners
dissimilar, and of dispositions uncongenial, that in the hour of their
country's danger, their most inveterate local prejudices were instantaneously
forgotten? That each confederate member of the community, as if eager to rival
the other in the sacrifices it should make, cheerfully came forward, and
relinquished those of its rights, which were discovered to be no longer tenable
consistently with the general good? In what happy clime, remote from these
peaceful shores, has such a people been known to exist; who, when their
political compacts no longer ensured to them that security and convenience,
which it is the end of all legitimate governments to afford, calmly convoked
the wisdom of the nation; and without war, without carnage, without tumult;
having the interest of the confederacy for their pole star and that of the
several parts of it for their compass, devised a new compact, so exactly
correspondent to the circumstances and situation of the whole, as that none
should have any just cause of complaint? Or where, after devising such a
compact and carrying it into operation, has it been attended, in so short a
period, with such a train of public benefits? In vain should we search for the
example in the records of antiquity -- those of modern times afford none.

The republics of Greece indeed united, and for a time seemed to forget their
local attachments, when threatened with invasion, but no sooner was the idea of
danger removed, than they were again rivals, and again enemies. Intent to
aggrandize their own particular state, the rulers of each had no conception of
a community of interests. The effect of which blind policy proved the ultimate
overthrow and extinction, not only of the whole confederacy; but of the several
members of which it was composed.

The Romans have been characterized as a magnanimous, an enterprizing, a
virtuous people. The portrait I am not disposed to gainsay. Considered in the
sense in which these terms are more frequently understood it is no doubt a true
one. But contrasted with the American, there were no features in their
government, which resembled yours; except that in the ages of their republic it
was styled popular. Founded on principles, consistent only with the spirit of
conquest, almost the first achievement of their arms was an outrage on
humanity, of which we have scarce a parallel, save in the recital of modern
revolutions. The whole tenor of their history corresponds with this act of
barbarism. They traversed sea and land, and carried war and devastation into
every country by them known. The power of their arms was felt and submitted to,
in the regions, I had almost said, of the torrid and of the frigid zones -- on
the banks of the Nile and of the Rubicon -- on the shores of Britain and of
Persia. But their government afforded neither protection or security to the
frontier, nor tranquillity to the interior, provinces. A constant collision of
interests and factions, distracted and enfeebled her councils -- a succession
of civil feuds exhausted her resources -- till, grown too unwieldy abroad, too
weak, too indecisive in her measures, too luxurious, effeminate and corrupt in
her manners at home, she became successively the prey of usurpation; and
finally of the most frightful papal despotism. Of her it may with infinite
propriety, be said; " Sic transit gloria mundi."

Shall we yet pursue our researches? Do you apprehend we should be any more
successful in consulting the pages of modern, than of ancient history? No -- my
fellow citizens! Astonishing as have been the scenes represented on the theater
of Europe within the last ten years -- how much soever they may have excited
the momentary exultation or applause of one, but the perpetual execration and
abhorrence of all other nations; it is not from them that we are to borrow
images, with which to compare our own government. Neither in principle nor
administration should we be able to discover any resemblance.

In this political drama we have contemplated revolution rapidly succeeding
revolution -- constitutions and civil codes proposed to day, which, with
tomorrow's dawn were to be annihilated -- pacific and virtuous monarchs,
precipitated from their thrones, and doomed to languish in inglorious exile, or
await the tortures, of a barbarous execution -- princes and nobles, driven from
their native land to seek an asylum in foreign climes -- their estates seized
upon, and by the mockery of legislative decrees, converted into means of
extending the calamities of war. (2) We have contemplated further, the fathers
of the christian church, the spiritual guides of a numerous, and, till late, a
happy people, divested of their clerical functions, stripped of their wealth
and privileges, their dignities and honors, and, as far as was in the power of
a most subtle and deleterious philosophy, falsely so called, robbed of the
confidence, esteem and affection of their parochial brethren. We have beheld
Religion proscribed -- the sacred Institution of the Sabbath prostrated -- and
Virtue, in consequence, hovering on the extreme verge of a devoted country,
ready to slit her final departure. We have seen Vice tolerated -- Infidelity
triumphant -- and Iniquity, in a thousand frightful forms, pervading the land.
We have seen also this same devoted country, rent by factions and agitated by
civil commotions, deluged with the blood of her citizens, perishing on all
sides by mobs, assassinations, and the guillotine. All these melancholy scenes
have we witnessed, as in swift succession they have followed each other, in
support of a visionary system of Liberty and Equality.

Yet, not confined to the country in which they originated, we have viewed
their deadly influence extending first to approximate, and then to remote
countries. Following the progress of her arms, we have every where witnessed
the subversion of long established legitimate governments; and the imposition
of her own base-begotten institutions. Every vile artifice and intrigue, which
her boasted diplomatic skill could invent -- might I not say, which was capable
of being devised in the dark conclave of fallen angels? have we seen practiced,
with unparalleled impudence and effrontery; with intent to excite divisions and
alienate the minds of people from their governors. Public faith and the faith
of treaties, solemnly plighted, after lulling to security the objects of her
rapacity, have been perfidiously sacrificed. Alliances have been formed, but
the more effectually to enslave and oppress; alluring her intended victims, by
presenting them the olive branch with one hand, while the other was secretly
drawing, from its concealed scabbard, a murderous poinard! Exactions,
requisitions, and contributions have been indiscriminately levied and demanded,
both from her allied and her subjugated vassals to their utmost ability to pay.
In fine, cities have been sacked -- their wealth and the treasure of provinces,
rifled and dissipated -- their statues and painting, with every production of
the Fine Arts, plundered and transported -- their defenseless inhabitants
wantonly massacred! Innocence, shrinking from the ruthless embrace of brutal
ravishers, has been publicly violated -- infants, torn from the palpitating
breasts of frantic mothers, impaled on halberts!!!

At the recital of these enormities what bosom is there in this assembly, that
does not thrill with inexpressible horror? What eye, that does not flash with
indignation? What countenance, that does not redden with anger?

Let us turn our agonizing view from a picture, whose every feature is
disgusting! Let us draw a veil before atrocities, which must perpetually
blacken the annals of the eighteenth century! Withdrawing our incautious feet
from scenes of slaughter and death, let us tread lightly over the ashes of
millions of wretched victims, who have been immolated at the shrine of
political fanaticism! And while we indulge the tear of sympathy for the
miseries to which so many of our unfortunate species are doomed, let us with
hearts impassioned with gratitude at our own exemption from these miseries,
once more revisit our Columbia's tranquil land.

Hail, happy America! Remote from the scenes of terror and dismay, of
desolation and distress, which agitate three fourths of the globe, it is thy
highly distinguished lot to yield an asylum to the fair goddess of Peace, long
since banished from the shores of Europe, of Asia, and of Africa! Independence
has on thy borders erected her waving banner; and Liberty, Justice and Plenty
sport in her train! No imperious consul dares here usurp thy well defined, well
guarded sovereignty; no tyrannising directory, to abolish thy legislative
councils, or impose commands on thy judges. Thy national, as well as local,
constitutions were composed by sages, nurtured in thine own bosom; renowned for
piety and wisdom, and of tried and unshaken patriotism. They were the offspring
of patient deliberation, of close investigation and of veteran talents. Not
imposed upon thee by the hand of a conquering General, they were received by
thy free and enlightened choice; after maturely examining their several merits;
and balancing every argument, whether for, or against them.

In these barriers of civil and social rights, the only rational ideas of that
liberty or equality, which ever did, or ever can subsist among mankind are
asserted and maintained -- liberty founded on law -- equality on obligation. A
liberty, wherein each citizen, while he is free to pursue the various
occupations, employments, or avocations; whether for interest, instruction,
amusement, or pleasure; to which, by inclination or circumstances he is
adapted, is bound by the laws to respect, and carefully to avoid infringing the
equal liberty of his fellow citizen: A liberty, wherein each enjoys the equal
right of opinion and belief, without any human restraint, in matters of
religion, science and government; and of publishing his sentiments to the
world, so that they be not repugnant to the freedom, safety or reputation of
others: A liberty, which secures to each equally the right of maintaining the
integrity of his person and fame; and of enjoying, without molestation, the
fruits of his honest industry: A liberty, which affords equal indemnity to all
in case of aggression: and, in fine, a liberty which yields even to aggressors
themselves; and to those, who may be suspected of being aggressors, the equal
right of a hearing and investigation before their peers: but a liberty, which
does not extend impunity to guilt, nor protection to its violators. Recognizing
these principles, founded in the immutable laws of nature, our constitutions
have hitherto proved a sure guarantee of the liberty, which they afford. They
seem also to presage that this guarantee will be perpetual.

Do we not, in all the instances, before us, perceive, in these constitutions
characteristics clearly distinct from those of every other nation which we have
contemplated? Distinct from those of Greece, in guarantying to each state her
sovereignty and independence in all matters of local concern, or which respect
the social intercourse of citizen with citizen; while the United States only
are sovereign in all matter of more general concern -- in those, which relate
to foreign intercourse, to measures for public defense, to peace and war, to
trade, navigation and commerce? Distinct from those of Rome, in that the Roman
established hereditary honors and privileges, whereby those citizens only, who
were of patrician descent, were for a long time eligible to offices -- that an
arbitrary and oppressive power was given to creditors over their unfortunate
debtors -- that hers maintained the right of conquest, and in effect arrived at
the summit of her political glory, by means subversive of every principle of
civil as well as moral right? Distinct also from both the Greecian and Roman
codes, in providing for an equal and full representation of every part of the
community in the legislative assemblies; and in separating, defining, and
limiting the several powers of government; so that while the legislative,
executive and judiciary departments are mutual checks upon each other against
any undue use or abuse of power, each is restricted from exercising the
functions of the other? And distinct from those of France -- in that, while
they are one in principle and indivisible in energy and purity, they are yet
both local and federal -- that they afford security to every citizen against
all unreasonable restrictions of his liberty; all oppressive requisitions of
personal service or of property; all cruel and unjust imprisonments, and still
more unjust and tyranical executions, on mere suspicion, without any sufficient
evidence of criminality, and with scarce the form of a trial -- that, founded
on principles established in the nature of man, they do not, for the sake of
levelling all distinctions in society, authorize one class of citizens to
fatten on the spoils of another class to whom fortune has been somewhat more
propitious -- that, content with securing happiness and freedom to the
territory, which they particularly embrace, they do not tolerate principles,
which aim at the prostration and overthrow of every other government -- that
being in their nature sacred, as constituting the bulwark of our liberties,
they are two much revered by the whole American people to suffer any daring
usurper to rescind, modify or abridge them? But time would fail me; your
patience would be exhausted, ere I could enumerate half the instances in which,
our free constitutions vary from those heterogeneous, those short-lived codes,
which have successively sprung from the ashes and been sacrificed on the tombs
of each other, in that "hot bed of revolution."

We do not however contend that these constitutions are perfect, or without
fault. No human device bears this stamp. If, nevertheless, they have fewer
faults, fewer imperfections, and those of less pernicious tendency, than the
constitutions of any other nation or country; if notwithstanding some defects,
which in themselves are inessential, the great, fundamental principles on which
they are established are consistent with the nature and obligations of society
-- if notwithstanding some features, which may be thought to border on
asperity, their general complexion is lenient and mild: if on the whole, they
are the best adapted to secure the peace, happiness and independence of our
country of any that, in the circumstances of the times, could have been
devised, ought they not to excite the confidence, affection and zealous support
of every real patriot? How prompt should such citizens be, if not to forget, at
least to overlook, their imperfections; to strengthen every defect; and, by a
ready and cheerful submission of individual to the general will, to lessen the
effect and moderate the tendency of every asperity? Opposition would then
subside; the virulence of party spirit soon die away; and the odious terms
federalist and jacobin be no more heard. (3)

It was in the original plan of this discourse, here to have dilated on the
administration of our government; but the extent, to which the magnitude of
events, already contemplated, have led our meditations; together with the
shortness of the notice allowed for previous preparation, will oblige us, on
this topic to be concise.

The most prominent features exhibited in every department of our admistration,
as it respects our foreign relations, are a love of national justice, a strict
observance of treaties, and an ardent desire to preserve peace with all
nations. These sentiments correspond with the nature of our constitution; and
are perfectly consistent with the exercise of that liberty which we have
endeavored to explain. Subordinate to these has been every measure relative to
foreign intercourse. It was these considerations, which dictated the policy of
taking a neutral position on the commencement of hostilities between our
European neighbors; and which have since prompted that uniform and persevering
adherence to the same policy. Still however, in a war that was to be prosecuted
with so much zeal and animosity, it was not to be expected, that we should be
able to maintain that position, without great firmness and constant exertion.
It was therefore necessary, while we gave the surest demonstrations of the
sincerity of our wishes for peace, to convince all nations, that we were
determined to vindicate our neutral rights; and that, sooner than relinquish
the smallest of them, an appeal to the last resort would be preferred. Hence,
while negociations were going forward with a nation, which was first to
infringe those rights, and while the event of those negociations was then
problematical, resulted the necessity of strengthening our seacoast -- of
systematizing our militia, and of replenishing our magazines with military
stores. And when, after an amicable adjustment of all matters in controversy
with this nation, aggression from a source least to be expected, had now become
more daring and frequent; when the success of negotiation, a second time
resorted to, had begun to be despaired of; and an enormous tribute was
proposed, not as the price of redress, but of permission to prefer our
remonstrance; hence also resulted the necessity of annulling our political
connection with a perfidious ally -- of interdicting the commercial intercourse
of our citizens with her; of permitting our merchantmen to arm in their own
defense; of authorizing reprisals and recaptures; of equipping a naval force;
of providing by law for the removal of inimical aliens -- of recognizing by
legistive sanction the constitutional and common law right of punishing the
authors of libellous publications -- of again revising our military system --
and of embodying an army.

That these measures, originating in the love of peace, were dictated by the
soundest policy, time has already attested, in the happy effects, which have
been the immediate consequence.

While our shores were thought to be destitute of means or the spirit to repel
invasion; while our flag was unprotected, our merchantmen defenseless; while it
was believed that our citizens, disaffected with the present measures, were
divided in sentiment and might be made the pliant tools of foreign incendiaries
and disorganizers; while our councils and executive departments were supposed
to be filled with men, who, being the dupes of faction, might be influenced to
abandon the important interests of their country; and, charmed with the siren
sounds of liberte-egalite, to dance at the dulcet notes of Ca-Ira; the tone of
our late ally became haughty and imperious. She spurned at our overtures for
negotiation; and nothing on our part, short of unconditional submission, could
satisfy her unbounded thirst for sway! But when her illusive dreams were
dispelled, when she discovered the integrity and firmness of every governmental
department, and the real attachment of the great body of citizens to their
government, however a few might have been seduced from their loyalty by her
arts; when she saw with what promptitude and alacrity defensive measures would
be adopted; how changed her demeanor! Instead of being now the supplicators
for redress; instead of beholding our envoys spurned with indignity from a
directorial audience; instead of having our ears stunned with the humiliating
term tribute; the olive is extended to our view. We are invited to renew our
commission for negociating. Our messengers of peace are received and honored,
as those of a magnanimous people, determined still to be free! Our flag is
revered and respected. The American eagle soars triumphant on the ocean. And
the thunder of our navy is heard with awe. Blessed also with the brightening
prospect of continuing peace, we again behold our patriotic soldiers retiring
from the field of war to that of agriculture; not indeed as formerly, grown
veteran in service and scarred with glory; but crowned with the applauses of
their fellow citizens, and rich in the thanks of their country, for the zeal
with which they rallied to her standard in an hour of supposed danger.

While these pacific, but at the same time spirited, measures respecting our
transatlantic connections have been unremittingly pursued; a system of the
mildest and most disinterested policy has distinguished the various measures
which have been adopted respecting our savage neighbors. Several of these
tribes had been duped into war with the United States. But on discovering their
deception, and perceiving at length more distinctly our true policy, they
readily embraced the terms of pacification, which were offered them. They are
now protected in the quiet possession of their legal territory. The useful arts
are gradually progressing among them. And their more necessary wants are
supplied from the public treasury.

Nor has our interior administration been less distinguished; on the one hand,
by mildness; by energy and firmness, on the other. Twice have combinations of
deluded citizens, instigated no doubt by the restless spirit of evil minded
foreigners, been found in arms, to oppose the operation of certain legislative
acts, which, through misrepresentation, had been conceived, by them, to be
oppressive. Twice have the daring factions been quelled, and the citizens
reclaimed to a sense of duty, by decisive measures, without the effusion of
blood. The chiefs of the treason, after being arraigned, convicted and
sentenced to merited punishment, have, in both instances, received again their
forfeited lives at the lenient hand of our executive.

Great as have been our national expenses; accumulated, as the demands upon our
treasury, in consequence of the defensive operations, which have been deemed
expedient; unequaled, as the depredations on our marine; yet so well conducted
have been our fiscal arrangements, that the resources of government have proved
fully adequate to every demand; while at the same time, we are happy to remark,
a gradual diminution of the public debt has been effected: and this indeed
without the aid of any unusual or oppressive taxes. Add to all that has been
said, that the liberal arts have been duly encouraged -- to the sciences, a
fostering influence, extended -- and the authors of useful inventions, amply
rewarded.

Such, my fellow citizens, is the government of your choice. Such are some of
the numerous blessings, which you derive from it. However imperfect the
outline, which we have endeavored to trace; how inferior soever to the great
original; do we not discover in it excellencies sufficient to draw forth our
profoundest veneration? to excite our warmest love? to lead us fervently to
supplicate the great Author of all civil society, that we may be allowed to
transmit it, as the noblest inheritance to posterity? and that it may be
preserved, in perfect purity, unadulterated by the leprous embrace of foreign
Cupidity -- unassayed by the cancerous tooth of domestic Disunion, coeval with
the most distant periods of time? To this end let us pursue the only means,
which can ensure to it stability or duration. Let us endeavor, all in our
power, to cement the bonds of federal union and concord. Let us add our firm
support to ever constitutional measure. Let us resist every dangerous
innovation. Let us withdraw every devotion -- every blind attachment to foreign
nations. Let us learn to think, act and speak as Americans only; as a people,
who are conscious of their independence. And while we conduct with strictest
justice toward all nations, let us, with heart and hand, oppose every
usurpation or unwarrantable influence, which may be grasped at by any. Let us
learn, from the examples, which are constantly exhibited to our view, to place
no confidence -- no reliance on their friendship, abstracted from their
interest, or their ambition. Finally, let us pursue with ever steadfast
perseverance, the measures, which, in great wisdom, have been adopted to
promote the extention and general diffusion of the arts, of science and of
virtue; assured, that an enlightened, a virtuous, can never be an enslaved,
people.

Then shall Peace with ever new, with ever radiant charms, continue to smile
around us. -- Our shores shall then be the abode of Happiness and Contentment.
The fig tree shall not then cease to blossom, nor fruit to be in the vine; the
labor of the olive shall not (...), nor the field withhold its increase; the
flocks shall not be cut off from the folds, nor the herds from the stalls. --
But the wolf and the lamb shall then feed together; our deserts shall become
fertile fields; our wildernesses, blossom as the rose; and, at no distant era,
our western horizon, be skirted with cities, wherein thousands and tens of
thousands, through a long succession of ages, shall rise up and pronounce our
government blessed.

NOTE 1
THE author is sensible of a slight deviation, in this place, from the strict
unity of time; as actual hostilities between the United States and the Indian
tribes did not commence till subsequent to the adoption of the federal
constitution. He conceives however that, in a discourse of this kind, the
accuracy of a historian, in recapitulating events, is hardly to be expected. He
hopes therefore for the indulgence of his critic brethren.

NOTE 2
IT has been objected to this paragraph; first that the case of the royalists
in France, was exactly parallel to that of the tories in this country;
wherefore, by censuring the one, we cast a censure on the other. Second that
the French clergy had become exceedingly corrupt; that they had imposed on the
credulity of the populace to an amazing degree; and that all the calamities,
which they have suffered in consequence of the revolution, are therefore but
the just reward of their iniquity. In reply to the first objection; though
there may be some degree of similarity in the two cases; yet the writer does
not conceive them to be perfectly parallel, because the principles of the two
revolutions were not so. Still, however, he would have suppressed the clause,
had not the subsequent transactions of the French revolutionists warranted a
faithful narration of all their excesses -- to the second; so far as the
objection respects the licentious part of the clergy it may be well sounded.
But when it is considered, that the all-devouring influence of the revolution
has, without distinction, involved in its career the virtuous with the vicious
-- and that instead of aiming to correct the abuses which had crept into the
church, the leaders of that revolution have endeavored to overturn the whole
system of Christian morality, and to open wide the flood gates of infidelity
and wickedness, much of its force, if not the whole objection, must, in the
opinion of the writer, evaporate.

NOTE 3
THE propriety of denominating the term federalist odious may not perhaps
immediately occur to every reader Considered in the sense in which it is now
used, as characteristic of that class of citizens, who are, from principle,
attached to the government and laws of their country, it would seem to merit a
more deserving epithet. But could we attain to a state of civil policy, so
perfectly free from dissension, as that all the members of the social body
should concur in sentiment -- that none should be found to cavil at this
measure, as impolitic; or that, as unconstitutional -- in short, that there
should be no party, because the whole were united; the introduction of any
term, which might excite an idea of an opposition of sentiment among the
citizens, an idea of one part, whose opinions and corresponding practice were
hostile to the rest, would be looked upon with equal odium; whether that term
were applicable to the adherents of one, or of the other, party: as thereby
that happy unanimity and coincidence of sentiment which had subsisted, would be
destroyed. The very mention of a party excites the idea of its opposite. If we
speak of a federalist, the idea of a jacobin, as opposed to him, is also
created.


