ORATION, PRONOUNCED AT SUFFIELD, ON SATURDAY, THE 22d OF FEB. A. D. 1800. THE
DAY RECOMMENDED BY CONGRESS, For the People to assemble, publicly to testify
their Grief, for the Death of GENERAL GEORGE WASHINGTON.

BY THE REV. EBENEZER GAY.

SUFFIELD, PRINTED BY EDWARD GRAY, 1800.

AN ORATION, etc. FEBRUARY 22, 1800.
MY FELLOW CITIZENS,
WE are now assembled to review the life and to lament the Death, of the first
of uninspired Men. We have often met to celebrate our national Independence. We
never before assembled to weep over the memory of the man, who under the
auspices of heaven established us an Independent Nation. The grateful tribute,
which America this day pays her Washington will not be forgotten. It will be
registered in the annals of our country for the instruction of mankind, and
remotest posterity will read with mournful pleasure and admiration our
expressions of gratitude and grief. As the death of this great man is a
national calamity, there is a propriety in our national conduct. And since this
day, sixty eight years, introduced him into life, this day is fitly chosen, for
the people to assemble in their respective cities and villages, as a nation to
recollect his virtues and bewail his death.

WHEN great and good men fall, in proportion to their greatness and goodness is
the public loss, and in the same proportion should be the public grief. If the
character of Washington may be estimated by the effusions of grief, which in
the moment of general feeling have been poured forth to his memory, he was
great and good. His memory shall live. It shall live, to stimulate others to
live like him, and as a tribute due to departed merit.

WHEN Moses died, the Children of Israel wept for him in the plains of moab
thirty days. With equal justice may the inhabitants of this land weep for their
beloved Washington. By his death every description of citizens is called to
mourning, and such as are skillful in lamentation to wailing. And while freedom
waves her banner over this happy land, all the singing men and singing women
will speak of him in their lamentations.

IF we search the pages of ancient or modern times, in what age or country
shall we find a character so universally beloved and respected? Such is the
reputation, which he acquired and preserved through life, that the man, who
attempts to wound his fame, brings dishonor upon himself. His eminent talents
were consecrated to the service of his country. His exalted virtues gave him
the first seat in the hearts of his Fellow Citizens. He lived and died the
ornament of human nature, his country's pride and boast.

Illustrious men have frequently risen up, who have been eminently useful in
their day. But they have generally exhibited to the world a versatility of
character. Not so the illustrious Washington. However diversified his lot, he
exhibited himself the same. In prosperity and adversity he has been uniformly
great and good. -- Men of talents, devoid of principle, instead of being
blessings to the world, generally prove scourges to mankind. The man, whose
memory we now honor, was endowed with uncommon talents, and possessed of
virtuous principles. These united have rendered him a rich blessing to his
country; and while talents and virtue are respected, he will command the
esteem, and stand forth the admiration of the world.

IN all the relations and characters, which he sustained, he merits attention.
Whether we view him in public or in private life, as a WARRIOR, a STATESMAN, or
a CITIZEN, we love and admire the man. The transactions of this day, my
friends, will rather diminish, than add to his Glory. For as the finest pencil
cannot paint like nature, so no portrait will be drawn of his character, which
will justly represent him. Too low or too high coloring will mar every picture.
The most striking resemblance will be the most beautiful.

BUT however deficient we may be in taking the portrait of our Washington, we
shall express our gratitude for his services, and our admiration of his
character. We shall exhibit a Phenomenon, new in the history of nations; a
republic, which knows how to appreciate and reward the services of her citizens.

THE highest happiness of Rome consisted in sending into exile the men, who had
rendered her the most signal services. Ingratitude has hitherto been
characteristic of republics. We shall rescue them from this reproach. It is
left to the eighteenth century, and to this western world, properly to respect
merit. America has never lost sight of the virtues, nor forgotten the good
deeds of her Washington. And she will this day review his life with as much
pleasure, as the traveller repeats the story of his travels, the seaman his
adventures, and the warrior the battles he has won.

GEORGE WASHINGTON was the 3'd son of Mr. AUGUSTINE WASHINGTON, a wealthy
farmer of distinguished reputation in Virginia. His ancestors came from England
about the year 1657. He was the first fruit of a second marriage, and at the
commencement of our Revolution had living three Brothers, and one sister. Under
a private tutor he was taught the rudiments of the Latin language, English
Grammar, and the elements of the Mathematics. At the age of ten years he buried
his Father. The morning of his days however did not pass inactive, nor was it
spent in vanity and vice. While a pure mountain air and the healthy occupations
of rural life favored the production of a large and well proportioned body,
his application to useful studies tended to the formation of a correct and
solid mind. Having laid the foundation of his eminence in its proper season, he
entered the theater of life, peculiarly well calculated to act the noble part,
which we have seen him exhibit. No man ever walked the stage to better
advantage, or left it with greater applause.

WITH what satisfaction may we take a view of him in the character of a
CITIZEN? Virtuous simplicity adorned his private life. In his family seat at
Mount Vernon, we behold him exhibiting to his fellow citizens an example worthy
of Imitation. He was the greatest farmer of which his Country did boast. In
1776 his landed property was estimated at "more than a hundred and sixty
thousand pounds sterling." He raised in one year seven thousand bushels of
wheat, and ten thousand of Indian Corn. The year following he raised two
hundred lambs, sowed twenty seven bushels of flax seed, and planted more than
seven hundred bushels of potatoes. He had manufactured under his own eye, by
his domestics, linen and woollen cloth sufficient for his household, which
confused of nearly a thousand souls. The strictest economy and most exemplary
method were established in all his departments. Reports were weekly received by
him from his overseers, and correctly registered in his agricultural books: and
at the end of every year, he was able accurately to determine the labor and
produce of his farm. Husbandry was his delight, and as he cultivated his farm
with pleasure, so with equal pleasure he contributed more than any Farmer in
America to the support of that Government, which confirmed him in the
possession, and secured to him the profits of his farm. The blessings of good
Government he knew how to appreciate, and while he gloried in American Freedom,
he yielded, as a subject, implicit obedience to his country's laws.

IN domestic and social life, he was a kind husband, a gentle master, an
unfailing friend, and a bountiful benefactor. When the ear heard him it blessed
him, and when the eye saw him, it gave witness to him; for he delivered the
poor that cried, and the fatherless, and him that had none to help him. In his
intercourse with his fellow men, the strictest honor and integrity were stamped
upon his conduct, and punctuality marked all his engagements. Kind and generous
in his disposition, the blessings of many ready to perish came upon him, and he
caused the widows heart to sing for joy.

REGULARITY, temperance and industry were habits in which he lived. He
generally rose at the dawn of day and his usual hour for retirement was nine in
the evening. Every hour had assigned to it its proper employment: and to his
own and his country's honor be it spoken, in these assignments religion had its
place. Amidst the multiplicity of his concerns he remembered God. This is the
brightest part of this great man's Character. Feeling his entire dependence, he
daily, at stated seasons, paid his acknowledgements to his maker and sought his
blessing. With what pleasure do we behold him expressing the morality of the
gospel in his life, and ascribing, in his public, writings, the meliorated
condition of mankind, and the increased blessings of society, to the PURE and
benign light of REVELATION? With what pleasure do we behold him, offering up
earnest prayer to God, that he would dispose us all, to exhibit in our lives
those virtues, which were the characteristics of the DIVINE AUTHOR of our
BLESSED RELIGION; without an humble imitation of whose example, in this
respect, we can never hope to be a happy nation? He was punctual and devout in
his attendance upon the instituted worship of Christ. He honored Gods Sabbaths:
and may we not charitably hope, that God gave him in his house and within his
walls, a place and a name, better than of sons and of daughters?

LET us now turn and view him in PUBLIC LIFE. Here he presen^s himself to us in
two important characters, that of a warr^^r and a statesman. In the Cabinet and
in the Field he has none with distinguished luster, and we may contemplate hi^
in both with peculiar pleasure.

His talents as a CIVILIAN did not pass unnoticed by his na^^ve state. From the
year 1759, when he resigned his commission, as Commander in chief of all the
Virginia forces, which had been raised, to repel the French, who were
endeavoring to subjugate these colonies, and annex them to the Crown of
France, he was constantly a member of assembly, till the year '74; when he was
called to take a more conspicuous part in the politics of his country. He was
a magistrate of the county in which he lived, and a judge of the court; and in
this capacity discharged his duty with singular applause. Clothed with
righteousness, he was eyes to the blind, and feet to the lame, and the cause,
which he knew not, he searched out. When the rapacious hand of Britain was
grasping at the liberties of America, he was honored by his fellow citizens
with a seat in the first and second Congress, which assembled to consult the
interests of the nation.

SINCE the establishment of our Independence, we have seen him acting a very
interesting and dignified part. We have seen him in our public councils like
the stately cedar in the forest. He was President of that Convention, which in
the summer of '87, in Philadelphia, framed that excellent Constitution of
Government, which is the Bulwark of American liberty. When, according to the
Constitution, a man was sought for, to sit at helm and execute the laws, by the
united voice of his country he was called to this important station. On the
30th of April '89, in the City of New York, amidst the acclamations of
thousands, he was inaugurated President of the United States. At this time he
was clothed in a suit of American Manufacture.
Twice was he thus publicly invested with the highest Office, which a grateful
people could bestow. With what honor to himself and advantage to his country he
discharged the duties of this elevated action, let the blessing of millions
testify, which followed him from the chair of state to the peaceful retreats of
private life. Through two successive periods of the presidency, while great
convulsions were agitating the nations with whom we stood connected, with what
wisdom did he steer our national bark upon the tempestuous sea of Liberty?
Haughty Briton preyed upon our Commerce. The British Order for bringing in
neutrals was issued June 8 th, 1793. France had issued a similar Order on the 9
th of the preceding month, in consequence of which the vessels of the United
States were captured, and their cargoes disposed of in the ports of France.
Crafty When G^net, the first minister from the Republic, arrived in America,
he declared in his public addresses, that France did not wish us to engage in
the War. Upon being recalled, he published his Instructions, in which he was
directed to bring us in at all adventures.
France attempted to exercise the rights of sovereignty Genet landed at
Charleston, and before he reached Philadelphia and could possibly be
acknowledged as a Minister, he began to exercise the rights of sovereignty.
After his reception, he continued to exercise these rights, though expressly
prohibited, by the President. All this was done, at a moment, when the greatest
part of Europe was leagued against France, and America was the only power
acknowledging the Republic.
and prostrate our Independence. Jarring ^^ntiments disturbed our public
councils and the tranquillity of our citizens: superior to them all, we see him
acting with a decision peculiar to himself, and having assumed a neutr^l
station, resolved to maintain it. Unawed by fear, uninfluenced by party, like a
rock in the midst of the sea against which the waves dash in vain, he resolved
that we should be respected as an Independent nation, and that no act of his
should involve us in those calamities under which Europe groaned. Successful in
his measures, and grown old in his country's service, with a glory equal to his
years, he nobly retired from the boundless field of public action, incessant
trouble and high responsibility, and cheerfully assumed the Citizen.

LET us now turn and contemplate this great man in the character of a WARRIOR.
In the morning of life he exhibited proofs of his military Genius. "At the age
of 15 he was entered a midshipman on board a British ship of war, and had his
baggage prepared for embarkation": but in compliance with his mother's wishes,
who expressed a "reluctance at his engaging in that profession," he
relinquished the plan. Before he reached the age of 21 he was honored with the
rank of major in the military department. In 53 we find him engaged in an
important and perilous embassy to the French and Indians, who were making
encroachments upon our western frontiers. Behold the illustrious Washington, at
the age of 21, pressing through the wilderness on foot, with his provisions on
his back, to remonstrate with the French commander, and treat with the hostile
Tribes. Behold him with patriotic ardor entering upon this important service,
in an uncommonly severe season, accompanied with few attendants! Ramsay, the
Historian, says, but one.

THE next year, we find him with a Colonel's Commission at the head of 300 men,
going forth with dauntless courage to oppose these invaders of his country.
Learning from a prisoner, that the enemy were 1500 strong, he encamped with his
little army, now increased to about 400 effective men, at a place called the
Great Meadows. Here he threw up some temporary works, which from his peculiar
situation he named Fort Necessity. While he here waited, expecting
reinforcements, he was attacked by nearly four times his number of French and
Indians. In this desperate situation, after a brave resistance, worthy of
himself, he nobly capitulated, and marched out at the head of his troops with
the honors of war.

THE year following, GENERAL BRADDOCK came over with two veteran Regiments to
the assistance of the colonies. But such was the arrangement of rank that "no
officer who did not immediately derive his commission from the KING, could
command one who did." Colonel WASHINGTON therefore resigned his commission, and
as a volunteer and extra aid de camp, joined the General. In marching for fort
du quesne, they were unexpectedly met by the enemy. A hard fought and bloody
battle ensued, which terminated in the total defeat of Braddock's army. Colonel
WASHINGTON nobly distinguished himself on this trying occasion. By his valor
many were rescued from slaughter on that calamitous day. He was the only
officer, whose duty obliged him to be on horseback during the battle who was
not either killed or wounded. Providence seemed to reserve him to save from
utter destruction the wreck of a defeated army. With his brave provincials he
covered the confused retreat, and hastened to concert measures for their future
safety. Notwithstanding the fatigues of the preceding day, we behold him with
two guides traveling the dreary wilderness, in the darksome night, and so
exausted in the morning, as to be under the necessity of being supported with
cushions on his horse! Noble youth! how did the love of country inflame thy
breast? President Davies, in a sermon preached to a military company in the
year '55, points him out to the public, as one, whom Providence had hitherto
preserved, in the most signal manner, for some important service to his country.

The government of Virginia, sensible of his merits, in a new commission,
placed him at the head of all the troops raised, and to be raised in that
colony. This commission he held with singular credit, till the French and
Indians were entirely vanquished, and tranquillity was restored.

IN '59 he exchanged the soldier for the citizen, married the widow Martha
Curtis, and settled as a farmer at Mount Vernon. Here he cultivated the arts of
peace, till the year '75, when by the unanimous vote of Congress, of whom he
was himself a member, he was placed at the head of the armies of the United
States.

WE come now to an interesting period in the life of this great man. His
actions from that day forward are familiar to our minds. We no longer
contemplate him, as directing the forces of an individual state; but as heading
the armies of 13 states in union; and founding an empire, which will rise and
rise, till it shall far exceed the most celebrated empires of ancient date.

LET us cast ourselves back to the commencement of the American Revolution.
With what feelings will a recollection of the hopes and fears of that anxious
day inspire our minds? Happy in the inheritance left us by our fathers, we
hoped still to enjoy it; and to transmit it unimpaired to posterity. The
projects of Great Britain alarmed our fears. We saw this haughty nation, whom
we had been taught to look up to, as to a parent, envying us the happiness of
free born sons, and grasping at our liberties. On the one hand, to depress our
spirits, the power of Britain was great. On the other, to excite our hopes and
stimulate our exertions, the prize for which we were to contend was greater.

WE were sensible, that we were in possession of a goodly land, where we might
eat in safety the increase of the field, and suck honey out of the rock, and
oil out of the flinty rock. We considered, that it was the gift of Heaven to
our fathers, who fled from persecution in their native land. We called to mind
the dangers, which they braved: how they gat their bread by the peril of their
lives because of the sword of the wilderness. We remembered how God was with
them: how he protected them as the apple of his eye, and bore them as on eagles
wings. We encouraged ourselves, that the God of our fathers would be our God;
and relying upon his aid, we resolved to live and die like Freemen, in the full
possession of our rights.

STILL, fears were in the way. From one end of the continent to the other, the
cry was made: There is no king in us and our counselor is perished. The GOD of
our pious fathers heard the cry, and presented himself as our king. We paid him
homage. He raised us up counselors.

Our hearts were soon pained within us at the sound of the trumpet and the
alarm of war. He raised us up warriors. He raised up WASHINGTON to head our
armies, and lead us on to Victory and Independence. To the astonishment of the
world, the earth brought forth at once, and a nation was born in a day!

TIME will not permit us to recapitulate the various incidents of the
revolution in which the illustrious WASHINGTON appeared so glorious. Clouds and
darkness many times rested upon our prospects; but in the most gloomy season,
this great man retained the affection and confidence of his fellow soldiers and
fellow citizens. In the darkest hour, when hearts of oak were ready to yield,
he remained firm and undaunted, and never lost sight of the pillar of cloud,
and the pillar of fire.

BEHOLD him in the Jerseys, with his little army, hunted up and down like a
Patridge upon the mountains. Who but WASHINGTON could have inspired his feeble
band with courage, fleeing before a victorious enemy, and inscribing upon the
frozen ground, with their naked feet, their attachment to their General, in
letters of blood?

BUT perhaps in no instance during the revolutionary war, does this great man
appear so great, as in the closing scene. A victorious army was about to be
disbanded. The exhausted resources of the country rendered it impossible to
give them present compensation for their services. By the artful insinuations
of an anonymous writer the minds of Officers and Soldiers were inflamed, and
they were just ready to turn their swords upon that very country, which they
had so gloriously defended. The illustrious WASHINGTON stepped forth. He
conjured them by the rights of humanity, by the honor of soldiers, by the
patriotism of citizens, not to open the flood gates of civil discord, and
deluge their rising empire with blood.

HIS unbounded influence, over an army, which had participated in his toils and
dangers, and been witnesses of his wisdom and valor, rendered him victorious.
The tumult subsided. They unanimously resolved, that no circumstances of
distress or danger, should induce a conduct, that might tend to fully the
reputation and glory they had acquired.

WITH what splendour does the, the noble WASHINGTON appear in this transaction?
Why did he not, by a single word, blow up into a blaze the seditious spark, and
like Octavianus inspire his soldiers to demand the consulate for their General?
Why did he not, like the conqueror of Italy and Egypt, with the unmeaning
expressions of Liberty and Equality in his mouth, seize upon the administration
of his country; and because he could swear by no greater, swear in his own name
See B^onaparte's speech, at the Bar of the Elders, Nov. 9th 1799, when he had
forcibl^ over turned the Constitution of his Country.
and in the name of his comrades in arms, that he would maintain a republic,
upon the basis of rational liberty and equal rights? Deeds, like these, how
hateful to the pure and elevated mind of WASHINGTON! With a dignity peculiar to
himself, he surrendered into the hands of Congress, the appointment, which he
"accepted with diffidence"; and with heartfelt satisfaction, the blessing of
millions attending him, retired from the service of his country, hoping never
to embark again on the "tempestuous and uncertain ocean of public life."

THE wishes of his fellow citizens corresponded with his own, that he might
never again be called to assume the character of a soldier. But how vain are
mortal wishes? His country once more demands his aid, as commander of her
forces. He obeys the summons.

HIS obedience could not result from motives of private interest: for with a
noble generosity, such as he had been accustomed When appointed to command the
American forces in 1775; and when he accepted the Presidency of the United
States, he expressly declared receiving any pe^uniary compensation for his
services.
to exercise, he expressly declined receiving any emolument annexed to the
appointment. It could not result from a desire of aggrandizing himself and
family, by the destruction of our republic, and the establishment of a monarchy
upon its ruins: for he knew that his lamp was nearly expended, that a crown
would tarnish his glory, and that he had neither child nor brother. It must
therefore have resulted from that patriotism, which ever fired his breast, and
from a conviction of the necessity of the measures adopted by administration.
This conviction is completely stamped upon his letter of acceptance. Writing to
the President he says: Satisfied, that you have sincerely wished and endeavored
to avert war, and exhausted to the last drop the cup of reconciliation, we can
with pure hearts appeal to Heaven for the justice of our cause; and may
confidently trust the final result to that kind Providence, who has heretofore,
and so often, signally favored the people of these U. States. Thinking in this
manner, and feeling how incumbent it is upon every person to contribute at all
times to his country's welfare, and especially in a moment like the present,
when every thing we hold dear and sacred is so seriously threatened, I have
finally determined to accept the commission of Commander in chief of the Armies
of the United States. I take the liberty to mention, that I must decline having
my acceptance considered, as drawing after it any immediate charge upon the
public; or that I can receive any emoluments annexed to the appointment, before
entering into a situation to incur expense.

WITH what a glowing pencil does our beloved WASHINGTON here paint the
sentiments and feelings of his heart? And how many patriotic breasts has this
painting inspired with similar sentiments and feelings?

What pity is it, that such friends to the world, such protectors of the rights
of men, should ever die? But what man is he that lives and shall not see
death? This great man has fallen! His luster as a CITIZEN, his eminence as a
STATESMAN, his celebrity as a WARRIOR, were props too feeble to support him.
His coat of mail, which had shielded him, for such a length of time, from the
greatest dangers, was no security. He fell in all his military trappings, and
with all his martial honors upon him. While Capt. of the American host, and in
full possession of himself, at the first summons, he resigned his commission
into the hands of death. How great is that power, to which so great a General,
so readily submits!

WE shall retire to our dwellings impressed with the vanity of all earthly
greatness. God has taken from us the judge and the prudent, the ancient and the
honorable, the mighty Man, and the Man of War. How humbling to our pride is the
consideration, that no circumstances or degree of greatness, are of any avail
when the King of Terrors advances? The greatest general must die like men, and
fall like one of the Peasants.

WE shall retire to our dwellings, filled with Grief, that so much greatness
and goodness must submit to death. What gloom overspreads the mind, when we
contemplate in dust, the illustrious citizen, who with patriotic fervor
espoused the cause of mankind, emancipated his country from impending bondage,
and secured the happiness of millions?

WE shall retire to our dwellings, inspired with sentiments of gratitude to
God, for raising up and continuing to us so long, a man so extensively great
and good. God is never in want of instruments to accomplish the important
purposes of his providence. When the time drew near, in which this land was to
be planted with civilized men, he raised up Columbus, and endowed him with a
spirit of enterprise, adequate to the important discoveries, which he made.
When the days were accomplished, and we must emerge from under tutors and
governors, and assume a station among the nations of the earth, he raised up
and sent us Washington, furnished in a peculiar manner for the part assigned
him in this grand event. He, who raised him up, has chosen the best time for
his removal. America has never seen the day, when she could have spared him so
well. Age might have diminished, but nothing could have increased the glory of
his Character. He had completed his work, and it was just, that he should
receive his wages. He has gloriously retired in his full strength; and neither
time nor mortals have it in their power to obscure his brightness. The unerring
judge of men will weigh all his great actions in an even balance, and
distinguish him with suitable rewards.

THERE is a wonderful coincidence of character, between the LEADERS of God's
ancient and his American Israel. They were both peculiarly watched over and
instructed in the days of youth. They were both Presidents in council and
Generals in the Field. They both delivered their Brethren from bondage, and
established them in Freedom and Independence. They both brought their
respective nations in sight of a permanent seat for their public councils. A
few steps more, and the israelitish nation would have pitched their Government
in Canaan. A few steps more, and the American nation would have pitched their
Government in the City of Washington. MOSES longed for the completion of his
peoples travels, and to go with them, and see them in full, possession of the
good land, which was beyond Jordan, that goodly mountain and Lebanon.
WASHINGTON longed for the completion of his people's foreign and domestic
trials, and to go with them, and see their Government permanently seated in
that goodly city, which is called by his own name. Both were denied the sight.
And to complete the picture, both (...), (...) a few hours warning, when their
eyes were not dim, nor their natural force abated.

THE Jews wept for Moses: and we this day weep for Washington. Go with me to
Mount Vernon, and behold him great even in death. With what nobleness of mind
does he receive the summons to submit to the King of terrors, and resign his
body a prisoner to the grave? Behold this unequalled man, closing his mouth and
eyes, with his own hands, and expiring without a sigh, or a groan!!!

YET Vernon Vernon is here used simply for the domestics of the General, or the
inhabitants of the village -- as we say; the whole city is in confusion.
sighed and when the tidings spread,
Through this vast Empire, WASHINGTON is dead!
The nation groaned, the Sons of Freedom wept:
Columbia's Daughters mourned: the WARRIOR slept.
BEHOLD an affectionate people assembled in crowds, to testify their esteem and
bear his body to the burial. The mansion of joy was now the seat of sorrow. He
who once enlivened the scene, and brightened every object, was no longer to be
found. Where is he, who once welcomed the stranger to his hall? Where is the
good man, who opened his door to the traveller? They looked for him in vain.
The noble frame which he once animated was found; but in mournful ruins! They
viewed it. They wept! Blame them not. Hearts of marble would have wept! Had you
been present your hearts would have melted within you. They viewed it, and wept
again, and weeping conveyed it to the tomb!

LET us this day ascribe righteousness to our MARER, and reverence that Being,
who lives and reigns, while great and good men die, and the fashion of this
world is passing. HE should be the object of our hope and trust. To him we
commend our afflicted nation. When a WASHINGTON fails from among us, to him
will we direct our eyes, to raise up other WASHINGTONS, who shall be the
chariots and horsemen of our land.

LET us all stand admonished, and prepare for that war in which there is no
discharge. The King of Terrors is advancing. When the greatest general falls,
how can the feeble soldier stand? Christ Jesus is our strength: the captain of
our salvation. He only can make us conquerors. He alone can put into our mouths
that triumphant song: "O death where is thy sting? O grave, where is thy
victory."

FINIS.

