AN ORATION, PRONOUNCED July 4, 1800, AT THE REQUEST OF THE INHABITANTS OF THE
TOWN OF BOSTON, IN COMMEMORATION OF THE ANNIVERSARY OF American Independence.

BY JOSEPH HALL.

Boston. FROM THE PRINTING-OFFICE OF MANNING and LORING, SPRINGLANE.

Vote of the Town.
AT a Meeting of the Freeholders and other Inhabitants of the Town of Boston,
duly qualified and legally warned in public Town-Meeting, assembled at
Faneuil-Hall, the 4th day of July, A. D. 1800:

On motion, Voted, That the Selectmen be, and hereby are appointed a Committee
to wait on JOSEPH HALL, Esquire. in the name of the town, and thank him for the
elegant and spirited ORATION, this day delivered by him, at the request of the
Town, upon the Anniversary of the Independence of the United States of America,
in which, according to the institution of the Town, he considered the feelings,
manners, and principles, which led to that great National Event -- and to
request of him a copy for the press.

Attest. WILLIAM COOPER, Town Clerk.

BOSTON, July 4, 1800. GENTLEMEN,
THE political sentiments by me expressed this day, as they were dictated by
serious conviction, are freely submitted to your disposal.

With great respect, I am, Gentlemen, Your most obedient Servant, JOSEPH HALL.
The Selectmen of Boston.



ORATION.
DISTINGUISHED for loyalty, industry, and for manners which adorn and support
the purest state of civilized society, animated with the feelings of men
accustomed to the sweets of freedom, you were impelled, Americans, from
principles of justice to yourselves and your posterity to resist the
encroachments of British policy.

ATTACHMENT to constitutional rights, not a rage for innovation, stable not
revolutionary principles dictated your resistance. In vain did you entreat,
petition and remonstrate. You were compelled to arm. Friendless and unaided you
entered the field against the veteran troops of a mighty nation supported by
veteran auxiliaries. When thus engaged in the arduous conflict and thus
unfriended, in presence of the Great Arbiter of nations, you solemnly
pronounced your claim to Independence. You firmly resolved at every hazard to
support it. This great effort the hostile measures of Britain imposed upon you.
This gloriously successful effort has been called a revolution; and the war on
your part a revolutionary war, though by you undertaken and supported upon
anti-revolutionary principles.

IN this all important contest, the Court of Versailles were not prevailed upon
to assist you until a powerful and well appointed army, commanded by an
experienced and favorite general, were vanquished and made captive by the
native valor of freeborn Americans. Encouraged by this event, France ardently
embraced the long wished for opportunity of humbling a formidable rival. With
you, she entered into a defensive treaty. She furnished you succors by land
and by sea. Her deranged treasury was exhausted by her naval and military
exertions. At your solicitation, she supplied you with money though almost
destitute of it herself. The favors and assistance you received from her were
seasonable and important. They served to bring the contest to a more speedy
issue, and probably lessened the expense of your own blood and treasure. The
nature of our obligations to France for her assistance and those arising from
our defensive treaty, may be ascertained by a very notable precedent.

FROM motives similar to those which prompted her aid in our war with Britain,
she assisted the Seven United Provinces to throw off the Spanish yoke. After a
truce of twelve years between Spain and the Provinces, Cardinal de Richlieu
with true diplomatic skill persuaded the latter to enter into a treaty for the
conquest and partition of the Spanish Low Countries. Open and unsuspecting
republicans, their animosity against Spain made them at first blind to the
insidious designs of the French Court. They were at length roused to a sense of
their real danger. The dictates of self preservation compelled them to withhold
from France the supplies stipulated by treaty. Interest and duty obliged them
in the face of this treaty to make a separate peace with Spain. The
commissioners who concluded this peace and the Dutch patriots who advised and
supported it, were charged by the French minister with being bribed and
corrupted by Spanish gold. A celebrated author who has written expressly upon
the subject censures the French government and justifies the conduct of the
United Provinces. In their behalf he dictates a remonstrance to France of the
following tenor. Des principes des negociations par M. l'Abbe de Mably. -- Page
135.
"We shook off the Spanish yoke in order that we might be free. In this object
you assisted us, on account of its tendency to humble an ambitious enemy who
had long disturbed the repose of your provinces, and who had frequently invaded
them. As your favors to us in the assistance thus afforded were of a political
nature, have the justice to require of us only a return in kind. Be satisfied
with a political gratitude. If it gives you offense because we prefer the
neighborhood of the half conquered Spaniards to that of a nation rendered
formidable by their contempt of danger and by their very services in our
favor, you will then be to us what the Spaniards were heretofore. It will
become our duty to hate you."

AN apology may be expected for this dull detail of facts and dry exposition of
principles. But facts and principles tending to elucidate national rights and
duties, ought to be received with the force of novelty, and to make a deeper
impression because sanctioned by experience. The peculiar applicability of the
subject to our own times recommends it to our particular attention.

IN support of the neutral policy adopted by the immortal WASHINGTON, and
pursued by his able patriotic Successor, in refutation of pretended treaty
obligations, and of idle claims of gratitude to France, we have here the
written, deliberate opinion of a political writer of the first eminence. This
writer was a Frenchman.

IF, however, reasoning from the nature of things we should not remove that
skepticism in relation to the sinister views of France, which has been so
frequently manifested since the revolution in that country; if some should yet
maintain the generosity of the motives to our alliance which actuated the
magnanimous French monarch, still the proceedings in the Congress at Paris are
sufficient to open the eyes of blindness and prejudice itself. Pursuant to the
policy of Turgot, as displayed in the secret memoirs Les politiques de tous les
cabinets de l'Europe. Tome II. fol. 395, etc.
of the French cabinet, Vergennes not only recommended the relinquishment of
our fisheries, the nursery of our seamen; he even advised us to treat with
Great Britain without an express recognition of our Independence. To the
disgrace of our annals, our Commissioners were then enjoined by public
authority to consult the French minister, and to be governed by his counsel.
The firm and enlightened ADAMS and JAY revolted at the idea. And though assured
by Vergennes, that Britain would never cede either of the two points, and
though (to use a mild phraseology) meanly deserted by one of their colleagues,
our Commissioners succeeded to accomplish the treaty of 1783.

UPON the attainment of peace, those of our countrymen, who with valor and
success had fought the battles of freedom, retired from the tented field to the
bosom of their friends and families, unremunerated but by the proud
consciousness of having deserved well of their country. Their modest Chief,
accompanied by the grateful admiration of his countrymen, withdrew to the mild
retreats of Mount Vernon. Of Timoleon and Paulus Emilius it is recorded, that
they were so famous, equally for their virtues and success, as to leave it
doubtful whether their great achievements were due to fortune, or to their own
prudence and conduct. The character, the services, the virtues of WASHINGTON,
are indelibly impressed upon the bleeding hearts of his surviving
fellow-citizens. In the attempt to portray them, the pencil of genius itself
has despaired of doing him justice.

THE feebleness and inefficiency of the confederated system, by which our
national affairs were conducted during the war, were unfolded in all their
impotence at the return of peace. Making due allowances for the burdens and
expenses of an eight years war prosecuted too in a manner derogatory to the
national character of our enemy, did plenty, did the encouragement of useful
industry and commerce bear any proportion to the resources of our country?
Instead of general regulations to embrace these important objects, each State
was governed by a narrow, selfish policy; and under pretense of supporting her
own trade and manufactures, carried on a commercial warfare with her sister
States. In pursuit of this policy, some men of talents and distinction were so
conspicuously active, as to acquire a degree of popularity, and an influence
over their fellow-citizens, which a subsequent unrelenting opposition to our
present national system has not yet wholly dispossessed them of.

HAD Congress been vested with adequate powers during the war, many serious
inconveniences, experienced at its termination, would have been prevented. Our
meritorious army would have received seasonable compensation. A more just
apportionment of the burdens and expenses of the past eight years would have
taken place between the States and amongst individuals.

THE humiliation we were exposed to, for years after peace, must have gratified
those proud monarchs, who falsely viewed our contest as the conflict of
Republicanism with Monarchy -- Falsely viewed, because our object was to
preserve and to perpetuate rights and immunities to which we had a
constitutional claim, confirmed by prescription. We never entertained the mad
project of revolutionizing the world. Fortunately for ourselves and for our
posterity, we were unlettered in the mazy lore of modern philosophy. The belief
of a Supreme Being, the practice of religious and moral duties, we never viewed
as uncongenial with the nature of our civil and political institutions. Nor
were we such fanatics in philosophy to court hostility with a nation for a
difference of creed in religion or politics. Other nations might be governed by
one or more despots, by a Consul or Directory. To us they were unimportant. If
they interfered not with our rights, it was our duty and our policy not to
intermeddle with their affairs.

FROM a very natural digression, which none but wild enthusiasts will frown at,
I proceed to consider the estimation in which we were holden by European
nations, when so much sunken in our own. Our foreign trade depended upon
curtesy and the momentary caprice of a minister. Louis XVI. conducted in this
respect with honorable though not disinterested liberality. His policy toward
us was more beneficial than all the friendship and protestations of his
unprincipled, short-lived successors. Hitherto their friendly proffers have
been uniformly accompanied with every species of hostility.

THE continued though ineffectual efforts of our first Envoy to the Court of
St. James to effect a commercial treaty with Great Britain, prove how lightly
she esteemed us. In plain language we were told, "you have not a national
government capable of enforcing on your part the observance of a treaty." Our
separation from her doubtless mortified her pride. Our disunion and jealousies
gratified it. Nor ought we to be surprised if, at this period, she anticipated
a reunion. Here, my fellow-citizens, let us pause to reflect upon the perils
of our political situation at this anxious crisis. We were distracted by
jealousies and disunion. Public credit was destroyed. Every effort to revive it
was fruitless. Opposition to its revival, if made by talents, was a sure road
to popular favor. The public creditor was beggared by public default. Foreign
creditors were pressing, without effect, for the payment of loans made when our
all was at stake. This is but a faint sketch of the humiliating picture. We
were apparently doomed to all the horrors of anarchy, to become a prey to each
other, to become the vile dupes of foreign influence and intrigue.

THIS sad destiny, the Tutelary Genius of America has hitherto averted. By her
genial influence, a form of government was by the voice of the people adopted
and established, upon "a consolidation of the union of the States." Upon its
adoption depended "the prosperity, felicity, safety, perhaps national
existence, of the American people." The Constitution, thus adopted, evidenced
their virtue and good sense, as it resulted "from a spirit of amity, and of
that mutual deference and concession, which the peculiarity of our political
situation rendered indispensible." This Constitution thus approved of and
adopted by the people of all the States, explicitly vested in the General
Government all the attributes of National Sovereignty. It as expressly divested
the State Governments of each and every of those attributes, and particularly
prohibited their exercise of any act of National Jurisdiction. Thus was a
radical cure provided for the many evils and disorders then experienced; and
thus a preventive was furnished against the more serious ills with which we had
been menaced.

A POLICY so liberal, so enlightened, so calculated to diminish the influence
of men whose popularity and title to public confidence had for their basis
specious professions rather than sound political principles, popular appeals
rather than public services, was sure to meet with their disapprobation. The
sentiments of the people evidenced in favor of the Constitution at the time it
was adopted, stifled for a moment the spirit of opposition, and compelled some
of its opponents to give their voices in its favor. But I appeal to your sober
recollection, and to your present serious conviction, whether that spirit has
not burst forth with virulence against every important constitutional act of
our national government.

WITH an affectation of regard for the officers and soldiers of our highly
deserving "patriot army," these champions of State sovereignty inveighed with
bitterness against the sunding system, and urged the impracticable scheme of
discrimination.

WHEN neutrality was enjoined by proclamation, they censured the measure as
inconsistent with our treaty obligations, and as the highest pitch of
ingratitude to France, then in their view the great model of Republicanism.

WHEN in perfect consistency with our interest, with our dignity, and with good
policy, an Envoy was dispatched to Great Britain to demand reparation for her
aggressions, they represented it as unmanly and dishonorable. Of every thing
calculated to provoke hostility they were the ready advocates. In the true
spirit of gasconade, they attempted to bully Great Britain with commercial
resolutions. They constantly opposed every measure of defense, or of military
preparation, tending to enforce the claims of our Envoy, or to express our own
sensibility.

WHEN that instrument "pregnant with so much evil," the British treaty, was
ratified by the Senate, and so honorably disclosed to the public by an
honorable Senator, they made every exertion to mislead the minds of the people
upon the subject. A little modesty and reflection upon this occasion would have
dictated on their part a different line of conduct. In proportion as the treaty
was unfavourable to the American interests, they should have considered
themselves responsible for its defects. In proportion as a clamorous opposition
prevails in our free government, we shall necessarily lose our influence when
treating with any foreign nation. With deep regret I utter it, the affiliated
societies of Genet were almost an overmatch for our constituted authorities,
when Mr. JAY's nomination took place. Such mistaken principles then actuated
many of our citizens, that had our territory, like that of the then free and
happy cantons of Switzerland, been contiguous to France, we should have shared
their since wretched, remediless fate.

THE French government were soon advised of the strength of the treaty
opposition. Happily for our country, they mistook the ebullitions of the moment
for an invincible attachment to their disorganizing principles. In order to
countenance the phalanx on whose support they depended, and to fulfill the
predictions of some of our unworthy citizens, they commenced a predatory war
upon our commerce. They insultingly told us, the motives of their conduct were
to teach us respect for our neutral rights. They censured our administration in
every particular that had been urged by their supposed partisans.

THESE insults and outrages began to produce their natural effect upon an
intelligent, high-spirited people. Our overweening attachment began to be
superseded by manly resentment. This salutary effect was checked, and the cause
of Jacobinism was promoted in our country by a nation, whose blood and treasure
had been profusely expended to prevent its deleterious influence in Europe. The
unwarrantable capture and condemnation of our vessels in the British
West Indies justly exasperated Americans. This fresh aggression was disavowed
by the British cabinet, and imputed to the mistakes and errors of subordinate
officers. Changing the source of the aggression neither diminished the
responsibility of the British government, restored our property, nor softened
our just resentment at the moment. But French depredations continuing, our
minister to France not only unaccredited, but treated with a petulance
unbecoming the dignity of any government, three Envoys were appointed with full
powers to adjust all matters of difference. The contumelious manner in which
they were treated, the insidious attempts to persuade them to sacrifice the
dignity and interests of the United States, the public anxiety occasioned by
the long delay and extra-official intercourse of one of those Envoys, are
recent in your recollection. The indignation then kindled in every true
American bosom ought not to cease to operate, until a real spirit of amity on
the part of France shall in some measure atone for her past outrages.

AFTER her repeated rejection of the Olive Branch, after experiencing from her
new and aggravated hostilities, our government resolved upon the protection of
our commerce. Our trading vessels were suffered to arm. Public ships of force
were equipped and commissioned to convoy our trade, and to capture the French
vessels that annoyed it. The beneficial consequences that have resulted from
these indispensible, though expensive measures, have been felt and recognized
throughout the whole American nation. Millions have been saved by them from
French rapacity; and the labors of the mechanic, the tradesman, the husbandman
and the merchant, been essentially promoted. Yet these important measures, so
promotive of our solid interests, were opposed violently by some of our
citizens. If they were actuated by mistaken, not perverse principles, we ought
to forgive them. But, until the desolating war, which convulses Europe to its
center, be terminated, we ought not to forget them; much less ought we to
testify our gratitude for their patriotic services by electing them our
Governors or Legislators.

WHEN we consider the difficulty of forming a Constitution of government for
five millions of freemen, scattered over an immense territory, of different
habits, accustomed to different laws and usages, of strong local prejudices,
naturally jealous of the governors even of their own choice, we could not
rationally expect our national government to be administered without opposition.

WHEN we reflect that it scarcely began to operate before the fascinating
jargon of modern French principles were propagated throughout our country, we
are struck with admiration of the virtues and intelligence of our countrymen.

WHEN we review the wanton provocations to hostility which we have received, as
well from Great Britain as from France, though not in equal degree, we feel a
pride, as Americans, in the prudence, moderation, wisdom and sound policy of
our National Administration.

WHEN we contemplate the consequences which have resulted from our
Independence, and from the operation of our national government, which alone
can support it, gratitude to Heaven compels us to ascribe to the God of our
forefathers the innumerable blessings we enjoy as a people.

IF we contrast the gloomy period between 1783 and 1788 with the brightening
prospect which our existing national system has continued to develop, we shall
find abundant reason to revere its wisdom and efficacy, to persist in its
support, and to pursue the steady policy by which it has been directed.
Notwithstanding the depredations we have suffered externally; although a mortal
pestilence has repeatedly ravaged our cities; and although two unprovoked
rebellions have enormously augmented our expenditures; yet our public credit
stands upon an unshaken basis, our commerce has extended, our manufactures have
advanced, our agriculture is improved, our wealth and population have increased
in an unparalleled manner. Such have hitherto been the happy results of our
wise national policy. But in the apprehension of some good men, clouds and
darkness await us.

WE hear gloomy predictions of the probable consequences of our mission to
France, as respects our interior and foreign concerns. Should a free
intercourse now take place between her and us, it is feared that her former
partisans in our country will supplant in the public confidence its long-tried,
steadfast friends, and materially change its policy. It is to be hoped that the
understanding and virtue of Americans will prevent so great a public calamity.
We are induced to cherish this hope, when we reflect that even in those parts
of our Commonwealth most disaffected to our national policy, opposition
candidates are studious to disavow any partiality to France, and loudly to
vaunt of their federalism, the better to support their pretensions to public
confidence. With respect to our foreign concerns, it is apprehended that an
adjustment with France during the European contest will excite the enmity of
Britain. Let us not, by opposing our administration, or by predicting the
hostility of Britain, invite it. If we remain true to ourselves, and continue
to place a manly confidence in our national government and administration, we
shall have no reason to dread the frowns or hostility of any nation, however
potent; more especially of a nation that is generally governed by wise maxims
of policy, and that has so lately denounced to the world the unprincipled
interference of France in the affairs of other nations. Be the consequences of
the mission favorable or otherwise, it has been adopted by constitutional
authority, and as good citizens we are pledged to abide the issue.

THE future destiny of the American empire depends upon the constancy,
intelligence and virtue of the American people. To render it truly great and
glorious, they must continue cordially and constitutionally to support our
national government, renouncing the absurd, destructive, unconstitutional
doctrine of State sovereignty.

The pernicious influence of foreign incendiaries must be controlled by Alien
Acts. The tongue of foul slander against our public functionaries must be
curbed by wholesome Sedition Acts. To the honor of my native countrymen be it
spoken, few indeed of them have been convicted of sedition. The operation of
the act against this dangerous crime has been chiefly confined to the
punishment of foreign renegadoes. This circumstance alone proves its
expediency. The constitutionality of both acts remains unimpeached, maugre the
elaborate report to the Virginia Legislature, drawn by the misdirected pen of
the specious Madison. Had such salutary laws been adopted by the free republics
of Greece, neither the emissaries nor the gold of Philip would have sapped
their freedom.

THE situation of our territory, from north to south embraced by the ocean, the
abundance and the variety of its productions, the industry and hardy enterprise
of its inhabitants, direct our destiny as a commercial people. Dear-bought
experience instructs us, that we can look to ourselves alone for the protection
of our commerce. We have witnessed the operation upon neutrals of the jus
gentium, as recognized by great maritime nations, who are never neutrals
themselves when any maritime power is a belligerent. We have witnessed how
little favorable to the rights of neutrality are the opinions of their learned
judges and civilians. Hence we see the absolute necessity of a respectable
naval establishment, As our exports principally consist of the produce of the
farmer's industry, his peculiar interest in the support of a navy must be
obvious to the slightest observer.
not for the purposes of foreign conquest or of annoyance to the trade of other
nations, but solely for the protection of our own.

"Let us observe good faith and justice toward all nations; let us cultivate
peace and harmony with all," as far as we can consistently do it; let us pursue
a steady system of policy, without which no nation can become respectable; let
us respect ourselves and our own institutions, and we shall not fail to command
the respect of foreign nations.


