Mr. GANO's SERMON, ON THE DEATH OF General Washington.

1800.

A SERMON, ON THE DEATH OF General George Washington; DELIVERED LORD's DAY,
JANUARY 5, 1800, BEFORE THE BAPTIST SOCIETY, IN PROVIDENCE.

BY STEPHEN GANO, Pastor of the Baptist Church and Congregation.

PROVIDENCE: PRINTED BY JOHN CARTER, JUN. AT THE NEW PRINTING-OFFICE,
MARKET-STREET.

1800.

PROVIDENCE, January 13, 1800.
TO the Baptist Church and Congregation in this town, before whom this Sermon
was delivered, and by whose request it is now published, it is respectfully
dedicated by a sincere mourner on the occasion, and their

Most affectionate Servant in the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, THE AUTHOR.

A SERMON, etc.
LAMENTATIONS, V. PART OF THE 16TH AND 17TH VERSES. THE JOY OF OUR HEART IS
CEASED -- THE CROWN IS FALLEN FROM OUR HEAD.
My BRETHREN and FELLOW-CITIZENS,
THE late afflicting dispensation of Divine Providence, in removing from this
life the First Man in the nation, is universally felt, and sincerely lamented.
Such is the force of this shock, which millions feel with the keenest
sensibility, that eloquence fails to express it, and imagination to paint it.

LET others engage actors on such occasions, as some of the ancients have done,
to exhibit external marks of grief -- a vain mockery, which passes off like an
empty tale: but when the heart is pierced with anguish, even nature herself
directs to suitable expressions of it. Such are the tears, and such the badges
of mourning in our nation, on this solemn occasion. To mourn with those who
mourn, is a principle of nature, particularly enforced by the christian
religion. It is at the same time a mournful satisfaction to friends; the means
of exciting a laudable emulation among survivors, and of transmitting to
posterity characters rendered illustrious by their public services, by their
talents, and by their virtues.

I SHALL take the liberty to apply our text to the mournful subject of our
discourse, although originally expressive of Zion's sorrows: and I. I SHALL
consider something of the public loss we have sustained -- The crown is fallen
from our head. II. THE effect this loss has produced -- The joy of our heart is
ceased. And, LASTLY, conclude with some reflections and inferences from the
subject.


I. IN considering the public loss we have sustained, it is not to be expected
we should fully display the character of the departed, nor the greatness of
this national calamity. Indeed it is a subject so far beyond my feeble powers
of expression, that I was ready to mourn in silence, with my beloved country,
in this common calamity. But lest we should appear deficient in respectful
attachment to the memory of this best of men, I have been emboldened to ask
your attention to this solemn and affecting subject -- while I hold up to your
view this bright example of public services and private virtues.

HIS fame and great military talents shone conspicuous early in life; and as if
destined by heaven to be the instrument of saving his country, he then, by his
foresight, prudence and bravery, brought off the remnant of a defeated British
army, and baffled an enemy of superior number. This exploit excited several
predictions respecting his future glory. Among the many observations made upon
this subject, we find President DAVIS, in a Sermon delivered in Virginia, in
the year 1755, speaks of him in strains of praise, and predicts his being a
future blessing to his country.
These predictions have been verified in the late revolutionary war. Our
countrymen, at the commencement of the war, were unprovided with military
stores; untutored in the art of war, and destitute of a leader to direct their
military operations. How could they meet the veteran bands of foes, led on by
generals grown old in war? Lo! the renowned friend and father of his country,
WASHINGTON, appears! The ornament of human nature, to compose whose character,
such an assemblage of shining virtues conspire, that it were difficult to
mention one most eminent. His dignity of mien, propriety of manners, wisdom in
council, valor in the field, disinterested patriotism, inflexible probity,
humanity to his enemies, sympathy to the suffering, and veneration for virtue,
rendered him the joy of the people, and gave him an unrivalled ascendancy in
our armies through an eight years war. From this height of dictatorial power,
equally possessing the unbounded confidence of soldiers and citizens; having
accomplished the object of his appointment, and the wishes of his heart, he
returns to the common rank of citizenship; retiring to the peaceful shades of
Vernon, without pension or emolument to himself or family, and without other
reward for his long, painful and important services, than the affectionate
glowing hearts of his countrymen, and the admiration of the world. How unlike a
Caesar or a Cromwell, or the heroes of antiquity! When they had acquired or
usurped the sovereign power, the reins of government were guided to aggrandize
themselves at the expense of their country's liberties. It was reserved to this
first of men, with disinterested zeal for his country's welfare, to secure her
freedom, and then to retire to enjoy, in common with his fellow-citizens, the
blessings he had procured with so much toil and danger.

HAD his life terminated with our revolutionary war, what American heart would
not have lamented his departure? He stood unrivalled in human glory and
greatness; -- but Heaven, as if determined to show to posterity the sublimest
virtues of human nature, preserves his important life until the exigencies of
public affairs require the aid of his other talents and virtues. The statesman
and civil ruler remain to be displayed. Although our foreign enemies are driven
from our favored land, and the dove with the olive branch of peace settles
upon the bosom of our country; yet, without order and government, peace cannot
long be maintained; like a vessel destitute of rudder and compass, she lies
exposed to the fury of every wave. Alike great in war and peace, this man of
the people again steps forth, and presides in the formation of our excellent
constitution. Called by the unanimous voice of his country, he relinquishes his
beloved retreat, and guides the helm of government. At this critical moment,
his consummate prudence, inflexible firmness and endearing moderation, secured
his country from the machinations of designing internal enemies, and the
horrors of civil war. Under the auspices of his most excellent administration,
we reposed in peace under our "vines and fig trees." The paternal advice he
gave us on his voluntary retirement from this exalted station, his country
being in a prosperous condition, I hope is indelibly engraven on the tablets of
all our hearts, and will be faithfully transmitted to posterity, as the best of
earthly legacies.

HIS acceptance of the command of the armies of the United States, on a recent
apprehension of his country's danger, from the hostile aggressions of a great
and ambitious nation, enhances our obligations of gratitude, and more
especially as he was in the decline of life. Yet such was the energy of his
mind, and ardour for public usefulness, that he was yet ready once more to
forsake the most endearing domestic enjoyments, when his country demanded the
sacrifice.

WHILE we contemplate such heroic virtue in this ever faithful leader and
friend to his country, we are constrained to admire and to applaud; -- to
rejoice in such a noble sample of the sublime virtues to which our fallen
nature may be restored in this life. But the instance is singular, nor can the
annals of history furnish a parallel.

IF we believe that GOD raised up, girded and went before Cyrus, to deliver
Israel from their oppressors, why are we not to believe that this far more
meritorious character has been, by an especial and particular Providence,
raised up to deliver and to secure the people of this land?

BUT what avails our weak essay? Has not the trumpet of fame long since
circulated through the nations of Europe the achievements and virtues of this
hero and patriot? But, my fellow mourners, we have this day to lament that the
"Crown is fallen from our head." "How are the mighty fallen!" And we may say,
with greater emphasis than David said of Abner, "Know ye not that a Prince and
a great man is fallen?" Yes, Americans, your crown, your friend, the friend of
man, the father of his country, the guardian of your rights, sleeps in dust.
How incalculable the loss! No more will he lead our arms to victory and peace
-- no more shall he hear our call on the greatest public exigencies -- no more
shall he add dignity to order and government by his illustrious examples -- no
more salutary counsels shall flow to us from his lips, now sealed up in death.
"The joy of our heart has ceased." I proceed to consider,

II. The effects this loss has produced in our country. -- It always has been
customary, in days of great public calamities, to indulge public expressions of
grief. Who can forbear, upon an occasion like the present, to mingle their
sorrowful notes with the millions whose "joy has ceased," and whose song of
melody is turned into mourning? Why this solemn appearance in the house of
prayer? Why these uncommon ensigns of mourning which meet our eyes and damp our
joys in the house of GOD? On this melancholy occasion, the meeting house
exhibited such affecting testimonies of affliction, as were highy calculated to
impress the mind with seriousness and solemn veneration. The pulpit was
entirely covered with black, with the addition of a mourning-piece in front,
representing a pedestal and urn, with three angels over it, as guarding the
richest dust of America; the pedestal inscribed with this motto: "Sacred to the
Memory of WASHINGTON;" under it the following lines: Glory with all her lamps
shall burn,
And watch the Warrior's sleeping clay,
Till the last trumpet rouse his urn,
To aid the triumphs of the day.



We may well lament a friend to virtue fallen. Let not the reproachful
complaint be repeated in our ears, which the Lord made by the Prophet, "The
righteous perishes, and no man lays it to heart." The melancholy tidings
produced a general shock pervading the nation, and the sorrow stands depicted
on every countenance, which shows that the joy of the heart has ceased: from
every part of our country the sad echo finds the nation in tears.

THE badges of mourning exhibited among all ranks and ages of citizens,
strikingly pourtray the feelings of their hearts. While our sorrow is expressed
in national groans, what heart interested in human affairs can be indifferent?
Weep, then, my friends; ye do well to weep with your country, with the world.
And while we drop our tears over his precious dust, and bewail this public
bereavement, we join in the general lamentations of all that is human. Mourn,
then, ye veterans, whose heads have been shielded in the day of battle, for
your beloved leader! Mourn, ye young and rising generation, for you have lost a
faithful friend and counselor! Mourn, ye friends of liberty and justice, for
our crown is fallen! Mourn, ye friends of the arts and sciences, your patron is
removed! Let the world mourn, FOR WASHINGTON IS DEAD!

LET us close with some reflections and inferences:

1st. IN all the dispensations of Divine Providence, it becomes rational beings
to contemplate the Sovereign Disposer of all creatures, and make suitable
reflections for their own profit. And in all GOD's dispensations of judgments,
we may trace the emanations of his goodness, infusing some salutary cordial
into the most bitter draught. This sentiment is strikingly exemplified in the
present melancholy instance. It has been a singular blessing, that GOD should
raise up such a wonderful character, at such a very critical time of our
nation, as a luminary to shed his rays upon us in dark and dismal times.

2d. THE preservation of his life, which seemed essential to our national
existence, was no less expressive of GOD'S goodness. In the name of WASHINGTON
were all the hosts of America united. The security which all felt under his
guidance, has no parallel. His name united the different parties in the nation,
and reconciled them to a change in the system of government. Our most excellent
constitution, under his administration, dispelled the fears of those who were
jealous of innovations.

3d. THE example of his dignified retirement to the condition of a private
citizen, cultivating those peaceful employments which give strength to the
government, and happiness to the governed, is worthy imitation. He has taught
this lesson, that happiness does not consist more in leading armies, or filling
a presidential chair, than in filling the duties of our several stations with
industry, probity, honor and virtue. Indeed we cannot turn our eyes upon this
first of men, but our hearts are filled with veneration, and warmed with the
flame of sincere and filial love. However fondly we may wish that talents and
virtues like these might be continued upon earth, heaven has otherwise
ordained, to show us that "all flesh is grass, and all the goodliness thereof
as the grass which perishes."

WE shall now infer,

1st. IF death has entered Vernon's shade, and taken the great, the good, and
wise, who can expect to escape? If temperance, that best preservative of health
and life; if the collected virtues of the Man, the General and the President,
could have secured an earthly immortality, never, O lamented WASHINGTON, never
should thy fall have added fresh honors to the trophies of death! But since he
is no more, let the great and the mighty of the earth prepare to die like men.
Let us be wise, and consider our latter end, when the alarm of mortality is
sounded from such an elevated height; -- and he who lived for our benefit, may
then die for our benefit too -- to remind us that we also must die.

DEATH, sweeps off our fellow-citizens every year, every day. Our neighbors,
like leaves in the autumn, drop into the grave in a thick succession. The air,
the earth, the ocean, and all the elements, are armed with death. A thousand
dangers lie in ambush for us. The principles of mortality lurk in our own
constitutions; and sickness, the herald of the last enemy, often warns us to
prepare. Yet how few realize the thought, that they must die! How many forget
this solemn subject, till they feel it! They stand fearless and unapprehensive
upon the slippery brink of eternity, till they unexpectedly fall, and are
ingulphed in the boundless ocean. But shall not this loud alarm awaken us out
of our vain dreams of an earthly immortality? When the mighty is "fallen,"
shall not the feeble tremble? If the father of a people must cease to live,
shall not the people expect to die? If common deaths are so frequent that they
have lost their monitory force, shall not the death of this mighty man
constrain us to realize our own mortality? Shall it not awaken that universal
seriousness which that prospect inspires? How great a blessing might this awful
dispensation prove, if thus religiously improved?

2d. AMERICANS have been indulged with a living example of such distinguished
and rare virtues; are they not bound to improve it, by copying those parts of
it within their particular spheres of action? Let not the exalted height deter
us from the attempt. The more fair, beautiful and perfect the original, the
more refined the pleasure we shall have in the imitation. It is not expected
that we should all be generals, presidents or rulers; but we should all be good
citizens -- peaceable, industrious, virtuous and faithful, in our several
stations; "rendering to Caesar the things that are Caesar's, and unto God the
things that are God's." Do we venerate the character of the deceased? Let us
give evidence of our veneration, by imbibing his spirit, treasuring up his
advice in our bosoms, and transmitting the same to posterity, that our children
may learn to lisp that beloved name, and look up to him as a model for their
imitation. Let us cherish his philanthropic sentiments -- let us copy his
example of humanity, and convince the world, that Americans have caught the
"mantle" of our departed FATHER and BENEFACTOR.

3d. IF all that is great in human nature is but mortal -- if "the joy of our
heart is ceased," it becomes a rational immortal being to seek permanent,
unchanging good. Where shall it be found? only in the Supreme Good. Let us then
lay up for ourselves "treasures in heaven," and be rich toward God. There is
one gift of heaven to mankind, which shall survive the dissolution of the
world, which shall flourish and reign forever; I mean religion. Yes, the divine
religion of our adorable Savior, who conquered death when he died, who has
opened the portals of eternal glory, "and holds the keys of death and the
grave;" who opens, and no man shuts; who shuts, and no man opens.
This religion will shine bright in the night of affliction -- will irradiate
the thick glooms of death, and blaze out into immortality. This will be a
source of happiness through the revolutions of eternal ages; what inconceivable
comfort does our religion disclose to the believing eye! It guides the pilgrim
in the house and prison of his clay; it points cut the road to duty and
happiness; it soothes the mourner in the deep anguish of sorrow, when his
earthly "crown is fallen," and "the joy of his heart ceased." When the "king of
terrors" knocks at the door of the pious, he may bid him welcome; for, with a
well grounded hope of eternal life by JESUS CHRIST, he can sing, "Oh death,
where is thy sting? Oh grave, where is thy victory? Thanks be unto God, who
gives us the victory, through our Lord JESUS CHRIST." Yes, this religion
unfolds the mystery of a resurrection; that the precious dust of the righteous
has the guard of Omnipotence, and the deep sounding trump of God shall finally
bring forth the sacred deposite. Then shall corruption put on incorruption, and
the vile bodies of his servants "be fashioned like unto the glorious body of
our Lord JESUS CHRIST."

Now we may ask, in the language of an elegant writer, "Is this senseless dust
all that is left of this greatest of men? Has he suffered a total extinction of
being? Is he dead to himself, to the universe, and to his God? No, he lives! he
greatly lives the life of immortals -- he lives in the immense regions of
spirits; where all the superficial distinctions of birth, riches, power and
majesty, are lost forever; and all the distinction that remains, arises from
virtue and vice; from our having acted our part well or ill in the station
where we are fixed. There triumphant tyranny, that bade defiance to human
power, is blasted and degraded by the frown of Omnipotence: and there those
rulers of men, who were the servants of God, are advanced to a higher sphere of
dominion and beneficence, and the badges of earthly greatness are superfluous
to their dignity, and would but conceal their worth;" "for they are made kings
and priests unto God forever." There they are clothed with the robes of
salvation, and the garments of praise: and wear crowns of unfading glory,
infinitely brighter than those which the gold, and gems, and glittering trifles
of the earth, can compose.

THIS view of the great, good and mighty, does not diminish, but heighten and
brighten their glory: for what renders the nature of man, and even of angels,
so important, so noble, so divine, as immortality? This advances the offspring
of the dust to a kind of equality with the natives of heaven. Are not
sentiments like these congenial with our most ardent wishes and rational
feelings, when we see the great, good and useful of our fellow creatures, fall
before the all-conquering hand of death? If so, let us forever banish from our
hearts every seed of infidelity, which filled the soul with black despair; and
has no virtue to calm and soothe the mind, torn by the heart-rending anguish of
parting with the objects of our dearest affections; and let us cherish the
religion of our Savior; let us receive it as a heavenly balm, fitted to
fortify us against the trials of the present life, and to give us the
soul-comforting confidence, that our godly separated friends are disposed of to
their everlasting advantage, in their enjoyment of the heavenly world.

TO THAT SOVEREIGN, ALL-WISE AND MOST GRACIOUS GOD, WHO "KILLS AND MAKES
ALIVE, AND FROM WHOSE HAND NONE CAN DELIVER," LET US GIVE ADORATION, PRAISE AND
THANKSGIVING, NOW AND FOREVER.

AMEN.

