AN ORATION, ON THE DEATH OF Lieut. Genesis George Washington, COMPOSED ON THE
SPECIAL REQUEST OF THE COMMANDANT AND HIS BROTHER OFFICERS, OF THE CANTONMENT
IN THIS VICINITY, AND DELIVERED AT STAUNTON, ON THE TWENTY SECOND DAY OF
FEBRUARY LAST PAST, 1800.

By Rev. JOHN GLENDY, Minister of the Gospel.

2d Chron, XX. 12. -- " We know not what to do, O our God, but our eyes are
upon thee." Deuteronomy. XXXIII. 27. -- " The Eternal God is thy refuge, and
underneath is the everlasting (...)," Psalm. XLVI. 1. -- " God is our rock and
strength, a very present help in time of trouble." STAUNTON: -- PRINTED By JOHN
WISE, (...) ENGLISH AND GERMAN PRINTING-OFFICE.

MDCCC.

To the Public.
THE Author in yielding cordial and prompt compliance with the earnest
requisition contained in the annexed ^ddress, trusts that an enlightened,
candid and liberal Public, will asscribe it to pure and honorable motives.

If the Oration shall have any claim to your protection o^ regard, it must flow
from that Spirit of Liberty which it breaths; and that the Immortal Washington
the Champion of fair freedom is its favorite Theme: which must forever be near
and grateful to AMERICAN CITIZENS.

The goodness of the Committee has already forestalled my hopes; and my anxious
wishes, even at this early period, are nearly accomplished.

SIR,
IN presenting to you the thanks of your Fellow-Citizens, for the elegant
Oration delivered upon the late melancholy occasion, we cheerfully discharge a
duty honorably imposed upon us by the Resolutions of that day; and in this
declaration of general approbation most unequivocally express our own. -- In
the further pursuance of that duty, we have to request you will furnish a copy
for publication, and in so doing tender a just tribute to unequalled worth;
comply with an unanimous expression of the public mind; particularly gratify
the wishes of this Committee; pay the highest compliment to your own
enlightened understanding, and render important service to a grateful country.

By order of the Committee. ALEXANDER St. CLAIR, CHAIRMAN.
T^st^. JOHN COALTER, Sec'ry.
ORATION, andC.
Psalm. 89. 48. -- " What Man is he that lives, and shall not see Death?"
MOMENTOUS question! yet awfully solved every returning day, by the exit of the
mighty and mean, the noble and base, the renowned and inglorious. --

Could moral excellence and manly worth; could illustrious deeds and un^ainted
honor; could the purest patriotism conjoined with rational piety; could the
love and veneration, the gratitude and admiration of MILLIONS rescue from the
stroke of death, your Washington had never died -- And yet he is gone -- the
political savior of your Country -- the pride of your nation -- the favorite
of Heaven -- your Washington is gone to happier Climes -- It must be so --
^eaven's will be done.

Why should we pause here for a fleeting instant, to announce what is the awful
dispensation of the most High, that directed my attention to this solemn theme?
The deep-rooted sorrow, the woe-worn hearts and grief-wrung spirits, of many
dignified characters present; and the grave sympathising countenance of this
crowded august Assembly, anticipate me on the occasion. -- The heart
interesting solemnity of this day has a double retrospect -- In its vast
importance, it takes cognizance of the BIRTH and DEATH of the greatest George.
-- It proclaims to the universe, a Republican Government issuing a requisition,
with which the heads and hearts of ten thousand times ten thousand, ^him^e in
sweet unison, without one jarring, or one discordant ^ote, equally honorable,
to the governor and governed, to the first Magistrate and the People --
kindling in our breasts, the mingled emotions of triumph and condolence. All
hall Columbia! I would felicitate myself indeed, could I participate
individually in that high honor which America may justly claim to herself, of
being the kind Foster-Mother OF THAT MAN whose love of glory was devoid of
Ambition -- whose generous Soul embraced no object but the emancipation of his
country -- whose fidelity was equal to your unbounded confidence. "Whose
prudence and valor, were a^ once the shield and sword of his native soil."
These are glorious outlines, that will forever illumine the page of your
history, that can never be erased from your dear remembrance, and will be
indelibly engraven on the minds of your posterity. But alas! the mournful
solemnity of this day reverses the lovely sce^^, and darkens the gilded
prospect. -- Mourn America! Your greatest, bravest, best beloved Son is now no
more -- Mourn ye sons of freedom GREAT WASHINGTON is gone, and you are bereaved
indeed -- yes, we are well aware, that undisguised are your compunctions of
sorrow, unfeigned the sensibilities of your nature -- yes, ever since the
unwelcome doleful tidings winged their ^light to this Village and its Vicinity,
the deepened sigh was heaved, and the heart throbbed in silent anguish.

Humanity is deeply interested in the heart confounding query of my text --
every man living perceives and feels that he must depart ^his life, and ere
long dea^^ will p^^h him off the stage of time. "For life is soon ^ut off, and
we fly away." That we must shortly yield up our breath and be lodged in the
gloomy caverns of the grave is most assuredly an awful thought, and were it
unceasingly to dwell upon the mind with that powerful energy with which i^ some
times comes home to the heart, our state would be pitiable indeed. The
beneficent Father of all however has framed the human heart with such happy
sensibility, such spirit and animation, as are absolutely necessary for
agenting the grand business of life and time with vigor and activity. Yet
surely the fa^e of others, should impress mortal man, with grave f^^ling and
devout reflection -- "Man is as the grass indeed" He springs up, blooms, fades,
and perishes from the earth as if he had never been. Yet the swelling vanity of
mortal man will lift itself into importance -- Hark child of the dust! The ga^
and airy scene begins to change apa^e -- Mark the hoary head and wrinkled face,
sad ravages of time! with what certainty can man promise himself tomorrow?
when we take a ^^trospective glance at those who were the endearing companions
of out boyish days, the heart sickens at the doleful recollection.

As travelers on the way to our eternal home, shall we part after this world
and forget our destination* Shall we trifle with all-Important time, and lavish
the precious hours away? We sojourn in a vale of tears, where all things have
changed, are changing, and may change again. The dreary tomb is the last abode
of erring man, even there is laid low your Washington the magnanimous.

Woeful event (...) Here are we convened to commemorate a nation's loss, a loss
I had almost said irreparable. The painful yet pleasing task, assigned me in
the important transactions of this day, is to be the organ, for expressing the
part we bear in the universal mourning. I feel confident from the sensations of
my own heart, that there is not a bosom in this great assembly so callous, ^s
not to melt, and mourn and sadden, at Columbia's woe.

Various causes combine to announce my inequality to the duties of the day.
Little schooled in political researches, a stranger to the din of arm^ and
clangor of war; equally unknowing and unknown, in acts of chivalry or the
thunder of battle, in the tactics of sap or storm; a foreigner, yea a^^ Alien
on your shore, of a few "little months," standing. The ground on which I tread
i^ truly declicate and embarrassing. We are well aware that servile adulation,
and unmerited encomium, are only adapted to the taste and genius of mean
temporizing sycophants; yet surely, when an undeviating virtuous character
holds an exalted station, i^ indefatigable in promoting the public good, even
national felicity, to withhold praise from such honorable men, is ungenerous,
ungrateful, criminal* for the plaudits of the wise and good in every age, have
proved incentives to the noblest deeds. Fulsome adulation we detest, and
unmerited compliment either to DEAD or LIVING, would be satire in disguise. In
our feeble attempts to delineate the character of your immortal Washington,
(whose death we ^^plore this day) there is little danger of transcending his
real worth^ and it would betray the weak head o^ bad heart, to keep within
common bounds, when we either think, write, or speak, of such an UNCOMMON MAN.
When Washington is the theme of our honest eulogium; the subject is almost too
vast for regular thought* (...) reviewing the assemblage of his endearing
virtues, we feel extremely difficulted which we shall most admire, the mild and
amiable virtues of the man in the tranquil walks of life; the philans ^hropy of
the citizen, the love of country in the patriot, the valor of the hero, the
wisdom of the general, the policy of the statesman, or the piety of the
christian. In tracing this extensive range of character, I trust the
earnestness of my zeal and purity of my intention, will, in your indulgent
estimation supply the lack of talent.

Let the mighty nations across the Atlantic, boast of their Scipio's, their
Caesar's and Alexanders -- their Gustavus Adolphus and their Ferdinand -- their
Marlborough and their Buonaparte; yet you will be constrained to resolve their
blazoned achievements, into mad ambition, false love of glory, or tyrannic
conquest. Contrast them with your beloved Washington as Patriot* Heroes, and as
the stars of Night fade away before the glory of the rising day, ^o shall they
hide their diminished luster and sink into obscurity.

The bravest Potentate of Europe immortalized himself in yielding to this fact;
we mean the late Frederic of Prussia, who, after the acknowledgment of your
Independence, transmitted a golden-hilted Sword to your Hero, with this signal
inscription, "from the oldest to the greatest General."

It is true, transatlantic countries have given birth to individual rare
characters, who may vie with your late Chief, in some one of the sublime
excellencies that adorn humanity; and it seems to be characteristic of our
nature, that to excel in any one grand pursuit, will command the whole
attention and absorb the noblest powers of man; yet, it would appear as if
propitious Heaven intended, that your Washington should stand unrivalled in
all. -- Select all the characters of Ancient and Modern History, where the man
to be found, exhibiting such depth of penetration, such versatility of talent,
such active, energetic, bold, comprehensive powers of mind; bearing down all
obstacles that opposed their progress; piercing through the various
combinations and relations of surrounding circumstances; seeing all things with
an equal eye, in their just dimensions; and attributing to each its due
proportion?

What shall we think of that rich fountain, which, while i^ was poured out
through so many different channels, flowed through each, with a full and equal
stream -- On all sides he touched the extremes at human character; and his
great Soul was only bounded by that impenetrable circle, which prescribes the
limits of human nature.

From so rich an aggregate of materials, we must content ourselves, with
sketching only a few outlines, of the lovely portrait of your dignified
citizen. When we behold a character from the retired walks of humble life
"starting early in the career of true glory," by an undeviating progress
through a life of honor, arriveing at the first dignities of the state --
organizing a great nation, and raising America to her proper altitude in the
scale of the Universe, manly curiosity is rouzed into energy, and pure
philosophy delights to trace the path of fair ^ame, from the vale of obscurity,
to the zenith of elevation. There is scarce any circumstance so trivial or
minute in great characters, as not to command the attention, and interest the
heart. The laudable curiosity of generations yet unborn will be strongly
excited, to learn even what were the air and mein, the f^^^ and feature of your
lamented Washington. From connoisseurs in what constitutes the elegance of
human frame, I have learned that it would have puzzled the most minute
observer, ^o have discovered one single deficiency in his whole form* or
thought of one beauty that could enrich it -- celestial virtue was clothed in
the form of Washington.

Those divine characters imprinted on his luminous Heaven-directed countenance,
would have whispered, where his hope entered, where his confidence was stayed.
-- There was an uncommon inexpressible SOMETHING about the man, that would have
announced to every spectator, this is the American Chief, this the Conqueror of
Heroes. Behold him, so soon as he had counted the days of manhood, delegated by
the Burgesses of this State -- traversing the trackless desert, (part of it
savage country) for four hundred miles, even to the banks of the Ohio, where
foreign marauders infested your Territory -- Follow him through his early deeds
of valor, and military manoeavres, at the defeat of Braddock, that overbearing,
incautio^s, ill-fated man -- THERE budded his ^awre^s, which ere long ripened
into full maturity -- HERE dawned the day, that ushered in his (...) glory.

In the progress of human events, the period wheeled around, when the British
Parliament, intoxicated with prosperity, and in the delirium of policy,
pretended a right to legislate for this great continent -- outraging every
principle of rational liberty and equal representation. Heaven justified your
resistance even to blood. My feelings recoil at the contemplation of those
black days; and were it not to unrake the dying embers of national jealousy, we
could here narrate a gloomy memorial.

Merciful Heaven, what a sight! Your country, your dear country become the
abode of carnage and desolation! a formidable host of foes overspread your
plains, possess, your cities -- prepared are the internal engines of
destruction for your ruin -- The sword is drawn -- Vengeance and rage have
^ighted up their torches -- The enemy thirst for conquest, and for plunder --
You opposed with courageous resistance -- Vain were your efforts in a thousand
instances -- Blood flows -- Death flies -- The flame rages -- Righteous God!
shall millions fall the victims of a few ambitious mortals? Children be
murdered at their mother's breast -- The gray hairs of the venerable old man be
dragged in blood and dust -- Innocent beauty become the prey of the ^oul
ravisher, or brutal murderer? merely because the covetousness of a monster,
thirsts for increased revenue, or a tyrant pants for increased territory. --
But we forbear, and trust you have done forever with those dismal scenes. --
Here your Hero rises to view, rises to the admiration of the world, in
accumulation of interesting circumstances, delineation of character, and
important scenery of action.

He could no longer witness, without feeling greatly indignant, the sparkling
sword of despotism, (...) the odious chains of slavery. At the call of his
country, worthy to command, willing to obey, he "girded on the harness without
boasting," -- conscious of his intrepidity, yet di^^ident of his talents. The
elegant apostrophe of Col. Hu^^phreys (that fine Poet, and finished Scholar) to
General Washington on taking command of the army, sublimely expresses my
conceptions on the occasion.

" O first of Heroes, favorite of the skies,
To what dread (...) thy country bade thee ^i^e!
'Twas thine to change (...) sweetest scenes of life
For public cares -- to guide the embattl'd strife --
Unnumber'd ills of every kind to dare --
The winters blast, the summers sultry air,
The lurking dagger -- and the turbid storms,
Of wasting War, with death in all his forms --
Nor aught could daunt unspeakably serene,
Thy conscious soul smiled over the dreadful scene. "
Then lay at s^ake his earthly all -- His ^ee simple estate in his native ^oil
-- his precious life -- his honor superior to both -- his country dearer than
all.

Though possessed of undoubted talents for military exploits, and unequalled
sagacity to avail himself of every possible advantage; yet, he was nobly
superior to that avarice of dominion, which blindly aims at extensive
possession. The war he waged, was a war of resistance against tyrannic invasion
-- a war for security, not for increased territory.

He was not insensible to the charms of ambition -- No, but his ambition was
not to grasp at aggrandizement by en^^^ous accumulation of wealth, his ambition
was to serve his country gratis.

In his military career you may always note him bold, hazardous, and
enterprizing, when and where, there was national hope of success --
prudentially cautious, where circumstances appeared desperate -- lavish of any
thing, rather than the blood of his brave and beloved Countrymen -- like the
renowned Fabius he conquered by delay.

Follow him to Cambridge -- Hear him address the army -- Who are they? A band
of undisciplined husbandmen -- many without arm^* all at different times nearly
destitute of ammunition -- great in nothing* but their unconquerable love of
Liberty, their meritorious cause, and firm confidence in Heaven. To whom are
they opposed? To the first Admirals -- the first Generals -- the bravest troops
of Europe* Established in your cities, garrisoned in your strong holds: Mark
the issue, environed* (...) in by your Hero; cut off are their resources*
constrained to abandon the enterprise, and fly for refuge to the watery
element. Yet sure, the upstart Politician, the ^ire-side General, (...) half
concealed Tory dared to cavil.

Hard is the task indeed, to discharge with decided approbation the complex
duties of Commander in Chief in troublous times* to carry on with vigor an
extensive war, and yet be frugal of the public money; to organize (...) vast
armament -- "to constrain those to serve, whom it may be delicate to offend;"
to maintain due subordination of rank, to conduct at the same time a
complicated variety of operations, from the burning sands of Georgia, even to
the Fort of Quebec; and to accomplish every valuable purpose, in spite of envy,
^^ction, and disaffection; to effect all this, O Americans! was reserved for
your Washington.

The Heroism of your General was not the off^pring of low-minded pride,
established by habit, and confirmed by discipline -- No, his sprung from an
happy commixture of blood and spirit; a ^oul elevated and noble; an
understanding strong and refined; a self-denial and self-command that raised
him greatly superior (...) misfortune. These burnished by education, warmed
with the love of country, and rouzed into energy by a sense of duty,
constituted the bravery of your chief Commander.

Haste with him to New York, see him straining every nerve, exerting every
power, to establish that Independence, which your Congress had proclaimed on
the memorable Fourth of July 1776; applauded by the citizen, rejoiced at by the
soldier -- THAT WAS THE DAY when the equestrian Statue of the British George
was levelled with the dust.

Here vain alas! were the efforts of your illustrious Chief -- He had no
adequate force, either to oppose or resist the invading foe; (...) even his
attempts to oppose the inglorious flight of some of his troops, on the first
approach of the enemy -- He drew his sword, threatened instant death, cocked,
snapped his pistol -- (...) in the extreme was then the situation of your brave
Commander -- to extricate him from it, his faith full attendants snatched the
bridle ^ein and gave his horse an opposite direction.

But as men feeling for the infirmities and pitying the misfortunes of our
fellow-men it would become us, to "drop a tear on this paragraph and blot it
out forever."

No alternative now remained for your beloved Washington but ^ither to evacuate
the city, or by an unequal contest, to hazard your Independence and political
salvation for ages to come. He (...), dark was his path; the prospect on all
hands gloomy and tremendous -- with a remnant of his army he retreats to
^^wark. At no other period did he ever conceive the American cause as verging
on desperation. Said ^e to Col. Reid, "If we retreat to the back settlements of
Pennsylvania will the inhabitants support us?" Doubts and fears re^^ed on the
Colonel's mind. On which your General waving his hand across his throat
observed, "My neck does not feel as though it was made for a halter, we must
retreat to Augusta County in Virginia, and if overpowered by numbers we will
cross the Allegheny.

At that ^^ing heart-agonizing moment; few men would have exchanged, feelings,
situation, and circumstances with your Hero, for the empire of the world.

Follow him next to Brandy wine, it was there that the celebrated La Fayette
first bled in the cause of Liberty, which he had espoused with enthusiastic
ardour, and still renders him dear to Americans. Accompany your Chief through
s^r^pless nights and anxious days, through toil and tumult, blood and death, to
Philadelphia and German-Town; to Trenton, Princeton, Monmouth and back to
New York. In every step you trace wisdom, prudence, valor; all the dignified
virtues of a great, patient, persevering heroic mind. At this critical period
Burgoyne's defeat was announced through the union. It produced a mighty
revolution in Cabinet and (...) hosanna, where dismay had poured a black deluge
on the (...); hope fixed her anchor where despair had taken up her about.

Thus the rise and fall of the mightiest empires may depend on the minutest
incidents. "Lives there a man, who dare consider these as blind un meaning
casualties?" No, they are the direct acts of a ^^peri^^^nding Providence that
governs the affairs of the Universe; establishing his own august purposes,
through the jarring devices of mortals -- "making the very wrath of man to
praise him, and restraining the remainder of wrath."

During this year and for some time after, the views of a few factious men,
were strongly bent, on rendering the Commander in Chief unpopular: Ungenerous,
ungrateful men; who would meanly envy, and basely traduce, conscious, they
could not nobly emulate. He was well aware of their sinister plot; and his
conduct on the trying occasion, displays the purest patriotism, truest
magnanimity, and unsullied honor.

Hear his own words, in a confidential letter to his friend: "I am said a
scheme of that kind is now on foot by some (namely the change of Commander in
Chief,) whether true or false, ferrous (...) to try the pulse* I neither know
nor care. Neither ambitio^s no^ interested views, ^led me into the service; I
did not solicit the command, but accepted it, after much entreaty with all that
diffidence which a conscious want of ability and experience, equal to the
discharge of so important a trust, must naturally exci^e in a mind not quite
devoid of thought; and after I did engage, pursued the great line of my duty,
and the grand object in view, as pointedly (...) the needle to the pole. So
soon as the public gets dissatisfied with my services, or a person is found
better qualified to answer her expectation, I shall quit^ the helm with as much
pleasure, and retire to a private station with as much content, as ever the
wearied Pilgrim felt upon his safe arrival, at the Holy Land or haven of hope;
and shall most devoutly wish that those who come after, may meet with more
prosporous gales than I have done." Such was the avowal of Washington the
GREAT, worthy of himself.

Now the cloud that obscured your political horizon, began to be wafted far
away -- The mist that enveloped your military glory, began to be dissipated --
a new era dawned -- a treaty with the French, that magnanimous nation was
formed, negotiated by the illustrious Franklin and his worthy colleague,
faithful servants of the people. Fleets and armies, were de^^ined to wing their
speedy ^ight a^ross the wide atlantic, for your safety and salvation. The siege
of New York was then planned, by wise heads and dauntless souls.

But the tardy returns of your reinforcements, the destination of Count De
Grasse's fleet for the Chesapeake, the arrival at New York of three thousand
additional troops from Europe, and Lord Cornwallis having p^sted himself at
Yorktown, as Head Quarters, depot, and general rendezvous for the approaching
winter -- all, all conspired to change the mighty scene of action.

Thither, Heaven-directed, your Washington bent his way, and there achieved
the mighty deed, that gilds his well earned same -- Lo! here a glorious
combination -- an allied army indeed! not for the inglorious purpose of
annihilating, but for the noble end of establishing revolution^. Delightful
harmony* differing in naught but the manly contest, of who shall excel in
hardiest deeds and boldest enterprise. We should pause here to be wail, nay to
execrate, the Policy of that inauspicious day that ever made you twain.

Feats of valor and martial prowess distinguished the great Cornwallis on the
momentous event, that we have now in contemplation; "Great let me call him
though conquered by your hero; every maneuver hazarded, ^orties, resistance,
all proved fruitless! To retire impossible, to retain intolerable, submission
must ensue* ^^^our Hero shall prevail. Opened were your batteries! your (...)
thundered! the elements of nature seemed convulsed! Citizen soldiers mount,
they scale the strongest bulwarks, storm redoubts that were deemed impregnable!
Then and there, many a brave man bled, many a father, brother, husband, son,
levelled with the dust!

Justly may we exclaim -- O God of mercy! never more let us hear the sighs of
misery, or groans of despair -- let us never more behold man destroying his
fellow creature. The British army broken down in strength, exhausted in spirit,
hope fled, no succor as hand, were constrained to surrender.

The gallantry of your hero on that day was truly signalized, even in the
choice of his officer (Lieutenant Colonel Lawrens) for arranging the terms of
capitulation. -- That at the very period; while the father was immured in the
gloomy dungeons of a British bastile, the son was penning articles, whereby an
English nobleman and British arm^, ^^came prisoners of war.

That was the day of Columbia's triumph! That the day, whence her freeborn
sons may date their Independence. -- As such your Washington displayed it -- no
doubt he exulted -- But then it was the triumph of a pious grateful ^oul wafted
^o Heaven in fervent adoration, and lively thanksgiving -- "Giving glory where
glory was due." -- Not like the deistical Heroes of modern days in Europe, who
after unrivalled deeds of military renown, seldom if ever, deign to acknowledge
an overruling Heaven; but infidel like, ascribe all the praise to brilliant
Generals and intrepid Soldiers.

Your Hero manifested his rational exultation, by a general release of all who
lay under arrest; that there might not be (as he expressed himself) a single
American, who should not participate ^o the universal joy -- By orders of your
Chief Commander, divine service was performed two days after the capitulation,
in all the brigades of the American army; in testimony of their gratitude to
the Most High, for his surprising ^nterposition at that decisive event. How
unlike this, was that blasphemous Te De^m of Catharine late Empress of Russia;
a disgrace to all the sensibility, refinement and fascination of women; chanted
by her savage soldiery, ^owled rather by her bloodhounds of war, after their
cold deliberate murder of twenty two thousand aged men, women, and children at
the gates of Warsaw, the capital of unfortunate Poland.

No doubt your Washington at the period alluded to above could avow it in the
presence of the immortal God, that he would not then have given up, (even
without the sweet hope of an eternal recompense in a more perfect state) the
noble feelings of his heart, that elevation of mind, which ever accompanies,
active, suffering, triumphant virtue, for the seductive smiles of a Court, the
gaudy trappings of Royalty, or the glories of a Crown.

A few months after the capture of Lord Cornwallis, the British government
cured of their mania for conquest, and yet in the very paroxism of wounded
ambition, after seven years bloody experience, were compelled to abandon all
offensive operations on your continent -- Their hostile operations coverged to
a point, and the grand catastrophe of the American war opened to the astonished
world.

Having terminated the renowned exploits at York Town, your Chief returned with
part of his exulting victorious troops to the vicinity of New York -- Few deeds
of heroism remained for him now to atchieve -- The definitive treaty was signed
-- Your Independence reluctantly acknowledged with bleeding hearts, amid
exhausted ^^ances and tarnished glory, on the third day of September, 1783 --

Ancient history records no exploit superior to this, and it will ennoble the
modern, whenever another Livy or Plutarch shall arise to do justice to it --
when another Cicero with his glowing diction, or a Demosthenes with his
fascinating elocution shall ^et your Hero in the true perspective.

Your Washington could boast the noblest of Empires, the Empires he gained over
the minds of his countrymen -- Military force, or popular caprice, may give
power, but nothing can give lasting authority, except ^ure wisdom and spotless
virtue -- By these your Hero obtained, by these he preserved, a dominion in the
hearts of his f^llow citizens, unstained by bloody usurpation -- a dominion
conferred by public affection, continued by public gratitude.

The British and their mercenary hirelings evacuate New York, and bade an
inglorio^s farewell -- Your Great Washington makes a triumphant entry, amid the
heart approving, jowful acclamations, of surrounding thousands. To his
dignified virtues which command admiration, to his exalted services, from which
have flowed great and durable advantages, "may the honest tribute of praise be
rendered without the reproach (...)." --

Now ceased the bloody rage of war, the Olive Branch waved all around, and
sheathed we trust forever here the gore stained weapon -- Then your beloved
Chief (decidedly resolved to retire to the tranquil walks of life) bade an
affectionate "warm hearted f^^d adieu" to his brother officers and victorious
troop^ -- Then were rouzed into energy the mingled emotions of the heart, joy
and sorrow, lively gratitude and deep regret, more easily conceived than
expressed -- Then heaved the heartfelt sigh, then flowed the (...) drop, that
would not disgrace a Hero's cheek. Your country's political Savior repairs to
Philadelphia -- There he delivered in his accounts to the Comptroller General,
from June 1775, to December 1783, all his own manuscript, s^ating every item,
producing every voucher, and accounting for every disbursement. -- Happy will
it be for America -- happy for every nation, if their Chancellors of Exchequer,
if all through whose hands, the glittering tempting metal circulates, may prove
as correct, as (...) and as honorable. "Crushed be the Vipers! who for a grasp
of (...) or paltry office would ^ell their country to the foe," or (...) a
nation into Bankruptcy.

What though your great George could not trace a venerable line of Ancestors,
through what is vainly, perhaps absurdly called noble blood -- What though he
could not boast Garter, Star or Ribbon, these Symbols of hereditary foppery,
mere creatures of the imagination -- What though he could not boast the
bewitching titles of Lord or Earl, often the appendages of cruel fraud* or vile
oppression -- Yet your Washington could hold up to view illustrious deeds --
His "good works' praise him, which can alone confer nobility on man -- He dared
to be great -- "He could display the Standards, Colors, Trophies, torn from
the vanguished foe" -- He could boast of honors, not the fruit of inheritance,
but well yet dearly earned by toils, by abstinence, by valor; amidst clouds of
dust and (...) of blood -- He could boast of laying CRO^CHANT the frowning Lion
of British glory tha^ appalled the nations -- that for successive years,
through every quarter of the globe, waved victorious by sea and land.

He arrives at Annapolis -- waits on Congress -- begs leave to resign his
Commission* But here vain is description! Language falls in picturing duly the
heart-interesting scene.

Having taught an awful lesson of moderation to ambitious Royalty -- having
taught political slaves what a nation may atchieve under the auspices of
Heaven, by union, valor, and perseverance -- having established the standard of
Liberty on this wide extended continent -- having laid the foundation for
revolutionary movements, through every quarter of the globe, where tyranny
invades the rights of oppressed humanity -- He retires from THE GREAT THEATER
of action -- Great in himself -- Great in the plaudits of admiring thankful
millions -- Who but your Washington would not have been elated? (...) him,
would not have felt one ray of vainglory dart across the Soul*

This man approved of Heaven, closed that last act of his official life, by
commending the dearest interest of his country to the protection of the
Almighty, and th^se who have the superintendence thereof, to his holy keeping.

Having established the Independence of this mighty continent, ^e seized the
cri^^cal moment to retire -- his retirement immortalized his character -- He
has left an honorable memorial to the generalissimo's of other continents --
that the glory which is ^^quired in the field by deeds of military prowess,
without guilt o^ ambition, may be retained in the shade of private life,
without false power or dazzling splendour -- He retired to Mount Vernon loaded
with benedictions.

A new Era now dawned on your political hemisphere -- Your confederated
government of 1778 proved inefficient, could not apply to the exigencies and
situation, either of State or People -- Jealousy of power; the licentiousness
of war; habits of luxury; the depreciation of your paper currency which
Congress could neither fund nor pay; the influx of British goods; want of
specie; vile speculation and cruel swindling; gross and open outrage against
several Acts of Congress; and fearful symptoms of approaching insurrection;
all, all, preached aloud the rapid accomplishment, of the humiliating, hateful
prediction of your (...)* to wit, that your Independence would ere long prove
your greatest ^^rse. Your government destitute of energy; devoid of a sanction
to its laws; destitute of a guarantee for the State-Governments, rendering the
salvation OF ONE the preservation of ALL, and in fine, devoid of a judiciary
power -- These grievances rung through the nation -- Th^se defects were felt,
heard, and understood from the President to the peasant. Hence the resistless
necessity of renovating the system, of establishing your federal government. --
Here again your well tried, long approved friend, your illustrious favorite
rises to view, presiding in the grand council of the nation, composed of men,
whose heads and hearts, whose principles and talents, were equal to the
magnitude of the (...). -- Behold the venerable Sages with unprejudiced
coolness, with mature deliberation, with dignified freedom of sentiment, with
harmony and candor, digesting your glorious and happy constitution; sanctioned
by the states; celebrated by the wi^e and good of every nation; by every true
friend of rational Liberty; approved by Heaven. We have contrasted it with the
governments of Europe, (for constitutions they have none) they sink into
contempt; it (...) great and sacred importance; (...) security of property and
purity of legislation superior to all; for energy of^ government PERHAPS
inferior to none. Would to God that your Constitution and Government may always
harmonize and chime in sweet unison.

To give motion to the wheels of this mighty m^chine, your beloved Washington
again, at the unanimous call of his country, must renounce the joys of
retirement, to seal by his administration in peace, what his bravery had
achieved in war. "Ask now of the days that are past, since the day that the
omnipotent God first created man on the earth" where ever before the precedent,
of an enlightened people, by free election, calling the chief in their armies,
to watch over and guard their civil and political rights and privileges* no
usurpation here by force and arms -- terror was not the order of the day.

The great the important period of inauguration came around, magnificent
indeed, novel in the history of the universe, more splendid by far than all the
false blazon of royal coronation. -- ^^thinks I see your Washington the beloved
father and deliverer of his country, advance to the open gallery of the
Federal-Hall, under the inspection of Heaven and in view of enraptured
thousands; methinks I hear him with devout fervency repeat the sacred oath, and
behold him bowing with profound reverence to seat it with an impressive kiss on
the volume of inspiration. Superlatative transaction! all conspired to render
it one of the most august, interesting human scenes, that perhaps, has ever
^^en exhibited on the theater of our world.

Firm in the inflexibility of his patriotism, he hazards his unpolluted ^oul,
his untarnished fame on the tempestuous ocean of political life. Propitious
omen! Glorious prognostic! He commences his pol^tical, as he terminated his
military career, by an ardent ejaculation to Heaven; fervently supplicating the
Almighty, who rules the universe, and presides in the councils of Nations, to
consecrate his Administration. He renders homage to the great Auther o^ all
Good, and adores that invisible hand, that providential agency, signally
manifested in every step of your progress to Independence -- Here "boasting was
excluded," her^ vainglory could find no place.

From him you anticipated, in him you recognized, the happy union of liberty
and ^^w; lenity and vigor; justice and mercy. "The enlightened policy of a
mind calm amidst the influence of power, and uncorrupted by the fascinating
charms of Ambition." -- This was the ^oul that animated and pervaded your
federal system; superior to the emolument of office, to pension or to salary.
In his retinue you behold dignified simplicity -- no vain pomp inconsistent
with pure Republicanism -- destitute of frippery gaiety and volatile
dissipation -- of expensive parade and foolish ostentation. But even to mark a
few outlines of his political and military character in the future history of
his life, would carry me far beyond tha^ portion of time allotted to services
of this kind -- (...) i^ to observe, they were such as adorned the statesman
and ornamented the Hero. I feel that I have trespassed, and must haste to the
heart-sickening scene th^^ opens ^ow before us.

Your Hero is arrested, arrested by a gloomy foe; resistance her^ is vain; the
conqueror of heroes vanquished; the black angel usurps the ^eat of life; vital
warmth forsakes him: exhausted (...) sinks. Words are needless (...) to paint
the awful scene to your feeling hearts -- language is unnecessary (...), as to
^^ay, the Image of a (...) is presented to view. But shall we retire from
contemplating his dissolution and bid him an eternal adieu! no, grace and
reason, revolt at the idea -- He died as he lived, with undiminished greatness
and dignity of mind -- with one hand he closed his eyes that were tinged with
the (...) of Heaven -- with the other, he sealed those lips in the ley embrace
of death, that summoned you to victory, to liberty and peace.

That majestic princely form, which seemed as if designed by nature to command
the empire of the world, in laid full low -- mute is that tongue, which wafted
o^^^^ons to Heaven -- announced your Independence, and preached peace, union
and harmony, to Columbia's sons -- cruel death has ^orn him from you, and your
hearts still shed drops of blood at the parting pang -- Men, Brethren,
Citizens! her^ cherish the dear remembrance* here without (...) of blush may
flow the manly tributary ^^^r.

He is gone! and much we ^ear you never will behold his (...) again; he was the
rallying point, the standard, where animosity, faction, (...)-spirit, all, all,
were melted down (...), all absorbed in public good -- And is he gone* (...) is
the light of li^^ righteous Heaven! continued to the (...) captive under
clanking chains -- to tottering old age with (...) lo^d of woes -- to object
poverty in tattered r^gs and pining with want, and yet the Father of his
Country called away? Have pity O our God! show mercy to poor weak creatures who
adore thee, who are unable to scan thy administration, and have hearts perhaps
too susceptible of a Nation's loss.

When the sculptured monumental marble in your house of Supreme Legislature
shall moulder and decay -- When the speaking (...) shall lose expression, and
become the prey of cankering moths, still shall the name and fame of GEORGE
WASHINGTON "survive the wrecks of matter," and the ruin of corroding time --
S^^ll live dear in the grateful remembrance of American Citizens generation
after generation, when hundreds of millions may have peopled your vast
continent.

Does a disordered fancy deceive us, or is ^e on yonder cloud? If ever immortal
Spirits are permitted to quit their immortal abode, and hover (...) this (...)
globe; ^^ok down beloved Washington, from that height of felicity to which you
are raised* behold millions (...) ^^is moment testifying their profound
attachment; behold the unexampled sympathies and sorrows of a nation for your
loss; nor will it disgrace even your celestial nature, to feel the glory of the
sacrifices.

Ah! why should ever Americans forget they are Brethren? -- why ^^ver the ties
of nature and country, that should unite your ^o^ls together, in one sweet bond
of amity and friendship? As Freemen you can, you dare, you WILL think for
yourselves. In vain shall man presume to arrest the progress of the rising
(...) the swelling of the mighty deep -- no less vain the attempt, to control
the intellectual world, which (...) the clumsy restrictions of bolts and bars,
of fines and chains.

You may differ in political opinion, you may view through a different medium,
the measures of administration, -- yet I would (...) you to consistence, and
entreat, that your only contest in future (...) may be, who shall most excel IN
PROMOTING PUBLIC GOOD.

We detest spirit-of-party -- it is the bane of social life -- it is the curse
of dear communion -- When the fell-monster lifts his head, every loyal citizen,
every gentleman, every considerate father of a family, indeed every man of
common humanity beholds it with horror.

In the vile train of this pernicious monster, this murderer of social bliss,
you may easily perceive the s^akes of envy, the black features of malice* the
yellow tinge of jealousy, and the distorted grin^ings of disappointment. We
early admired the speaking importance of one borrowed device in your Nations*
(...): THE BUNDLE OF ^ODS -- to break them when combined exceeds your power,
separate them, they are easily ^^^vered -- Who (...) American valor combined?
UNITED, ^o^ bid defiance to the Universe^ SEPARATED, you might be easily
crushed, and become the prey of every daring invader. On you I call ye Heroes,
officers and men* brave Soldiers! who fought, and bled, and triumphed with you^
dear General -- at the tap of whose drum you ^^arched quick through perils, toils
and blood, to fame and glory -- when (...), cold and hunger, were your portion,
his generous soul, his feeling heart was agonized -- He bemoaned your ^ate with
bowels of compassion -- And shall Washington the Great and Good, "born to save
his country," die without regret? Can you retain the memorials of his gallant
spirit, and withhold the ^ear of sorrow -- Happy America that gave him birth!
Her sons will be black ingrates indeed, if ever his dear remembrance is erased
from their hearts. Men of valor, Soldiers! you will never be taught to cringe
and s^oop and lick the hand of tyranny -- Your untamed generous ^ouls, ^^ll
dare ^o assert your Independence and your Freedom. My (...) is up in arms
against EVERY EUROPEAN FOR, who shall dare ^o insult your Great Republic, and
we adore the memory of your patriotic Brothers, who nobly died, in asserting
the Independence of your States, and the Liberty of your Nation.

We would now glance the sympathetic eye with tender sensibility, on the
disconsolate situation of the amiable and heart wrung Relict of your departed
Father, Protector, Friend. We are well (...) that her grief is of no common
kind; woe rankles in her breast, "(...) ^e her sorrows*" great were her
sacrifices. Worthy woman, gl^^^ of her sex; I had almost said, Fellow Laborer,
in the heroic and (...) Work of delivering and emancipating^^ Country! To be
frequently ^evered from her Wedded-Love, during eight long tedious years,
exposed as he was to "death in all its forms," what fearful forebodings must
overwhelm and sink the heart? Let virtuous, female, refined sensibility,
picture the melting scene: -- Awful probation! She outlives that husband; lives
his wife no longer; divorced by cruel death; much rather had she died a
thousand deaths. -- Revered Widow! live worthy your great Peer -- ere long the
day will d^wn, and the day (...) on your beclouded mind -- live in the sweet
persuasion, that ye shell again be united after melancholy absence, "united
never more to separate." Surely there is not an hour of the short span of life
alloted her here below, since the departure of that best of men, in which she
would exchange the honest pride, and rational joy, that she constantly feels in
hearing his praise, and beholding the monuments of his glory, erected in this
great Commonwealth, for all the delights this world could afford.

I would now assume the privilege of addressing for a few moments, you
Gentlemen of the Brotherhood, distinguished by the ancient and honorable
appellatiion of Free and Accepted Masons: Perhaps silence here would better far
become me, stranger as I am to the sacred mysteries of your Craft. Yet surely,
after the ennobled testimony afforded this d^y, of your poignant sorrow, and
exquisite regret, for the loss of your Illustrious Brother General George
Washington, silence in me would border on a crime.

Gentlemen, the eyes of the world are upon you; PERHAPS I might have added,
(without a breach of the laws of charity) of a prejudiced bigoted and (...)
world. In every clime and in every country, you will find sneaking dastardly
souls; cowardly assasins, who gratify their black hearts, in deceitfully
whispering away more^ character, (...) to bring down manly excellence and
sterling worth, to a level with their own contemptible insignificance; no
doubt* your fair fame has been corroded by the venom of slanderous aspersion;
doubtless the tongue of calumny has prated to your disadvantage: But you you
will take care gentlemen, to (...) yourselves with such circumspection and
correct propriety, ((...) the digui^ed Philosopher of antiquity) as that nobody
will believe the babblers -- If Sirs, your institution is founded on the
immutable pillars of Faith, Hope and Charity (and it must be so, otherwise your
renowned Washington would not have lived and died a master builder thereof)
without peradventure it will stand un^^ved, as it has stood for ages, in
defiance of all opposition, and "will shine more and more unto the perfect day."

From the history of the world, Masonry has been patronized in every age, by
the wise, the great, the good -- Your enemies have never as yet dared to cavil
this position -- and yet it is a doleful truth, that not a few of the
fraternity, have by irreverent language, and inglorious deeds, disgraced the
profession, and afforded lamentable cause for gainsayers to open their mouths;
this however is no valid objection against the excellence of the institution
itself -- for that pure, spotless, all perfect system of Religion promulgated
by the sacred Jesus, has been dishonored by thousands of worthless votaries --
If though after your various gradations in Masonry, you should GENERALLY prove
more ungracious and immoral -- less pure in heart -- less temperate in
enjoyment -- l^ss guarded in expression -- less reverential to Heaven, than in
the former history of your life; in that case, it would undoubtedly proclaim
aloud, that there was something in the craft, that ^ad a fatal tendency to
corrupt morals, and deprave the heart. But you will take care Gentlemen Free
Masons, to prove the reverse to the world, by that most convincing of all
arguments, a holy life and honorable deportment -- that you are indeed and in
TRUTH MEN, BRETHREN, CHRISTIANS* When through future life* in the retirements
of your Lodge, you may glance the anxious eye of fraternal condolence, on the
lively Emblems exhibited to day, of your deceased Brother and America in
mourning -- That weeping Urn and that drooping Eagle -- Be taught, to li^t the
^earful ^ye to yonder Heaven, to that celestial temple above, where your
Washington dwells in ceaseless harmony and love divine. Be ^^ught, to copy his
bright example; let his humility teach you, (...) stand upon a level with the
brotherhood -- like him, learn to keep within compass -- like him, walk by
rule, as children of the light; and I most unfeignedly pray, that the fountain
of life and light, may inspire you with wisdom from above, and grace from
Heaven, to square your whole conduct, by the eternal laws of piety and purity,
of truth and virtue, of sobriety and honor.

In fine, I would beg leave to address you Gentlemen Citizens. Soldiers,
Mili^a, who have taken up arms in the cause of your country; we entreat you to
persevere in opposition to every difficulty, until you have fully attained the
use of arms for the service of your country, which you have nobly in view. Then
every little hill will become a strong-hold, and every village pour forth an
most to defend itself; you have A COUNTRY, you have A CONSTITUTION, well worth
contending for.

In the energetic superior style of my reverend and dearly beloved friend and
countryman, I would ask you "with what composure could you behold the wives of
your bosoms, with whom ye sweetly shared life's toils and pleasures wantonly
abused, insulted by an abandoned soldiery, or driven to distraction by the
piercing cries of an infant offspring? How bear the ^^ght of your habitations
in flames, the fruits of your honest ^^^ustry consigned to destruction, and the
tender pledges of your love, reduced in a moment to beggary, slavery or death?

How could you give up forever a brother, with whom you have trodden youth's
flowery path in love and peace, and mutually exchanged friendships hallowed
vows warm from the heart? Or with what feeling^ behold your dear country wa^ted
with the des^^ating sword and drenched in blood*" Religion revolts and the
spirit of man rises in arms against it. PERHAPS the fame of your preparations
his already impressed your enemies with terror -- manly consideration --
soul-comforting reflection! to bid defiance to an imperious foe -- give energy
to the good laws of the land, and secure tranquil^ty to your country; the
honorable rank you hold in civilized society will attract the attention of
mankind* dignity ought to stamp the whole of your d^meanor; intemperance or
dissipation should never be known amongst you, or the gross outrage of bold
(...) ever stain your conversation; the very appearance of this would blast
your character, and the reality render you odious to our God and contemptible
in the estimation of good and worthy men.

Do your duty citizen-soldiers and leave the event to Heaven's Lord; the womb
of Providence teems with mighty events; convulsions shake the European nations;
whether despotism shall prevail or the standard of liberty wave victorious "is
the question?" Indeed when or where these unexampled commotions shall
terminate, God, even our God only knows? Persevere, ye^chosen bands -- go on --
be the temporal guardians of your wide extended continent and the dread of
surrounding foes -- so shall the morning and evening incense of a grateful
nation be wafted to Heaven in your behalf; tottering old age will pour forth
blessings upon you; the rising youth will be trained to noble and virtuous
deeds under the captivating influence of your example "and generations unborn
will revere your memory." Persevere brave and worthy men! may the almighty
though invisible arm of Jehovah defend you as with a shield whilst here, and
the peaceful abodes of an immortal Paradise be your everlasting inheritance
hereafter.

FINIS

