MR. GREENWOOD's ORATION.

AN ORATION, COMPOSED AT THE REQUEST OF THE SELECT-MEN, AND DELIVERED BEFORE
THE INHABITANTS OF THE TOWN OF BATH, ON SATURDAY, 22d FEBRUARY, 1800.

BY ANDREW GREENWOOD, ESQUIRE.

HALLOWELL (DISTRICT OF MAINE) PRINTED BY PETER EDES. 1800.

AN ORATION.
FRIENDS AND FELLOW-TOWNSMEN,
AFTER the many eloquent orations, the many splendid eulogiums, which have so
lately attracted your attention, it is not without extreme diffidence I now
venture to appear before you; but I trust your candor and generosity will
receive, with indulgence, the feeble efforts of one who never had before the
honor to address a public and mixed assembly.

SCARCELY two months have elapsed since we received the melancholy and
distressing tidings that our Washington was no more! that quitting its earthly
mansion, his sublime soul had fled to mingle with the spirits of Columbus and
of Franklin.

GENIUS has already exerted her powers, and fancy has displayed her brightest
colorings, in attempting to portray the character of him whose loss we are now
assembled to deplore. The venerable sage and the youthful orator, have vied in
extolling the virtues of this extraordinary man. But still with tender anxiety,
with filial solicitude, we listen to and enquire after fresh testimonies of
veneration and respect. Not content with the private effusions of gratitude and
affection, the supreme authority of our country, in honor to the memory of her
dearest son, has appointed this day, the anniversary of his birth, to be
observed as a day of mourning from one end of our empire to the other. Twice,
my respected auditors, have you attended to hear from this place, expressed in
the language of piety and religion, the just praises of Washington; but if I
may be allowed to judge of the feelings which now possess you, you will think
it no trespass on your time if I should recapitulate some of the most striking
and prominent periods in the history of this great man's life.

THOSE who are conversant in the annals of our country will readily recollect
the first glorious instance that, in the dawn of manhood, marked our Washington
as the first of men. -- When scarcely known to the military world, he rescued
from entire ruin the remnant of Braddock's defeated host; 'twas then the Genius
of America first displayed her guardian care in protecting her future savior
from the secret ambuscade and poisoned arrow of Indian warfare. From this time,
while he was maturing in years and acquiring that knowledge and experience
which expanded his opening mind, a revolution was preparing in the world that
was to call forth all his powers. In the first list of American worthies we
find enrolled the name of George Washington, from Virginia. 'Twas then, in the
meridian of life, that his noble person, his ingenuous mind, his open and manly
countenance, his firm and intrepid temper, pointed him to the discriminating
wisdom of his illustrious compeers; and with the universal consent of the
patriots of the day, they appointed him to command the armies of his country.

From hence to trace him would indeed require
"An Angel's pencil, and a Seraph's fire!"
With a modest distrust of his talents, but with the firmest reliance on the
justice of his cause, he entered foremost on the theater of our revolution; not
like some modern heroes confiding solely in human aid, but with an ardent and
fervid zeal he implored the approbation and assistance of his GOD.

AT Cambridge, in this Commonwealth, he commenced his conspicuous career. Here
he was called upon to pass through the most difficult and trying scenes, -- an
army without discipline, officers without military skill, and no supplies but
such as were afforded by the precarious hand of uncertain fortune; but
surrendering to no difficulties, dismayed by no appearances, he assumed the
difficult duty, he reconciled the discordant minds of rival chiefs, he
regulated the strange fancies of unruly freemen, he brought them to act as one
body, to unite in the capital blockade of Boston; and thus drove the enemy from
our state.

LET us now follow him to the next most interesting and most distressing scene
of all his life, to December 1776, when the gallant How, commanding the
veteran armies of Britain, arrayed in the splendour of military uniformity,
flushed with the sense of their superior discipline, presented the dreadful
phalanx, while the poor followers of Washington trod with naked feet the frozen
grounds of Newj^^^^y -- 'twas then, my friends, our liberties lay gasping --
feeble minds were driven to despair -- this was indeed "the time that tried
men's souls;" every false and hollow friend then retreated from the scene --
the sunshine patriot hid his head, while the portentous heavens shrouded their
armory in black. Amidst the jarring elements, amidst the wreck of matter, in
the crush of contending armies, Washington stood unmoved; his great soul felt
no alarm -- the eyes of the world were on him; in that perilous moment his
mighty genius suggested, and he executed the masterly feat that has forever
eclipsed the victories of Hannibal and Caesar. Moving in the rear of his enemy,
while they were pleasing themselves with the thought of soon swallowing up his
little band, he captured 900 Hessians, and filled with terror and dismay his
valiant and astonished foe. Fain would I pursue this brave and illustrious man
through the after vicissitudes of an eight years war, recount all his glorious
exploits, all his magnanimous struggles. -- Fain would I drop a tear on the
ashes of the departed heroes who fell, while contending with him for the
glorious prize. -- Gladly would I condole with those who will now renew the
memory of a father, a husband, a son, a brother, who, fighting for their
country, under the command of Washington, died nobly in the bed of honor; but I
forbear. I will now come to that pleasing and brilliant epoch when, at the head
of triumphant armies, Victory placed his wide spreading standard on the
battlements of York town, when, with joyful acclamations, we hailed him the
conqueror of the great Cornwallis. Here the same magnanimity of mind is still
distinguished -- he is equally great in the hour of prosperity, as in that of
adversity -- Not depressed with the difficulties of misfortune, not dazzled
with the brightness of success, the western gales wafted the intelligence
abroad, and Great Britain now learned that all attempts to subdue America were
idle and absurd; that in Washington was a successful Sir William Wallace; and
that the spirit of her immortal ancestors animated her sons. Peace ensued, and
the eagle of America, on the wings of independence, soared unmolested to the
skies; but the love of our country cooled. There was on foot a numerous army,
whose long and severe services called aloud for restitution; whose officers
felt and expressed the feelings natural to men. They had toiled -- they had
wasted the prime of life -- they had given every thing to others, and they were
without reward; combining in a moment of unreflecting disappointment they
determined never to lay down their arms till their claims were satisfied; but
that could not be -- Washington appeared among them -- that rhetoric which had
so often been employed to raise their drooping hopes -- that countenance that
had so often animated them in the day of battle, again prevailed, and they
solemnly pledged themselves rather to relinquish their pay, than tarnish their
dear earned honors.

TAKING now an affectionate and long farewell of his brave companions in arms,
he moved on to the place where Congress were then holding their session, not
clad in the helmet of suspicion, no impenetrable lining to his waistcoat, but
clothed with the majesty of conscious virtue, and erect with patriotic pride,
he entered the august assembly: no sullen grenadier trod in his footsteps; no
russian with a dagger leaped forward to cut short his thread of life; no cries
of outlawry assailed his ears; but while silence reigned through the hall --
while every heart beat high with hope -- while every bosom swelled with
gratitude and love, and the rolling tear betrayed the amiable weakness of
humanity, Washington reposed on the altars of his country that commission which
had enabled him to give liberty and empire to America! What a spectacle for the
admiring world! What a lesson for conquerors! What an example for future
heroes! That tongue which, on the pardon of Marcellus, shook the Roman senate
with the praises of Caesar, must here have been silent; the feelings of that
moment were too big for utterance, tears only could speak the gratitude and
admiration of his country. Well might the orator exclaim, No flow of genius, no
force of eloquence, no power of description is sufficient, I will not say, O
Washington, to embellish, but even to recount your deeds; yet this I affirm,
and this with deference insist upon, that from none of them will you reap
greater glory than from that of this day.

FROM this momentous crisis the philosopher and the historian will go with him
to the shades of private life, to his beloved retreat, the elegant abode of
Mount Vernon; there contemplate him engaged in the most benevolent purposes,
encouring the arts and sciences, promoting every useful improvement, and
sanctioning by his name and signature, every exertion to advance the honor and
reputation of his country. He was truly the patron of American merit. But what
was now the situation of America? -- a government without energy, reduced to
the humble state of seeking support by the futile means of requisition; a
decline of public virtue, disorder and confusion in many of the states, and a
rebellion in Massachusetts, spoke an empire falling to decay. All considerate
men saw and lamented the existence of so feeble an edifice. But thanks be to
GOD, there was virtue yet enough: a strong confederation under a general
government was proposed, was planned and adopted, and the constitution of the
United States, that stupendous fabric, whose adamantine pillars will, I hope,
resist the mouldering hand of time, published to America, subscribed by
Washington, proclaimed us saved.

AND now once more, the voice of his country, ever heard with veneration and
love, called Washington from retirement, a retirement which he had chosen with
the fondest predilection as the asylum of his declining years. The united and
unanimous suffrages of his fellow-citizens, pronounced him President of the
United States. How he conducted in this high and arduous station is well known
to you all; domestic faction and internal discord were hushed by his healing
counsels. The supple politicians, the artful and intriguing minister of a
foreign nation, stood abashed before his penetrating eye. All their schemes to
introduce among us the disorganizing principles of France were baffled -- all
their plans were mildewed by his vigilance and virtue. As he had shone first in
the ranks of war, he now shone first in the mild reign of peace. Having
completed nearly eight years of virtuous administration, seeing his beloved
country greatly advanced in happiness and prosperity, and feeling the hand of
time, he summoned us to attend his solemn declination. What we felt at that
moment may possibly be conceived, but can never be described. To attempt to
abridge that excellent performance would be indeed presumptuous. To select a
plant, to cull a flower, would destroy the symmetry of so beautifully decorated
a parterre; but let it be read and repeated by the old and young, and let the
lisping infant learn it with his prayers. Again Washington withdrew with the
pleasing expectation that he should now realize, without alloy, the sweet
enjoyment of partaking, in the midst of his fellow-citizens, the benign
influence of good laws under a free government; but this pleasing hope soon
vanished -- the storm gathered thick, and clouds and darkness once more hung
around us. Our commerce, the life, the soul, the vital spring of greatness,
could not be pursued with its necessary freedom. French cruisers covered the
ocean; and the acquiescence of the French government, in their hostile attacks,
was a silent acknowledgment that it countenanced their unjust proceedings. Our
indignation at these unmerited insults was not so great or so prompt, as they
provoked; but it at length burst forth, and a determined resistance to any
further hostilities was the order of the day. Our ships of war appeared as it
were by enchantment on the ocean; and our gallant seamen soon told the enemies
of their trade that they feared them not. It was also thought necessary that an
army should be organized and prepared to meet occurrences as they rose. Every
eye was turned to the man now to be appointed to command that army. We heard
the Genius of America whispering the name of Washington -- that his sword, though
sheathed, rusted not -- that his spirit, indignant at the insults offered to
his country, glowed with its ancient ardor. The wisdom of our President
selected him, and the approving voice of the Senate confirmed the choice; and
soon the important communication was made to the Senate, to America, and to the
World, that Washington, after reviewing the conduct of France and the insidious
plans of her government, and reflecting that every thing we held dear and
sacred was seriously threatened, had finally determined to accept the
commission of Commander in Chief of the Armies of the United States. Every fear
then vanished, every arm was nerved, and we justly counted on success. But
whither, my friends, does this bring us? alas! approaching to that solemn scene
-- to that awful period -- to that never to be forgotten day, the 14th
December, 1799, when the Sun of America, that had arisen fair and clear, that
advanced to and long shone in meridian splendour, that sinking had illumined the
western world, set in glory -- when Washington, parting forever from his
country, ascended to his GOD. While the deepest mourning covered the face of
the earth there was joy in heaven, and angels, trumpet-tongued, sounded their
loudest hallelujahs. Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord.

THUS, my friends, I have made a weak attempt to touch some of the outlines in
the history and character of a man who, while living, was the greatest ornament
to the world, and who will ever be the theme of the virtuous and the good to
the latest generations. To strive to imitate his bright example, and even to
bear in mind his considerate precepts, is the first duty of an American.

I CANNOT take leave without congratulating you on the prospect you have from
the abilities of his great successor -- the pure integrity, the exalted worth,
the incorruptible patriotism of JOHN ADAMS -- Oh! happy America! may thy
guardian Angel hover round him, preserve his invaluable life, and long, long
continue him -- PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES.

FINIS.

