HUMBLE SUBMISSION TO DIVINE SOVEREIGNTY THE DUTY OF A BEREAVED NATION:

A SERMON, OCCASIONED (...) DEATH OF HIS EXCELLENCY General George Washington,
LATE COMMANDER IN CHIEF OF THE ARMIES, AND FORMERLY PRESIDENT, OF THE UNITED
STATES OF AMERICA.

PREACHED IN THE BAPTIST CHURCH, IN CHARLESTON, SOUTH CAROLINA, ON THE 22D OF
FEBRUARY, 1800, BEFORE THE AMERICAN REVOLUTION SOCIETY, THE STATE SOCIETY OF
THE CINCINNATI, AND A NUMEROUS ASSEMBLAGE OF CITIZENS.

BY RICHARD FURMAN, A. M. PASTOR OF THE SAID CHURCH, AND A MEMBER OF THE
AMERICAN REVOLUTION SOCIETY.

Originally delivered, and now published, at the joint request of the two
Societies.

Shall not the Judge of all the Earth do right?

Genesis xviii. 25. The Memory of the Just is blessed.

Prove. x. 7. CHARLESTON: PRINTED BY W. P. YOUNG, FRANKLIN's HEAD, NO. 43, BROAD
(...).

To the Honorable ^^^dier-General ARNOLDUS VANDER^^^^, President, and the other
Members of the American Revolution Society, in South Carolina;
And to the Honorable Major General MOULTRIE, President, and the other Members
of the State Society of the Cincinnati,
THE following Discourse, preached and published at their request, is, with
profound respect for their persons, sincere attachment to the cause which they,
as societies, support, and the utmost veneration for the character of the
illustrious Person, by whose death it was occasioned, humbly inscribed,

By their Sincere Friend, And devoted Servant In the Gospel, RICHARD FURMAN.
CHARLESTON, March 1st, 1800,
SERMON, etc.
PSALM xxxix, 9. "I was dumb, I opened not my mouth, because thou did it."


THE great soul of our beloved Washington, has left the world. -- Accounts, not
to be disputed, have announced his death. -- It is an event long to be
remembered by Americans. -- The melancholy tidings have vibrated on our ears,
in saddest accents; they have penetrated our hearts, exciting sensations not to
be described; and have produced, in copious effusion, sincere, but unavailing
tears. -- On this day, the anniversary of that which gave him to his country
and to mankind -- the day, which, in honor of his virtues, you were used to
devote to festivity and joy; we are met, for the first time, in the house of
God, to deplore our loss of him; -- to weep over his urn; and to collect such
instructions from his death, as the solemn event is suited to inspire. This
observance of the day was first the voluntary choice of the respectable
societies, I have the honor to address, at whose command I appear in this
affecti^^ ^^blic service; but the Representatives and (...) Magistrate of the
nation, influenced by the same sentiments of gratitude, love, and respect for
the deceased Hero, Statesman, and Patriot, have added their sanction, by
recommending such observance of it to the citizens at large.

With the millions of America, therefore, we unite in paying an affectionate
tribute of respect to the memory of this first of Americans; -- this friend of
religion, of liberty, and of man.

To assist us in the pious intentions and duties of the day, the text under
consideration has been selected. For this purpose it appears strictly
appropriate, and furnishes excellent instruction.

It presents to our view, a great and good man, suffering some distressing
bereavement, or heavy affliction from the hand of God. -- Feeling the keenest
sensibility, and a struggling of all the tender or violent passions of his
soul, he is prompted to murmur, or bewail his loss in strains of hopeless
grief. -- But turning his eyes toward Heaven, viewing the majesty of God, the
wisdom of his counsels, the righteousness of his government, the perfections of
his nature, and, especially, his transcendent goodness and mercy, he is awed
into silence; -- he stills the commotion of his breast, with arguments derived
from these sources; and resigns himself to the sovereign pleasure of his God;
listening with profound attention, to the imposing dictates of the heavenly
mandate: -- To the voice of Providence, which speaks to man in afflicting
dispensations. -- Conscious of the sincerity of his heart, and the uprightness
of his inte^^^^^^ and at the same time, no doubt, exercisin^ (...) ^umble
affiance in the divine faithfulness, c^^passion, and protection, he expresses
his sentiments, and recounts his conduct, in a direct, devotional address to
the Deity: "I was dumb, I opened not my mouth, because thou did it."

The several important doctrines suggested in the text, if taken into
consideration and treated abstractly, would be found worthy of our most serious
attention; but this our time, and other existing circumstances, will not admit.
I shall therefore unite doctrinal discussion of the subject, with its
application to that mournful event, we this day recognize and lament.

In the execution of this design, let us consider, the greatness of the loss
and affliction we have sustained, in the death of the illustrious General, and
late President, Washington;

Adduce the reasons which require our resignation, and submission to the Divine
will, so manifested; And,

Point out the proper method of improving the important, mournful event.

The first intention has its accomplishment in our taking a just view of the
character, services, and influence of this great man; and of the present state
of our country.

The character of the General is so conspicuous in the American history, where
his great actions are recorded; -- has been presented to our view in such a
variety of engaging forms, in transactions intimately connected with our first
interests and tenderest feelings; and has, justly, been so often the subject of
eulogy, that it is not necessary we should enter into a particular
investigation: and were we to attempt it, the limits of a volume would be found
too confined. -- Where also should we find the Raphael-hand that could draw it
to the life, and present it to our view in all its pleasing attitudes and
glowing colors?

Leaving, therefore, this arduous service to a master's hand, we shall only
attempt a sketch.

In treating of his character, we must briefly touch on his history.

General George Washington was the third son of an opulent gentleman of
Virginia, who traced his descent from the eldest of two brothers of the name,
who had migrated to that country from York or Lancashire, in Great Britain,
about the year 1660. They were men of property when they left their native
land, and secured to themselves, as settlers in this, the usual advantages
attendant on wealth and respectability of character; which both themselves and
descendants appear to have uniformly possessed.

The General was born on the eleventh day of February, old style, in the year
1732. While very young, he began to manifest that greatness of mind, and
excellency of disposition, which have since shone so conspicuously in his
character. His companions at school have declared, that they never discovered
in him any profanity in language, or indecency of behavior; and that they
often suffered reproof, from their parents or guardians, by the comparison
which was drawn between his conduct and theirs.

Though he did not enjoy the advantages of a collegiate education, yet, he was
furnished, under a competent tutor, with an opportunity of gaining acquaintance
with classical learning. But so strong was his inclination for the
mathematics, that his genius could not be long confined to the study of the
dead languages. In mathematical science he was said to have made considerable
progress; as well as in whatever belongs, in general, to an English education.
That logic and oratory must in some early part of his life, have engaged his
serious attention, is very naturally concluded, from the classical purity and
elegance of his style; and from the clear, concise, and nervous manner of his
reasoning.

A respectable testimony has been given to his improvement in science, by the
emulation with which several of the most eminent American seminaries conferred
on him their literary honors.

When he began his military career we are not quite certain; as the historical
accounts and other sources of information which have been consulted, respecting
this and some other consequent transacactions of his life, are not so
particular as could be wished. By some accounts, it is said he had acted as an
adjutant; and by others, that he raised a company of volunteers in the capacity
of captain, for the defense of the Virginia frontiers. In either of these
cases, and both are probable, he must have entered on military service when
very young, and made rapid advances; for we find him with the rank of major at
the age of 21, when, in the year 1753, he was sent by governor Dinwiddie to
negociate with the French commandant on the Ohio. In the following year, he
distinguished himself as colonel commandant on the Ohio station, by the total
defeat of a party of French sent to dislodge him; and by his subsequent defense
of the unfinished fort Necessity, against a force vastly superior to his own.
In the year 1755 he was present at the battle of Monongahela, and acted as aid
to general Braddock. Had his prudent advice and courageous offer been accepted
by that haughty, confident commander, it is probable the fatal and shameful
defeat of the day would have been prevented: and had not his courage and
conduct, at the head of the provincial troops, interposed, after the fall of
Braddock, the remainder of the British regulars must have been cut to pieces.

Having thus established, in early life, an exalted character for courage,
prudence, patriotism, and wisdom, mature beyond his years, he retired at, or
before, the peace of 1763, from military employments; at least, from the
regular service; but was generally, if not always, a representative of the
people in the provincial assembly. In this station, the principles of liberty,
of government, and of general law, must have seriously employed his mind. -- By
this previous acquaintance with both military affairs and legislation, Divine
Providence gradually prepared him for those high stations which he afterward
filled: -- for the important part he acted in the revolutionary war, and in the
establishment, organization and government of these United States.

The state of Virginia, sensible of his abilities and worth, appointed him one
of that band of worthies, which composed the congress of '74; and on the 15th
of June 1775, congress appointed him commander in chief of the American armies.

Under his conduct they supported, amid manifold disadvantages, an arduous and
successful opposition, during an eight years war, against the superior force of
British and auxiliary veterans, headed by their ablest generals. By him they
were conducted to victory and renown.

Having finished the defensive, revolutionary war, which terminated in the
acknowledged independence, freedom, and peace of his country, he voluntarily
resigned his commission, on the the 23d of July, 1783, into the hands from
which he received it; and retired, covered with glory, to the peaceful shades
of private life.

But within the compass of four years, the exigencies, and call of his country,
again requiring him to engage in national transactions; he became a member, and
president of the convention, which framed the constitution of the United
States: And on its adoption by the States, was, by the unanimous voice of the
citizens, called to the first magistracy in the union. Having finished the
constitutional term of his appointment, as President; a second unanimous vote,
re-elected him to the same important office; and had he not voluntarily
retired, a third, or fourth, in all probability, had this been requisite, would
have continued him in it to the end of his life.

Long worn in the fatigues and dangers of the field, and pressed with the
weighty, complicated cares of government, he must, at this time of retirement,
have sighed for repose; especially at his advanced stage of life, and when all
the charms of relative and domestic enjoyment united their influence to invite
him to his pleasing home.

His intention and hope therefore, were, no doubt, fully expressed in the
declaration made to the citizens at large, in his farewell address: -- "Of
appearing no more in a public character." But once more his country called, and
he obeyed. The hostile appearance in Europe, respecting America: -- Threats and
insults, menacing a blow, roused all the patriot and soldier in his breast. He
spurned the thoughts of ease, of indulgence, and, as it were, even the
infirmities of age, when the honor and safety of his country required exertion!
-- Again he accepted the command of the American forces; again he appeared
terrible in arms!

In the cares, rather than the dangers, of this new appointment (for the last
were not permitted,) he suffered, at the high disposal of all-ruling Heaven,
the arrest of death, on the 14th of December, 1799. -- With manly fortitude he
met the awful summons; and in the 68th year of his age, complacently
surrendered his soul into the hands of his Creator and his God.

By a regular view of his character, we shall discover in him, a man endowed
with superior gifts of nature -- a great general -- an able statesman, and just
magistrate -- a true patriot -- a man of exalted virtues, and religion.

The firmness and vigor of his constitution, the manly, dignified appearance of
his person, the comprehension of his mind, the correctness of his judgment, and
his persuasive powers in eloquence, or written addresses, were at once happy
and honorable to himself, and eminently useful to mankind.

He possessed, in an eminent degree, the qualities of a great general; --
wisdom and foresight in forming his plans; promptness and courage in the
execution. Impenetrable secrecy watched over his military councils; prudence
and quick discernment directed his choice and confidence in agents. The
influence he exerted over an heterogeneous body of raw, inexperienced soldiers,
of which his army generally consisted, so as to unite and inspire them with
patience and fortitude, under all the wants, and disadvantages they suffered;
and to face with courage the enemy, superior in numbers, discipline, and the
means of war, whenever a proper occasion offered, was truly admirable. Add to
this, his skillful maneuvering, so as to deceive, delay, or elude the foe; and
the command he maintained over himself. In dangers and sufferings he was not
unreasonably depressed; in victory not arrogant, vainly elated, or secure. He
was the eye, the ear, the heart, the soul of the army: Ever attentive, ever
watchful: -- Alive to the wants and sufferings of the soldiers; but resolute to
restrain their irregularities and check their insolence. -- As a general, he
was honored by the great Frederick.

He gave an earnest of his great abilities as a statesman, by first suggesting
the idea of a federal government, in the circular letter he addressed to the
governors of the different states, at the close of the war: And he eminently
displayed them, during his eight years administration, as President of the
United States.

They appear by his recommendations to the national legislature; by the prudent
use he made of the power lodged in his own hands; by his appointments to
office; and by his suppression of insurrection. But the highest honor is done
to his character as a statesman, by his placing this country in a state of
neutrality, when the flames of war were kindling in Europe; by the effectual
measures he took to counteract the attempts of those who would have drawn or
plunged us into them; and by the excellent maxims and counsels of his farewell
address.

So just was his administration, that he might, with the greatest propriety,
have addressed the citizens of the United States, in the language of Samuel,
the Prophet and Judge of Israel: "Whose ox have I taken; whose ass have I
taken; whom have I defrauded; or whom have I oppressed?"

But to his country he was more than just: -- He was the true, the generous
patriot. For her welfare he consecrated the services of his early youth, of his
manly prime, and of his declining years. For the arduous services of commander
in chief of the armies, and president of the United States, during a term of
near twenty years, he received no pecuniary compensation: His generous soul
refused it! He sought no rewards but the rewards of virtue! He labored, only
to render his country free, independent, and happy! -- What opportunities had
he at the head of the army, for amassing wealth, had this been his object? And
what rewards might he not have received had he yielded, like the traitor
Arnold, to the overtures which proposed his betraying the cause of liberty?

His conduct uniformly justified the declaration he made on his appointment as
general, that "in assuming the character of a soldier, he did not relinquish
that of a citizen." That unremitted care he exercised to preserve the military,
in due subordination to the civil power, reflects the highest honor on his
public character; and proves the genuineness of his patriotism. -- He might,
like Cromwell and others, have surrounded the legislature with armed men; have
obtruded on their deliberations to awe them with his presence; and, to effect
the purposes of ambition, have amused the people with the cry of liberty and
republicanism. But so far was he from adopting such measures; that when by
designing men, through the medium of the army's wants, rebellion and violence
were excited, and were ready to burst forth with destructive fury; he, to his
immortal honor, risked all his popularity with the soldiers and their love of
him; exerted all his eloquence and influence; interposed his authority, and --
prevented the evil. It was his intention that his country should be really
free, and that the source of power should be preserved pure. He well knew, that
when soldiers dictate to a state, her liberties are gone.

The conduct he observed toward the British admiral, Lord How, and the
adjutant-general Patterson; and to the French ambassador, Genet, shows, that
however he would patiently bear personal injuries, or in a dignified manner
overlook slights of a private nature, he would suffer none which affected the
honor of his country. His concern for her honor, and happiness, extended to
future ages -- hence that valuable legacy, his farewell address.

So much has been already said of his virtues (and must be said when his
character is the theme) that it is only necessary to enumerate some of the
chief of that bright assemblage which appeared in him. His temperance, candor,
courage, moderation, modesty, justice, humanity, magnanimity, benevolence, and
generosity, shone forth through the whole circle of his public and private
life. -- The tears shed over Andre, whom political justice and the laws of war
suffered not to live, and his concern for Asgil, show his humanity in an
amiable light, having in them even an enemy for its object. His generosity to
his country extended to the expenditure of money in her cause, as well as to
his free personal services. -- Shares in the canals of Virginia to a
considerable amount, which that state presented to him under impressions of
gratitude and respect, were by him appropriated to the important use of
educating the American youth. -- Besides this, he gave, yearly, a liberal sum,
from his own fortune, for the support of a school in Alexandria; and by his
will the benefaction is rendered permanent. -- Of his hospitality and kindness
many were partakers. -- His eminently possessing the relative, domestic, and
social virtues was strongly evidenced by sighs and tears in the late moving
scene which was exhibited at Mount Vernon, when his beloved remains, amid his
weeping family, friends, and neighbors, were deposited in the silent mansion
of the dead.

His modesty cast a softening shade over all his other virtues. It attended him
to the last, when his praise filled every mouth but his own, and his fame had
extended to every part of the civilized world. -- Amid all his seize he
retained a sense of the imperfections of human nature: these, as a wise man, he
discovered in himself: the discovery, united with a sense of his obligations to
his God, prevented him from becoming vain: and both these, as a good man, he
was ready to acknowledge.

That the General possessed a high sense of the importance and excellency of
religion, his public declarations on almost every occasion abundantly
manifested. God's superintending Providence; his special interposition in favor
of the just and innocent; his attention to the prayers of his supplicating
people; and the necessity of religion, for the support of morality, virtue, and
the true interests of civil society; are articles which he has fully stated in
them, and zealously supported. In the style of genuine devotion, and gratitude,
he acknowledged the interposition of Heaven in the great events of the
revolution, and pledged himself to supplicate the Almighty in behalf of his
country, and of his companions in arms. -- With such professions he entered on
his offices, of general and president; and with such he retired from them. But
as no words can so well express his views, and feelings, as his own; let us
hear him on some of these occasions.

In his last general orders, at the disbanding of the army, he says: -- "And
being now to conclude these his last public orders, to take his ultimate leave
of the military character, and bid a final adieu to the armies he has so long
had the honor to command; the commander in chief, can only again offer in their
behalf his recommendations to their grateful country, and his prayers to the
God of armies. -- May ample justice be done them here; and may the choicest of
Heaven's favors both here and hereafter attend those, who under the divine
auspices, have secured innumerable blessings for others! -- With these wishes,
and this benediction, he is about to retire from service. -- The curtain of
separation will soon be drawn -- and the military scene, with him will be
closed for ever!"

On delivering his commission to the president of congress, his words are: "I
resign with satisfaction the appointment I accepted with diffidence, a
diffidence in my abilities to accomplish so arduous a task; which was
superseded, however, by a consciousness of the rectitude of our cause, the
support of the supreme power of the union, and the patronage of Heaven.

"The successful termination of the war has verified the most sanguine
expectations; and my gratitude for the interpositions of Providence increases
with every review of the momentous contest. -- I consider it as an
indispensible duty to close this last act of my official life, by recommending
the interests of our dearest country to the protection of Almighty God, and
those who have the superintendency of them to his holy keeping!"

These sentiments are yet more fully expressed in the superexcellent speech
delivered to congress, at his entering into office as president; and make a
distinguished figure in his valedictory address to the American people. To
these I refer you. --

His regular attendance on divine worship, and frequently enjoining an
observance of it, while in office; the respect the ministers of religion
experienced in his company and at his table -- and, above all, his strict
morality and many virtues, on his own principles showed, that these professions
were not words of course; but the genuine sentiments of his heart. The whole
conspires to induce the belief, that he was more fully acquainted with the
sublime doctrines of christianity, and their gracious, experimental influence
on the heart, than there was occasion to declare in these communications he
made to the public.

In a word, he was the friend, the father, the ornament of his country!

His public services, recorded in the page of history, too numerous, too vast
to be here described, we shall not now attempt to repeat. But retaining, as he
did, the powers of body and mind, in an eminent degree, he was still capable of
rendering many more of essential importance. -- Let us turn our attention to,
--

His influence in the nation; and the existing circumstances of our national
affairs.

His virtue was tried -- his character was known: His abilities were
acknowledged -- his exeperience was great: He possessed the confidence and the
love of his country. He was a kind of rallying point to all its citizens who
possessed the least share of virtue; however diversified in sentiment. Those
who did not approve all his measures; yet never for a moment, called in
question the uprightness of his intentions. -- While he lived, all competition
for the command of the army was in a manner impossible. -- An American army
was, at all times, ready to follow him in any enterprise; to face with him any
danger. He was respected by our friends; -- he was formidable to our enemies.

Unhappily for America, at this time, when it has pleased the great Arbiter of
heaven and earth to call him hence; union in principles and public measures,
though greater than at a former period, is not so complete as it ought to be.
War still deluges the nations of Europe in blood. Our differences with one of
the most potent are not yet adjusted; -- and the rival powers, at variance, are
endeavoring to gain an ascendency in our councils; or to awe us into
compliance with their wishes and interests. At this eventful period, -- while
the dark clouds of political commotion still hover in our eastern and southern
horizon, portending a storm; and while it remains uncertain, whether our state
vessel shall have to contend with the conflicting elements, or be anchored safe
in the haven of peace; our ablest pilot is snatched from the helm! -- While the
alarm of war is still sounding; the chariot and horsemen of our American Israel
has taken his upward flight! -- The loss is great; it is sensibly felt by all.
The venerable president, the congress, the public ministers, the army, the
seminaries of learning, the churches and ministers of Christ, the people of the
United States at large, acknowledge it, and mourn.

But let us now consider the reasons which require our submission to the divine
will, manifested in this event.

A forcible one occurs at first view: It is the act of God: -- Of him, who has
a sovereign right and propriety in, and over all worlds, and all their
inhabitants: -- Of him whose goodness is infinite.

Had the ruffian hand of an assassin, or the enemies to liberty, perpetrated,
or but attempted, his death; thousands, I had almost said, millions, of swords
would have been drawn by patriotic Americans, and in their hands have flamed
for vengeance. But to oppose the will of heaven, or murmur at its
accomplishment, is impiety, folly, and madness. In the acts of God, unerring
wisdom, united with justice and goodness, directs all events, both of the moral
and natural world.

Washington was to America the valuable gift of God: he had a right to resume
his own gift at his pleasure.

The event we mourn is the common lot of man: "The Fathers, where are they? And
the Prophets, do they live for ever?"

To the good man, death is desirable: It terminates the toils and sufferings of
life; and leads to perfect bliss -- to never-ending joys.

Our beloved patriot had lived to a good old age. Had he lived much longer, he
must, according to the common course of nature, have suffered those infirmities
and decays, which impair, if not destroy the comfort and usefulness of life;
and rob it of respectability. Greatness in ruins is a mournful sight: To
himself, therefore, this might be the most desirable time for his departure.

To which we may add, he had for his own honor, and the honor of his country,
completed a long course of great and dignified actions, without tarnishing his
reputation; in such a manner as to give him full rank, if not precedence, among
the great characters of ancient or modern times; -- and to make his example
useful to future ages. Did Greece boast of Solon, Aristides, Leonidas,
Timoleon, Epaminondas, and Aratus? or Rome, of Romulus, the Bruti, Cincinnatus,
Fabius, Scipio, the Antonines, or Cato? Does modern Europe glory in her
Frederick, Gustavus Adolphus, Marlborough, Hampden, or Sidney: -- as heroes,
statesmen, or patriots? It is sufficient for America that she has had a
Washington. -- Heaven has made him to us both a Moses and a Joshua. -- His
example will live, though his body returns to its primeval dust.

The cause in which this great man engaged, remains the same: and equally, we
trust, the care of heaven. 'Twas the special favor of God to him, and to his
country, which made him so eminently virtuous, great, and successful. -- The
genuine and enlarged liberty, both civil and religious, brought about by the
revolution, and in connection with law and justice, constitutionally established
in these United States, are important objects in God's moral government. --
While these are preserved inviolate; and while we acknowledge the interposition
of the Deity, supplicate his throne, fear his judgments, render thanks for his
mercies, and honor religion by a temper and conduct correspondent to its
principles, -- as this great patriot and our ancestors have done; and as the
body of our citizens, I trust, are disposed to do; -- America will remain the
object of divine care and favor. -- If, therefore, one honored agent is
removed, another will be raised up to fill his place; to catch, as it were, his
mantle, imbibe his spirit, and stand forth, under God, the guardian of our
lives, liberties and laws. -- 'Twere impiety to repose in any creature, though
an Archangel, our ultimate confidence for safety and defense.

We have, indeed, as individuals, been found wanting in our returns of
gratitude, for the manifold and excellent blessings conferred on us by
Providence. In too many instances we have abused our privileges; and perhaps*
in some, have given that honor to the servants, which was due only to their
Lord! This may be a reason for their removal; -- not out of displeasure to
them, nor ultimately to us; but for our humbling: -- that we may feel our
dependence on God, fear his holy name, and henceforth make his everlasting arm
our trust.

This is an affecting consideration. Under conviction of its truth, well may we
be dumb with religious awe in the divine presence as penitents: and with silent
admiration and gratitude contemplate his goodness, long-suffering, and mercy;
by which we are continued in the possession of so many valuable blessings; and
by which we are encouraged to hope for blessings yet to come.

Furnished with such powerful reasons to console our grief, and silence our
repining; let us turn our thoughts to the improvement we should make of this
mournful event:

And, in the first place, let us learn sincere and humble resignation to the
sovereign pleasure of Almighty God, in this, and every other afflicting
dispensation of his providence. For this purpose, let us bring home to
ourselves the arguments which have been suggested, respecting the character and
prerogatives of Deity; the frailty, dependence, duty, and interests of man;
especially those arguments which immediately apply to the death of our departed
friend. Thus let us moderate our grief and make it useful. Not to be affected
on this occasion, would argue want of sensibility -- want of virtue: But to set
bounds to our grief, and turn its tide into a proper channel, is the work of
reason and religion.

The great events and happy consequences of the revolution, in which General
Washington acted so distinguished a part, are so inseparably connected with his
history and character; that a review of the latter necessarily brings the
former before us in all their importance and excellency. By beholding them in
this connection, our love and veneration are increased to the excellent man, who
was honored by heaven as the (...) of so much good to his country: And we are
constrained to offer our tribute of gratitude and praise to God for the gift of
so valuable a citizen: -- To thank him, also, that the excellent Washington was
continued to us so long, to guard the liberties, his conduct and valor won; --
to guide our councils, by his wisdom; and, by his bright example, to teach us
virtue.

Let his grateful country honor his memory. Let her citizens recount the
instances of his generosity and patriotism; -- his heroic deeds, his toils, his
dangers, and his triumphs! -- This I am confident they are disposed to do: And
that among all descriptions of them, none will be found more forward and active
therein, than the honorable societies I this day address. -- A society formed
by the officers of that patriotic army, which fought the battles of the
glorious revolutionary war, under his conduct; to whom he stood in the
honorable and near relation of President General; -- and another, composed of
the most enlightened and respectable citizens, who have united for the express
purpose of perpetuating the events, the principles, and the spirit of the
revolution; can never be indifferent to the memory of Washington.

No, much respected members of these societies, you cannot, you will not suffer
his virtues and achievements to be obliterated! -- And that you, my Christian
brethren and fellow citizens, of every description, will not withhold the
grateful tribute of respect, your serious attendance on this occasion is both
an evidence and earnest. -- You will recollect, his sleepless nights, and days
of care; when he watched for the safety of his army, and for the freedom of his
country: how, in dangers and distress, he stood collected, with undaunted
courage; relying on the aid of heaven. -- With refined pleasure you will
recount, what my feeble voice cannot describe, how he moved sublime before his
martial bands, darting his experienced eye through the long ranks of war,
leading them to victory! -- How he drove Britain's warlike hosts from Boston!
-- How, with his little patriotic army, when the cause of liberty appeared
almost expiring, he crossed the Delaware, through the darkness, cold, and
storm; and, like the thunder of heaven, burst on the numerous, secure, and
nearly triumphant foe, at Trenton; withering their strength and prostrating
their confidence! -- At York Town you will behold him, receiving with dignity
the surrender of a powerful army; and the laurels of the British Hannibal
fading in his presence. -- You will follow him, to that august interview with
congress, when he resigned his military command; to the place where, in the
view of listening and admiring thousands, he received the investiture of his
office, as President! -- Through the various walks of public and private life
you will pursue him with your mental eye; witnessing his philanthropy, justice,
magnanimity, and piety -- and then, will say: "This is the man, who has merited
from his country, the first degree of love, respect, and veneration, that is
due to mortals."

Intimately connected with the respect due to his memory, is the sacred duty of
preserving inviolate these rights and privileges; those inestimable liberties,
civil and religious, for which he fought and labored. Let it not be said, that
after his death, Americans have become indifferent to that cause which lay so
near his heart; on his labors in which heaven so propitiously smiled -- That
cause which is so essential to our present happiness, and as favorable to our
future hopes -- That cause which is intimately connected with the honor of God,
and the interests of the Redeemer's kingdom. Let us then feel for the interests
of our country, and of mankind, as our departed patriot did; and like him, set
our faces in a determined manner against tyranny and oppression; selfish
interest and faction; dissipation and folly; infidelity, vice, and immorality
in all their various forms. -- Let us cultivate the masculine, as well as mild
virtues, and all that dignifies the man.

These his example recommends to us. An example of virtue, in a high station,
resembles the sun in the firmament; unveiling his glories to every eye, and
shedding his beams on all around. Such was his. -- It not only commands our
respect; but invites our imitation. It proves also what great things are
attainable, and may be expected, by those who sincerely engage, and strenuously
persevere in virtuous pursuits.

This example will teach the senator wisdom, the statesman justice and
magnanimity; the patriot generosity, the soldier heroism, and the citizen,
virtue. It will show to our approving understanding and conscience, that the
foundation of every truly great character is laid in personal virtue, and a
sincere regard to religion. So true are the words of the Poet: Who errs in
private never can act well.
Nor honor, faith, nor truth to such belong. --
Who can be right, whose life is in the wrong?
To the rising generation, especially, this example is recommended. Let the
American youth, fired with the laudable ambition of excelling in all that is
great, virtuous, and amiable, improve the early part of their lives in forming
their character by this excellent model: Then may we expect to see future
Washingtons arise, and stand forth the assertors and guardians of their
country's rights; the heroes and patriots of their day; the ornaments of human
nature.

But amidst all our care to secure the honor and happiness of our country;
while fears of danger distress; or pleasing expectations of prosperity and
improvement, public or personal, expand the heart; we are arrested by the
direful alarm of death. Like the bellowing thunder from a gloomy cloud; or the
volcano's horrid roar from the disrupting earth, it shakes the confidence of
mortals: -- We hear the deafening sound; our souls shudder at the shock; they
start at death's approach, and look down with awe on the vast scenes of
eternity opening on their view. "It is appointed unto all men once to die, and
after this, the judgment." "What man is he that lives, and shall not see
death?"

He is not bribed by wealth, nor restrained by power; he is blind to the charms
of beauty, and deaf to the persuasive powers of eloquence. The sprightly youth
and the smiling infant, as well as the man of gray hairs, do feel alike the
stroke of his fatal dart. -- The great and good, as certainly as the mean and
vile, shall fall before him.

Washington, the great, the virtuous, the magnanimous, the brave, the father of
his country, is numbered with the dead! --

Anterior, or subsequent to this mournful event, within a few months, several
others of the most distinguished patriots, and prime actors in the great
contest for American liberty and independence, have also fallen. Henry, whose
bold, unconquerable spirit, fired with the love of liberty and his country's
rights, stood forth the first to oppose the encroachments of usurping power, in
a manner that astonished patriots themselves; -- who plead the equal rights of
conscience, and succeeded; whose irresistible eloquence bore down all
opposition, and flashed conviction on every mind; who, in times the most
perilous, held with integrity the reins of government in a powerful
neighboring state -- Henry, the Demosthenes of Virginia, the friend, the
compatriot of Washington, is also fallen. -- The gallant Mifflin, famed in
council and in the field, is numbered with them: -- And now, -- mournful
reflection! -- the amiable, the eloquent, the accomplished Rutledge, our late,
honored governor; an early, tried, and steadfast patriot; the Tully of
Carolina, has likewise bid adieu to mortal things.

A few of these honored, first characters; of these virtuous patriots, and
citizen-soldiers, remain, venerable in years as in virtue; -- but they --
ourselves -- the whole present generation, must soon -- soon pass from time, to
an unknown world.

"Nor man alone is mortal; empires die!" -- This world itself shall suffer
dissolution -- shall be wrapped in flames: -- And all beyond is vast eternity!

These considerations should awaken us to the calls of death; especially to
that solemn call, which this day claims our attention. Death is God's awful
messenger, sent on the most momentous errand to man. -- He breaks the tender
ties of relative, social, and political connection; -- reduces our mortal frame
to dust; -- dislodges, from this c^ay tabernacle, the immortal spirit, and
fixes it in an endless state of bliss or woe!

How, as rational, accountable creatures, should we be concerned to meet, in a
becoming manner, the unavoidable, grand event, -- the change of death? What
exertions should we not make, to obtain an interest in the justifying
righteousness, atoning blood, and living intercession of the adorable Redeemer,
who is the resurrection and the life; and to be found faithful in his service
at the all-important moment, when we are summoned away to the world of spirits?
That then, when we are bidding a long and last farewell to mortal things, and
our eyes are closing in death; we may be comforted with the assurances of
divine love; -- that while we are passing through the shades of that dark
valley, where nature's light is extinguished; the reviving rays of heavenly
glory may dawn on our departing spirits, and the bright scenes of perfect bliss
open to our view. -- So shall we escape the wrath and punishment which await
the wicked; and enter into the joy of our Lord; into the sublime, permanent joy
of heaven, which no time can waste, nor created power destroy.

This happiness is reserved for all the righteous; -- of this the departed
spirits of the just already partake.

On this principle, therefore, we found the last article of improvement, we
have on this occasion contemplated to make, of that solemn event which this day
commands our attention. Let us not indulge hopeless grief concerning the pious
dead. -- It Is the command of revelation; the reason is obvious and conclusive.
Was our beloved Washington numbered among the pious, as well as the wise, the
great, the brave? -- of which we are furnished with so many pleasing evidences;
-- And has he died their death?

Then let us cheerfully submit to the afflicting dispensation which has removed
him from us; and in the contemplation of his perfect happiness and endless
rest, divest our minds of every repining thought; and of every sense of
disadvantage we have sustained by his death.

Cease to weep, thou virtuous, honored matron, who have lost in him, the man
who ranked with the best of husbands! --

Be consoled, ye, his adopted children, who shared in him the tenderest
father's care! --

Citizens of America! his political children, dry up your tears! -- Turn away
your eyes from the desolate mansion, where his presence is no longer seen; --
turn them from the dreary vault on Potomack's-bank, where his mortal part lies
mouldering in dust; -- view him in the realms of light, united in blessed society
with saints and patriots, who have finished, like him, the toils of virtue, and
now share the vast rewards of grace: -- See him holding high converse with the
Angels of Light; and, with them, approaching the Divine Presence in humble
adoration, perfecting, in high, immortal strains, those grateful
acknowledgements of the divine interposition, goodness, and mercy, which he
began on earth: -- While youth smiles in his face, joy sparkles in his eyes,
and his brow^ are bound, not with a wreath of fading laurel; but with branches
of the tree of life, and flowers of Paradise.

If such is the happiness glorified spirits po^^^^^ -- and such ideas of it
(but far more exalted than we can conceive) are given by the holy religion our
patriot professed; -- and if in their happiness he shares; -- we are not only
favored with a rich source of consolation, respecting him, and all others of
whom we may indulge the christian hope; but are furnished with the most
powerful motives to honor and cleave to that religion, which lays so solid a
foundation for human happiness: -- That we too may pursue a truly virtuous and
holy course of action; aspire to the sublime glories of the heavenly world, and
finally share in its blessedness, when time shall be no more.

At this important period, when the ravages of death, and the revolutions of
empire are ended; when the trumpet of the Archangel has ceased to sound, and
the conflicting elements are gone to wreck, or have assumed a new and heavenly
form; -- when the transactions of judgment are past, and the everlasting states
of men are by righteous retribution fixed; -- when the grand schemes of
Providence and Grace shall have their completion, and be unfolded; -- then will
the Divine Wisdom, Righteousness, Goodness, and Mercy toward the just, even in
dispensations, which to us are now most dark and afflictive, burst forth, in a
flood of light and glory, on our astonished and admiring eyes.

With a transport of love, gratitude, and joy, we shall then unite in the grand
chorus of the skies, and ascribe glory, majesty, and praise, "to Him that (...)
upon the throne, and to the (...) ever and (...)!" -- To this ascriptio^ (...)
^^ery creature say, AMEN!


