AN IMPARTIAL ACCOUNT OF THE TRIAL OF Mr. LEVI WEEKS, FOR THE SUPPOSED MURDER
OF Miss Julianna Elmore Sands. AT A COURT HELD IN THE CITY OF NEW YORK. MARCH
31, 1800. BY JAMES HARDY, A. M.

NEW YORK: Printed and Sold by M. M'Farlane, No. ^9 Gold-Street. 1800.

INTRODUCTION.
MURDER is a crime of so atrocious a nature, and at the same time so seldom
committed in the United States of America, that whenever it is perpetrated, our
souls shudder at the depravity of human nature, and we become eager to find out
the wretch, who should be so sunk in villainy, as to imbrue his hands in
innocent blood.

To this crime of so deep a die, a proportionate share of punishment is
annexed: murder and treason being now, according to the ameliorated laws of our
state, the only felonies for which those who are found guilty of them, can be
condemned to suffer an ignominious death.

But if our minds revolt with horror, at the idea of murder, it unfortunately
happens that this crime may frequently be committed in such a manner, as to
render it impracticable for us to obtain direct and positive proof against the
guilty. Hence the verdict of a jury must in such cases be entirely dependant on
circumstantial evidence. These, however, ought to be received with the utmost
caution; as circumstances may appear exceedingly strong against the suspected
person, who may, notwithstanding be perfectly innocent of the crime laid to his
charge.

He must, indeed, be little acquainted with the history of jurisdiction in
Great Britain, Ireland, and the other nations of Europe, who does not know,
that various instances have occurred, in which juries, actuated by the purest,
though no doubt, the most mistaken motives, have, by placing too much stress on
circumstantial proof assigned to undeserved punishment, persons, who, in
consequence of their verdict, have, after suffering an ignominious death, been
fairly and positively proved to have had no share in the crimes for which they
have suffered.

Upon the first intelligence of a murder being committed, suspicion will
naturally be attached to somebody -- The rumor against the unfortunate man,
whether innocent or guilty, is propagated with unremitting assiduity, either by
those, who entertain some animosity against him, or by credulous persons, who
greedily swallowing what they hear, are eager to disseminate their opinions as
widely as possible. Thus the tale goes round, daily accumulating further
strength, till at last a prejudice, which at first might only have influenced
the minds of a few individuals, becomes popular, a molehill becomes a mountain
-- and the unfortunate victim become the object of horror and indignation to
the unthinking multitude, who, if it were not for the just rigor of the laws,
would make him, with out judge or jury, a sacrifice to their own wild and
distracted imaginations.

The above remarks could never, perhaps, with more propriety have been applied
to any particular case, than that of Mr. LEVI WEEKS, a young gentleman of
respectable character, against whom, at the last court of Oyer and Terminer,
and general Jail-deliver, a bill of indictment was found, for the Murder of
Miss JULIANNA ELMORE SANDS.

The circumstances of his guilt appeared at first, very trivial. They were
however, afterward, either by the malicious and studied designs of his
enemies, or what is more probable, by that prepensity which thoughtless people
generally exercise, in propagating slander, without, perhaps, having any
particular design in view, augmented to such a degree, as in a great measure,
to render him the object of universal abhorrence. Those who dared to suppose
him innocent, were very generally considered as partakers in his guilt. Tale
after tale, succeeded to irritate the public mind. Hand-bills were soon after
his first confinement, generally distributed throughout the city, either by the
industry of those bent upon his destruction; or, perhaps, by some unprincipled
scribbler, who, regardless of the effect, which his productions might have upon
the weak part of the community, could conjure up thousands of ghosts and
goblins We have seen hand-bills, announcing the appearance of dancing devils: a
ghost in the debtors' apartment: various accounts of witchcraft, strange and
wonderful prophecies, etc. etc. On due examination, where are those
supernatural appearances to be found? Shall we never learn wisdom, or must we
ever be the dupes of imposture?
at the Manhattan Well, for the sake of raising a few pence to purchase a
dinner.

Happy, thrice happy the people, who entertaining true notions of rational
liberty, whilst, on the one hand, they are ready to bring real criminals to
that punishment, which the laws of the land inflict on their demerits, are on
the other, bound by the ties of the social compact, never to condemn a man
without a hearing -- nor to suppose him guilty, till his crime shall be proved
against him, in a court of justice --

An impartial court, composed of such wise and upright magistrates, as at
present adorn our bench; and a jury of such citizens as ever have, and I trust,
ever will compose the jurors of the city of New York, will, no doubt, on all
occasions, endeavor to divest themselves of that bias which popular rumors may
have instilled into their minds, against the accused; examine the testimony,
which may be brought before them, with calmness, coolness, and deliberation,
and without prejustice, favor, or affection, pronounce the innocence or guilt
of the prisoners who may be brought before them.

In the case of MR. LEVI WEEKS, who was brought to the bar on Monday the 31st
of March last, the attention of the public was in general attracted, though his
name had been very generally marked with undeserved obloquy, since the middle
of the preceding January, and many had been taught to believe, that the charges
to be adduced against him would not only be of the most serious nature, but
also that no exculpatory proof could possibly appear in his favor, yet we find
that after the most lengthy, and impartial trial which perhaps was ever held in
the city of New York, the jury, after having withdrawn for the short space of
about four minutes, pronounced him innocent, and the surrounding multitudes,
who, a few days before, were crying out crucify him, crucify him, began in a
manner unknown in our courts of justice, to express their approbation by loud
applauses. Such is the benefit of impartial courts and juries, from whose
decision resulted this TRIUMPH OF INNOCENCE.

It need scarcely be premised, that the case of a young man who is a native of
this place, and who had, therefore, been universally beloved by the most
respectable inhabitants of New York, for his probity, industry, temperance,
suavity of disposition, gentility of manners, etc. in short, for a display of
all those virtues, which are most ornamental in the human character, when
accused of so heinous a crime, as that of murder, would attract a large share
of the public attention: particularly, when it is considered, that the reports
concerning him were so numerous and contradictory as to leave no place whereon
the impartial mind wearied in endeavoring to investigate the truth, could find
a rest.

Accordingly, when the trial came on, the concourse of people was so great, as
was never before witnessed on a similar occasion in New York. Indeed, it is
probable, that though the room in which the court was held is very large, not
one fourth of those who attended could procure admission.

On the evening previous to the trial, I had expressed to a few friends my
intention of going to the Federal Hall, on the ensuing day, and waiting its
result. They suggested the idea, that the public were gaping with eager anxiety
for the issue, and that an account of it would no doubt be very generally
acceptable.

Not being acquainted with the art of stenography, I am incapable of giving
verbatim what was said upon this solemn and awful occasion. Indeed if I were, I
should, in the first instance, think it proper to give only a cursory sketch.

The prejudices respecting him, who was so lately a prisoner, but who is now so
honorably cleared, have been disseminated far and wide. The sooner this can be
announced to the public the better, so that all false impressions may be done
away.

The vast concourse of people, which upon this occasion, not only crowded the
outer hall, but even the bar itself, prevented me from taking my notes with
that accuracy, which I could have wished. I believe, however, that from what I
wrote on the occasion, and what my memory can supply, the following sketch may
be deemed, with respect to the most important points, authentic.

J. H.
New York, 2 d April, 1800.
THE TRIAL.
SEVERAL of the jury summoned on this occasion, were objected to by the
prisoner; but the following gentlemen were at last impannelled:

Garret Strong, Simon Schermerhorn, Robert Lilburn, George Scriba, Wm. G.
Miller, Richard Ellis, James Hunt, Samuel Ward, John Rathbone, Wm. Wharton,
jun. Wm. Wilson, and Jasper Ward.

The indictment being read, the purport of which was, that on the evening of
the 22d December, about 8 o'clock, he had taken from the place of her residence
Miss JULIANNA E. SANDS, that after beating, abusing, etc. the body of the said
ELMORE, he had thrown her into a well belonging to the Manhattan company, near
Bayard's Lane, which contained a great quantity of water, and that he had been
the means of killing or murdering the said ELMORE -- To which Mr. WEEKS pleaded
Not Guilty.

The judges, upon this occasion, were Judge Lansing, Richard Varick, Esqr.
Mayor, and Richard Harrison, Esquire. Recorder.

Richard Furman and Robert Lenox, Esqrs. Aldermen, likewise attended during a
great part of the trial.

The Council on behalf of the state, was, Mr. Colden, assistant
Attorney General -- and on the part of Mr. WEEKS, Genesis Alexander Hamilton, Col.
Burr, Brockholst Livingston, Abraham Skinner, James Woods, Charles Baldwin, and
Francis Lynch, Esqrs.

The business was opened by an elegant address from Mr. Colden, in which, after
paying a handsome compliment to the talents of the attorneys for Mr. WEEKS, and
noticing that influence which they might acquire by the force of oratory, he
observed, that if from the mass of evidence, he should adduce, he could draw
truth, he would, in that case, fully discharge the duty of a public prosecutor.

With respect to the person, who now stands as a prisoner at the bar, it was
certainly much in his favor, that he had heretofore been universally
considered as a young man of unblemished character, and irreproachable morals;
and that indeed, the crime of which he was accused, was of such a horrid
nature, as scarcely to make it possible that he could have committed it; and
that when all circumstances were considered, it could scarcely be supposed,
that human nature was capable of such a crime.

He, however, on the other hand, stated, that notwithstanding these favorable
appearances, he could adduce proofs, that Mr. LEVI WEEKS had seduced the
affections of the deceased Miss E. SANDS that he had promised her marriage;
taken her in a sleigh, on the evening of the day mentioned in the indictment,
carried her to the fatal spot and murdered her.

This was the general purport of the attorney general's adddress. He, however,
condescended, on a number of particulars, which, though no doubt necessary in a
court of justice, is incompatible with the brevity contemplated in the present
sketch.

He concluded by observing, that whether Mr. WEEKS was guilty of the crime laid
to his charge or not, it was certain, that a most inhuman murder had been
committed by some one on the body of the deceased: that the nature of the
testimony could, in such a case as the present, be only circumstantial; but
that a chain of circumstances, supported by a number of witnesses, should often
be more conclusive with a Jury than a direct proof -- inasmuch, that in the
latter case, there might be perjury, whereas in the former no such thing could
be suspected. He added, that as the trial would undoubtedly be long, and the
witnesses on the part of the people numerous, he would now proceed.

[ And here I would observe, before I enter upon the evidence on either side,
that it is not my intention to give even a DETAIL of ALL the different
testimonies. Many of them appeared to have no sort of connection with the point
in question. Indeed the learned Judge, in summing up the evidence at the
conclusion of the trial, spoke to the following purpose -- That in the great
mass of evidence before them, there was a considerable portion, which would
seem to disgrace the records of a Court. -- Nothing, therefore, shall appear
here, except what is more immediately connected with the subject.]

The first, and perhaps the most material evidence on the part of the people,
was Mrs. Ring, who affirmed, that in the month of July last, Levi Weeks came to
board in her husband's house and was soon after observed to pay particular
attention to Elmore Sands, who had lived with them as one of their family for
the last three years: that about the 10th or 11th September, being apprehensive
of the fever she went to the country and was desirous of taking Elmore along
with her, who was, however, unwilling, and that she therefore remained at home.
That about four weeks after her departure she received a letter from her
husband advising her to return home, with which she soon after complied, and
returned accordingly. That Elmore being taken unwell, Mr. Weeks was very
assiduous in his attention toward her; sat by her bed, expressed great
uneasiness at her affliction, and wished to call a physician; that about the
end of November or 1st of December, Elmore usually slept in her own room; and
that going up about twelve o'clock one night, she found Mr. Weeks sitting by
the bedside with his clothes on* and that the door was shut against her. (Here
Mr. Ring, the husband of this evidence, was ordered to leave the court, during
the time his wife was giving evidence.) That the deponent asked Mr. Weeks what
was meant by the door being shut against her; to which he answered that he did
not know that it was she, upon which the witness asked, why the door was shut
at all, to which M. Weeks replied, that as Elmore was sick, he was afraid to
trust her with any other person for fear of neglect. That at another time when
the deceased was unwell, Mr. Weeks was found sitting by her bed side, that they
were often found together, and alone in different parts of the house, and that
every day gave corroborations to prove that Mr. Weeks intended to marry her.
That on the morning of the 22d of Dec. Mr. Weeks went out immediately after
breakfast, saying he was going over to his brother's. When he returned some
time after he said he had hurt his knee: upon which one observed that he would
not be able to go out that day. He said, he would be able at night. After
Elmore had dressed his knee he went up stairs accompanied by her, where they
remained more than an hour; that some time after eleven o'clock he came down
stairs and was soon after followed by her. That a little before night Mr. Weeks
and Elmore were in the dining room together, from whence they soon after went
up stairs and staid about half an hour. That about dark Elmore had dressed
herself as neatly as she possibly could; and that as it was cold and she was to
go out that evening, she borrowed a muff from a neighbor: that Mr. Weeks came
in a little before eight; and that when the clock struck eight, her husband,
the deceased and Mr. Weeks were sitting together; that the witness then
adjusted Elmore's shawl, which was crooked, and that she had the muff in her
hand: that Mr. Weeks then went to the door with his hat in his hand; that
Elmore was then up stairs, all ready to come down: that immediately after, the
door being opened, she heard a person come down stairs, and that there was a
whispering by the door, which was instantly shut: that she was a good deal
agitated upon this occasion, and that the supposed going out of the two
attracted the attention of her husband: that she did not see Mr. WEEKS again
till ten o'clock, when William Anderson, his apprentice, was waiting for the
key to go to bed: that he then came to the fire and gave the key to the
apprentice, desiring him to go to bed, and that he appeared to be agitated, and
his countenance pale: that he asked whether Hope, the sister of this deponent,
who had gone out in the morning, had returned, to which she answered, No: that
he then asked whether Elmore had gone to bed, to which she answered, that she
had gone out: that he then expressed his surprise that she should go out alone
at so late an hour, to which the witness answered, that she had no reason to
suppose that she had gone out alone, to which he made no reply: and that Mr.
Weeks went to bed in about half an hour after he came in, and that he was
apparently much distressed: That under the expectation of the return of Elmore,
she had sat up till about twelve o'clock, at which time she searched the house,
and not finding her, went to bed, leaving the door unlocked. On Monday the 23d,
Mr. Weeks along with the other boarders breakfasted as usual, and that a little
after Mr. Weeks went out: that she then heard some person go softly up stairs,
whom she supposed to be Elmore: that Mr. Weeks then came into the room and
asked concerning Elmore, to which the deponent answered, that she had not seen
her: that he then expressed his surprise where she should be, to which she
answered, that perhaps she might be upstairs; and that the deponent being
nettled at his questions, farther observed, that she supposed he knew best
where she was, upon which he went up stairs, and upon coming down said she was
not there: that the witness not believing him went up stairs herself, and found
that what he had said was true* that about fifteen minutes after he came again,
making enquiry about Elmore, and expressing his surprise where she could be, to
which the witness answered, that she had reason to believe she had gone out
with him, to which he replied, that he had not seen her since the time she left
the room the preceding evening, on which he appeared much concerned: that about
twelve o'clock, upon observing to Mr. Weeks that she had been fifty times at
the door looking for Elmore, he replied, that he had looked oftener than that
himself: that on the next morning the 24th December, after breakfast, Mr. Weeks
perceiving her (the witness) to be exceedingly distressed, took hold of her
arm, saying, "Don't be uneasy; things may turn out better than you expect."
That on the afternoon of the same day, the witness told Mr. Weeks, that matters
had now become exceedingly serious, and that she could stand it no longer; that
she asked him what had become of her, at the same time observing, that if it
had not been for the unlimited confidence which she entertained of him, she
would have been much more unhappy than she now was; and he then expressed great
sorrow at the deponent's distress: That in a farther conversation upon this
subject, the deponent had mentioned to Mr. Weeks, that Elmore previous to her
going out had mentioned to her, that she was to be married to him that evening
at 8 o'clock; upon which he appeared to be much agitated, and began to cry,
saying, that he was ruined and undone, unless she appeared to clear him, and
that he would rather die than live under it: That on the Thursday following Mr.
Weeks came in about seven o'clock P. M. at which time the witness being much
afflicted, said, she was sure that he had got her, and begged he would tell the
truth; to which he replied, "It is my firm belief she is now in eternity. It
really is." That upon being asked what made him say so, he answered, "that he
had frequently heard her say, she wished that she had never been in existence."
The witness, upon being questioned with respect to the disposition of the
deceased, replied, that she was exceedingly lively, and that the evening she
last went out, she appeared more cheerful than usual: that on Thursday the muff
was found in the Manhattan well. Being questioned concerning the character of
Mr. Weeks, she replied, that he was a kind, friendly, and sober young man, and
always very sociable in the family. The witness being questioned, whether she
had ever enquired of Mr. Weeks, about his being engaged to Elmore, replied,
that she never had, till the Tuesday after her disappearance. On being asked
whether she did not know of the deceased being intimate with any other person
besides Mr. Weeks, she answered, No. Whether there was reason to suspect any
improper conduct between her husband and Miss Sands, she replied, not in the
least.

Hope Sands, sister of the last witness, affirmed -- That she had once found
Mr. Weeks and the deceased locked up in a room together; but did not know what
passed between them: That upon her asking him on Monday, the 23d Dec. whether
he knew where Elmore was, he replied, he did not. On being questioned with
respect to Mr. Weeks' general character, she replied, that he was loved by all
the family, but that his attachment appeared to be more particularly fixed upon
Elmore than any other person.

Elias Ring, affirmed -- That during his wife's absence in the country, from
the tenth or eleventh of September, till about six weeks thereafter, Mr. Weeks
and the deceased were frequently alone together in different parts of the
house; that one night, believing them to have been in bed together, he next
morning went to Mr. Weeks' room, found the bed greatly tumbled, and the
clothes, which Elmore had worn the preceding evening, lying in the room. On
being asked whether he had ever said, that Mr. Weeks was engaged to Elmore, he
replied, that probably he might -- He likewise deposed, that Mr. Weeks was much
more attentive to Elmore, than he was to Hope Sands, or Mary Clark, both of
whom were unmarried women living in the house: That Elmore was a girl of a
lovely disposition, and decent character, and that he was not at first uneasy
on account of her disappearance, because he thought that Mr. Weeks, in whom he
reposed the greatest confidence, was along with her. That upon the twenty-sixth
of Dec. Mr. Weeks, after taking him, (this deponent) up stairs, had enquired
whether he had said any thing about his, (Mr. Weeks') knowing any thing about
Elmore, to which he, (the deponent) answered, that he had, and that he verily
believed he knew all about her. On being asked, whether he had ever said, that
if he could do it privately, he would kill Mr. Weeks, he replied, that he had
never even thought of such a thing.

Margaret Clark being sworn, deposed that she had lived in Mr. Ring's house, in
the capacity of servant some time before Mr. Weeks had come to reside there as
a boarder; but that she was not there during the time that Mrs. Ring was in the
country, that she knew that Mr. Weeks and the deceased had been in bed together
the Monday before her disappearance, but that she did not believe, that Mr.
Weeks had engaged to marry her. That he was always very attentive to any one in
the family who might be sick; but not more so to the deceased, than to any
other person. That the deceased was an active and lively girl, and that during
the conversation, which at any time had passed between them, she had never
said, that she was engaged to marry Mr. Weeks.

Isaac Hatfield being sworn, said that he had gone to lodge in Mr. Ring's house
about the 14th or 15th of September, where he continued four or five weeks,
during which time he observed a great intimacy to subsist between Mr. Weeks and
the deceased, who seemed to be exceedingly fond of each other: that when he
left the house, there was no boarder there except Mr. Weeks; being asked with
respect to the disposition of the deceased, he said, that she appeared to him
to be a very lively and cheerful girl.

Mr. Croucher being sworn, deposed that he had lodged in the house from the 2nd
week in September, during which time he had observed great intimacy between Mr.
Weeks and the deceased; and that he had never observed any courtship to be more
warm; that for two nights, the deceased had been a great while in Mr. Week's
bed-room, and that one evening, the door being left unguardedly open, he had
seen them engaged in an indecent act: Upon being asked whether he had any
difference with Mr. Weeks, he answered that he once had, and in consequence of
that difference, he had called Mr. Weeks an impertinent puppy; that the evening
on which the deceased was missing he had been at a house in the Bowery, from
which he returned about half past eleven o'clock, an hour later than usual, as
he had engaged with Mr. Ring always to be at home by ten o'clock; that he had
never been on bad terms with the deceased, except that there was some dryness
between them for a while, in consequence of his difference with Mr. Weeks: that
on the night of Sunday, the 22d Dec. on Monday night, and every night
thereafter as long as Mr. Weeks continued there, he had been disturbed by a
noise in Mr. Week's room, etc. On being asked whether he had passed near the
Manhattan well the night of the 22d, he answered that he had not; he further
observed, that the night was cloudy and walking very bad.

Henry Ronalds having affirmed, said, that he had been acquainted with the
deceased from her infancy, concerning whom he never knew any thing unbecoming
in her conduct or character, and that she was a lively and active girl.

John Benson having affirmed, said, that he had resided in the house of Mr.
Ring for some days, in the month of September last, during which time he had
perceived nothing extraordinary in the conduct of the deceased, or Mr. Weeks.
He added that the deceased was a lively and active girl.

Susannah Broad, an aged woman, being sworn, deposed, that she lived in the
vicinity of the house of Mr. Ezra Weeks, and that about eight o'clock, on a
Sunday evening, she heard the gate open, which made her believe that somebody
was stealing: that a sleigh or chaise had been brought out, she knew not which,
and that about twelve days after the body of the deceased was found. That she
had never before nor since, heard a sleigh or carriage go out from that gate.
-- On being cross-examined, she seemed quite indecisive with respect to the
sleigh going out, and gave no satisfactory answers with respect to other
circumstances, concerning which she was questioned. Chief Justice Lansing, in
summing up the evidence, mentioned her testimony as being entitled to no
consideration.

Several evidences were now brought to prove, that on the evening of the 22d
December, a one horse sleigh, without bells, had been met driving down the
middle road, at a great rate, containing, as some of them said, a man and a
woman, and others, two men and a woman: that on Monday the track of a one horse
sleigh had been observed near the Manhattan Well, and that, on the preceding
evening, cries of the most extreme distress were heard. As, however, there did
not appear the smallest shadow of evidence, that Mr. Weeks had any share in
these transactions, it is unnecessary to detail them.

Dr. Skinner being duly sworn, deposed, that he had visited the body of the
deceased, after it had been taken out of the well, both in the house of Mr.
Ring, and in the street: but more particularly in the latter. For the sake of
such of my readers as may not be acquainted with the subject, it may be proper
to observe, that the body of the deceased continued exposed to public view, at
the house of Mr. Ring* for two or three days previous to interment: and that
for some hours before the removal of the corpse, it was placed in the street.
Hundreds, perhaps I might say thousands, came to view it.
That he found several bruises on her legs, neck, left breast, forehead, and
chin, which he supposed to be occasioned by compression: that he observed
several redish and black spots, the cause of which he did not exactly know;
that her neck was not broken; that he was unacquainted with both the parties;
that he did not believe that the appearances which he saw could be the effect
of cold or heat.

James W. Lent being sworn, says, That while sitting at dinner, he had been
called upon to assist in searching for the body of a young woman in the
Manhattan well; and that he had gone thither, accompanied by Messrs. Andrew
Black, Lawrance Myers, -- Page, and Elias Ring; that they took along with them
a pole, in which they fixed some nails; that upon putting down the pole into
the well, they found something, which upon attempting to draw up became heavier
and heavier; that upon seeing some calico appear upon the top of the water,
they were convinced they had got the body of the young woman of which they were
in quest; that in order to get her up the more easily, a rope was procured from
the neighborhood and placed under her arms, by which means she was pulled up
in such a manner as to do no injury to the body; that her appearance was such
as to induce him and the others who were present upon the occasion, to suppose
that she was murdered; that her hat, handkerchief and shoes were off; that her
stockings were down and partly torn, and that her toes were scratched, and also
her hands, but not in such a manner as to induce a belief, that she had
sustained the injury by attempting to climb up the well; that immediately after
finding the body, they went to the Police Office, where a warrant appeared to
be in readiness for the apprehension of Mr. Weeks; that upon finding him to be
the person suspected, he was exceedingly astonished, as he could not conceive
him to be guilty of an atrocious deed; and that immediately after his caption,
he asked, whether the body was not found in the Manhattan well? The witness, on
being asked whether the discovery had been kept a secret amongst those who took
the body out of the well, replied that it had.

Dr. Snedeker being sworn, deposed, that he had seen the corpse two or three
days after it was taken out of the well -- that the collar and breast bones
were hurt -- and the neck much injured: that he could move the collar from the
breast bone: and that, upon her breast, there was a livid appearance as large
as a dollar. The witness being asked whether a corpse might assume a livid
appearance by exposure to the air or cold, replied, he believed not -- Being
questioned, whether such an appearance might not be occasioned by suffocation,
he answered, that he was not certain.

Dr. David Hossack having sworn, deposed, that he had seen the body of the
deceased, and had observed three or four spots on the neck, and that her
forehead was bruised: both of which he considered to be the effect of violence
from some other person than herself, and that in his opinion, she could by no
act of her own, have inflicted such wounds on herself as appeared on his
examination of the body.

Mrs. Osborn, being sworn, deposed that the deceased Miss Sands, with whom she
was well acquainted, was a lively girl, received the muff, which was afterward
found in the Manhattan well from Mrs. Blonk.

William Williams being sworn, deposed that he had rode from the house of Mr.
Ring with a horse to the Manhattan well in sixteen minutes, and at another in
fifteen, that he was then only on a trott and hat very probably it might have
been done in less time.

Mr. Buskirk being sworn, deposed exactly to the same purpose as the evidence
immediately preceding.

William Cross being sworn, deposed that the horse belonging to Mr. E. Weeks
was a good runner, smart and active, and that such a horse with a sleigh,
moderately loaded might, when there was good sleighing run a mile in five
minutes.

The evidence being now closed on the part of the people, colonel Burr
addressed the court and jury in one of the most eloquent speeches, which we
have ever heard. His eloquence was however, in the present case unnecessary, as
the guilt ascribed to Mr. Weeks, appeared to every person present upon the
trial to have been unsupported by any substantial evidence.

Colonel Burr then addressed himself in behalf of the prisoner to the court and
jury, in one of the most masterly speeches both with respect to composition and
oratory, which we have ever heard, the purport of which is as follows.

He began by taking notice of the great calmness, with which the jury had
listened to the subject in discussion for many hours. He observed, that in
criminal cases, it was essentially necessary for a jury who did not wish to be
hereafter tortured with remorse of conscience that circumstantial evidence was,
in general, improper, and ought in no case whatever, to be relied on, unless
that they were uniformly and completely connected together in one regular
chain. He spoke of the influence which prejudice might have upon the
imaginations, as tending in such cases to prevent a wise and just decision:
that in a court of justice, if there were any biass it ought rather to be in
the favor of the prisoner's innocence, than of his guilt, and at all events,
every man should be deemed innocent of the crime laid to his charge, 'till he
was proved guilty: that tales of every species had been ^^^^^gated against the
prisoner, which had left the most unfavourable impression upon the public mind.
That with respect to these it was essentially necessary for the jury to fortify
themselves, in order to their fixing upon a just and proper verdict; and that
he was persuaded, that if the whole evidence aqainst Mr. Weeks was fairly and
impartially examined, there was not a single circumstance on the face of the
testimony, which could influence a jury to pronounce the prisoner guilty.

He observed, that, notwithstanding the intimacy, which was said to have
subsisted between the prisoner and the deceased, it did not amount to
courtship, or a well-founded expectation of a future marriage; and that his
attention to her appeared by no means to indicate any such views: that the
deceased had manifested equal partiality for other persons, as for Mr. Weeks:
and that she was frequently in the habit of going out late at night, and that
in her apologies for such conduct, it would be found, that she had asserted,
that she had spent her time in houses, where it afterward appeared she had not
been: -- and that hence it might fairly be concluded, that if the conduct of
the deceased had not been irregular, it at least had been very indiscreet, and
might have exposed her to danger, both with respect to her morals and person;
and that if she really had been murdered, the suspicion might, with more
propriety be attached to some other person than to Mr. Weeks. That it would
appear, on the evidence, which would hereafter be produced, in what manner the
prisoneer was employed on the evening of the 22d Dec.: from which it would be
evident, that he could not possibly have had any share in throwing the deceased
into the Manhattan Well -- and that about half past 8 o'clock, being nearly the
time at which the unfortunate transaction was supposed to have happened, he was
at the house of his brother, where he supped, and sat till ten o'clock, in a
calm, composed, and cheerful manner, as usual, and without discovering the
least perturbation of mind.

He observed, that before a jury could be justified in bringing a verdict
against a prisoner, upon circumstantial evidences, circumstances upon which
they were to found their opinion, must be closely connected together, and that
there must be no breach in the chain -- but that the old woman's deposition,
with respect to the story of the sleigh, was so exceedingly defective, that it
did not deserve the smallest attention -- that she was obviously lost in
recollection, with respect to dates and time.

He observed, that on this occasion, the utmost industry and ingenuity had been
exercised, to irritate the public mind against the prisoner -- that upon
observing every circumstance, he could have no motive in perpetrating so horrid
a deed: that there could be no love connected with jealousy -- that he could
not possibly have harbored any resentment -- which was more than could be said
with respect to some others, who were her acquaintances, and whose interest it
might be greater to have destroyed the deceased, than Mr. Weeks.

He then proceeded to state, that Mr. Weeks was a young man highly esteemed by
many of the most respectable inhabitants of New York; that there could not
possibly be any good ground for suspecting that he was the murderer of the
deceased; that considering every circumstance, viewing his general character
and appreciating any motive, by which it might be supposed, he could possibly
be actuated, he could not be guilty.

That there was nothing extraordinary in the circumstance of his being
appalled, when taxed with the charge of murder, as this might be produced at
the astonishment of the charge, or resentment against the persons who dared to
harbor such a supposition.

He warned the jury against paying attention to popular rumors and mentioned
two cases* in which persons after having been generally supposed guilty of the
crimes alleged against them, were afterward found innocent.

The first was with respect to a man who was indicted for having murdered a
young woman. Although entirely innocent of the crime laid to his charge, he got
affrightened and in order, as he hoped, to save himself from the agony of
death, upon the gibbet, got another woman to represent the person who was
supposed to be missing -- the fraud was discovered and this connected with
other circumstances induced the jury to bring their verdict guilty. The man was
hanged; but the woman supposed to be murdered, afterward made her appearance,
by which every person was convinced that the jury had been mistaken in their
verdict.

The second case which he mentioned was respecting a rape supposed to be
committed, some few years ago upon a young woman of this city, the
circumstances of which must be fresh in the memory of most people: the public
mind was in that case greatly incensed, and notwithstanding the verdict of a
jury declaring the presoner not guilty, the irritation of (...) minds was so
great as to induce them to insult the magistrates and to pull down the house of
a person who was believed to be aiding and abetting this supposed rape -- A
civil suit was afterward commenced against the person accused, who, though
acquitted by a jury, was for a long time, to gratify the vengeance of some
vindictive individual, immured within the walls of a prison -- The accusation,
however, against the prisoner, has of late appeared to be absolutely false and
groundless Colonel Burr previous to the jury being enclosed, quoted the case of
three other persons, who were executed for supposed crimes of which it was
afterward clear they were innocent.
-- Thus he was a sufferer on account of popular prejudice.

Without mentioning these things he had reason to suppose the jury now before
him was fully armed against prejudice, which, in many cases, had been found to
operate against the innocent: that they should impartially weigh the whole mass
of testimony before them and give no scope to the effect, which previous
reports might have had upon their imagination, that in cases of this sort every
body knew something: every day added more and more to the report -- incessant
talk upon the subject inflamed the public mind: frequent repetition induced
belief and that imagination formed reality.

He concluded by observing, that the circumstance of Mr. Weeks, when first
apprehended, having asked whether the body of the deceased was found in the
Manhattan well was not in the least extraordinary, as he had been previously
apprised that the muff had been found there. On the whole he believed that the
proof against his client, was so little to the purpose and that the evidence
which would now be adduced in his favor, was such as to induce the jury to
bring in a verdict in his favor without leaving their seats.

After having finished this eloquent address, of which I have given a cursory
sketch, the evidences were then brought forward in favor of Mr. Weeks.

Wm. Seaman being sworn, deposed, that he lives in the house of Mr. Ezra Weeks,
as an apprentice; that amongst other things assigned to his care, there was
that of the horse and sleigh, concerning which Mr. E. Weeks paid little or no
attention: that upon the evening of the 22d December, he had as usual locked up
the gate and had either put the key in his pocket or on the mantle-piece, he
could not say which -- nor could he recollect whether he had found it in his
pocket, or on the mantle piece, the next morning -- that, however, when he went
there, he found every thing in the same situation as he had left it -- that the
sleigh had eight bells affixed to it with leather strings, which it would take
some time to unloose* and that he believed if the knots had been unloosed, and
afterward tied by some other person, he was inclined to believe, that he would
have observed it. He added farther, that he had been home on the evening of the
22d of Dec, saw Mr. Levi Weeks there, about half past 8 o'clock, and that he
was perfectly mild, composed and cheerful as usual.

Mrs. Forest being sworn, deposed, that she lived in the neighborhood of the
house of Mr. Ring, and of course was near at hand, when the unfortunate
circumstance of the disappearance, and afterward the discovery of the deceased
took place. That upon the second of Jan. about twelve in the forenoon, previous
to Mr. Levi Weeks being arrested, she had mentioned to him the circumstance of
the muff, which the deceased had worn, being found at or near a well close by
Bayard's lane: that he received this information with the utmost composure, and
from every appearance, did not discover the smallest degree of perturbation.

Joseph Watkins being sworn, deposed, that he had been called upon by Mr. Ring,
on the twenty second of Dec. for the purpose of assisting in fetching up the
body of the unfortunate Miss Sands: that after getting a pole properly
prepared, with nails in it, and a rope, by which they might with more
convenience, take up the corpse. That upon its being got out of the well, her
hair appeared to be down and tumbled, her shawl torn off, her face much
swelled: and being questioned with respect to the other injuries which appeared
on her body, he seemed to consider them rather as scratches than bruises. He
observed farther, that her stockings were down; that with respect to her feet,
he had not obsereed whether they had been injured or not: that the neck of the
deceased was swelled; but that he had not perceived any marks.

This witness further declared, that in September or October last, during the
time that Mrs. Ring was absent in the country, he heard a noise in a room in
Mr. Ring's house which was only separated from his own appartment by a thin
partition, and that the noise was similar to that, which might happen when
husband and wife were in bed together, that two distinct voices could be heard
upon these occasions, the one of which was loud and rough, and the other low;
that he believed the voice of the former was that of Elias Ring, and the latter
that of Miss E. Sands; that this struck his mind with astonishment, and that he
was apprehensive, it might occasion great disquietude in Mr. Ring's family.
That the voice of the man was not that of Mr. Weeks because his was very
smooth; that of Mr. Ring on the contrary was rough, and that he was well
acquainted with the tone of Mr. Ring's voice: and that for 12 or 14 times he
had heard a noise of a similar kind between the middle of the months of
September and October, that after Mrs. Ring's return no noise of that nature
was heard; that one morning after the discovery of the deceased body, Mrs. Ring
appeared exceedingly sorry for the situation of Mr. Weeks, whom she represented
as being a young man of the most friendly disposition, and exceedingly attached
to her family: and that if any person was sick he would without discrimination
pay the utmost attention. This deponent further added, that the body of the
deceased had, in a room of Mr. Ring's house been exposed for several days, and
afterward for a few hours previous to its interment, in the street: that Mr.
Croucher was very assiduous in spreading suspicions against Mr. L. Weeks.

Mrs. Watkins, the wife of the aforesaid deponent, being from sickness,
confined to her room, was sworn by the chief justice, and her testimony was as
follows: That between the room in which she and her husband slept, and another
in the possession of Mr. Ring, there was only a thin lath and plaster
partition, that from the middle of Sept. to the middle of Oct. she had
frequently been disturbed by the rustling of the beds, such as might be
occasioned by man and wife* that the voice was evidently rougher than that of
Mr. Weeks: that he possibly could not be the person who was with that woman:
That Mr. Watkins appeared greatly alarmed about the business, and said that the
devil would be to pay in Mr. Ring's family, upon the return of Mrs. Ring --
That upon Mrs. Ring's return, no noises of a similar nature were heard: on
being asked with regard to Miss E. Sands's general conduct she answered, that
she believed it was in general regular and proper, that Mrs. Ring had told her
that Mr. Weeks was amiable in his manners and kind to the children; that in
fact he was considered rather as one of the family than a boarder.

Anthony Rutgers being sworn, deposed that he had fallen in with Elias Ring in
Gre^^wich Street, accompanied by another person, that the weather at that time,
was exceedingly bad, admitting neither of walking or riding with convenience,
that Mr. Ring asked him if he knew any thing about a muff; upon which the
deponent expressed great surprise when Mr. Ring told him the girl had been
missing about eight days, that she might be dead for ought he knew, and her
death might be occasioned by a love fit, that this deponent supposing her body
might be in the river, advised them to employ George Wallgrove who was one of
the most expert persons of any in this city for sweeping for drowned persons;
the deponent further declared that from the conversation which passed between
him and Mr. Ring, he did not believe at the time that Mr. Ring had any idea of
the girl's having been murdered.

Mrs. Forest being again called, mentioned a conversation which had passed
between her and Mr. Groucher -- That Mr. Croucher was sorry for the unfortunate
affair: that he had spent the evening of the twenty second of Dec. at a
friend's house in the bowery: that he was very sorry that on his way home, he
had not come past the Manhattan well, as in that case he might have been the
means of saving the life of the deceased.

Elizabeth Watkins, daughter of Joseph Watkins, being sworn, deposed, That she
was acquainted with Miss E Sands, and that she knew the room in which she
slept, to be adjoining to that of her mother's. Upon being questioned with
respect to the general character of Mr. Weeks, she declared in her opinion he
was a quiet, peaceable, and benevolent young man.

Doct. Mackintosh being sworn, deposed, That he had been called upon to attend
a coroner's inquest, upon the body of Miss E. Sands, and that going thither,
had fallen in with Dr. Prince, who accompanied him, and who was also desired by
in officer to attend upon the occasion. That upon examining the body, nothing
appeared to vindicate a supposition of external violence, as the injuries which
she had reveived, seemed more like scratches, than wounds or bruises: that he
had opened her head, breast and body, and that no extravasion of blood
appeared: that there was no dislocation of the neck, that, however, there were
livid spots -- That being particularly required by the coronore's inquest, to
examine whether she was pregnant or not, he was decidedly of opinion she was
not: that there was no marks of violence on the belly, and that the collar bone
was not dislocated.

Dr. Prince being sworn,, appeared exactly to coincide with Dr. McIntosh in
opinion.

Dr. Romayne, being sworn, seemed to coincided in the same opinion.

David Forest being sworn, deposed, that in a conversation with Mr. Croucher,
who came into his store where this deponent was, said if Miss Sands was dead,
it would be nothing strange to him, after he had heard what the landlord
expressed: he further told him, that there was a material evidence, who would
come from the Jerseys, that would be fully sufficient to have Mr. Weeks
arraigned, condemned and hanged!

Israel Lacey being sworn, deposed, that he was a lodger in Mr. Ring's house at
the time Miss Sands disappeared. That he came home that evening, about ten
o'clock, and in about four minutes after, went to bed along with his companion,
Mr. Russel; that during his, the deponent's stay at that house, he did not
perceive that Mr. Weeks appeared more attentive to Miss Sands than to any of
the other females about the house. That upon the night of Miss Sands'
disappearing, and on the ensuing night; he did not hear any noise in Mr. Weeks'
room: that on the contrary, in all his actions he appeared to be as cool,
tranquil and collected as ever. That he understood Mr. Ring had expressed
himself to this purpose: That it would be no harm to shoot Mr. Weeks, if it
could be done without discovery.

Mr. Dustan being sworn, deposed, that on Friday last, a man, at that time
unknown to him, but whom he afterward knew to be Mr. Croucher, had come into
his store, between 6 and 8 o'clock in the morning, who saluted them with "good
morning, gentlemen -- Levi Weeks is taken up by the high sheriff -- Some more
fresh proof will be brought forward against him -- A material evidence will
come forward from Hackensack." After announcing his name to be Croucher, he
took his leave, apparently having no other business than to communicate this
news.

Hugh M'Dougal being sworn, deposed, That he had for some time past been
acquainted with Mr. Croucher, concerning whom, however, he did not entertain
the most favorable opinion: that upon going through Greenwich street about the
2d of January, and passing the house of Mr. Ring, he found Mr. Croucher
amazingly assiduous in drawing in the multitude who came past, to view the
corpse: that he mentioned a variety of circumstances against Mr. Weeks, in the
propagation of which he appeared very diligent that the said Croucher had been
occasionally in the habit of coming to his (the deponent's) house with such
articles as shawls, etc. to sell; that he made it a general point to come at
dinner time, but not liking him, his visits were not welcome; that he had told
his wife if Mr. Croucher should come with more goods, she should tell him that
if they wanted any they would call upon him: that upon Thursday last he had
called upon him while busy in his garden, and his sole business appeared to be,
to inform him of fresh evidence from the Jerseys: To which the deponent
replied, that as a difference had subsisted between him and Mr. Weeks, his
conduct appeared to him to be extremely indelicate and improper; and that for
his part, notwithstanding all the tales which might be propagated to Mr. Weeks
^^^advantage, he should suppose him innocent till he ^^^rd more about it.

In support of the testimony of Mr. Croucher ^^^dence, were brought forward to
depose, that on the evening of the 22d of December, he had supped at a house in
the Bowery, in which he continued from sundown or before that period till
nearly eleven o'clock at night, during which time he could not have been gone
ten minutes from the house without being missing. Mrs. Brown, who resides in
the upper end of the Bowery, deposed, that upon the anniversary of her child's
birthday, she had invited some friends to supper, amongst whom was Mr.
Croucher, who continued in the house from about half past four till eleven
o'clock in the evening: but upon being more particularly examined, she could
with great difficulty condescend upon the precise day, on which this birthday
feast happened.

A School-Madam, who lives in that vicinity, being sworn, deposed, that she had
on the evening of Mrs. B.'s child's birthday, been at her house, during the
latter part of the day, along with several other persons, amongst whom Mr.
Croucher was one, who continued there from about sun-down till about eleven
o'clock. On being questioned on what day this happened, she could not tell.
Whether before or after Christmas she could not recollect. Was it on a Sunday
or week day -- she could not at first remember: but at last assented that it
was on a Sunday: but what particular Sunday, she could not expressly determine.

Two more persons, who were said to have been present at this birthday feast,
deposed, that Mr. Croucher had been one of the party, and that he continued in
the house from about sun-down till toward eleven o'clock. They, however, were
equally undecisive with respect to the month and day on which this transaction
happened as the two preceding evidences.]

Timothy Crane being sworn, deposed, That he boarded some time at the house of
Mr. Ring, during which he could perceive no partiality of Mr. Weeks to either
of the girls about the house; that the deceased was sometimes more cheerful
than at others; that he worked in the shop with Mr. L. Weeks, on whose conduct
he perceived no difference after the absence of Miss Sands; that he laid out
the work as usual, and attended to every part of his business as heretofore.

John M'Comb being sworn, says, That about 6 or 7 o'clock in the evening, his
wife and he had gone to the house of Mr. E. Weeks, where L. Weeks stayed till
about 8 o'clock; that some time previous to his departure, he stood leaning on
the back of a chair, listening to the conversation which passed between me and
his brother, without indicating the smallest confusion or perturbation of mind.

Amos Mead being sworn, says, That on the evening of the 22d of December, Mr.
and Mrs. M'Comb were at the house of Mr. E. Weeks; that L. Weeks stayed there
from about half past eight till about ten o'clock, when he went away.

Ezra Weeks being sworn, says, That on the morning of the 22d of December, L.
Weeks had come to his house, where he remained till he (the deponent) went to
church, and that he did not return till about 5 o'clock in the afternoon: that
between 6 and 7, L. Weeks came in and continued till about 8, conversing
cheerfully with Mr. and Mrs. M'Comb, and himself; that he then left the room
and returned in about 20 minutes, supped, and talked in his usual manner, spoke
about the business of the ensuing day, took minutes of the work to be done with
accuracy, and had the work done with punctuality.

Charles Thurston being sworn, says, That he wrought in the shop with Mr. E.
Weeks, first as a journeyman, then as a foreman; that upon the report of Miss
Sands being missing, Mr. L. Weeks still appeared to be as attentive to business
as formerly; that the books were kept with the same accuracy; that he appeared
to be perfectly composed in his mind.

Among the numerous witnesses who have been already mentioned, there were none
who, when questioned with respect to Mr. Weeks's character, did not speak of
him in terms of the highest applause.

To substantiate this point, which, however, appeared to be disputed by nobody,
a great number of the most respectable citizens were called as evidences. And
their unanimous opinion with respect to him was, that he was a young man of
amiable character, and the most irreproachable manners; that he was mild,
humane, benevolent, industrious and temperate, and that in short, he was
universally esteemed by all who knew him.

After the examination of the witnesses, which continued from Monday morning at
eleven o'clock, till Wednesday morning at two, the Counsel for Mr. Weeks,
without a single remark upon the testimony, submitted the whole to the Court.
Mr. Chief Justice Lansing, after briefly commenting upon the testimony before
them, expressed the opinion of the Court, that he was innocent. The Jury then
withdrew, and after having chosen Mr. Simon Schermerhorn as their foreman,
returned in about four or five minutes, with the verdict -- NOT GUILTY.

THE END. [ Copy-Right Secured.]

