MODERN INFIDELITY CONSIDERED WITH RESPECT TO ITS INFLUENCE ON SOCIETY: IN A
SERMON, PREACHED AT THE BAPTIST MEETING, Cambridge.

By ROBERT HALL, A. M.

Professing themselves to be wise they became fools.

ST. PAUL. Sunt qui in fortunae jam casibus, omnia ponant,
Et nullo credant mundum rectore moveri,
Natura volvente vices et lucis, et anni;
Atque ideo intrepidi quaecunque altaria tangunt.
JUV. THE THIRD EDITION.

PHILADELPHIA: Printed by JOHN BIOREN -- For T. DOBSON, at the Stone House, No.
41, S. Second-Street. 1800.

PREFACE.
THE Author knows not whether it be necessary to apologize for the
extraordinary length of this Sermon, which so much exceeds the usual limits of
public discourses; for it is only for the Reader to conceive, (by a fiction of
the imagination, if he pleases so to consider it,) that the patience of the
Audience indulged him with their attention during its delivery. The fact is,
not being in the habit of writing his sermons, this discourse was not committed
to paper till after it was delivered; so that the phraseology may probably
vary, and the bulk be somewhat extended; but the substance is certainly
retained.

He must crave the indulgence of the Religious Public for having blended so
little theology with it. He is fully aware, the chief attention of a Christian
Minister should be occupied in explaining the doctrines, and enforcing the
duties, of genuine Christianity; nor is he chargeable, he hopes, in the
exercise of his public functions, with any remarkable deviation from that rule
of conduct; yet is he equally convinced, excursions into other topics are
sometimes both lawful and necessary. The versality of error demands a
correspondent variety in the methods of defending truth: and from whom have the
public more right to expect its defense, in opposition to the encroachment of
error and Infidelity, than from those who profess to devote their studies and
their lives to the advancement of virtue and Religion? Accordingly, a multitude
of publications on these subjects equally powerful in argument, and impressive
in manner, have issued from Divines of different persuasions, which must be
allowed to have done the utmost honor to the clerical profession. The most
luminous statements of the evidences of Christianity, on historical grounds,
have been made; the petulant cavils of Infidels satisfactorily refuted; and
their ignorance, if not put to shame, at least amply exposed; so that
Revelation, as far as truth and reason can prevail, is on all sides triumphant.

There is one point of view, however, in which the respective systems remain to
be examined, which, though hitherto little considered, is forced upon our
attention by the present conduct of our adversaries; that is, their Influence
on Society. The controversy appears to have taken a new turn. The advocates of
Infidelity, baffled in the field of argument, though unwilling to relinquish
the contest, have changed their mode of attack, and seem less disposed to
impugn the authority than to supersede the use of Revealed Religion, by giving
such representations of man and of society as are calculated to make its
sanctions appear unreasonable and unnecessary. Their aim is not so much to
discredit the pretensions of any particular Religion, as to set aside the
principles common to all.

To obliterate the sense of Deity, of moral sanctions, and a future world, and
by these means to prepare the way for the total subversion of every
institution, both social and religious, which men have been hitherto accustomed
to revere, is evidently the principal object of modern Skeptics; the first
Sophists who have avowed an attempt to govern the world without inculcating the
persuasion of a superior power. It might well excite our surprise, to behold an
effort to shake off the yoke of Religion, which was totally unknown during the
prevalence of gross superstition, reserved for a period of the world
distinguished from every other by the possession of a Revelation more pure,
perfect and better authenticated, than the enlightened sages of antiquity ever
ventured to anticipate, were we not fully persuaded the immaculate holiness of
this Revelation is precisely that which renders it disgusting to men who are
determined at all events to retain their vices. Our Savior furnishes the
Solution; they love darkness rather than light, because their deeds are evil;
neither will they come to the light lest their deeds should be reproved.

While all the Religions, the Jewish excepted, which, previous to the
promulgation of Christianity, prevailed in the world, partly the contrivance of
human policy, partly the offspring of ignorant fear, mixed with the mutilated
remains of traditionary revelation, were favorable to the indulgence of some
vices, and but feebly restrained the practice of others; betwixt vice of every
sort and in every degree, and the Religion of Jesus, there subsists an
irreconcilable enmity, an eternal discord. The dominion of Christianity being,
in the very essence of it, the dominion of virtue, we need look no farther for
the sources of hostility in any who oppose it, than their attachment to vice
and disorder.

This view of the controversy, if it be just, demonstrates its supreme
importance, and furnishes the strongest plea with every one with whom it is not
a matter of indifference whether vice or virtue, delusion or truth, govern the
world, to exert his talents in whatever proportion they are possessed, in
contending earnestly for the faith once delivered to the saints. In such a
crisis, is it not best for Christians of all denominations, that they may
better concentrate their forces against the common adversary, to suspend for
the present their internal disputes, imitating the policy of wise states, who
have never failed to consider the invasion of an enemy as the signal for
terminating the contests of party? Internal peace is the best fruit we can reap
from external danger. The momentous contest at issue betwixt the Christian
Church and Infidels, may instruct us how trivial, for the most part, are the
controversies of its members with each other, and that the different
ceremonies, opinions and practices, by which they are distinguished, correspond
to the variety of feature and complexion, discernible in the offspring of the
same Parent, among whom there subsists the greatest family likeness. May it
please God so to dispose the minds of Christians of every visible church and
community, that Ephraim no longer vexing Judah, nor Judah Ephraim, the only
rivalry felt in future may be, who shall most advance the interests of our
common Christianity, and the only provocation sustained, that of provoking each
other to love and good works! When, at the distance of more than half a
century, Christianity was assaulted, by a Woolston, a Tindal and a Morgan, it
was ably supported both by Clergymen of the Established Church, and writers
among Protestant Dissenters; the labors of a Clarke and a Butler, were
associated with those of a Doddridge, a Leland and a Lardner, with such equal
reputation and success, as to make it evident that the intrinsic excellence of
Religion needs not the aid of external appendages; but that, with or without a
dowry, her charms are of sufficient power to fix and engage the heart.

The writer of this discourse will feel himself happy, should his example
stimulate any of his brethren, of superior abilities, to contribute their
exertions in so good a cause. His apology for not entering more at large, into
the proofs of the being of a God, See an excellent Sermon on Atheism, by the
Rev. Mr. Estlin, of Bristol, at whose meeting the substance of this discourse
was first preached. In the sermon referred to, the argument for the existence
of a Deity, is stated with the utmost clearness and precision, and the
sophistry of Dupuis, a French Infidel, refuted in a very satisfactory manner.
and the evidences of Christianity It is almost superfluous to name a work so
universally known as Dr. Paley's View of the Evidences of Christianity, which
is, probably, without exception, the most clear and satisfactory statement of
the Historical proofs of the Christian Religion, ever exhibited in any age or
country.
, is, that these subjects have been already handled with great ability by
various writers, and that he wished rather to confine himself to one view of
the subject, the total incompatibility of Skeptical principles with the
existence of Society. Should his life be spared, he may probably, at some
future time, enter into a fuller and more particular examination of the Infidel
Philosophy, both with respect to its speculative principles, and its practical
effects; its influence on Society and on the individual. In the mean time, he
humbly consecrates this discourse to the honor of that Savior, who, when the
means of a more liberal offering are wanting, commends the widow's mite.

Cambridge, January 18.
P. S. The Author has availed himself of the opportunity afforded by a new
impression, to correct some errors which had crept unawares into the first
edition, as well as to make a few other alterations too trivial to be specified.

A SERMON ON EPHESIANS ii. 12.
Without God in the world.
AS the Christian ministry is established for the instruction of men,
throughout every age, in truth and holieness, it must adapt itself to the ever
shifting scenes of the moral world, and stand ready to repel the attacks of
impiety and error, under whatever form they may appear. The church and the
world form two societies so distinct, and governed by such opposite principles
and maxims, that, as well from this contrariety as from the express warnings of
scripture, true Christians must look for a state of warfare, with this
consoling assurance, that the Church, like the burning bush beheld by Moses in
the land of Midian, may be encompassed with flames, but will never be consumed.

When she was delivered from the persecuting power of Rome, she only
experienced a change of trials. The oppression of external violence was
followed by the more dangerous and insidious attacks of internal enemies. The
freedom of enquiry claimed and asserted at the reformation, degenerated, in the
hands of men who professed the principles without possessing the spirit of the
reformers, into a fondness for speculative refinements, and consequently into a
source of dispute, faction and heresy. While protestants attended more to the
points on which they differed, than to those in which they agreed, while more
zeal was employed in settling ceremonies and defending subtleties, than in
enforcing plain and revealed truths, the lovely fruits of peace and charity
perished under the storms of controversy

In this disjointed, and disordered state of the Christian church, they who
never looked into the interior of Christianity were apt to suspect, that to a
subject so fruitful in particular disputes, must attach a general uncertainty,
and that a religion founded on revelation, could never have occasioned such
discordancy of principle and practice amongst its disciples. Thus infidelity is
the joint offspring of an irreligious temper and unholy speculation, employed,
not in examining the evidences of Christianity, but in detecting the vices and
imperfections of professing Christians. It has passed through various stages,
each distinguished by higher gradations of impiety; for, when men arrogantly
abandon their guide, and wilfully shut their eyes on the light of Heaven, it is
wisely ordained that their errors shall multiply at every step, until their
extravagance confutes itself, and the mischief of their principles works its
own antidote. That such has been the progress of infidelity will be obvious
from a slight survey of its history:

Lord Herbert, the first and purest of our English free-thinkers, who
flourished in the beginning of the reign of Charles the first, did not so much
impugn the doctrine or the morality of the scriptures, as attempt to supersede
their necessity, by endeavoring to show, that the great principles of the
unity of God, a moral government, and a future world, are taught with
sufficient clearness by the light of nature. Bolingbroke and others of his
successors, advanced much farther, and attempted to invalidate the proofs of
the moral character of the Deity, and consequently all expectations of rewards
and punishments, leaving the Supreme Being no other perfections than those
which belong to a first cause or Almighty contriver. After him, at a
considerable distance, followed Hume, the most subtle, if not the most
philosophical of the deists, who, by perplexing the relations of cause and
effect, boldly aimed to introduce an universal skepticism, and to pour a more
than Egyptian darkness into the whole region of morals. Since his time,
skeptical writers have sprung up in abundance, and infidelity has allured
multitudes to its standard; the young and superficial by its dexterous
sophistry, the vain by the literary fame of its champions, and the profligate
by the licentiousness of its principles. Atheism, the most undisguised, has, at
length, begun to make its appearance.

Animated by numbers and emboldened by success, the infidels of the present day
have given a new direction to their efforts, and impressed a new character on
the ever growing mass of their impious speculations.

By uniting more closely with each other, by giving a sprinkling of religion to
all their literary productions they aim to engross the formation of the public
mind, and, amidst the warmest professions of attachment to virtue, to effect an
entire disruption of morality from religion. Pretending to be the teachers of
virtue and the guides of life, they propose to revolutionize the morals of
mankind, to regenerate the world by a process entirely new, and to rear the
temple of virtue, not merely without the aid of religion, but on the
renunciation of its principles and the derision of its sanctions. Their party
has derived a great accession of numbers and strength, from events the most
momentous and astonishing in the political world, which have divided the
sentiments of Europe betwixt hope and terror, and, however they may issue,
have, for the present, swelled the ranks of infidelity. So rapidly, indeed, has
it advanced since this crisis, that a great majority on the continent, and in
England a considerable proportion, of those who pursue literature as a
profession, By those who pursue literature as a profession, the Author would be
understood to mean that numerous class of literary men who draw their principal
subsistence from their writings.
may justly be considered as the open or disguised abettors of Atheism.

With respect to the skeptical and religious systems, the inquiry at present is
not so much which is the truest in speculation, as which is the most useful in
practice; or, in other words, whether morality will be best promoted, by
considering it as part of a great and comprehensive law, emanating from the
will of a supreme, omnipotent legislator; or as a mere expedient adapted to our
present situation, enforced by no other motives than those which arise from the
prospects and interests of the present state. The absurdity of Atheism having
been demonstrated so often and so clearly by many eminent men, that this part
of the subject is exhausted, I should hasten immediately to what I have more
particularly in view, were I not apprehensive a discourse of this kind may be
expected to contain some statement of the argument in proof of a Deity, which,
therefore, I shall present in as few and plain words as possible.

When we examine a watch, or any other piece of machinery, we instantly
perceive marks of design. The arrangement of its several parts and the adaption
of its movements to one result, show it to be a contrivance; nor do we ever
imagine the faculty of contriving to be in the watch itself, but in a separate
agent. If we turn from art to nature, we behold a vast magazine of
contrivances, we see innumerable objects replete with the most exquisite
design. The human eye, for example, is formed, with admirable skill for the
purpose of sight; the ear for the function of hearing. As in the productions of
art, we never think of ascribing the power of contrivance to the machine
itself, so we are certain the skill displayed in the human structure is not a
property of man, since he is very imperfectly acquainted with his own
formation. If there be an inseparable relation betwixt the ideas of a
contrivance and a contriver, and it be evident in regard to the human structure
the designing agent is not man himself, there must undeniably be some separate
invisible Being who is his former. This great Being we mean to indicate by the
appellation of Deity.

This reasoning admits of but one reply. Why, it will be said, may we not
suppose the world has always continued as it is; that is, that there has been a
constant succession of finite beings, appearing and disappearing on the earth
from all eternity? I answer, whatever is supposed to have occasioned this
constant succession, exclusive of an intelligent cause, will never account for
the undeniable marks of design, visible in all finite Beings; nor is the
absurdity of supposing a contrivance without a contriver diminished by this
imaginary succession, but rather increased by being repeated at every step of
the series.

Besides, an eternal succession of finite beings involves in it a
contradiction, and is, therefore, plainly impossible. As the supposition is
made to get quit of the idea of any one having existed from eternity, each of
the beings in the succession must have begun in time; but the succession itself
is eternal. We have then a succession of beings infinitely earlier than any
being in the succession; or, in other words, a series of beings running on ad
infinitum, before it reached any particular being; which is absurd.

From these considerations, it is manifest there must be some eternal Being, or
nothing could ever have existed; and since the beings which we behold, bear in
their whole structure evident marks of wisdom and design, it is equally certain
that he who formed them is a wise and intelligent agent.

To prove the unity of this great Being, in opposition to a plurality of Gods,
it is not necessary to have recourse to metaphysical abstractions: it is
sufficient to observe, that the notion of more than one author of nature is
inconsistent with that harmony of design which pervades her works, that it
solves no appearances, is supported by no evidence, and serves no purpose but
to embarrass and perplex our conceptions.

Such are the proofs of the existence of that great and glorious Being whom we
denominate God; and it is not presumption to say, it is impossible to find
another truth in the whole compass of morals, which, according to the justest
laws of reasoning, admits of such strict and rigorous demonstration.

But I proceed to the more immediate object of this discourse, which, as has
been already intimated, is not so much to evince the falsehood of Skepticism as
a theory, as to display its mischievous effects, contrasted with those which
result from the belief of a Deity, and a future state. The subject viewed in
this light, may be considered under two aspects; the influence of the opposite
systems on the principles of morals, and on the formation of character; the
first may be styled their direct, the latter their equally important, but
indirect, consequence and tendency.

I. The skeptical or irreligious system subverts the whole foundation of
morals. It may be assumed as a maxim, that no person can be required to act
contrary to his greatest good, or his highest interest, comprehensively viewed
in relation to the whole duration of his being. It is often our duty to forego
our own interest partially; to sacrifice a smaller pleasure for the sake of a
greater; to incur a present evil in pursuit of a distant good of more
consequence: in a word, to arbitrate, amongst interfering claims of
inclination, is the moral arithmetic of human life. But to risque the happiness
of the whole duration of our being in any case whatever, admitting it to be
possible, would be foolish, because the sacrifice must, by the nature of it, be
so great as to preclude the possibility of compensation.

As the present world, upon skeptical principles, is the only place of
recompense, whenever the practice of virtue fails to promise the greatest sum
of present good, cases which often occur in reality, and much oftener in
appearance, every motive to virtuous conduct is superseded, a deviation from
rectitude becomes the part of wisdom; and should the path of virtue, in
addition to this, be obstructed by disgrace, torment, or death, to persevere
would be madness and folly, and a violation of the first and most essential law
of nature. Virtue on these principles, being in numberless instances, at war
with self-preservation, never can or ought to become a fixed habit of the mind.

The system of Infidelity is not only incapable of arming virtue for great and
trying occasions; but leaves it unsupported in the most ordinary occurrences.
In vain will its advocates appeal to a moral sense, to benevolence and
sympathy; in vain will they expatiate on the tranquillity and pleasure
attendant on a virtuous course; for it is undeniable that these impulses may be
overcome, and though you may remind the offender, that in disregarding them he
has violated his nature, and that a conduct consistent with them is productive
of much internal satisfaction; yet, if he reply that his taste is of a
different sort, that there are other gratifications which he values more, and
that every man must choose his own pleasures, the argument is at an end.

Rewards and punishments awarded by omnipotent power, afford a palpable and
pressing motive, which can never be neglected without renouncing the character
of a rational creature; but tastes and relishes are not to be prescribed.

A motive in which the reason of man shall acquiesce, enforcing the practice of
virtue, at all times and seasons, enters into the very essence of moral
obligation; modern infidelity supplies no such motive; it is, therefore,
essentially and infallibly a system of enervation, turpitude and vice.

This chasm in the construction of morals, can only be supplied by the firm
belief of a rewarding and avenging Deity, who binds duty and happiness, though
they may seem distant, in an indissoluble chain, without which whatever usurps
the name of virtue, is not a principle, but a feeling, not a determinate rule,
but a fluctuating expedient, varying with the tastes of individuals, and
changing with the scenes of life.

Nor is this the only way in which Infidelity subverts the foundation of
morals. All reasoning on the morals, pre-supposes a distinction betwixt
inclinations and duties, affections and rules: the former prompt, the latter
prescribe; the former supply motives to action, the latter regulate and control
it. Hence, it is evident, if virtue has any just claim to authority, it must be
under the latter of these notions, that is, under the character of a law. It is
under this notion, in fact, that its dominion has ever been acknowledged to be
paramount and supreme.

But without the intervention of a superior will, it is impossible there should
be any moral laws, except in the lax, metaphorical sense, in which we speak of
the laws of matter and motion: men being essentially equal, morality is, on
these principles, only a stipulation or silent compact, into which every
individual is supposed to enter, as far as suits his convenience, and for the
breach of which he is accountable to nothing but his own mind. His own mind is
his law, his tribunal, and his judge.

Two consequences, the most disastrous to society, will inevitably follow the
general prevalence of this system; the frequent perpetration of great crimes,
and the total absence of great virtues.

1. In those conjunctures which tempt avarice or inflame ambition, when a crime
flatters with the prospect of impunity and the certainty of immense advantage,
what is to restrain an Atheist from its commission? To say that remorse will
deter him, is absurd; for remorse, as distinguished from pity, is the sole
offspring of religious belief, the extinction of which is the great purpose of
the infidel philosophy.

The dread of punishment or infamy from his fellow creatures, will be an
equally ineffectual barrier, because crimes are only committed under such
circumstances as suggest the hope of concealment; not to say that crimes
themselves will soon lose their infamy and their horror, under the influence of
that system which destroys the sanctity of virtue, by converting it into a low
calculation of worldly interest. Here the sense of an ever-present Ruler and of
an avenging Judge, is of the most awful and indispensible necessity, as it is
that alone which impresses on all crimes the character of folly, shows that
duty and interest in every instance coincide, and that the most prosperous
career of vice, the most brilliant successes of criminality, are but an
accumulation of wrath against the day of wrath.

As the frequent perpetration of great crimes is an inevitable consequence of
the diffusion of skeptical principles, so to understand this consequence in its
full extent, we must look beyond their immediate effects, and confider the
disruption of social ties, the destruction of confidence, the terror, suspicion
and hatred, which must prevail in that state of society in which barbarous
deeds are familiar. The tranquillity which pervades a well-ordered community,
and the mutual good offices which bind its members together, is founded on an
implied confidence in the indisposition to annoy, in the justice, humanity and
moderation of those among whom we dwell; so that the worst consequence of
crimes is, that they impair the stock of public charity and general tenderness.
The dread and hatred of our species would infallibly be grafted on a conviction
that we were exposed, every moment, to the surges of an unbridled ferocity, and
that nothing but the power of the magistrate stood between us and the daggers
of assassins. In such a state, laws deriving no support from public manners,
are unequal to the task of curbing the fury of the passions, which from being
concentrated into selfishness, fear and revenge, acquire new force; terror and
suspicion beget cruelty, and inflict injuries by way of prevention; pity is
extinguished in the stronger impulse of self-preservation; the tender and
generous affections are crushed, and nothing is seen but the retaliation of
wrongs, the fierce and unmitigated struggle for superiority. This is but a
faint sketch of the incalculable calamities and horrors we must expect, should
we be so unfortunate as ever to witness the triumph of modern infidelity.

2. This system is a soil as barren of great and sublime virtues, as it is
prolific in crimes. By great and sublime virtues are meant, those which are
called into action on great and trying occasions, which demand the sacrifice of
the dearest interests and prospects of human life, and sometimes of life
itself; the virtues, in a word, which by their rarity and splendor draw
admiration, and have rendered illustrious the character of patriots, martyrs,
and confessors. It requires but little reflection to perceive, that whatever
veils a future world, and contracts the limits of existence within the present
life, must tend, in a proportionable degree, to diminish the grandeur and
narrow the sphere of human agency.

As well might you expect exalted sentiments of justice from a professed
gamester, as look for noble princiciples in the man whose hopes and fears are
all suspended on the present moment, and who stakes the whole happiness of his
being on the events of this vain and fleeting life. If he is ever impelled to
the (...) of great achievements in a good cause, it must be solely by the hope
of fame; a motive which, besides that it makes virtue the servant of opinion,
usually grows weaker at the approach of death, and which, however it may
surmount the love of existence, in the heat of battle, or in the moment of
public observation, can seldom be expected to operate with much force on the
retired duties of a private station.

In affirming that infidelity is unfavourable to the higher class of virtues,
we are supported as well by facts as by reasoning. We should be sorry to load
our adversaries with unmerited reproach; but to what history, to what record,
will they appeal, for the traits of moral greatness, exhibited by their
disciples? Where shall we look for the trophies of infidel magnanimity, or
atheistical virtue? Not that we mean to accuse them of inactivity: they have
recently filled the world with the same of their exploits; exploits of a
different kind indeed, but of imperishable memory and disastrous luster.

Though it is confessed, great and splendid actions are not the ordinary
employment of life, but must from their nature, be reserved for high and
eminent occasions, yet, that system is essentially defective which leaves no
room for their cultivation. They are important, both from their immediate
advantage and their remoter influence. They often save, and always illustrate,
the age and nation in which they appear. They raise the standard of morals;
they arrest the progress of degeneracy; they diffuse a luster over the path of
life: monuments of the greatness of the human soul, they present to the world
the august image of virtue in her sublimest form, from which streams of light
and glory issue to remote times and ages; while their commemoration, by the pen
of historians and poets, awakens in distant bosoms the sparks of kindred
excellence.

Combine the frequent and familiar perpetration of atrocious deeds, with the
dearth of great and generous actions, and you have the exact picture of that
condition of society, which completes the degradation of the species; the
frightful contrast of dwarfish virtues and gigantic vices, where every thing
good is mean and little, and every thing evil is rank and luxuriant; a dead and
sickening uniformity prevails, broken only at intervals by volcanic eruptions
of anarchy and crime.

II. Hitherto we have considered the influence of Skepticism on the principles
of virtue; and have endeavored to show that it despoils it of its dignity, and
lays its authority in the dust: its influence on the formation of character
remains to be examined. The actions of men are oftener determined by their
character than their interest: their conduct takes its color more from their
acquired taste, inclinations and habits, than from a deliberate regard to their
greatest good. It is only on great occasions the mind awakes, to take an
extended survey of her whole course, and that she suffers the dictates of
reason to impress a new bias upon her movements; the actions of each day are,
for the most part, links which follow each other in the chain of custom. Hence
the great effort of practical wisdom is to imbue the mind with right tastes,
affections and habits; the elements of character, and masters of action.

The exclusion of a Supreme Being and of a superintending Providence, tends
directly to the destruction of moral taste. It robs the universe of all
finished and consummate excellence, even in idea. The admiration of perfect
wisdom and goodness, for which we are formed, and which kindles such
unspeakable rapture in the soul, finding in the regions of skepticism nothing
to which it corresponds, droops and languishes. In a world which presents a
fair spectacle of order and beauty, of a vast family nourished and supported by
an Almighty parent, in a world which leads the devout mind, step by step, to
the contemplation of the first fair and the first good, the skeptic is
encompassed with nothing but obscurity, meanness, and disorder.

When we reflect on the manner in which the idea of Deity is formed, we must be
convinced that such an idea, intimately present to the mind, must have a most
powerful effect in refining the moral taste. Composed of the richest elements,
it embraces, in the character of a beneficent parent, and Almighty ruler,
whatever is venerable in wisdom, whatever is awful in authority, whatever is
touching in goodness.

Human excellence is blended with many imperfections, and seen under many
limitations; it is beheld only in detached and separate portions, nor ever
appears in any one character whole and entire: so that, when, in imitation of
the stoics, we wish to form out of these fragments the notion of a perfectly
wise and good man, we know it is a mere fiction of the mind, without any real
being in whom it is embodied and realized. In the belief of a Deity these
conceptions are reduced to reality: the scattered rays of an ideal excellence
are concentrated, and become the real attributes of that Being with whom we
stand in the nearest relation, who sits Supreme at the head of the universe, is
armed with infinite power, and pervades all nature with his presence.

The efficacy of these sentiments, in producing and augmenting a virtuous
taste, will indeed be proportioned to the vividness with which they are formed,
and the frequency with which they recur; yet some benefit will not fail to
result from them even in their lowest degree.

The idea of the supreme Being, has this peculiar property, that as it admits
of no substitute, so from the first moment it is impressed, it is capable of
continual growth and enlargement. God himself is immutable; but our conception
of his character is continually receiving fresh accessions, is continually
growing more extended and refulgent, by having transferred upon it new
perceptions of beauty and goodness, by attracting to itself, as a center,
whatever bears the impress of dignity, order or happiness. It borrows splendor
from all that is fair, subordinates to itself all that is great, and sits
enthroned on the riches of the universe.

As the object of worship will always be, in a degree, the object of imitation,
hence arises a fixed standard of moral excellence, by the contemplation of
which the tendencies to corruption are counteracted, the contagion of bad
example is checked, and human nature rises above its natural level.

When the knowledge of God was lost in the world, just ideas of virtue and
moral obligation disappeared along with it. How is it to be otherwise accounted
for, that in the polished nations, and in the enlightened times of Pagan
antiquity, the most unnatural lusts and detestable impurities were not only
tolerated in private life, It is worthy of observation, that the elegant and
philosophic Xenophon, in delineating the model of a perfect Prince in the
character of Cyrus, introduces a Mede who had formed an unnatural passion for
his hero, and relates the incident in a lively festive humor, without being in
the least conscious of any indelicacy attached to it. What must be the state of
manners in a country where a circumstance of this kind, feigned, no doubt, by
way of ornament, finds a place in such a work? Cyri Instit, Lib. 1. Deinde
nobis qui concedentibus philosophis antiquis, adolescentulis delectumur etiam
vitia saepe jucunda sunt.

Cicero De Not. Dei. Lib. 1.
but entered into religion, and formed a material part of public worship; --
Nam quo non prostat faemina templo.
JUV. The impurities practiced in the worship of Isis, an Egyptian Deity, rose
to such a height, in the reign of Tiberius, that that profligate Prince thought
fit to prohibit her worship, and at the same time inflicted on her priests the
punishment of crucifixion.

Joseph. Antiquit. Judaic. L. 18.
while among the Jews, a people so much inferior in every other branch of
knowledge, the same vices were regarded with horror?

The reason is this -- the true character of God was unknown to the former,
which, by the light of divine revelation, was imparted to the latter. The
former cast their deities in the mould of their own immaginations, in
consequence of which they partook of the vices and defects of their
worshippers: to the latter, no scope was left for the wanderings of fancy, but
a pure and perfect model was prescribed.

False and corrupt, however, as was the religion of the Pagans (if it deserve
the name) and defective, and often vicious, as was the character of their
imaginary deities, it was still better for the world, for the void of knowledge
to be filled with these, than abandoned to a total Skepticism; for if both
systems are equally false, they are not equally pernicious. When the fictions
of heathenism consecrated the memory of its legislators and heroes, it invested
them for the most part with those qualities which were in the greatest repute.
They were supposed to possess in the highest degree the virtues in which it was
most honorable to excel, and to be the witnesses, approvers and patrons of
those perfections in others, by which their own character was chiefly
distinguished. Men saw, or rather fancied they saw, in these supposed deities,
the qualities they most admired dilated to a larger size, moving in a higher
sphere, and associated with the power, dignity and happiness of superior
natures. With such ideal models before them, and conceiving themselves
continually acting under the eye of such spectators and judges, they felt a
real elevation; their eloquence became more impassioned, their patriotism
inflamed and their courage exalted.

Revelation, by displaying the true character of God, affords a pure and
perfect standard of virtue; heathenism, one in many respects defective and
vicious; the fashionable skepticism of the present day, which excludes the
belief of all superior powers, affords no standard at all. Human nature knows
nothing better or higher than itself. All above and around it being shrouded in
darkness, and the prospect confined to the tame realities of life, virtue has
no room upwards to expand, nor are any excursions permitted into that unseen
world, the true element of the great and good, by which it is fortified with
motives equally calculated to satisfy the reason, to delight the fancy, and to
impress the heart.

II. Modern Infidelity not only tends to corrupt the moral taste; it also
promotes the growth of those vices which are the most hostile to social
happiness. Of all the vices incident to human nature, the most destructive to
society are vanity, ferocity, and unbridled sensuality; and these are precisely
the vices which Infidelity is calculated to cherish.

That the love, fear, and habitual contemplation of a being infinitely exalted,
or in other words, devotion is adapted to promote a sober and moderate estimate
of our own excellencies, is incontestible; nor is it less evident that the
exclusion of such sentiments must be favorable to pride. The criminality of
pride will, perhaps, be less readily admitted; for though there is no vice so
opposite to the spirit of Christianity, yet there is none which, even in the
Christian world, has, under various pretenses, been treated with so much
indulgence.

There is, it will be confessed, a delicate sensibility to character, a sober
desire of reputation, a wish to possess the esteem of the wise and good, felt
by the purest minds, and which is at the farthest remove from arrogance or
vanity. The humility of a noble mind scarcely dares to approve of itself, until
it has secured the approbation of others. Very different is that restless
desire of distinction, that passion for theatrical display, which inflames the
heart and occupies the whole attention of vain men. This, of all the passions,
is the most unsocial, avarice itself not excepted. The reason is plain.
Property is a kind of good, which may be more easily attained, and is capable
of more minute subdivisions, than fame. In the pursuit of wealth, men are led
by an attention to their own interest to promote the welfare of each other;
their advantages are reciprocal; the benefits which each is anxious to acquire
for himself, he reaps in the greatest abundance from the union and conjunction
of society. The pursuits of vanity are quite contrary. The portion of time and
attention mankind are willing to spare from their avocations and pleasures, to
devote to the admiration of each other is so small, that every successful
adventurer is felt to have impaired the common stock. The success of one is the
disappointment of multitudes. For though there be many rich, many virtuous,
many wise men, fame must necessarily be the portion of but few. Hence every
vain man, every man in whom vanity is the ruling passion, regarding his rival
as his enemy, is strongly tempted to rejoice in his miscarriage and repine at
his success.

Besides, as the passions are seldom seen in a simple, unmixed state, so
vanity, when it succeeds, degenerates into arrogance; when it is disappointed
(and it is often disappointed) it is exasperated into malignity and corrupted
into envy. In this stage the vain man commences a determined misanthrophist. He
detests that excellence which he cannot reach. He detests his species, and
longs to be revenged for the unpardonable injustice he has sustained in their
insensibility to his merits. He lives upon the calamities of the world: the
vices and miseries of men are his element and his food.

Virtue, talents and genius are his natural enemies, which he persecutes with
instinctive eagerness, and unrelenting hostility. There are who doubt the
existence of such a disposition; but it certainly issues out of the dregs of
disappointed vanity: a disease which taints and vitiates the whole character
wherever it prevails. It forms the heart to such a profound indifference to the
welfare of others, that whatever appearances he may assume, or however wide the
circle of his seeming virtues may extend, you will infallibly find the vain man
is his own center. Attentive only to himself, absorbed in the contemplation of
his own perfections, instead of feeling tenderness for his fellow creatures as
members of the same family, as beings with whom he is appointed to act, to
suffer, and to sympathize; he considers life as a stage on which he is
performing a part, and mankind in no other light than spectators. Whether he
smiles or frowns, whether his path is adorned with the rays of benificence or
his steps are died in blood, an attention to self is the spring of every
movement, and the motive to which every action is referred.

His apparent good qualities lose all their worth, by losing all that is
simple, genuine and natural: they are even pressed into the service of vanity,
and become the means of enlarging its power. The truly good man is jealous over
himself, lest the notoriety of his best actions by blending itself with their
motive, should diminish their value; the vain man performs the same actions for
the sake of that notoriety. The good man quietly discharges his duty and shuns
ostentation; the vain man considers every good deed lost that is not publicly
displayed. The one is intent upon realities, the other upon semblances: the one
aims to be virtuous, the other to appear so.

Nor is a mind inflated with vanity more disqualified for right action than
just speculation; or better disposed to the pursuit of truth than the practice
of virtue. To such a mind the simplicity of truth is disgusting. Careless of
the improvement of mankind, and intent only upon astonishing with the
appearance of novelty, the glare of paradox will be preferred to the light of
truth; opinions will be embraced, not because they are just, but because they
are new: the more flagitious, the more subversive of morals, the more alarming
to the wise and good, the more welcome to men who estimate their literary
powers by the mischief they produce, and who consider the anxiety and terror
they impress as the measure of their renown. Truth is simple and uniform, while
error may be infinitely varied; and as it is one thing to start paradoxes, and
another to make discoveries, we need the less wonder at the prodigious increase
of modern philosophers.

We have been so much accustomed to consider extravagant self-estimation merely
as a ridiculous quality, that many will be surprised to find it treated as a
vice, pregnant with serious mischief to society. But, to form a judgment of its
influence on the manners and happiness of a nation, it is necessary only to
look at its effects in a family; for bodies of men are only collections of
individuals, and the greatest nation is nothing more than an aggregate of a
number of families. Conceive of a domestic circle, in which each member is
elated with a most extravagant opinion of himself, and a proportionable
contempt of every other, is full of little contrivances to catch applause, and
whenever he is not praised is sullen and disappointed -- what a picture of
disunion, disgust, and animosity would such a family present; how utterly would
domestic affection be extinguished, and all the purposes of domestic society be
defeated! The general prevalence of such dispositions must be accompanied by an
equal proportion of general misery. The tendency of pride to produce strife and
hatred, is sufficiently apparent, from the pains men have been at to construct
a system of politeness, which is nothing more than a sort of mimic humility, in
which the sentiments of an offensive self-estimation are so far disguised and
suppressed, as to make them compatible with the spirit of society; such a mode
of behavior as would naturally result from an attention to the apostolic
injunction: Let nothing be done through strife or vain glory: but, in lowliness
of mind, let each esteem other better than themselves. But if the semblance is
of such importance, how much more useful the reality: if the mere garb of
humility is of such indispensible necessity, that without it society could not
subsist, how much better still would the harmony of the world be preserved,
were the condescension, deference, and respect, so studiously displayed, a true
picture of the heart?

The same restless and eager vanity which disturbs a family, when it is
permitted in a great national crisis to mingle with political affairs,
distracts a kingdom; infusing into those entrusted with the enaction of laws a
spirit of rash innovation and daring empiricism, a disdain of the established
usages of mankind, a foolish desire to dazzle the world with new and untried
systems of policy, in which the precedents of antiquity and the experience of
ages are only consulted to be trodden under foot; and into the executive
department of government, a fierce contention for pre-eminence, an incessant
struggle to supplant and destroy, with a propensity to calumny and suspicion,
proscription and massacre.

We shall suffer the most eventful season ever witnessed in the affairs of men,
to pass over our heads to very little purpose, if we fail to learn from it some
awful lessons on the nature and progress of the passions. The true light, in
which the French revolution ought to be contemplated, is that of a grand
experiment on human nature. Among the various passions which that revolution
has so strikingly displayed, none is more conspicuous than vanity; nor is it
difficult, without adverting to the national character of the people, to
account for its extraordinary predominance. Political power, the most seducing
object of ambition, never before circulated through so many hands; the prospect
of possessing it was never before presented to so many minds. Multitudes, who
by their birth and education, and not unfrequently by their talents, seemed
destined to perpetual obscurity, were, by the alternate rise and fall of
parties, elevated into distinction, and snared in the functions of government.
The short-lived forms of power and office glided with such rapidity through
successive ranks of degradation, from the court to the very dregs of the
populace, that they seemed rather to solicit acceptance, than to be a prize
contended for -- Aequo pulsat pede pauperum tabernas Regumque turres. HOR.
: yet, as it was still impossible for all to possess authority, though none
were willing to obey, a general impatience to break the ranks and rush into the
foremost ground, maddened and infuriated the nation, and overwhelmed law,
order, and civilization, with the violence of a torrent.

If such be the mischiefs both in public and private life resulting from an
excessive self-estimation, it remains next to be considered whether providence
has supplied any medicine to correct it; for as the reflection on excellencies,
whether real or imaginary, is always attended with pleasure to the possessor,
it is a disease deeply seated in our nature.

Suppose there were a great and glorious Being always present with us, who had
given us existence with numberless other blessings, and on whom we depended
each instant, as well for every present enjoyment as for every future good;
suppose again, we had incurred the just displeasure of such a Being, by
ingratitude and disobedience, yet that in great mercy he had not cast us off,
but had assured us he was willing to pardon and restore us, on our humble
entreaty and sincere repentance; say, would not an habitual sense of the
presence of this Being, self-reproach for having displeased him, and an anxiety
to recover his favor, be the most effectual antidote to pride? But such are
the leading discoveries made by the Christian Revelation, and such the
dispositions which a practical belief of it inspires.

Humility is the first fruit of religion. In the mouth of our Lord there is no
maxim so frequent as the following, Whosoever exalts himself shall be abased,
and he that humbles himself shall be exalted. Religion, and that alone,
teaches absolute humility, by which I mean a sense of our absolute nothingness
in the view of infinite greatness and excellence. That sense of inferiority,
which results from the comparison of men with each other, is often an unwelcome
sentiment forced upon the mind, which may rather embitter the temper than
soften it: that which devotion impresses, is soothing and delightful. The
devout man loves to lie low at the footstool of his Creator, because it is then
he attains the most lively perceptions of the divine excellence, and the most
tranquil confidence in the divine favor. In so august a presence, he sees all
distinctions lost, and all beings reduced to the same level: he looks at his
superiors without envy, and his inferiors without contempt; and when from this
elevation he descends to mix in society, the conviction of superiority, which
must in many instances be felt, is a calm inference of the understanding, and
no longer a busy, importunate passion of the heart.

The wicked, says the Psalmist, through the pride of their countenance, will
not seek after God: God is not in all their thoughts. When we consider the
incredible vanity of the Atheistical sect, together with the settled malignity,
and unrelenting rancour with which they pursue every vestige of religion -- is
it uncandid to suppose, that its humbling tendency is one principal cause of
their enmity; that they are eager to displace a Deity from the minds of men,
that they may occupy the void; to crumble the throne of the Eternal into dust,
that they may elevate themselves on its ruins; and that, as their
licentiousness is impatient of restraint, so their pride disdains a superior?

We mentioned a ferocity of character, as one effect of skeptical impiety. It
is an inconvenience attending a controversy with those with whom we have few
principles in common, that we are often in danger of reasoning inconclusively,
for the want of its being clearly known and settled what our opponents admit,
and what they deny. The persons, for example, with whom we are at present
engaged, have discarded humility and modesty from the catalogue of virtues; on
which account we have employed the more time in evincing their importance; but
whatever may be thought of humility as a virtue, it surely will not be denied
that inhumanity is a most detestable vice; a vice, however, which skepticism
has a most powerful tendency to inflame.

As we have already shown that pride hardens the heart, and that Religion is
the only effectual antidote, the connection between irreligion and inhumanity
is, in this view, obvious. But there is another light in which this part of the
subject may be viewed, in my humble opinion, much more important, though seldom
adverted to. The supposition that man is a moral and accountable being,
destined to survive the stroke of death, and to live in a future world in a
never ending state of happiness or misery, makes him a creature of incomparably
more consequence, than the opposite supposition. When we consider him as placed
here by an Almighty Ruler, in a state of probation, and that the present life
is his period of trial, the first link in a vast and interminable chain which
stretches into eternity, he assumes a dignified character in our eyes. Every
thing which relates to him becomes interesting; and to trifle with his
happiness is felt to be the most unpardonable levity. If such be the
destination of man, it is evident, that, in the qualities which fit him for it,
his principal dignity consists: his moral greatness is his true greatness. Let
the skeptical principles be admitted, which represent him, on the contrary, as
the offspring of chance, connected with no superior power, and sinking into
annihilation at death, and he is a contemptible creature, whose existence and
happiness are insignificant. The characteristic difference is lost betwixt him
and the brute creation, from which he is no longer distinguished, except by the
vividness and muliplicity of his perceptions.

If we reflect on that part of our nature which disposes us to humanity, we
shall find that, where we have no particular attachment, our sympathy with the
sufferings, and concern for the destruction of sensitive beings, is in
proportion to their supposed importance in the general scale; or, in other
words, to their supposed capacity of enjoyment. We feel, for example, much more
at witnessing the destruction of a man than of an inferior animal, because we
consider it as involving the extinction of a much greater sum of happiness. For
the same reason, he who would shudder at the slaughter of a large animal, will
see a thousand insects perish without a pang. Our sympathy with the calamities
of our fellow creatures is adjusted to the (...) proportions: for we feel more
powerfully affected with the distresses of fallen greatness, than with equal or
greater distresses sustained by persons of inferior rank; because, having been
accustomed to associate with an elevated station the idea of superior
happiness, the loss appears the greater, and the wreck more extensive. But the
disproportion in importance, betwixt man and the meanest insect, is not so
great, as that which subsists betwixt man considered as mortal and as immortal;
that is, betwixt man as he is represented by the system of Skepticism and that
of Divine Revelation: for the enjoyment of the meanest insect bears some
proportion, though a very small one, to the present happiness of man; but the
happiness of time bears none at all to that of eternity. The Skeptical system,
therefore, sinks the importance of human existence to an inconceivable degree.

From these principles results the following important inference, that, to
extinguish human life by the hand of violence, must be quite a different thing
in the eyes of a Skeptic from what it is in those of a Christian. With the
Skeptic it is nothing more than diverting the course of a little red fluid
called blood; it is merely lessening the number by one of many millions of
fugitive contemptible creatures: the Christian sees, in the same event, an
accountable being cut off from a state of probation, and hurried, perhaps
unprepared, into the presence of his Judge, to hear that final, that
irrevocable sentence, which is to fix him for ever in an unalterable condition
of felicity or woe. The former perceives in death nothing but its physical
circumstances; the latter is impressed with the magnitude of its moral
consequences. It is the moral relation which man is supposed to bear to a
superior power, the awful idea of accountability, the influence which his
present dispositions and actions are conceived to have upon his eternal
destiny, more than any superiority of intellectual powers, abstracted from
these considerations, which invest him with such mysterious grandeur, and
constitute the firmest guard on the sanctuary of human life. This reasoning, it
is true, serves more immediately to show how the disbelief of a future state
endangers the security of life; but though this be its direct consequence, it
extends by analogy much farther: since he, who has learned to sport with the
lives of his fellow creatures, will feel but little solicitude for their
welfare in any other instance; but, as the greater includes the less, will
easily pass from this to all the inferior gradations of barbarity.

As the advantage of the armed over the unarmed is not seen till the moment of
attack, so in that tranquil state of society, in which law and order maintain
their ascendancy, it is not perceived, perhaps not even suspected, to what an
alarming degree the principles of modern infidelity leave us naked and
defenseless. But, let the state be convulsed, let the mounds of regular
authority be once overflowed, and the still small voice of law, drowned in the
tempest of popular fury (events which recent experience shows to be possible)
it will then be seen that atheism is a school of ferocity; and that having
taught its disciples to consider mankind as little better than a nest of
insects, they will be prepared, in the fierce conflicts of party, to trample
upon them without pity, and extinguish them without remorse.

It was late Neque enim assentior iis qui haec nuper differare coeperunt cum
corporibus simul animos interire atque omnia morte deleri. Cicero de Amicitia.
before the atheism of Epicurus gained footing at Rome, but its prevalence was
soon followed by such scenes of proscription, confiscation and blood, as were
then unparalleled in the history of the world; from which the Republic being
never able to recover itself, after many unsuccessful struggles, exchanged
liberty for repose, by submission to absolute power. Such were the effects of
Atheism at Rome. An attempt has been recently made to establish a similar
system in France, the consequences of which are too well known, to render it
requisite for me to shock your feelings by a recital. The only doubt that can
arise is, whether the barbarities which have stained the revolution in that
unhappy country are justly chargeable to the prevalence of atheism. Let those
who doubt of this recollect that the men, who, by their activity and talents,
prepared the minds of the people for that great change, Voltaire, D' Alembert,
Diderot, Rosseau, and others, were avowed enemies of Revelation; that, in all
their writings, the diffusion of skepticism and of revolutionary principles
went hand in hand; that the fury of the most sanguinary parties was especially
pointed against the Christian priesthood and religious institutions, without
once pretending, like other persecutors, to execute the vengeance of God (whose
name they never mentioned) upon his enemies; that their atrocities were
committed with a wanton levity and brutal merriment; that the reign of atheism
was avowedly and expressly the reign of terror; that in the full madness of
their career, in the highest climax of their horrors, they shut up the temples
of God, abolished his worship, and proclaimed death to be an eternal sleep; as
if, by pointing to the silence of the sepulcher, and the sleep of the dead,
these ferocious barbarians meant to apologize for leaving neither sleep, quiet,
nor repose to the living.

As the heathens fabled that Minerva issued full armed from the head of
Jupiter; so no sooner were the speculations of atheistical philosophy matured,
than they gave birth to a ferocity which converted the most polished people in
Europe into a horde of assassins; the seat of voluptuous refinement, of
pleasure and of arts, into a theater of blood.

Having already shown, that the principles of infidelity facilitate the
commission of crimes by removing the restraints of fear, and that they foster
the arrogance of the individual, while they inculcate the most despicable
opinion of the species; the inevitable result is, that a haughty
self-confidence, a contempt of mankind, together with a daring defiance of
religious restraints, are the natural ingredients of the atheistical character;
nor is it less evident that these are, of all others, the dispositions which
most forcibly stimulate to violence and cruelty.

Settle it, therefore, in your minds, as a maxim never to be effaced or
forgotten, that atheism is an inhuman, bloody, ferocious system, equally
hostile to every useful restraint, and to every virtuous affection; that,
leaving nothing above us to excite awe, nor around us to awaken tenderness, it
wages war with heaven and with earth; its first object is to dethrone God, its
next to destroy man As human nature is the same in all ages, it is not
surprising to find the same moral systems, even in the most dissimilar
circumstances, produce corresponding effects. Josephus remarks, that the
Sadducees, a kind of Jewish infidels, whose tenets were the denial of moral
government and a future state, were distinguished from the other sects by their
ferocity. De Bell. Jud lib. 2. He elsewhere remarks, that they were eminent for
their inhumanity in their judicial capacity.
.

There is a third vice, not less destructive to society than either of those
which have been already mentioned, to which the system of modern infidelity is
favorable; that is, unbridled sensuality, the licentious and unrestrained
indulgence of those passions which are essential to the continuation of the
species. The magnitude of these passions, and the supreme importance to the
existence as well as the peace and welfare of society, have rendered it one of
the first objects of solicitude with every wise legislature, to restrain them
by such laws, and to confine their indulgence within such limits, as shall best
promote the great ends for which they were implanted.

The benevolence and wisdom of the author of Christianity are eminently
conspicuous in the laws he has enacted on this branch of morals; for, while he
authorizes marriage, he restrains the vagrancy and caprice of the passions, by
forbidding polygamy and divorce; and, well knowing that offenses against the
laws of chastity usually spring from an ill-regulated imagination, he
inculcates purity of heart. Among innumerable benefits which the world has
derived from the Christian religion, a superior refinement in the sexual
sentiments, a more equal and respectful treatment of women, greater dignity and
permanence conferred on the institution of marriage, are not the least
considerable; in consequence of which the purest affections, and the most
sacred duties, are grafted on the stock of the strongest instincts.

The aim of all the leading champions of infidelity is, to rob mankind of these
benefits, and throw them back into a state of gross and brutal sensuality. Mr.
Hume asserts adultery to be but a slight offense when known, when secret, no
crime at all. In the same spirit he represents the private conduct of the
profligate Charles, whose debaucheries polluted the age, as a just subject of
panegyric. A disciple in the same school has lately had the unblushing
effrontery to stigmatize marriage as the worst of all monopolies; and, in a
narrative of his licentious amors, to make a formal apology for departing from
his principles, by submitting to its restraints. The popular productions on the
continent, which issue from the atheistical school, are incessantly directed to
the same purpose.

Under every possible aspect in which infidelity can be viewed, it extends the
dominion of sensuality; it repeals and abrogates every law by which divine
Revelation has, under such awful sanctions, restrained the indulgence of the
passions; the disbelief of a Supreme Omniscient Being which it inculcates,
releases its disciples from an attention to the heart, from every care but the
preservation of outward decorum; and the exclusion of the devout affections and
an unseen world, leaves the mind immersed in visible, sensible objects.

There are two sorts of pleasures, corporeal and mental: Though we are indebted
to the senses for all our perceptions originally, yet those which are at the
farthest remove from their immediate impressions, confer the most elevation of
the character; since, in proportion as they are multiplied and augmented, the
slavish subjection to the senses is subdued. Hence the true and only antidote
to debasing sensuality is, the possession of a fund of that kind of enjoyment
which is independent of the corporeal appetites. Inferior in the perfection of
several of his senses to different parts of the brute creation, the superiority
of man over them all consists in his superior power of multiplying, by new
combinations, his mental perceptions, and thereby of creating to himself
resources of happiness, separate from external sensation. In the scale of
enjoyment, the first remove from sense are the pleasures of reason and society;
the next, are the pleasures of devotion and religion. The former, though
totally distinct from those of sense, are yet less perfectly adapted to
moderate their excesses than the last; as they are in a great measure
conversant with visible and sensible objects. -- The religious affections and
sentiments are, in fact, and were intended to be the proper antagonist of
sensuality, the great deliverer from the thraldom of the appetites; by opening
a spiritual world, and inspiring hopes, and fears, and consolations, and joys,
which bear no relation to the material and sensible universe. The criminal
indulgence of sensual passions admits but of two modes of prevention; the
establishment of such laws and maxims in society as shall render lewd
profligacy impracticable or infamous, or, the infusion of such principles and
habits as shall render it distasteful: human legislatures have encountered the
disease in the first, the truths and sanctions of revealed religion, in the
last, of these methods: to both of which the advocates of modern infidelity are
equally hostile.

So much has been said by many able writers to evince the inconceivable
benefits of the marriage institution, that to hear it seriously attacked by men
who style themselves philosophers, at the close of the eighteenth century, must
awaken indignation and surprise. The object of this discourse leads us to
direct our attention particularly to the influence of this institution on the
civilization of the world.

From the records of Revelation we learn, that marriage, or the permanent union
of the sexes, was ordained by God, and existed under different modifications in
the early infancy of mankind, without which they could never have emerged from
barbarism. For, conceive only what eternal discord, jealousy, and violence
would ensue, were the objects of the tenderest affections secured to their
possessor by no law or tie of moral obligation; were domestic enjoyments
disturbed by incessant fear, and licentiousness inflamed by hope. Who could
find sufficient tranquillity of mind, to enable him to plan or execute any
continued scheme of action, or what room for arts, or sciences, or religion, or
virtue, in that state in which the chief earthly happiness was exposed to every
lawless invader: where one was racked with an incessant anxiety to keep what
the other was equally eager to acquire? It is not probable in itself,
independent of the light of scripture, that the benevolent author of the human
race ever placed them in so wretched a condition at first: it is certain they
could not remain in it long without being exterminated. Marriage, by shutting
out these evils, and enabling every man to rest secure in his enjoyments, is
the great civilizer of the world; with this security the mind is at liberty to
expand in generous affections, has leisure to look abroad, and engage in the
pursuits of knowledge, science, and virtue.

Nor is it in this way only that marriage institutions are essential to the
welfare of mankind. They are sources of tenderness, as well as the guardians of
peace. Without the permanent union of the sexes, there can be no permanent
families: the dissolution of nuptial ties involves the dissolution of domestic
society. But domestic society is the seminary of social affections, the cradle
of sensibility, where the first elements are acquired of that tenderness and
humanity, which cement mankind together, and which, were they entirely
extinguished, the whole fabric of social institutions would be dissolved.

Families are so many centres of attraction, which preserve mankind from being
scattered and dissipated by the repulsive powers of selfishness. The order of
nature is, evermore, from particulars to generals. As, in the operations of
intellect, we proceed from the contemplation of individuals to the formation of
general abstractions, so in the developement of the passions in like manner, we
advance from private to public affections, from the love of parents, brothers,
and sisters, to those more expanded regards which embrace the immense society
of human kind Arcti^r vero colligatio societatis propinquorum: ab illa (...)
humani generis, in exiguum angustumque concluditur, nam cum sit ho^ natura
commune animantium ut habeant libidinem procreandi prima societas in ipso
conjugio est, proxima in liberi^, deinde una domus, communia omnia. Id autem
est principium urbis, et quasi seminarium republicae. Cic. de Off.
.

In order to render men benevolent, they must first be made tender: for
benevolent affections are not the offspring of reasoning; they result from that
culture of the heart, from those early impressions of tenderness, gratitude,
and sympathy, which the endearments of domestic life are sure to supply, and
for the formation of which it is the best possible school.

The advocates of infidelity invert this eternal order of nature. Instead of
inculcating the private affections, as a discipline by which the mind is
prepared for those of a more public nature, they set them in direct opposition
to each other; they propose to build general benevolence on the destruction of
individual tenderness, and to make us love the whole species more, by loving
every particular part of it less. In pursuit of this chimerical project,
gratitude, humility, conjugal, parental, and filial affection, together with
every other social disposition, are reprobated; virtue is limited to a
passionate attachment to the general good. Is it not natural to ask, when all
the tenderness of life is extinguished, and all the bands of society are
untwisted, from whence this ardent affection for the general good is to spring?

When this savage philosophy has completed its work, when it has taught its
disciple to look with perfect indifference on the offspring of his body and the
wife of his bosom, to estrange himself from his friends, insult his
benefactors, and silence the pleadings of gratitude and pity, will he by thus
divesting himself of all that is human, be better prepared for the
disinterested love of his species? Will he become a philanthropist only because
he has ceased to be a man? Rather in this total exemption from all the feelings
which humanize and soften, in this chilling frost of universal indifference,
may we not be certain selfishness, unmingled and uncontrouled, will assume the
empire of his heart; and that under pretense of advancing the general good, an
object to which the fancy may give innumerable shapes, he will be prepared for
the violation of every duty, and the perpetration of every crime? Extended
benevolence is the last and most perfect fruit of the private affections; so
that to expect to reap the former from the extinction of the latter, is to
oppose the means to the end; is as absurd as to attempt to reach the summit of
the highest mountain, without passing through the intermediate spaces, or to
hope to attain the heights of science by forgetting the first elements of
knowledge. These absurdities have sprung, however, in the advocates of
infidelity, from an ignorance of human nature, sufficient to disgrace even
those who did not style themselves philosophers. Presuming, contrary to the
experience of every moment, that the affections are awakened by reasoning, and
perceiving that the general good is an incomparably greater object in itself,
than the happiness of any limited number of individuals, they inferred that
nothing more was necessary than to exhibit it in its just dimensions, to draw
the affections toward it; as though the fact of the superior populousness of
China to Great Britain, needed but to be known, to render us indifferent to our
domestic concerns, and lead us to direct all our anxiety, to the prosperity of
that vast, but remote empire.

It is not the province of reason to awaken new passions, or open new sources
of sensibility, but to direct us in the attainment of those objects which
nature has already rendered pleasing, or to determine among the interfering
inclinations and passions which sway the mind, which are the fittest to be
preferred.

Is a regard to the general good then, you will reply, to be excluded from the
motives of action? Nothing is more remote from my intention: but as the nature
of this motive has, in my opinion, been much misunderstood by some good men,
and abused by others of a different description, to the worst of purposes,
permit me to declare, in a few words, what appears to me to be the truth on
this subject.

The welfare of the whole system of being must be allowed to be, in itself, the
object of all others the most worthy of being pursued; so that, could the mind
distinctly embrace it, and discern at every step what action would infallibly
promote it, we should be furnished with a sure criterion of right and wrong, an
unerring guide, which would supersede the use and necessity of all inferior
rules, laws and principles.

But this being impossible, since the good of the whole is a motive so loose
and indeterminate, and embraces such an infinity of relations, that before we
could be certain what action it prescribed, the season of action would be past;
to weak; short-sighted mortals, Providence has assigned a sphere of agency,
less grand and extensive indeed, but better suited to their limited powers, by
implanting certain affections which it is their duty to cultivate, and
suggesting particular rules to which they are bound to conform. By these
provisions, the boundaries of virtue are easily ascertained, at the same time
that its ultimate object, the good of the whole, is secured; for, since the
happiness of the entire system results from the happiness of the several parts,
the affections, which confine the attention immediately to the latter, conspire
in the end to the promotion of the former; as the labourer, whose industry is
limited to a corner of a large building, performs his part toward rearing the
structure, much more effectually than if he extened his care to the whole.

As the interest, however, of any limited number of persons may not only not
contribute, but may possibly be directly opposed to the general good; the
interest of a family, for example, to that of a province, or, of a nation to
that of the world; Providence has so ordered it, that in a well-regulated mind
there springs up, as we have already seen, besides particular attachments, an
extended regard to the species, whose office is twosold; not to destroy and
extinguish the more private affections, which is mental parricide; but first,
as far as is consistent with the claims of those who are immediately committed
to our care, to do good to all men; secondly, to exercise a jurisdiction and
control over the private affection, so as to prohibit their indulgence,
whenever it would be attended with manifest detriment to the whole. Thus every
part of our nature is brought into action; all the practical principles of the
human heart find an element to move in, each in its different sort and manner,
conspiring, without mutual collisions to maintain the harmony of the world and
the happiness of the universe It is somewhat singular, that many of the
fashionable Infidels have hit upon a definition of virtue which perfectly
coincides with that of certain metaphysical divines in America, first invented
and defended by that most acute reasoner Jonathan Edwards. They both place
virtue, exclusively, in a passion for the general good, or, as Mr. Edwards
expresses it, love to Being in general; so that our love is always to be
proportioned to the magnitude of its object in the scale of Being; which is
liable to the objections I have already stated, as well as to many others,
which the limits of this note will not permit me to enumerate. Let it suffice
to remark, 1. That virtue, on these principles, is an utter impossibility: for
the system of Being, comprehending the great Supreme, is infinite, and
therefore to maintain the proper proportion, the force of particular attachment
must be infinitely less than the passion for the general good; but the limits
of the human mind are not capable of any emotions so infinitely different in
degree. 2. Since our views of the extent of the universe are capable of
perpetual enlargement, admitting the sum of existence is ever the same, we must
return back at each step to diminish the strength of particular affections, or
they will become disproportionate, and consequently on these principles
vicious; so that the balance must be continually fluctuating, by the weights
being taken out of one scale and put into the other. 3. If virtue consist
exclusively in love to Being in general, or attachment to the general good, the
particular affections are, to every purpose of virtue, useless, and even
pernicious; for their immediate, nay their necessary tendency is, to attract to
their objects a proportion of attention, which far exceeds their comparative
value in the general scale. To allege that the general good is promoted by them
will be of no advantage to the defense of this system, but the contrary, by
confessing that a greater sum of happiness is attained by a deviation from,
than an adherence to, its principles; unless its advocates mean, by the love of
Being in general, the same thing as the private affections, which is to
confound all the distinctions of language, as well as all the operations of
mind. Let it be remembered, we have no dispute respecting what is the ultimate
end of virtue, which is allowed on both sides to be the greatest sum of
happiness in the universe; the question is merely, what is virtue itself? or,
in other words, what are the means appointed for the attainment of that end?
There is little doubt, from some parts of Mr. Godwin's work, entitled
"Political Justice," as well as from his early habits of reading, that he was
indebted to Mr. Edwards for his principal arguments against the private
affections; though, with a daring consistence, he has pursued his principles to
an extreme from which that most excellent man would have revolted with horror.
The fundamental error of the whole system arose, as I conceive, from a mistaken
pursuit of simplicity; from a wish to construct a moral system without leaving
sufficient scope for the infinite variety of moral phoenomena and mental
combination: in consequence of which, its advocates were induced to place
virtue exclusively in some one disposition of mind; and, since the passion for
the general good is undeniably the noblest and most extensive of all others,
when it was once resolved to place virtue in any one thing, there remained
little room to hesitate which should be preferred. It might have been worth
while to reflect, that in the natural world there are two kinds of attraction;
one which holds the several parts of individual bodies in contact; another,
which maintains the union of bodies themselves with the general system; and
that, though the union in the former case is much more intimate than in the
latter, each is equally essential to the order of the world. Similar to this is
the relation which the public and private affections bear to each other, and
their use in the moral system.


.

Before I close this discourse, I cannot omit to mention three circumstances
attending the propagation of Infidelity, by its present abettors, equally new
and alarming.

1. It is the first attempt which has been ever witnessed on an extensive
scale, to establish the principles of Atheism; the first effort which history
has recorded to disannul and extinguish the belief of all superior powers; the
consequence of which, should it succeed, will be to place mankind in a
situation never before experienced, not even during the ages of Pagan darkness.
The system of Polytheism was as remote from modern Infidelity as from true
Religion. Amidst that rubbish of superstition, the product of fear, ignorance
and vice, which had been accumulating for ages, some faint embers of sacred
truth remained unextinguished; the interposition of unseen powers in the
affairs of men was believed and revered, the sanctity of oaths was maintained,
the idea of revelation and of tradition, as a source of religious knowledge,
was familiar, a useful persuasion of the existence of a future world was kept
alive, and the greater Gods were looked up to as the guardians of the public
welfare, the patrons of those virtues which promote the prosperity of states,
and the avengers of injustice, perfidy and fraud The testimony of Polybius, to
the beneficial effects which resulted from the system of Pagan superstion, in
fortifying the sentiments of moral obligation, and supporting the sanctity of
oaths, is so weighty and decisive, that it would be an injustice to the subject
not to insert it; more especially as it is impossible to attribute it to the
influence of credulity on the author himself, who was, evidently, a skeptic. It
is scarcely necessary to remark, that all the benefits, which might in any way
flow from superstition, are secured to an incomparably greater degree by the
belief of true Religion. "But among all the useful institutions," says
Polybius, "that demonstrate the superior excellence of the Roman government,
the most considerable, perhaps, is the opinion which people are taught to hold
concerning the Gods; and that, which other men regard as an object of disgrace,
appears in my judgment to be the very thing by which this republic is chiefly
sustained. I mean superstition; which is impressed with all its terrors, and
influences the private actions of the citizens, and the public administration
of the state, to a degree that can scarcely be exceeded.

"The ancients, therefore, acted not absurdly, nor without good reason, when
they inculcated the notions concerning the Gods, and the belief of infernal
punishments; but much rather are those of the present age to be charged with
rashness and absurdity in endeavoring to extirpate these opinions; for, not to
mention other effects that flow from such an institution, if, among the Greeks,
for example, a single talent only be entrusted to those who have the management
of any of the public money, though they give ten written sureties, with as many
seals, and twice as many witnesses, they are unable to discharge the trust
reposed in them with integrity. But the Romans, on the other hand, who in the
course of their magistracies and in embassies disburse the greatest sums, are
prevailed on, by the single obligation of an oath, to perform their duty with
inviolable honesty. And as, in other states, a man is rarely to be found whose
hands are pure from public robbery, so, amongst the Romans, it is no less rare
to discover one that is tainted with this crime."

Hampton's Polybius Vol. 3. B. 6. Though the system of Paganism is justly
condemned by reason and Scripture, yet it assumed as true several principles of
the first importance to the preservation of public manners; such as a
persuasion of invisible power, of the folly of incurring the divine vengeance
for the attainment of any present advantage, and the divine approbation of
virtue; so that, strictly speaking, it was the mixture of truth in it which
gave it all its utility; which is well stated by the great and judicious HOOKER
in treating on this subject. "Seeing therefore it does appear," says that
venerable author, "that the safety of all states depends upon religion; that
religion unfeignedly loved perfecteth men's abilities unto all kinds of
virtuous services in the commonwealth; that men's desire is, in general, to
hold no religion but the true, and that whatever good effects do grow out of
their religion, who embrace, instead of the true, a false, the ^oots thereof
are certain sparks of the light of truth intermingled with the darkness of
error, because no religion can wholly and only consist of untruths, we have
reason to think that all true virtues are to honor true religion as their
parent, and all well ordered Common wealths to love her as their chiefest stay.'

Eccles. Pol. B. 5.
.

Of whatever benefit superstition might formerly be productive, by the
scattered particles of truth which it contained, these advantages can now only
be reaped from the soil of true Religion; nor is there any other alternative
left than the belief of Christianity, or absolute Atheism. In the revolutions
of the human mind, exploded opinions are often revived, but an exploded
superstition never recovers its credit. The pretension to Divine Revelation is
so august and commanding, that, when its falsehood is once discerned, it is
covered with all the ignominy of detected imposture; it falls from such a
height (to change the figure) that it is inevitably crumbled into atoms.
Religions, whether false or true, are not creatures of arbitrary institution.
After discrediting the principles of piety, should our modern Freethinkers find
it necessary, in order to restrain the excesses of ferocity, to seek for a
substitute in some popular superstition, it will prove a vain and impracticable
attempt: they may recall the names, restore the altars, and revive the
ceremonies; but to re-kindle the spirit of Heathenism will exceed their power;
because it is impossible to enact ignorance by law, or to repeal, by
legislative authority, the dictates of reason, and the right of science.

2. The efforts of infidels, to diffuse the principles of infidelity among the
common people, is another alarming sympton peculiar to the present time. Hume,
Bolingbroke and Gibbon addressed themselves solely to the more polished classes
of the community, and would have thought their refined speculations debased by
an attempt to enlist disciples from among the populace. Infidelity has lately
grown condescending: bred in the speculations of a daring philosophy, immured
at first in the cloisters of the learned, and afterward nursed in the lap of
voluptuousness and of courts; having at length reached its full maturity, it
boldly ventures to challenge the suffrages of the people, solicits the
acquaintance of peasants and mechanics, and seeks to draw whole nations to its
standard.

It is not difficult to account for this new state of things. While infidelity
was rare, it was employed as the instrument of literary vanity; its wide
diffusion having disqualified it for answering that purpose, it is now adopted
as the organ of political convulsion. Literary distinction is conferred by the
approbation of a few; but the total subversion and overthrow of society demands
the concurrence of millions.

3. The infidels of the present day are the first sophists who have presumed to
innovate in the very substance of morals. The disputes on moral questions
hitherto agitated amongst philosophers have respected the grounds of duty, not
the nature of duty itself; or they have been merely metaphysical, and related
to the history of moral sentiments in the mind, the sources and principles from
which they were most easily deduced; they never turned on the quality of those
dispositions and actions which were to be denominated virtuous. In the firm
persuasion that the love and fear of the Supreme Being, the sacred observation
of promises and oaths, reverence to magistrates, obedience to parents,
gratitude to benesactors, conjugal fidelity, and parental tenderness, were
primary virtues; and the chief support of every commonwealth, they were
unanimous. The curse denounced upon such as remove ancient land marks, upon
those who call good evil and evil good, put light for darkness and darkness for
light, who employ their faculties to subvert the eternal distinctions of right
and wrong, and thus to poison the streams of virtue at their source, falls with
accumulated weight on the advocates of modern infidelity, and on them alone.

Permit me to close this discourse with a few serious reflections. There is
much, it must be confessed, in the apostasy of multitudes, and the rapid
progress of infidelity, to awaken our fears for the virtue of the rising
generation; but nothing to shake our faith, nothing which scripture itself does
not give us room to expect. The features which compose the character of
apostates, their profaneness, presumption, lewdness, impatience of
subordination, restless appetite for change, vain pretensions to freedom and to
emancipate the world, whilst themselves are the slaves of lust, the weapons
with which they attack Christianity, and the snares they spread for the unwary,
are depicted in the clearest colors by the pencil of prophecy. Knowing this
first, says PETER, that there shall come, in the last days, scoffers, walking
after their own lusts 2 Peter, iii. v. 3.
. In the same epistle he more fully describes the persons he alludes to; as
chiefly them that walk after the flesh, in the lust of uncleanness, and despise
government; presumptuous are they, self-willed, they are not afraid to speak
evil of dignities; sporting themselves in their own deceivings, having eyes
full of adultery, and that cannot cease from sin; beguiling unstable souls: For
when they speak great swelling words of vanity, they allure through the lusts
of the flesh, through much wantonness, those that were clean escaped from them
who live in error; while they promise them liberty, they themselves are the
servants of corruption 2 Peter, ii.
. Of the same characters JUDE admonishes us, to remember that they were
foretold as mockers, who should be in the last time, who should walk after
their own ungodly lusts. These be they, he adds, who separate themselves (by
apostasy) sensual, not having the spirit. Infidelity is an evil of short
duration. "It has," as a judicious writer observes, "no individual subsistence
given it in the system of prophecy. It is not a BEAST, but a mere putrid
excrescence of the papal beast; an excrescence which, though it may diffuse
death through every vein of the body on which it grew, yet shall die along with
it See an excellent work, lately published by the Rev. A. Fuller, entitled The
Gospel its own Witness. Sold by Mr. Button.
. Its enormities will hasten its overthrow. It is impossible that a system,
which, by vilifying every virtue, and embracing the patronage of almost every
vice and crime, wages war with all the order and civilization of the world;
which, equal to the establishment of nothing, is armed only with the energies
of destruction, can long retain an ascendency. It is in no shape formed for
perpetuity. Sudden in its rise, and impetuous in its progress, it resembles a
mountain torrent, which is loud, filthy and desolating; but, being fed by no
perennial spring, is soon drained off and disappears. By permitting to a
certain extent the prevalence of infidelity, Providence is preparing new
triumphs for religion. In afferting its authority, the preachers of the gospel
have hitherto found it necessary to weigh the prospects of immortality against
the interests of time, to strip the world of its charms, to insist on the
deceitfulness of pleasure, the unsatisfying nature of riches, the emptiness of
grandeur, and the nothingness of a mere worldly life. Topics of this nature
will always have their use; but it is not by such representations alone, that
the importance of religion is evinced. The prevalence of impiety has armed us
with new weapons in its defense.

Religion being primarily intended to make men wise unto salvation, the support
it ministers to social order, the stability it confers on government and laws,
is a subordinate species of advantage which we should have continued to enjoy
without reflecting on its cause, but for the developement of deistical
principles and the experiment which has been made of their effects in a
neighboring country. It has been the constant boast of infidels, that their
system, more liberal and generous than Christianity, needed but to be tried to
produce an immense accession of human happiness; and Christian nations,
careless and supine, retaining little of religion but the profession, and
disgusted with its restraints, lent a favorable ear to these pretensions. God
permitted the trial to be made: In one country, and that the center of
Christendom, Revelation underwent a total eclipse It is worthy of attention
that (...), a warm advocate of the French Revolution, and a professed deist, in
his recent work, entitled, "New Paris," acknowledges and lament; the extinction
of religion in France. "We have," says he "in proscribing superstition,
destroyed all religious sentiment: but this is not the way to regenerate the
world." See Appendix to the 30th Vol. Monthly Review.
, while atheism performing on a darkened theater its strange and fearful
tragedy, confounded the first elements of society, blended every age, rank and
sex, in indiscriminate proscription and massacre, and convulsed all Europe to
its center; that the imperishable memorial of these events might teach the last
generations of mankind, to consider religion as the pillar of society, the
safeguard of nations, the parent of social order, which alone has power to curb
the fury of the passions and secure to every one his rights; to the laborious
the reward of their industry, to the rich the enjoyment of their wealth, to
nobles the preservation of their honors, and to princes the stability of their
thrones.

We might ask the patrons of infidelity, what fury impels them to attempt the
subversion of Christianity? Is it that they have discovered a better system? To
what virtues are their principles favorable, or is there one which Christians
have not carried to a higher perfection than any of whom their party can boast?
Have they discovered a more excellent rule of life, or a better hope in death,
than that which the scriptures suggest? Above all, what are the pretensions on
which they rest their claims to be the guides of mankind; or which embolden
them to expect we should trample upon the experience of ages, and abandon a
religion, which has been attested by a train of miracles and prophecies, in
which millions of our forefathers have found a refuge in every trouble, and
consolation in the hour of death; a religion which has been adorned with the
highest sanctity of character and splendour of talents, which enrols amongst its
disciples the names of BACON, NEWTON, and LOCK, the glory of their species,
and to which these illustrious men were proud to dedicate the last and best
fruits of their immortal genius?

If the question at issue is to be decided by argument, nothing can be added to
the triumph of Christianity; if by an appeal to authority, what have our
adversaries to oppose to these great names? Where are the Infidels of such
pure, uncontaminated morals, unshaken probity, and extended benevolence, that
we should be in danger of being seduced into impiety by their example? Into
what obscure recesses of misery, into what dungeons, have their Philanthropists
penetrated, to lighten the fetters and relieve the sorrows of the helpless
captive? What barbarous tribes have their apostles visited, what distant climes
have they explored, encompassed with cold, nakedness and want, to diffuse
principles of virtue and the blessings of civilization? Or will they rather
choose to wave their pretensions to this extraordinary, and in their eyes,
eccentric species of benevolence (for Infidels, we know, are sworn enemies to
enthusiasm of every sort) and rest their character on their political exploits,
on their efforts to reanimate the virtue of a sinking state, to restrain
licentiousness, to calm the tumult of popular fury, and by inculcating the
spirit of justice, moderation, and pity for fallen greatness, to mitigate the
inevitable horrors of revolution? Our adversaries will at least have the
discretion, if not the modesty, to recede from this test.

More than all, their infatuated eagerness, their parricidal zeal to extinguish
a sense of Deity, must excite astonishment and horror. Is the idea of an
Almighty and perfect ruler, unfriendly to any passion which is consistent with
innocence, or an obstruction to any design which it is not shameful to avow?
Eternal God! on what are thine enemies intent: what are those enterprises of
guilt and horror, that, for the safety of their performers, require to be
enveloped in a darkness which the eye of Heaven must not pierce! -- Miserable
men! proud of being the offspring of chance; in love with universal disorder,
whose happiness is involved in the belief of there being no witness to their
designs, and who are at ease only because they suppose themselves inhabitants
of a forsaken and fatherless world!

Having been led by the nature of the subject to consider chiefly, the manner
in which skeptical impiety affects the welfare of states, it is the more
requisite to warn you against that most fatal mistake of regarding religion as
an engine of policy; and to recall to your recollection, that the concern we
have in it, is much more as individuals than as collective bodies, and far less
temporal than eternal. The happiness it confers in the present life are
blessings which it scatters by the way in its march to immortality. That future
condition of being which it ascertains, and for which its promises and truths
are meant to prepare us, is the ultimate end of human societies, the final
scope and object of present existence, in comparison of which all the
revolutions of nations and all the vicissitudes of time, are light and
transitory. Godliness has, it is true, the promise of the life that now is, but
chiefly of that which is to come. Other acquisitions may be requisite to make
men great; but, be assured, the religion of Jesus is alone sufficient to make
them good and happy. Powerful sources of consolation and sorrow, unshaken
fortitude amidst the changes and perturbations of the world, humility remote
from meanness, and dignity unstained by pride, contentment in every station,
passions pure and calm, with habitual serenity, full enjoyment of life,
undisturbed by the dread of dissolution, or the fear of an hereafter, are its
invaluable gifts. To these enjoyments, however, you will necessarily continue
strangers, unless you resign yourselves wholly to its power; for the
consolations of religion are reserved to reward, to sweeten and to stimulate to
obedience. Many, without renouncing the profession of Christianity, without
formally rejecting its distinguishing doctrines, live in such an habitual
violation of its laws, and contradiction to its spirit, that, conscious they
have more to fear than to hope from its truth, they are never able to
contemplate it without terror. It haunts their imagination, instead of
tranquillizing their hearts, and hangs with depressing weight on all their
enjoyments and pursuits. Their religion, instead of comforting them under their
troubles, is itself their greatest trouble, from which they seek refuge in the
dissipation and vanity of the world, until the throbs and tumults of conscience
force them back upon religion. Thus suspended betwixt opposite powers, the
sport of contradictory influences, they are disqualified for the happiness of
both worlds, and neither enjoy the pleasures of sin, nor the peace of piety. Is
it surprising to find a mind thus bewildered in uncertainty, and dissatisfied
with itself, court deception, and embrace with eagerness every pretext to
mutilate the claims and enervate the authority of Christianity, forgetting that
it is the very essence of the religious principles to preside and control, and
that it is impossible to serve God and Mammon? It is this class of professors,
who are chiefly in danger of being entangled in the snares of infidelity.

The champions of infidelity have much more reason to be ashamed, than to
boast, of such converts. For what can be a stronger presumption of the
salsehood of a system, than that it is the opiate of a restless conscience;
that it prevails with minds of a certain description, not because they find it
true; but because they feel it necessary; and that in adopting it, they consult
less with their reason, than with their vices and their fears? It requires but
little sagacity to foresee that speculations which originate in guilt, must end
in ruin. Infidels are not themselves satisfied with the truth of their system;
for, had they any settled assurance of its principles, in consequence of calm
dispassionate investigation, they would never disturb the quiet of the world by
their attempts to proselyte; but would lament their own infelicity, in not
being able to perceive sufficient evidence for the truth of a religion, which
furnishes such incentives to virtue, and inspires such exalted hopes. Having
nothing to substitute in the place of religion, it is absurd to suppose that,
in opposition to the collective voice of every country, age, and time,
proclaiming its necessity, solicitude for the welfare of mankind impels them to
destroy it.

To very different motives must their conduct be imputed. More like
conspirators than philosophers, in spice of the darkness with which they
endeavor to surround themselves, some rays of unwelcome conviction will
penetrate, some secret apprehensions that all is not right, will make
themselves felt, which they find nothing so effectual to quell as an attempt to
enlist fresh disciples, who, in exchange for new principles, impart confidence,
and diminish fear. For the same reason it is seldom they attack Christianity by
argument: their favorite weapons are ridicule, obscenity and blasphemy; as the
most miserable outcasts of society are, of all men, found most to delight in
vulgar merriment and senseless riot.

JESUS CHRIST seems to have his fan in his hand and to be thoroughly purging
his floor; and nominal Christians will probably be scattered like chaff. But
has real Christianity any thing to fear? Have not the degenerate manners, and
corrupt lives, of multitudes in the visible Church, been, on the contrary, the
principal occasion of scandal and offense? Infidelity, without intending it, is
gradually removing this reproach: possessing the property of attracting to
itself the morbid humors which pervade the Church, until the Christian
profession on the one hand is reduced to a sound and healthy state, and
Skepticism on the other, exhibits nothing but a mass of putridity and disease.

In a view of the final issue of the contest, we should find little cause to
lament the astonishing prevalence of Infidelity, but for a solicitude for the
rising generation: to whom its principles are recommended by two motives, with
young minds the most persuasive, the love of independence, and the love of
pleasure. With respect to the first, we would earnestly entreat the young to
remember, that by the unanimous consent of all ages, modesty, docility and
reverence to superior years, and to parents, above all, have been considered as
their appropriate virtues, a guard assigned by the immutable laws of God and
nature on the inexperience of youth; and with respect to the second, that
Christianity prohibits no pleasures that are innocent, lays no restraints that
are capricious; but that the sobriety and purity which it enjoins, by
strengthening the intellectual powers, and preserving the faculties of mind and
body in undiminished vigor, lay the surest foundation of present peace and
future eminence. At such a season as this, it becomes an urgent duty on
Parents, Guardians and Tutors, to watch, not only over the morals, but the
principles of those committed to their care; to make it appear that a concern
for their eternal welfare is their chief concern, and to imbue them early with
that knowledge of the evidences of Christianity, and that profound reverence
for the Scriptures, that with the blessing of God, (which with submission they
may then expect) may keep them from this hour of temptation that has come upon
all the world, to try them that dwell on the earth.

To an attentive observer of the signs of the times, it will appear one of the
most extraordinary phenomenon of this eventful crisis, that amidst the ravages
of Atheism and Infidelity, real Religion is evidently on the increase. The
Kingdom of God, we know, comes not with observation; but still there are not
wanting manifest tokens of its approach. The personal appearance of the Son of
God was announced by the shaking of nations: his spiritual Kingdom, in all
probability, will be established in the midst of similar convulsions and
disorders. The blasphemous impiety of the enemies of God, as well as the
zealous efforts of his sincere worshippers, will doubtless be overruled to
accomplish the purposes of his unerring providence: while, in inflicting the
chastisements of offended Deity on corrupt communities and nations, Infidelity
marks its progress by devastation and ruin, by the prostration of Thrones and
concussion of Kingdoms; thus apalling the inhabitants of the world, and
compelling them to take refuge in the Church of God, the true sanctuary; the
stream of divine knowledge unobserved is flowing in new channels, winding its
course among humble valleys, refreshing thirsty deserts, and enriching, with
far other and higher blessings than those of commerce, the most distant climes
and nations, until, agreeably to the prediction of prophecy, the knowledge of
the Lord shall fill and cover the whole earth.

Within the limits of this discourse, it would be impracticable to exhibit the
evidences of Christianity, nor is it my design; but there is one consideration
resulting immediately from my text, which is entitled to great weight with all
who believe in the one living and true God, as the sole object of worship. The
Ephesians, in common with other Gentiles, are described in the text as being,
previous to their conversion, without God in the world; that is, without any
just and solid acquaintance with his character, destitute of the knowledge of
his will, the institutes of his worship, and the hopes of his favor; to the
truth of which representation whoever possesses the slightest acquaintance with
Pagan antiquity, must assent; nor is it a fact less incontestible, that while
human philosophy was never able to abolish idolatry in a single village, the
promulgation of the Gospel overthrew it in a great part (and that the most
enlightened) of the world. If the unity and perfections of God, together with
his moral government and exclusive right to the worship of mankind, are truths,
they cannot reasonably be denied to be truths of the first importance, and
infinitely to outweigh the greatest discoveries in science; because they turn
the hopes, fears and interests of man into a totally different channel from
that in which they must otherwise flow. Wherever these principles are first
admitted, there a new dominion is erected, and a new system of laws established.

But since all events are under divine direction, is it reasonable to suppose,
that the great Parent, after suffering his creatures to continue for ages
ignorant of his true character, should, at length, in the course of his
providence, fix upon falsehood, and that alone, as the effectual method of
making himself known; and that, what the virtuous exercise of reason in the
best and wisest men was never permitted to accomplish, he should confer on
fraud and, delusion the honor of effecting? It ill comports with the majesty
of truth, or the character of God to believe he has built the noblest
superstructure on the weakest foundation, or reduced mankind to the miserable
alternative, either of remaining destitute of the knowledge of himself, or of
deriving it from the polluted source of impious (...). We therefore feel
ourselves justified, on this occasion, in adopting the triumphant boast of the
great Apostle, Where is the wise, where is the scribe, where is the disputer of
this world? has not God made foolish the wisdom of this world? for after that,
in the wisdom of God, the world by wisdom knew not God, it pleased God by the
foolishness of preaching to save them that believe.

Note to Page 36.
The fury of the most sanguinary parties was especially pointed against the
Christian priesthood, etc.] -- The Author finds he has given great offense to
some friends whom he highly esteems, by applying the term Christian priesthood
to the popish clergy. He begs leave to make a remark or two by way of apology.

1. It is admitted by all candid protestants, that salvation is attainable in
the Roman Catholic church; but he should be glad to be informed what part of
the Christian covenant entitles us to expect the salvation of those (where the
Gospel is promulgated) who are not even a branch of the visible church of
Christ. The papistical tenets are either fundamentally erroneous on which
supposition it is certain to papist can be saved, or their errors must be
consistent with Christian faith, and consequently cannot be a valid reason for
excluding those who maintain them from being a part (a most corrupt part, if
you please, but still a part) of the Christian church.

2. The popish clergy were persecuted under the character of Christians, not
under the notion of Heretics or Schismatics. They, who were the subjects of
persecution, were certainly the best judges of its aim and direction: and when
the Archbishop of Paris, and others, endeavored to screen themselves from its
effects by a recantation, what did they recant? Was it popery? no; but the
profession of Christianity. These Apostates, doubtless, meant to remove the
ground of offense, which, in their opinion, was the Christian profession. If
the soundest Ecclesiastical Historians have not refused the honors of
martyrdom to such as suffered in the cause of truth amongst the Gnostics, it
ill becomes the liberality of the present age to contemplate, with sullen
indifference, or malicious joy, the sufferings of conscientious catholics.

3. At the period to which the Author refers Christian worship, of every kind,
was prohibited, while, in solemn mockery of religion, adoration was paid to a
strumpet, under the title of the goddess of reason. Is it necessary to prove
that men, who were thus abandoned, must be hostile to true religion, under
every form? or, if there be any gradations in their abhorrence, to that most
which is the most pure and perfect? Are atheism and obscenity more congenial to
the protestant than to the popish profession? To have incurred the hatred of
the ruling party of France at the season alluded to, is an honor which the
author would be sorry to resign, as the exclusive boast of the church of Rome:
to have been the object of the partiality of such bloody and inhuman monsters,
would have been a stain upon Protestants which the virtue of ages could not
obliterate.

FINIS.

