A TEST OF THE RELIGIOUS PRINCIPLES OF MR. JEFFERSON.

The path of true piety is too plain to want any political direction.

WASHINGTON. PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED BY JOHN BIOREN, FOR ROBERT T. RAWLE, NO. 50,
NORTH 2d ST. 1800.

TO THE CITIZENS OF THE UNITED STATES:
WHILE candid and informed historians and other writers in the christian
church, confess and lament the spirit of intolerance which has frequently
degraded their religion, it is hoped that the following invaluable extracts
from the works of that excellent man, Thomas Jefferson, the present Vice
President of the United States, will be an acceptable tribute of respect for
true religion, correct animosities among sectarians, and extend universal peace
and confidence through our country.

This publication, appeared to be more needful at this time, when the
professors of christianity in the United States, lament that fasts, prayers and
sermons, have been perverted to the purposes of war, and the animosities of
party.

The truly religious man, impressed with due reverence for the author of his
existence and constant preserver, invariably obtains respect, dignity and
usefulness, by avoiding the overtures of hypocrisy, and specious pretexts of
piety.

Assuming no dominion over the faith of others, he respectfully resigns the
rites of religion and acts of piety to the acceptance of all men, according to
the light they have received, and the dictates of their own consciences.

To put an end to persecutions, jealousies, rancors and delusions, resulting
from the union of church and state, by political establishments, has been the
aim of those who secured independence and law for us, as a nation, with the aid
of our own valor and wisdom.

Upon the preservation of these sacred and inestimable rights, depends a large
proportion of our felicity and prosperity at all times.

THE EDITOR.

THE DIFFERENT RELIGIONS RECEIVED INTO THE STATE OF VIRGINIA.
THE first settlers in this country were emigrants from England, of the English
church, just at a point of time when it was flushed with complete victory over
the religious of all persuasions. Possessed, as they became, of the powers of
making administering, and executing the laws, they showed equal intolerance in
this country with their Presbyterian brethren, who had emigrated to the
northern government. The poor Quakers were flying from persecution in England.
They cast their eyes on these new countries as asylums of civil and religious
freedom; but they found them free only for the reigning sect. Several acts of
the Virginia assembly of 1659, 1662 and 1693. bad made it penal in parents to
refuse to have their children baptized; had prohibited the unlawful assembling
of Quakers; had made it penal for any master of a vessel to bring a Quaker into
the state; had ordered those already here, and such as should come thereafter,
to be imprisoned till they should abjure the country: provided a milder
punishment for their first and second return, but death for their third; had
inhibited all persons from suffering their meetings in or near their houses,
entertaining them individually, or disposing of books which supported their
tenets. If no execution took place here, as did in New England, it was not
owing to the moderation of the church, or spirit of the legislature, as may be
inferred from the law itself; but to historical circumstances which have not
been handed down to us. The Anglicans retained full possession of the country
about a century. Other opinions began then to creep in, and the great care of
the government of support their own church, having begotten an equal degree of
indolence in its clergy, two-thirds of the people had become dissenters at the
commencement of the present revolution. The laws indeed were still oppressive
on them, but the spirit of the one party had subsided into moderation, and of
the other had risen to a degree of determination which commanded respect.

The present state of our laws on the subject of religion is this. The
convention of May 1776, in their declaration of rights, declared it to be a
truth, and a natural right, that the exercise of religion should be free; but
when they proceeded to form on that declaration the ordinance of government,
instead of taking up every principle declared in the bill of rights, and
guarding it by legislative sanction, they passed over that which asserted our
religious rights, leaving them as they found them. The same convention,
however, when they met as a member of the general assembly in October, 1776,
repealed all acts of parliament which had rendered criminal the maintaining any
opinions in matters of religion, the forbearing to repair to church, and the
exercising any mode of worship; and suspended the laws giving salaries to the
clergy, which suspension was made perpetual in October 1779. Statutory
oppressions in religion being thus wiped away, we remain at present under those
only imposed by the common law; or by our own acts of assembly. At the common
law, heresy was a capital offense, punishable by burning. Its definition was
left to the ecclesiastical judges, before whom the conviction was, till the
statute of the 1 El. c. 1. circumscribed it, by declaring, that nothing should
be deemed heresy, but what had been so determined by authority of the canonical
scriptures, or by one of the four first general councils, or by some other
council having for the grounds of their declaration the express and plain words
of the scriptures. Heresy, thus circumscribed, being an offense at the common
law, our act of assembly of October, 1777, c. 17. gives cognizance of it to the
general court, by declaring that the jurisdiction of that court shall be
general in all matters at the common law. The execution is by the writ De
hoeretico comburendo. By our own act of assembly of 1705, c. 30. if a person
brought up in the Christian religion denies the being of a God, or the Trinity,
or asserts there are more gods than one, or denies the Christian religion to be
true, or the scriptures to be of divine authority, he is punishable on the
first offense by incapacity to hold any office or employment ecclesiastical,
civil, or military; on the second by disability to sue, to take any gift or
legacy, to be guardian, executor, or administrator, and by three years
imprisonment without bail. A father's right to the custody of his own children
being founded in law on his right of guardianship, this being taken away, they
may of course be severed from him, and put by the authority of a court, into
more orthodox hands. This is a summary view of that religious slavery, under
which a people have been willing to remain, who have lavished their lives and
fortunes for the establishment of their civil freedom. Furneaux passim.
The error seems not sufficiently eradicated, that the operations of the mind,
as well as the acts of the body, are subject to the coercion of the laws. But
our rulers can have no authority over such natural rights only as we have
submitted to them. The rights of conscience we never submitted, we could not
submit. We are answerable for them to our God. The legitimate powers of
government extend to such acts only as are injurious to others. But it does me
no injury for my neighbor to say there are twenty gods, or no god. It neither
picks my pocket nor breaks my leg. If it be said, his testimony in a court of
justice cannot be relied on, reject it then, and be the stigma on him.
Constraint may make him worse by making him a hypocrite, but it will never make
him a truer man. It may fix him obstinately in his errors, and will not cure
them. Reason and free inquiry are the only effectual agents against error. Give
a loose to them, they will support the true religion, by bringing every false
one to their tribunal, to the test of their investigation. They are the natural
enemies of error, and of error only. Had not the Roman government permitted
free inquiry, Christianity could never have been introduced. Had not free
inquiry been indulged at the era of the reformation, the corruptions of
Christianity could not have been purged away. If it be restrained now, the
present corruptions will be protected and new ones encouraged. Was the
government to prescribe to us our medicine and diet, our bodies would be in
such keeping as our souls are now. Thus in France the emetic was once forbidden
as a medicine, and the potato as an article of food. Government is just as
infallible too when it fixes systems in physics. Galileo was sent to the
inquisition for affirming that the earth was a sphere: the government had
declared it to be as flat as a trencher, and Galileo was obliged to abjure his
error. This error however at length prevailed, the earth became a globe, and
Descartes declared it was whirled round its axis by a vortex. The government in
which he lived was wise enough to see that this was no question of civil
jurisdiction, or we should all have been involved by authority in vortices. In
fact, the vortices have been exploded, and the Newtonian principle of
gravitation is now more firmly established, on the basis of reason, than it
would be were the government to step in, and to make it an article of necessary
faith. Reason and experiment have been indulged, and error has fled before
them. It is error alone which needs the support of government. Truth can stand
by itself. Subject opinion to coercion: whom will you make your inquisitors?
Fallible men; men governed by bad passions, by private as well as public
reasons. And why subject it to coercion? To produce uniformity. But is
uniformity of opinion desirable? No more than of face and stature. Introduce
the bed of Procrustes then, and as there is danger that the large men may beat
the small, make us all of a size, by lopping the former and stretching the
latter. Difference of opinion is advantageous in religion. The several sects
perform the office of a censor morum over each other. Is uniformity attainable?
Millions of innocent men, woman, and children, since the introduction of
Christianity, have been burnt, tortured, fined, imprisoned; yet we have not
advanced one inch toward uniformity. What has been the effect of coercion? to
make one half the world fools, and the other half hypocrites. To support
roguery and error all over the earth. Let us reflect that it is inhabited by a
thousand millions of people. That these profess probably a thousand different
systems of religion. That ours is but one of that thousand. That if there be
but one right, and ours that one, we should wish to see the 999 wandering sects
gathered into the fold of truth. But against such a majority we cannot effect
this by force. Reason and persuasion are the only practicable instruments. To
make way for these, free inquiry must be indulged; and how can we wish others
to indulge it while we refuse it ourselves. But every state, says an
inquisitor, has established some religion. No two, say I, have established the
same. Is this a proof of the infallibility of establishments? Our sister states
of Pennsylvania and New York, however, have long subsisted without any
establishment at all. The experiment was new and doubtful when they made it. It
has answered beyond conception. They flourish infinitely. Religion is well
supported; of various kinds, indeed, but all good enough; all sufficient to
preserve peace and order: or if a sect arises, whose tenets would subvert
morals, good sense has fair play, and reasons and laughs it out of doors,
without suffering the state to be troubled with it. They do not hang more
malefactors than we do. They are not more disturbed with religious dissensions.
On the contrary, their harmony is unparalled, and can be ascribed to nothing
but their unbounded tolerance, because there is no other circumstance in which
they differ from every nation on earth. They have made the happy discovery,
that the way to silence religious disputes, is to take no notice of them. Let
us too give this experiment fair play, and get rid, while we may, of those
tyrannical laws. It is true, we are as yet secured against them by the spirit
of the times. I doubt whether the people of this country would suffer an
execution for heresy, or a three years imprisonment for not comprehending the
mysteries of the Trinity. But is the spirit of the people an infallible, a
permanent reliance? Is it government? Is this the kind of protection we receive
in return for the rights we give up? Besides, the spirit of the times may
alter, will alter. Our rulers will become corrupt, our people careless. A
single zealot may commence persecutor, and better men be his victims. It can
never be too often repeated that the time for fixing every essential right on a
legal basis is while our rulers are honest, and ourselves united. From the
conclusion of this war we shall be going down hill. It will not then be
necessary to resort every moment to the people for support. They will be
forgotten, therefore, and their rights disregarded. They will forget
themselves, but in the sole faculty of making money, and will never think of
uniting of effect a due respect for rights. The shackles, therefore, which
shall not be knocked off at the conclusion of this war, will remain on us long,
will be made heavier and heavier, till our rights shall revive or expire in a
convulsion.

An ACT for establishing RELIGIOUS FREEDOM, passed in the Assembly of Virginia,
in the beginning of the year 1786.
WELL aware that Almighty God has created the mind free; that all attempts to
influence it by temporal punishments or burdens, or by civil incapacitations,
tend only to beget habits of hypocrisy and meanness, and are a departure from
the plan of the Holy Author of our religion, who being Lord both of body and
mind, yet chose not to propogate it by coercions on either, as was in his
Almighty power to do; that the impious presumption of legislators and rulers,
civil as well as ecclesiastical, who, being themselves but fallible an
uninspired men have assumed dominion over the faith of others, setting up their
own opinions and modes of thinking as the only true and infallible, and as such
endeavoring to impose them on others, has established and maintained false
religions over the greatest part of the world, and through all time; that to
compel a man to furnish contributions of money for the propogation of opinions
which he disbelieves, is sinful and tyrannical; that even the forcing him to
support this or that teacher of his own religious persuasion, is depriving him
of the comfortable liberty of giving his contributions to the particular pastor
whose morals he would make his pattern, and whose powers he seels most
persuasive to righteousness, and is withdrawing from the ministry those
temporal rewards, which, proceeding from an approbation of their personal
conduct, are an additional incitement to earnest and unremitting labors for
the instruction of mankind; that our civil rights have no dependence on our
religious opinions, more than our opinions in physics or geometry; that
therefore the proscribing any citizen as unworthy the public confidence by
laying upon him an incapacity of being called to offices of trust and
emolument, unless he profess or renounce this or that religious opinion, is
depriving him injuriously of those privileges and advantages to which in common
with his fellow-citizens he has a natural right; that it tends also to corrupt
the principles of that very religion it is meant to encourage, by bribing, with
a monopoly of worldly honors and emoluments, those who will externally profess
and conform to it; and though indeed these are criminal who do not withstand
such temptation, yet neither are those innocent who lay the bait in their way;
that to suffer the civil magistrate to intrude his powers into the field of
opinion and to restrain the profession or propogation of principles, on
supposition of their ill tendency, is a dangerous fallacy, which at once
destroys all religious liberty because he being of course judge of that
tendency, will make his opinions the rule of judgment, and approve or condemn
the sentiments of others only as they shall square with or differ from his own;
that it is time enough for the rightful purposes of civil government, for its
officers to interfere when principles break out into overt acts against peace
and good order; and finally, that truth is great and will prevail if left to
herself, that she is the proper and sufficient antagonist to error, and has
nothing to fear from the conflict, unless by human interposition disarmed of
her natural weapons, free argument and debate, errors ceasing to be dangerous
when it is permitted freely to contradict them.

Be it therefore enacted by the General Assembly, That no man shall be
compelled to frequent or support any religious worship, place or ministry
whatsoever, nor shall be enforced; restrained, molested, or burdened in his
body or goods, nor shall otherwise suffer on account of his religious opinions
or belief; but that all men shall be free to profess, and by argument to
maintain, their opinions in matters of religion and that the same shall in no
wise diminish, enlarge, or affect their civil capacities.

And though we well know that this assembly, elected by the people for the
ordinary purposes of legislation only, have no power to restrain the acts of
succeeding Assemblies, constituted with powers equal to our own, and that
therefore to declare this act irrevocable, would he of no effect in law, yet we
are free to declare, and do declare, that the rights hereby asserted are of the
natural rights of mankind, and that if any act shall be hereafter passed to
repeal the present or to narrow its operation, such act will be an infringement
of natural right.

THE END

