Mr. HOPKINS's SERMON ON THE DEATH OF GENERAL WASHINGTON.

A SERMON, PREACHED DECEMBER 29, 1799, IN THE SOUTH MEETING HOUSE, SALEM, THE
LORD'S DAY AFTER THE MELANCHOLY TIDINGS WERE RECEIVED OF THE DEATH OF GENERAL
GEORGE WASHINGTON, WHO DIED DEC. 14, 1799.

By DANIEL HOPKINS, A. M. PASTOR OF THE THIRD CHURCH.

Published by Desire of the Town.

SALEM: Printed by THOMAS C. CUSHING, at the Bible and Heart.

A SERMON.
2 SAMUEL, iii. 38. And the king said unto his servants, Know ye not that there
is a prince, and a great man, fallen this day in Israel?


THE man, the great man, to whom the king of Judah refers in this passage, was
General Abner, commander in chief of the armies, the thousands of Israel. He
was possessed of great political and military abilities. These he displayed in
the cabinet, and in the course of that bloody war which continued long between
the house of Saul and the house of David.

Attached to his country by warm affection, he voluntarily stepped forth in the
defense of its rights, its liberties, civil and religious; and fought the
battles of the Lord of Hosts*

He was highly esteemed by his countrymen. His name gave pleasure to all ranks,
and to all ages, of citizens; and in Abner, the great Abner, they placed the
most unreserved confidence.

He was now grown old in the service of his country; and the time of his
departure drew near. Like all other great men, the general must die! His exit
was attended with circumstances peculiarly affecting. This solemn event took
place when his friends were promising themselves great advantages from his
wisdom, patriotism, fidelity, and perseverance. They were then hoping for the
renewal of a union between them and a nation with whom they were now at war.
Yea, a treaty was, at that very time, actually on foot for the desirable
purpose.

This great man was interred with peculiar marks of respect. We are informed,
in the sacred page, that king David himself followed the bier. His memory was
embalmed with military honors. The scene drew tears from the vast multitude
that attended upon the affecting occasion; who composed the funeral procession.
And they buried Abner in Hebron; and the king lift up his voice, and wept at
the grave of Abner; and all the people wept.

The text then may be considered as an eulogy delivered at the tomb of this
great man. It contains the effusions of a heart deeply affected with the
subject, and appears to be spoken with all the energy of oriental eloquence.
The orator was the sweet Psalmist of Israel. And the king lamented over Abner;
and all the people wept again over him.

And to impress the minds of the risen, and especially the rising generation,
with a sense of the obligations they were under to this great man, orders were
issued by authority, that proper badges of mourning should be worn by the
citizens in honor to the renowned and illustrious general. And David said to
Joab, and to all the people, Rend your clothes, and gird you with sackcloth,
and mourn before Abner.

The people, no doubt, were the more deeply affected by this event, the fall of
this pillar of the state, as the times were troublous. There was not that
harmony in sentiment, with respect to the public measures, which every friend
to society most devoutly wished; and war, though at a distance, raged with
relentless fury.

What tidings were these to the great national council! to the army! to the
citizens! and to every benevolent friend of mankind! Abner is fallen! fallen
from his sphere of honor, dignity, and usefulness! fallen by the
all-conquering arm of the great destroyer of man! How much wisdom, what
military glory, are consigned to the narrow limits of his venerable tomb! This
brave man is fallen into the silent grave! There, princes, counselors, and the
prisoners, rest together. The small and the great are there, and the servant is
free from his master. They lie down alike in the dust, and the worms shall
cover them.

What a gloom was now spread over the mourning nation! Yea, a neighboring
prince, contemplating the irreparable loss society sustained in the death of
this great man, observes, I am this day weak, though anointed king.

Thus, in the course of Divine Providence, a prosperous and flourishing family,
an agreeable circle of acquaintance, an opulent and increasing town, a whole
nation, by the death of an important individual, may indulge a momentary
despondency, and say, Clouds and darkness are round about him. Thy judgments
are a great deep. Thy way is in the sea, thy paths in the great waters, and thy
footsteps are not known. But to the pious, who ever trust in God, light, like
the morning sun, arises from the consoling consideration, that righteousness
and judgment are the habitation of his throne. These, when darkness spreads
over the political horizon; when those great and good men, who by their wisdom
and influence seemed to be pillars in church and state, are removed by death;
yea, these, with unshaken confidence in Jehovah, are glad, and rejoice, for the
Lord God Omnipotent reigns.

This passage, my brethren, contains sentiments which harmonize with the
present feelings of the United States, with a variation, the propriety of which
all must acknowledge to be just: Know ye not, my friends, that General
WASHINGTON, one of the greatest and best of men, is fallen in America!

Who can refrain, upon this mournful and solemn occasion, from exclaiming, O
Death! what a victim do thou now embrace in thy cold arms! Thou art indeed
the king of terrors.

I. WASHINGTON was great.

His Maker endowed him with distinguished mental faculties, and formed him for
great and noble actions. His mind was solid, contemplative, sedate, vigorous,
tenacious, and determined. His acquirements were such as rendered him
agreeable, instructive, and eminently useful, to his connexions and to mankind.
His genius was prolific: its productions were such as displayed depth of
thought, soundness of judgment, peculiar penetration, and unconquerable energy.
But what gave a luster to his great abilities, his assemblage of virtues, and
to all his heroic achievements, was, the uprightness, the benevolence, of his
heart. What a disinterested regard for the welfare of his country animated him,
in his various exertions, while he was engaged in the most hazardous
enterprises!

He had an uncommon knowledge of men, of nations, and of the art of war. Of
this no one can doubt, who will read the history of the American war. Through
our long contest with Britain, this Great Man, in the most trying
circumstances, displayed the wisdom, the courage, the united qualifications,
which rendered him eminent in his important station, prepared him to contend
victoriously with the most renowned European generals, and, under the
protection and influence of the Lord of Hosts, and God of Armies, to become the
savior of his country.

Thus when fleets and armies arrived upon our coast, and had taken possession
of the town of Boston, with a view of depriving us of those privileges which
our venerable predecessors so highly valued; when we found ourselves under the
disagreeable necessity to have recourse to the sword; to raise an army of
American youth to defend the liberties, and to secure the civil and religious
rights, of their native land; at this period of memorable importance, the Great
and Benevolent Governor of the Universe had, in his wise and merciful
providence, provided a WASHINGTON to take the command of our newly-raised army.

Before this Great Man whole armies fell, laid down their arms, and owned him
Conqueror. Proud Britain was defeated in her cruel attempt to subdue the
Americans; and, "after expending nearly one hundred millions of money, and
losing an hundred thousand lives, was reduced to the humiliating necessity of
acknowledging the independence of the United States."

In this Great Man were united patience, prudence, probity, sincerity,
veracity, firmness, calmness, and unconquerable perseverance.

Actuated by that benevolence which influenced him to serve his country almost
eight years as General of the American Army, he refused every pecuniary
compensation for his inestimable services.

But the greatness of this excellent man was not only exhibited in his military
character; his Political Abilities shone with unsullied luster. He was great in
the cabinet. Even Congress itself, that venerable and highly-esteemed body of
wise statesmen, were indebted to WASHINGTON for that information which
originated those resolves, the wisdom of which has astonished the world.

We, my brethren, feel, to this day, the happy effects of his influence in that
National Convention, by whom the plan of our Federal Government was formed, in
which WASHINGTON, with his usual dignity, presided.

Called by the unanimous voice of the millions of America, he took the first
seat in our new government; and we, with gratitude to Heaven, beheld GEORGE
WASHINGTON President of the United States.

Here a wide field was opened; here was scope for the display of the abilities
of this great and illustrious Patriot.

All were pleased; all rejoiced; for all approved of, and put confidence in,
his wise and successful administration.

How safe felt all ranks and denominations of citizens! and what prosperity was
extended over our quiet country! The friends of mankind, upon both sides of the
terraqueous globe, rejoiced that America was favored with such a Great and
Good Man; so eminently qualified, and so benevolently disposed, to guide their
public affairs, and to give energy to their government. Yea, gentlemen of
distinguished observation and philanthropy, who came from the Old to visit the
New World, like Sheba's queen beholding Solomon in all his glory, have, with no
less admiration, when acquainted with this Great Man, exclaimed, It was a true
report that we heard in our own land of thy acts, and of thy wisdom. Howbeit,
we believed not the words until we came, and our eyes had seen it. And, behold,
the half was not told us. Thy wisdom and prosperity exceed the fame which we
heard. Happy are thy men. Happy are these thy servants, who stand continually
before thee, and that hear thy wisdom!

As an evidence of the greatness of this Man, in the estimate of the most
enlightened and judicious of mankind, the celebrated heroes, politicians,
statesmen, and benevolent, of all nations, have considered it as their
brightest ornament to be classed with General WASHINGTON.

The friends of religion, who interest themselves in the welfare of society,
have not been the inattentive spectators of these momentous events, these
amazing revolutions, which have been rolling on; and with which they have felt
themselves, and the cause they are engaged in, most intimately connected. They
have been concerned for the ark. Their closets can witness the sincerity and
fervency of their prayers to their God for their dear country. When therefore
they saw this Great Man placed at the head of our government, they considered
it as an evidence that God had not forsaken this, though they were a very
ungrateful and wicked people; but that he had blessings in store for the
present and future generations. They personally and unitedly rejoiced that God
had raised up this Great Man to be an instrument of so much good to them and to
their brethren.

It was in an eminent sense supporting to the humble followers of the Lamb of
God, of which they had the most plenary evidence, that WASHINGTON was not
seeking personal fame, worldly emolument, popular aggrandizement, and unlimited
power; but through all his military exertions, and his political labors, he
was aiming to promote the peace, happiness and best interest of his country.
This assimilated him to the ancient Mordecai, who was accepted of the multitude
of his brethren; seeking the wealth of his people, and speaking peace to all
his seed.

WASHINGTON discovered true greatness by his attention to, and uniform regard
for, religion. He believed that there was a God who governed the universe; that
he does according to his will in the armies of heaven, and among the
inhabitants of the earth; that none can stay his hand, or say unto him, What
do thou? Therefore he praised, extolled and honored the God of heaven; all
whose works are truth, and his ways judgment; and those who walk in pride, he
is able to abase. He knew that there is no king saved by the multitude of an
host; a mighty man is not delivered by much strength.

He saw the hand of God in those remarkable providence which took place under
his inspection, and were the effects of his exertions; that concatenation of
events, which preceded, opened the way to, and terminated it, the independence
of America. In the hour of victory therefore, he called upon all the brigade of
his army to give thanks to the Almighty for his merciful interposition in
favor of his conquering troops.

Thus, at the surrender of lord Cornwallis, the Commander in Chief of the
American army recommended to the officers and soldiers to attend upon divine
service with a serious deportment, and with that sensibility of heart, which
the recollection of the surprising and particular interposition of Providence,
in their favor, claimed."

Recollect, my brethren, his answers to the numerous and flattering addresses
of his fellow citizens; in which he kept his eye upon the government of
Jehovah; took nothing to himself, but gave all the glory to God.

Washington professed a veneration for the GREAT REDEEMER; was one of his
visible followers; united himself to his disciples; sat at his table; and
commemorated that solemn, that most interesting event, which opened the way for
the salvation of sinners.

It was one of the maxims of this Great Man, that religion is the only durable
foundation of republican governments. If a people are prosperous and happy,
they must acknowledge God in all their ways, observe his precepts, and obey his
commandments.

He knew that they, and they only, are truly great, who consult, and exert
themselves to promote, the best good, the real happiness, of mankind.

His conduct upon the stage of public life was a striking declaration, that
vice is no part of, but is incompatible with, real greatness; that a man may
sustain the highest offices, move in the most conspicuous sphere, be surrounded
with the most flattering temptations, and yet not deviate from, nor violate,
the laws of his God.

In the history of this Great Man we behold the most immaculate character that
was ever drawn by the pen of an uninspired historian.

Here, my brethren, is an example replete with wisdom and virtue, worth the
attention and imitation of politicians, magistrates, citizens, and persons of
all ranks and ages; an example which not only excites the admiration of the
present age, but will gain the veneration and applause of future generations.

The greatness of WASHINGTON was not eclipsed by his retirement from public
life. The very idea of his being alive, an inhabitant of MOUNT VERNON, had a
greater tendency to preserve the union of the States, and to repel foreign
invasion, than an army of twenty thousand men.

And when our national affairs wore an alarming aspect, we see him, at the call
of his country, "cheerfully relinquish the sweets of retirement, and once more
take the command of the armies of the United States."

But, while moving in this sphere of national importance; forming the necessary
arrangements -- death put an end to all his plans; dashed the high-raised
expectations of Americans, and filled the world with mourners.

II. WASHINGTON is fallen.

This Great Man was mortal. It is the decree, the irreversible decree, of
Jehovah, that man must die. I said, Ye are gods, but ye shall die like men, and
fall like one of the princes. With propriety may we adopt the affecting
lamentation of David over his beloved Jonathan, who fell upon mount Gilboa; How
is the mighty fallen!

By the decrease of this great man, this benefactor, this highly-esteemed,
heroic general, this patriotic statesman, the United States sustain a loss, an
irreparable loss. His sudden, unexpected exit has deprived his AMIABLE CONSORT,
his dear connexions, his weeping friends, of this ornament to his country, this
justly-admired, virtuous, great, and most amiable man.

The departure of such a man, in the present situation of our public affairs,
must be considered as no common calamity to our nation, and even to the world.

But the scene is closed! We must see his face no more! His voice, which
charmed thousands, is succeeded by a solemn, awful silence. His pen, that
taught lessons most important to society, has dropped from that hand, which,
guided by an enlightened mind, a virtuous heart, has charmed the world by its
productions.

The Wise and Holy Governor of the Universe has in the course of his
providence, which is ever just and righteous, removed from this region of
calamity the Father of his Country. Yes, there lies WASHINGTON, upon a level
now with a continental soldier! Both sleep quietly together, in the same grave;
the house appointed for all the living.

It is true, so long as the human mind is possessed of the power of
recollection, the character, the example, of this great man must be immortal.

III. It is reasonable that we should take public notice of this alarming event.

When Abner died, the king, the court, the army, the citizens, assembled; and,
as a testimonial of their respect, dropped a tear over the fallen general.

Much honor most certainly is due to the memory of those great men who have
rendered essential service to their country.

How immense is our debt of gratitude to God, who raised up this Great Man, and
qualified him for his distinguished station!

Upon this occasion sorrow has filled our hearts. Americans put on sackcloth;
they wear badges expressive of the general lamentation. We are all mourners
this day.

That venerable sage, the renowned ADAMS, President of the United States, must
sensibly feel, and unite with Congress in deploring, the departure of this
Great Man.

The army contemplate the death of their General with the keenest sensibility;
and express their undisguised grief in the animated style of an ancient
military corpse: WASHINGTON was worth ten thousand of us.

The Children of God, the Disciples of Jesus, are the most sincere mourners in
this day of darkness. They, it is true, are reconciled to all the divine
administrations. But when men of distinguished worth, and of eminent
usefulness, are suddenly removed by death, they consider it as a token of the
displeasure of God; a judgment of Heaven upon an u^^^ateful, wicked people.

The face of every citizen, who is a friend to his country, gathers paleness,
and neighbor addresses neighbor in the language of the text: Know ye not that
WASHINGTON, that great and good man, is fallen in our Israel!

But why do events like these take place in the wise and perfect government of
the the Most High God?

1. This event is calculated to impress the mind of man with a sense of
universal mortality.

Here we have the irresistible evidence, that the most distinguished abilities,
conspicuous virtues, wealth, honor, popularity, extensive usefulness, all that
the world esteem great and valuable, cannot secure the possessor from
sepulchral darkness, the gloomy mansion of the grave.

As for man, his days are as grass; as the flower of the field so he
flourishes. The wind passes over it, and it is gone; and the place thereof
shall know it no more* His days are determined; the number of his months are
with thee; thou have appointed his bounds, that he cannot pass. Man lies down,
and rises not till the heavens be no more.

How loud the present call! how alarming the admonition!

It is said of the king of Macedon, that he ordered his servant, though he
might be surrounded by his nobles, his generals, all the pomp and pageantry of
his court, every morning to enter his apartment, and to whisper in his ear,
PHILIP, THOU ART MORTAL.

May rulers and ruled hear the voice of God in this speaking providence: Serve
the Lord with fear, and rejoice with trembling.

And may we, my brethren, daily repeat the petition of ancient piety, Lord,
make us to know our end, and the measure of our days, what it is, that we may
know how frail we are. In the view of our approaching dissolution, may we
realize the vast importance of repentance toward God, and of faith in our Lord
Jesus Christ; that when he who is the believer's life shall appear, we may
appear with him in glory. Therefore be ye also ready, for at such an hour as ye
think not the Son of Man comes.

2. By the death of General WASHINGTON we are taught not to put too much
dependence upon any of our fellow creatures, however great and useful.

Is it not an evidence of the depravity of human nature, that rational beings
forget that the wise man dies? that the most important members in the
community dwell in houses of clay, whose foundation is in the dust, which are
crushed before the moth?

I recollect, in the course of the American revolution, an observation of a
young continental officer, who had, not many days before, left the camp. He
was, with peculiar pleasure, dwelling upon the matchless qualities of his
General. When it was suggested, that WASHINGTON was but a man, and that he
might soon fall a prey to the great destroyer; I know, replied the animated
soldier, that it is possible; but it is highly improbable that a man of his
worth; of his importance to America, and to the nations of the earth; a man,
too, for whose life the prayers of ten thousand christians daily ascend to the
throne of heaven; I repeat it, it is altogether improbable that WASHINGTON
should die.

The inhabitants of the United States have, perhaps, put too much dependence
upon this Great Man. In his death, therefore, God is teaching them, that it is
better to trust in the Lord, than to put confidence in man; it is better to
trust in the Lord, than to put confidence in princes.

3. The fall of WASHINGTON must be considered as a frown of God upon this
people, to whom he was so very dear.

Never, in the view of some of our most enlightened citizens, never did the
United States stand in greater need of his wisdom, influence, and exertions: so
doubtful hang the political scales, both in Europe and America. The time, most
certainly, is truly critical. The loss, therefore, of this Great Man, at such a
momentous crisis, ought to be viewed as a judgment, sent by the Ruler of
nations, upon the inhabitants of this guilty community. God is now correcting
us; and, by this providence, he is calling upon us all, old and young, to
repent, and turn to God from all our transgressions, that iniquity be not our
ruin.

4. This event affords matter of conviction, to every reflecting mind, that we
are greatly indebted to God for preserving the life of this Great Man to so
late a period.

We can recollect times when, if he had been removed, our loss would have been
greater, and his benevolent wishes to his country incomplete. But he lived to
see our enemies defeated, America independent, the Federal Government
established, commerce flourishing, agriculture progressing, the nation rising
in respectability, the whole community enjoying the blessings of civil and
religious liberty, his fellow citizens in the quiet and full possession of the
means of political and moral felicity.

Contemplating these desirable events, WASHINGTON drew his glittering sword.
And when he saw them accomplished, he returned it into its scabbard, and
retired from the theater of public life, that he might enjoy the
long-wished-for fruits of his persevering exertions, viz. his countrymen siting
under their vine, and under their figtree, and no one to make them afraid.

Therefore, while we deplore the death of this Great Man, let us with grateful
hearts acknowledge the goodness of God in continuing him so long a
distinguished blessing to the United States.

5. Such events, my brethren, taking place in the wise, benevolent and perfect
government of God, may be overruled for the greater happiness of a people.

Soon after Abner's death peace was established between Israel and Judah. One
of the wisest of men was placed at the head of the nation, the armies were
disbanded, the sound of war was heard no more, and Ophir's gold enriched the
public treasury. The temple of the Lord reared its sacred head; the tribes of
Israel, from Dan to Beersheba, present themselves before, and devoutly worship,
the God of Abraham. Prayers and praises ascend to Jehovah. We are informed,
that they went unto their tents joyful, and glad of heart, for all the goodness
that the Lord had done for his people. Thus their mourning is turned into joy.
The hand of the Lord is more visibly seen, both in the hour of adversity and
prosperity, and to God they ascribe all the glory.

Although our beloved Friend has closed his eyes, and now sleeps the long sleep
of death, the Lord lives. He governs his great empire in the most desirable
manner. The present very affecting providence, connected with, and being part
of, his great plan, will be overruled for the display of his glory, and promote
the best good of all those who are reconciled to the divine will; those who
love our Lord Jesus Christ in sincerity.

God can raise up men, and qualify them for the most important stations in
society. He can prepare the minds of this people to eye his correcting hand in
the fall of this great man, General WASHINGTON; and bestow the richest of his
blessings upon our dear country.

May we hear the voice of inspiration, which upon the present occasion is
particularly pertinent: Put not your trust in princes, nor in the son of man,
in whom there is no help. His breath goes forth, he returns to his earth; in
that very day his thoughts perish. Happy is he that has the God of Jacob for
his help, whose hope is in the Lord his God.

May light arise in darkness upon the United States, and God be glorified in
the salvation of our country.

AMEN.

