NATIONAL AFFLICTION, AND NATIONAL CONSOLATION!

A Sermon, ON THE DEATH OF General George Washington, LATE COMMANDER IN CHIEF
OF THE ARMIES; AND FORMERLY PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA: WHO DIED
AT MOUNT VERNON, DECEMBER 14, 1799, IN THE 68th YEAR OF HIS AGE.

DELIVERED ON THE TWELFTH OF JANUARY, ONE THOUSAND EIGHT HUNDRED, IN THE
INDEPENDENT, OR CONGREGATIONAL CHURCH, IN CHARLESTON, SOUTH CAROLINA.

BY ISAAC STOCKTON KEITH, D. D.

ONE OF THE PASTORS OF SAID CHURCH.

PUBLISHED BY REQUEST.

CHARLESTON: PRINTED BY W. P. YOUNG, FRANKLIN'S HEAD, NO. 43, BROAD STREET.

M,DCCC*

SERMON ON THE DEATH OF General George Washington, etc.
II. CHRONICLES. Chap. xxxv. Verse 24. "And all Judah and Jerusalem mourned for
Josiah."
IT is a very solemn and affecting scene, which is presented to our view, in
this portion of sacred history. Though a long series of ages has passed away
since it took place, it cannot, yet, be attentively reviewed, without exciting
in the thoughtful mind, and feeling heart, many serious reflections and tender
emotions. With every other part of scripture, it was doubtless recorded "for
our learning," for our instruction and improvement. It shows, particularly, in
a striking point of light, how important to a community, are the life and
services of a great and good prince; or of a person holding a primary place in
the government of his country -- and in that elevated station, distinguished by
his superior talents, integrity, and public spirit: and how heavy, and
afflictive, is the loss sustained by a nation, when such a ruler and benefactor
is "taken from its head," by the awful stroke of death.

To these interesting reflections, we are unavoidably led by the consideration
of the passage before us -- while we here behold the whole Jewish nation, with
one consent, and as by one instantaneous impulse, assuming the aspect, and
exhibiting the tokens of the deepest affliction and mourning, on account of the
death of their late king Josiah; who was one of the worthiest and best, that
ever reigned over them; and whose life, from his earliest years, had been
employed, under the influence of the purest and noblest principles, in
promoting the temporal and religious interests of his people.

This good king was yet in the midst of his days, or in the vigor of his age,
when it was his lot to receive a fatal wound, in a battle, to which he was
probably led, by the terms of his alliance with the king of Israel, who was
then tributary to the king of Babylon; and therefore bound to engage on the
side of that monarch, in the war which was commenced against him by the king of
Egypt. Of this wound Josiah died, immediately after his return to Jerusalem:
and thus the flattering, and apparently well founded hopes of his people, for a
much longer continuance of his reign, and of the multiplied blessings which
they derived from it, were suddenly terminated in the most gloomy and painful
disappointment.

An event, so calamitous, might well be expected to diffuse the most afflicting
sensations through the body of the nation; for whose welfare he had shown so
early, so zealous, and so constant a concern. Accordingly, the sacred historian
here informs us -- that "All Judah and Jerusalem mourned for Josiah:" The
inhabitants of every part of the country, concurring with those of the capital
city, the place of the royal residence, in every be coming affecting
demonstration of sorrow, under this heavy national calamity.

It is added, that Jeremiah the prophet, particularly lamented for Josiah. This
venerable prophet, as it became a servant of God, under that peculiar sacred
character which he sustained, was penetrated with the deepest grief for the
loss of a prince, whose pious cares, and indefatigable exertions, were
especially directed to the advancement of the cause of religion and virtue: a
cause with which the peace and prosperity, and all the great interests of every
community, as well as of every individual, are essentially and inseparably
connected. And it is also mentioned, as another memorable circumstance of this
national mourning for Josiah, that it was long perpetuated, by the institution
of certain solemn services, including, particularly, some elegiac compositions
set to plaintive music, in commemoration of an event, so mournful in its
nature, and so afflicting in its consequences.

In the history of mankind we shall often find a remarkable similarity of
events and circumstances, occuring in the most distant countries and periods of
time.

With this memorable mourning of the Jewish nation, for the loss of their
eminently worthy and amiable Josiah; -- how striking is the resemblance, that
appears in the universal, unfeigned mourning, now exhibited by the American
people, for the loss of their great, and excellent, and beloved WASHINGTON;
whose life was one of the most valuable blessings of a beneficent Providence to
his country, and whose death is justly lamented, as a great national affliction.

When the man, whom God in his good Providence, was pleased to honor, as the
most distinguished instrument in his hand, for securing to the people of
America, the liberty civil and religious -- the independence -- the peace, and
the prosperity, in the enjoyment of which, they are at this day, apparently,
the most favored, and happy nation in the world. When he, who, obedient to the
voice of his country, repeatedly, and with magnanimous self-denial, exchanged
his beloved domestic pursuits and enjoyments, for the most arduous stations of
public trust and service: And in those stations victoriously led our armies
through the vicissitudes of a most difficult and perilous revolutionary war;
and ably, and successfully presided in the executive department of our national
government, during many of the most eventful years of an unexampled, and
awfully portentous crisis in Europe, in which our political and commercial
interests were deeply involved. When he, who in the favorite scenes of private
life, in which he delighted to pass his tranquil days, whenever the safety and
glory of his country permitted, displayed the beauty and loveliness of those
finer feelings, and accomplishments, which dignify and adorn the gentleman, the
philosopher, the friend, and the domestic character. When he, in a word, who
first vindicated our rights, as men and christians, with his sword; and then
shielded them from the envious, hostile designs of powerful foreign nations,
and the turbulence of restless intestine factions, by the wisdom of his
counsels the equity, moderation, and firmness of his measures; and who
uniformly shone pre-eminent in great talents, in disinterested patriotism, and
in the luster of his public and private virtues and usefulness: -- When such a
man is removed by the supreme, righteous Disposer of all things, from every
station of honorable trust, and important service among his fellow-mortals --
and from all the scenes of mortality; -- surely, it well becomes the nation, of
which he was one of the brightest ornaments, and greatest benefactors, to mourn
with the feelings of undissembled, deep, and lasting sorrow!

In such a sorrow all the citizens of the United-States, who really love their
country -- with many in other nations, who possess the sensibilities of a
feeling heart, and the genuine spirit of philanthropy, will bear a tender
sympathetic part; and sincerely mourn the father of his country, the patron of
liberty, the friend of humanity -- fallen under that stroke of death, to which
the greatest, and most illustrious, equally with the fe^blest, and most obscure
of the human race, must finally bow. --

Of the general mourning, which the death of a man, so eminently and honorably
distinguished in life, might well be expected to produce -- the most
unequivocal tokens are exibited, wherever the melancholy tidings of it have
been spread abroad. The customary badges of grief, which indicate a near and
valued friend departed; together with the various, more public and solemn
expressions of a nation's sorrows, proclaim, in the most affecting, and
impressive language, that our illustrious and beloved WASHINGTON is numbered
with the dead; and that his country sensibly feels, and sincerely mourns, the
deeply interesting, and afflicting event! --

That the sorrows, which we share in common with our fellow-citizens,
throughout the union, and with the friends of liberty and humanity generally,
under this bereaving dispensation of Divine Providence, may be brought under
the guidance of sober reflection and true wisdom, and directed to some useful
ends. --

I shall endeavor, in the process of this discourse, to show, I. Why the death
of great and worthy men, who have been eminently useful in their day, and
especially in exalted stations of public trust and service, ought to be
lamented; and,


II. What profitable improvement may be made of the event, which is the
occasion of the present general mourning of our country. --

I. Why the death of great and worthy men, who have been eminently useful in
their day, and especially in exalted stations of public trust and usefulness,
ought to be lamented. --

Now the death of such men may well be lamented.

1. On account of the many and great evils which they are instrumental in
averting from a people. --

In the present fallen state of human nature, the passions of men, their pride,
their ambition -- their avarice, their love of criminal pleasure; in a word,
their selfishness, strongly impel them to deeds of injustice, oppression, --
and violence. -- By these vicious dispositions, individuals are often
stimulated to bitter and deadly contentions; -- and communities, and nations,
are plunged into all the outrages and calamities of public, and long protracted
wars. If left to follow the impulse of these corrupt propensities of their
fallen nature, without restraint or opposition, a few of the strongest and most
unprincipled, bringing others, by force or artifice, into a subserviency to
their views, would not hesitate, with the aid of such instruments of their
will, to invade the rights, to seize the possessions, to sacrifice the lives of
their fellow-men, in any extent which they might think expedient, or find
practicable, to the accomplishment of their own base and criminal purposes.

But as the great Ruler of the universe, has designed and formed mankind for
the social state; and has made their common mutual safety and welfare depend,
in a great measure, upon that union and order which constitute the strength and
beauty of society; -- so he constantly exercises a secret control over all
human inclinations, projects, and enterprises: -- And having the hearts of all
men in his hands, he holds all their tumultuous imaginations, raging appetites,
and furious passions, continually subject to that irresistible authority and
power, by which, when he pleases, he commands the stormy winds into a calm; and
says to the swelling boisterous sea, "Hitherto shall thou come, but no farther;
and here shall thy proud waves be stayed." In his government of mankind,
however, and for the accomplishment of his wise designs, relating to them, he
generally uses some visible means and subordinate agency, which have a natural
fitness to bring about the worthy ends that he has proposed. In this view, he
employs eminently the institutions of religion, and the ministers of his word,
among the people, to whom he has been pleased to grant the distinguishing
privileges and benefits of Divine Revelation. And in the nations generally, he
raises up from time to time, particular persons, endued with some peculiar
talents and dispositions; by which they are qualified to rule over their fellow
men, -- and prompted to employ their power and influence, in providing for the
common welfare of the great body of the people; in restraining and quieting the
turbulent members of the community; and in disconcerting the schemes, and
repelling the assaults of their various enemies.

Thus -- while the Supreme Governor of Nations, sometimes elevates men of
strong natural abilities, connected with the most vile, and profligate moral
principles, to great power, -- and then uses them as the sword in his hand, for
chastising any wicked and rebellious people, whom he determines to punish; --
he also, at his pleasure, calls forth, and advances to exalted stations of
authority and trust, men of superior talents and worthy character; and by their
instrumentality shields or delivers a people, whom he chooses to favor, from
those violences or grievances, with which they may be menaced or oppressed. --
By their friendly and successful agency, the nation, or community, with the
care of whose interests they are entrusted, whether in the capacity of military
commanders, or civil magistrates, is rescued from the galling yoke of bondage
-- from the dreadful state of anarchy and confusion: or from the final
dissolution and utter ruin, to which it might otherwise be reduced, by the
folly and wickedness of many of its own members; or by the all grasping
ambition, and insatiable cupidity of foreign hostile nations and potentates.

Such are the men, whom "the Lord Most High -- Who is the great King over all
the earth," often "gives to a people, according to his manifold mercies, to be"
under himself, "their saviors;" to be "the ministers of God, for" eminent
"good," to them in a state of peace; and his chosen instruments, for "saving
them out of the hand of their enemies," in a time of war. When, therefore, men
thus specially qualified, and called to fill the most exalted and important
stations, in the service of their country; and thus employed, under the
direction of Divine Providence, in averting from it the most formidable and
destructive evils, are removed by death; the afflictive event is doubtless to
be regarded, as justly demanding the tears of a bereaved people -- as worthy of
being lamented with every dignified expression of unfeigned national sorrow.

I proceed to observe, on the other hand, that the death of such valuable
defenders, and guardians of a people, is to be thus lamented.

2ndly. On account of the eminent benefits, which their instrumentality is
employed, by the good Providence of God, in securing to their country.

Many of the reflections, which (...) would be here naturally led to pursue,
have been, in some degree, already anticipated, in the observations suggested
under the preceding branch of this discourse.

The necessity of the institution and support of government, among mankind, is
universally acknowledged; and its utility has been recommended by the
experience of all nations, in all ages. So far as any system of government is
adapted to unite a people in a state of order and peace -- to enforce the
principles and rules of justice among them -- and to secure them from the
mischievous designs of their enemies, it is sanctioned by the approbation of
Heaven; and its establishment is to be regarded, as an important public
blessing, by the people who enjoy it.

Between different systems of human government, there is indeed as wide a
difference, as between the mean^^^ ^ut, raised by the rude savage, merely for
his defense from the attacks of beasts of prey, or the injurious effects of
inclement elements and seasons; and the noblest edifice, erected by the
ingenious artist, combining requisite strength, with pleasing proportion, and
chaste ornament, and adapted to afford the most secure and comfortable
accommodation to its inhabitants. But for directing well, and applying
efficaciously, the powers of the best constitution of government, it is
obvious, that none are properly qualified, but those who possess peculiar
abilities for the management of public affairs: And it is equally certain, that
on the moral principles, which direct their conduct, the welfare of the
community very much depends. Whether they are charged with the administration
of the civil, or military affairs of their country; having its great interests
committed to their care, and its resources placed in their hands; they are at
once laid under peculiar obligations, and enjoy peculiar advantages, for
studying and promoting the public good; and when possessed of those united
qualities of the head and the heart, which distinguish great and worthy rulers
and commanders -- the public good will be the favorite object of their regard
and pursuit -- and in the ordinary course of things, will be greatly advanced
by their agency. In their superior station, distinguished by their great
talents and virtues -- by their knowledge of human nature, of its powers and
weaknesses -- of its passions and its wants -- and of the state of their own
nation, considered in an abstract point of view, and in its relations to other
countries -- by their penetrating, accurate judgment, and enlarged,
comprehensive view of things -- by the wisdom of their counsels, and the
rectitude of their measures -- by the purity and ardor of their patriotism; and
by their active courage, and unyielding resolution, in meeting and surmounting
the various and multiplied dangers, difficulties and trials, which they may
have to encounter in their country's cause and service -- they are eminently
qualified, to teach the great body of the people, for whom they act, the nature
and value of their civil and sacred rights, and privileges, and to guide and
animate their exertions in the pursuit and defense of their true interests; --
and under the smiles of a favoring Providence, their instrumentality has a
great effect, in securing and improving the most important national advantages.

The desirable ends, which their high qualifications, and patriotic labors are
thus adapted to accomplish, are further promoted by the powerful engaging
influence of their great example. For "as the going forth of the sun, is from
the end of heaven, and his circuit unto the ends of it, and there is nothing
hid from the heat thereof;" so the examples of great and good men, moving in
exalted spheres of public service, and usefulness, diffuse their enlightening
and enlivening beams, through the wide extent of the land in which they bear
rule; and have an happy tendency to stimulate and allure the other members of
the community, in subordinate stations, to imitate their conduct, in the
cultivation of a public spirit, and in the practice of whatsoever things are
pious and just -- generous and honorable -- lovely and praiseworthy: -- and,
in short, in the pursuit of that course of well doing, which conducts
individuals, and communities, to a state of the most desirable prosperity in
this world; while it leads those, who walk in it, under the influence of a
truly christian faith, to glory, honor, and immortality in the world to come.

Highly favored indeed, are the people to whom the Lord gives such rulers and
commanders, as his chosen agents, for communicating and securing to them so
many precious blessings of his favor -- and so rich a portion of national honor
and happiness!

When, therefore, a people are bereaved of such valuable benefactors, they
sustain an unspeakable loss; and are solemnly called by the Providence of God
to mourn -- feelingly and deeply to mourn under the heavy and distressing
stroke of his holy hand.

The observations which have been suggested, will, it is believed, admit of a
just and forcible application to the present case of our own nation, under that
very afflicting dispensation of Divine Providence, which has bereaved us, of a
general and statesman, who, in the expressive and emphatical language of our
House of Representatives in Congress, -- "was the first in war -- the first in
peace, and the first in the affections of his country."

To trace the respectable descent of this great and worthy man -- to attend to
the first promising buds of a superior mind, and of his future greatness, which
began to unsold themselves in his juvenile days and pursuits -- to observe the
early display of his extraordinary military talents in a station of subordinate
but honorable and important command, while these United State; were yet
dependant provinces of Great Britain -- to follow him in his great career of
military glory, -- when as commander in chief, he directed the operations of
our armies, during the whole eight years of the memorable revolutionary war;
into which we were driven by the unwarrantable claims of the British government
-- claims too arrogant, degrading, and injurious, not to be resisted and
repelled by the free born and high-spirited sons of America -- to mark the
dignified manner in which he resigned into the hands of the American Congress
the high commission which he had received from them, when the great objects of
it, -- the independence and liberties of his country, were accomplished and
secured; and the truly paternal affection, and solicitude, with which he
addressed some of the wisest and most salutary moral and political instructions
and admonitions, to his fellow soldiers and fellow citizens, when from the most
elevated station of military authority and power, he voluntarily and cheerfully
descended to the ordinary condition and employments of a private gentleman --
to exhibit the important part, which within a few years after this period, he
was called to act in that venerable convention of the principal statesmen of
America; by whose collected wisdom, our present excellent system of federal
government was framed, and in whose deliberations he presided, as the most
honored and influential member of that enlightened and patriotic body -- to
review his able and successful administration of this new government, in the
office of President of the United States, to which he was first raised for the
legal term of four years; and in which he was afterward continued for a like
term, by the unanimous suffrages of the widely dispersed millions of his
fellow-citizens -- to represent him in the sublime attitude in which he
appeared, when delivering the last solemn advice, which he directly addressed,
under a public character, to the American people* advice which was the fruit of
superior wisdom, matured by long experience, and of the purest and most
disinterested patriotism, that had stood the test of the severest trials; while
at the same time he announced his decided resolution to decline standing a
candidate for a re-election to the presidency, on which he had reason to
calculate with the greatest confidence; -- and conformably to his declared
purpose, immediately retired, from all the flattering distinctions connected
with the supreme magistracy of the Union, to the ardently desired calm retreat
of private life, in which he designed, and hoped to pass the residue of his
days in undisturbed tranquillity and peace -- to pourtray the glory of the
finishing public act of his exalted, and unabated patriotism, when he once more
yielded to the importunate call of his country, and consented to resume the
command of the forces, which it was preparing for its defense against the
injustice and violence of a rapacious, ambitious, and unprincipled foreign
power; -- to contemplate him here in the closing scene, when thus determined
and prepared, to relinquish the repose which was so agreeable and desirable to
his advanced age, after the long continued pressing labors of a most active
public life, for the toils and dangers of an apparently inevitable and arduous
war; -- receiving the solemn mandate of Heaven, which summoned his great soul
to the world of spirits; -- and with that calm and unshaken firmness of mind,
for which he was ever remarkable, finishing his honorable, earthly career in
death -- to speak now particularly of the inestimable services which he
rendered to his country, and to the cause of religion, liberty, and humanity:
-- or to attempt a delineation of the particular features of his great
character: -- All this would form an undertaking, to which I feel myself wholly
incompetent! and which could not be well executed by the best abilities, within
the limits prescribed to this discourse. This accordingly comes not within my
present design; but is left as the proper work of the biographer and historian:
-- and in the faithful, well-written memoirs of his life, -- and history of his
country, -- the sublime character, -- and the illustrious deeds of our
WASHINGTON, will doubtless shine with pre-eminent glory, -- through a long
series of ages, and diffuse an increasing splendour over many succeeding
generations.

In the mean time, while we mourn the Father of our country taken from our
head, and gone down to "the grave, the house prepared for all living;" -- let
us now be led to consider, --

II. What profitable improvement may be made of this event, which is the
occasion of the present deep and universal sorrow and mourning of our country
-- and;

1. It becomes us to cherish the remembrance of the excellent character and
eminent services of our country's most illustrious citizen and distinguished
benefactor, whose death we now lament, with a grateful sense of our obligations
to the beneficent Providence of God, who qualified and employed him, as a
leading instrument, in securing to us so many, and such inestimably valuable
national blessings.

The memory of the man, whom God was pleased most remarkably to honor, as the
instrument in his hand, for the communication of so much good to our highly
favored nation, should be peculiarly dear to all our citizens; -- and it
should be transmitted, with every appropriate, impressive mark of
distinguishing esteem and regard, to posterity -- as a splendid example for the
imitation of future patriots, generals, and statesmen -- and of our citizens
generally, in every department of public and private life. -- In the records of
nations, excepting only those of God's ancient, chosen and peculiar people, we
would probably search in vain for the example of an union of great talents and
virtues, of worthy conduct, and important usefulness; superior, if we could
even find one equal, to that which has been exhibited by our admired and
beloved WASHINGTON, in those high military and civil employments, in which he
was called to defend and serve his country.

But remembering that "every good gift," every valuable possession, privilege,
or benefit, whether of a private or public nature, or through whatever channel,
or medium, conveyed to us, "comes down from the Great Father of lights and
mercies;" -- let us study to be thankful to HIM, who graciously provided such a
general and statesman, to conduct our military operations, and administer our
civil and political affairs, during a long period, the most critical and
interesting to our nation -- who crowned his wise councils, his virtuous
measures, his heroic efforts, with such happy success -- and who prolonged his
life, with his capacity, and his zeal unimpaired, for the service of his
country -- till it was safely conducted through a long series of the most
perplexing difficulties, and formidable dangers, and at length securely
established, as we trust, in the enjoyment of a most excellent constitution of
government, and a most desirable state of peace and prosperity. Most kind and
indulgent, indeed, has been the Providence of the God of our mercies, in first
bestowing upon us, and then forbearing to remove from us, the man, who was one
of the most impregnable bulwarks of our country in war, and one of its
strongest pillars in peace -- till it was settled and confirmed in its present
eligible situation; in which it does not probably so immediately depend, as at
some former periods, on the services or influence of any individual: and seems
not likely to be so easily shaken, as it might have sometimes heretofore been,
by the restless spirit of internal faction; or by the dark intrigues, or open
violence of foreign, jealous, and unfriendly nations!

Let us then, at once, honor the memory of our departed illustrious General and
President; and praise the divine and most bountiful Author of all the various
blessings of a civil and a sacred nature, which through his distinguished
agency, we have experienced, and now enjoy, as an independent, a free, a great,
and an happy nation!

2. Let us learn "to cease from man, whose breath is in his nostrils," -- and
to repose an humble, steadfast trust and hope, in the ever-living,
all-sufficient, and unchangeable God, for that guidance, protection, and
various aid, which as a people, we continually need, in order to our safety and
welfare.

"Lord, what is man, and wherein is he to be accounted of?" -- "All flesh is
grass, and the glory of man, as the flower of the grass; the grass withers,
and the flower thereof falls away. In the morning it flourishes and grows
up; in the evening it is cut down and withers!" -- What is man in honor? He
is a shadow that passes rapidly away. What is man in his best estate? He is,
in respect of all the worldly advantages which he may possess, and of all the
benefits which his fellow-mortals may expect from him, altogether vanity!

"Let us not then put our trust in princes," -- in those who among their fellow
men are clothed with supreme authority and power, or bear the character of the
great and the good -- "nor in the son of man," of whatever qualifications, or
in whatever station, "for in him there is no" effectualor certain "help."
"Their breath goes forth -- they return to their earth; in that very day all
their thoughts," either for their own aggrandizement, or security, or for
promoting the public good, "perish" in the gloom of "the grave, where they have
no more a portion in any thing that is done under the sun." -- But let us
remember, "that happy is the man, and happy the people -- and that happy alone
are they, who have the God of Jacob for their help, and whose hope is in the
Lord, their God, who made Heaven and earth, the sea, and all that therein is;
-- who keeps truth forever -- who executes judgment for the oppressed -- who
loves the righteous; but the way of the wicked he turns upside down -- who
puts down one and sets up another -- who straighteneth the nations and
enlarges them at his pleasure; and who, in the exercise of his sovereign,
Almighty, most wise, righteous, and beneficent dominion, reigns for ever,
even unto all generations."

Our lately universally esteemed, and now universally lamented WASHINGTON, in
the possession of all his excellencies and honors, was but a mortal man. Thanks
be to God for the great qualifications by which he was distinguished -- for his
important public services -- and for the long continuance of his eminently
valuable and useful life! -- And now, blessed be God, that the hopes of our
country are not buried in the same tomb with his venerable dust; but that to
Himself, who is "the possessor of all that is in the heaven and in the earth --
whose is the greatness, and the power, and the glory, and the victory, and the
majesty, who reigns over all, and who is the same, yesterday, to day, and for
ever" -- we may still look up as "our light and our salvation," "for leaders
and commanders of the people," for the preservation of our independence and
liberties, government and laws, order and peace, and the perpetuity and
advancement of our national, as well as personal safety, prosperity, and
happiness!

3. While we mourn for the loss which our nation has sustained, by the death of
such an able defender, and distinguished benefactor -- let us be excited to
pray for our country, and especially for those, who occupy the principal places
of authority, trust, and power, in its government.

"To offer up supplications, prayers, and intercessions for all men," and
especially for those, whose interest and welfare, are most nearly connected
with our own, and upon whose counsels and measures, our safety and happiness,
under God, most immediately depend -- is at all times an important christian
duty. For our fellow-men, in every nation of the earth, in every branch of the
great family of mankind, we should constantly pray; that they may enjoy the
advantages of wise and good governments and laws -- and the blessings of the
gospel of the great Redeemer of fallen men, in its unclouded light, uncorrupted
purity, and saving power; -- "that the people who delight in war may be
scattered -- that the wickedness of the wicked may come to an end -- that the
just may be established," -- and that the cause of truth and righteousness, and
of genuine liberty, civil and religious, involving all the great interests of
communities and individuals, may prevail and triumph, universally, through the
world.

For our country, especially, we should continually pray -- that the great
Governor of nations, our guardian God, and the God of salvation, may be pleased
to forgive our multiplied follies and offenses, by which we are daily
forfeiting his mercies, and provoking his judgments; -- "to turn away every
token of his anger from us, and remember us with the favor which he bears to
his chosen and peculiar people" -- to secure to us the full and uninterrupted
possession of our personal and national rights and privileges; in the enjoyment
of order, harmony, and tranquillity at home, and of peace and honor abroad --
to prosper all ranks and classes of the inhabitants of our land, in their
several stations, and lawful, worldly pursuits -- and "to visit us with" the
infinitely more precious blessings of "his spiritual and everlasting salvation."

"For all in authority over us," and entrusted with the care of our national
interests, in public stations, we ought more particularly to pray, that they
may be "wise and able men, such as fear God, men of truth, hating
covetousness," and zealous, active, resolute, and steadfast in their concern
for, and pursuit of the public good. Considering how multiplied, arduous, and
perplexing, are the cares of government -- how peculiarly strong and pressing
are the temptations, with which men, in exalted stations of trust and power,
are continually surrounded; and how many, and great, are the evils or benefits,
which may result to the community from their ill or good conduct, in the
important places which they occupy -- in the elevated spheres wherein they move
-- we should, from a tender sympathy for them, and a prudent regard to our own
interests, pray continually for our rulers -- "that the Lord may give them a
wise and understanding heart, to discern between good and evil, and to go out
and in before a great people," with discretion and fidelity, with unsullied
honor and good success.

And thus are we, by a special, solemn voice of Divine Providence, called to
pray for our country, at the present juncture, while mourning the recent death,
-- of our late illustrious General and President; and to pray, more
particularly, for his worthy and venerable successor in the presidency of the
Union -- that he may be divinely assisted, in sustaining the increased weight
of anxious care, which is devolved upon him, by the loss of so early, able, and
experienced an associate, in the great cause of America -- and that he may
steadily and firmly, proceed to tread in the same steps of wisdom, virtue, and
honor, by which the great and excellent WASHINGTON conducted his country; to
the present dignified and enviable rank, which it holds among the nations of
the earth. --

Finally; --

4. Let the consideration of this very affecting instance of mortality, which
has filled the heart of our nation with sorrow and mourning, be improved to
awaken and engage us all, to a faithful and diligent discharge of the duties of
our respective stations; and to a seasonable preparation, and constant
watchfulness for the order of God, which shall dismiss us from all our
employments here, to a state of righteous and everlasting retribution in a
future world.

To act, as if we thought that we were bound by no obligations, to extend our
views or regards beyond ourselves; but had a right to employ our time and
powers, merely to serve our own selfish purposes, would be very disgraceful to
our character as men and citizens. Much more reproachful then, must such
conduct appear to be, in those who bear the name of Christians -- when it is
viewed in the light of the gospel -- when it is considered as in direct
contradiction to those benevolent and refined principles of the religion of the
blessed Jesus, which require us "to love our neighbor as ourselves" -- "to
rejoice with them that rejoice -- to weep with them that weep" -- "to bear one
another's burdens" -- "and as we have ability and opportunity, to do good to
all around us."

Let us, therefore, reflect and consider what the Lord our God and Savior
requires of us, in our several stations -- and endeavor to occupy, with the
talents which he has committed to us, in that manner, by which his great name
may be most glorified and the best interests of our fellow men together with
our own, most effectually advanced.

FATHERS -- Let not the residue of your strength be wholly spent in that case
and inactivity, which, to declining years, usually appear most inviting. -- If
you are yet living to yourselves, and for this world* -- surely it is high time
that you begin to live to the Lord, and for eternity.

If, in the course of a life of christian faith, piety and virtue, -- you are
serving and honoring the adorable Author of your being and redemption, and
pursuing the great ends of your rational existence, -- "Be not weary in well
doing, but hold on your way, and hold out to the end, -- and still go from
strength to strength, till you enter into that everlasting rest, which
remains for the people of God." And remember, that it particularly becomes
you, to teach the rising generation their duties to God, to their neighbor,
and themselves -- to admonish them of the vicissitudes, the temptations, the
dangers, to which they may be exposed in the untried journey of life -- and to
recommend the counsels of matured wisdom, and long experience, by the engaging
influence of the good example, which you will exhibit, while you continue to
walk with steady steps, and cheerful hopes, in "the path of the just; which is
as the shining light" of the morning, "shining more and more unto the perfect
day."

YOUNG MEN -- Let not the flower of your age -- the vigor of your faculties,
be dishonored and wasted in the indulgence of unmanly sloth -- of unprofitable,
dissipating amusements -- or of for did, criminal, and destructive pleasures:
But study to furnish your minds with useful knowledge, to acquire and
strengthen the dispositions and habits of purity and temperance, -- of
regularity and diligence -- of generosity and economy. "Remember your Creator
and Redeemer in the days of your youth:" Choose and pursue "the ways of wisdom,
which are the only ways of pleasantness, and peace: Fulfill the obligations of
every relation, which you sustain, with respectful attention and affection --
with strict fidelity and becoming cheerfulness; and let your breasts glow with
a laudable, ardent ambition, to act a worthy part -- and become the ornaments
and blessings of society, in your day.

Let it be the concern of every one of us, in short, that we may feel the
power, and manifest the influence of those sacred, heavenly principles of the
gospel, which will bear down every selfish, contracted disposition of our
degenerate nature, and elevate and enlarge our hearts, in the most benevolent
desires -- and prompt us to correspondent, worthy efforts, to be as useful as
possible, in our respective spheres -- to contribute something to the welfare
of the civil community, with which we are connected, and to the extension of
the bounds, and the advancement of the glory of the Redeemer's kingdom of grace
in the world.

And by the great example of the distinguished friend and benefactor of his
country, whose loss we now deplore -- let us all be taught and animated to
cherish that public spirit, which shone so conspicuously in him -- and which
will determine us to maintain for ourselves, and to transmit to the
generations, that shall come after us, the national independence, and the
precious liberties involved in it, for which he so nobly fought -- and which he
guarded with so vigilant an eye, and faithful a hand, -- and to exert our
influence, as far as it may extend, for preserving and supporting religion and
morality, order and peace, in our land, -- for promoting the prosperity of
church and state, and for aiding our fellow-citizens, and fellow christians,
and our brethren of mankind, generally, whom we may be able to serve, in
respect to their common and sacred, their temporal and eternal concerns.

The father of his country no longer lives, to unite, animate, and guide its
citizens, and its armies in its defense -- to watch for its welfare -- to plan
and labor for its prosperity and its glory. -- How far its safety, or its
interests may be affected by his lamented death, we yet know not. But when we
reflect upon the existing circumstances of our nation, deprived, as it now is,
of the presence, the talents, the counsels, the cares, the example, the
influence of its most revered and honored citizen, its most strenuous defender,
and most vigilant and faithful guardian; -- we must surely be aware, that it
now demands, from all, whose interests are embarked in its cause, a more
solicitous attention to its necessities -- and a redoubled zeal in every
patriotic effort, by which it may be defended and benefited. -- And let those,
who may be ready to apprehend, that they can do little or nothing for the
public good, be reminded, that they can, at least, pray for it; -- and that
"the Lord is a God hearing prayer;" and "having already done great things for
us," may be ready to do still greater things for us, -- "but will yet be
enquired of by us, that he may do them for us."

Recollecting, also, that our opportunities in this world for serving God, and
our generation, according to the will of God, and for securing the salvation
and everlasting happiness of our own souls, are very short and precarious --
let us be admonished to undertake and "to do with our might, whatever our hand
finds to do."

Every instance of mortality, which we witness, or of which we hear, is
adapted, impressively, to enforce the word of God, by which we are warned,
"that the time is short." But from the tomb of the great WASHINGTON, for whom
his country now mourns, through all its borders -- the voice of death speaks to
us with more than ordinary solemnity and emphasis -- "Be ye also ready -- for
in such an hour as ye think not, the Son of Man comes." "In such an hour as we
think not," or may be least aware of his approach, the Son of Man, "who has
the keys of death, and of the invisible world," may come, by his dread summons,
to call us from time to eternity -- from a temporary state of service and
trial, to an everlasting state of righteous and unchangeable retribution.

How soon did the humane and amiable hero, yield to the violence of unrelenting
disease! -- How quickly did the mighty and renowned conqueror fall, with all
his mortal honors blooming upon him -- "in that war in which there is no
discharge!"

And must not we as certainly die? And may we not, in like manner, die with as
little previous warning of our impending dissolution -- or by a stroke from the
last enemy, still more sudden and unexpected? O let us hasten then, in our
preparation for the closing scene of life -- for that all important change of
worlds to which we are approaching, as fast as the rapid flight of time can
bear us forward!

Let us look well to ourselves, and see that our souls are committed in the
exercise of that unfeigned faith, "which is the gift of God, and the work of
his holy spirit," into the hands of that Divine, Almighty, and most gracious
Redeemer, "whose is the only name under Heaven, given among men, by which any
can be saved;" and on whose atonement, righteousness, and intercession, the
most illustrious saviors of their country, equally with the meanest and most
abject of the children of men, must entirely depend, for the forgiveness of
their sins -- for reconciliation and peace with God; and for the attainment of
that everlasting life, which God has promised to believers, and which is to be
found only in his Son. Let us, also, be active and diligent, "steadfast and
immovable, and more and more abounding, in all the work and service of the
Lord," to which we are called, as the followers of the great Captain of our
salvation; and let it be our most serious concern, and care, that we may be
found ever watching for the coming of our Lord -- and waiting with a steadfast
faith, with a lively hope, and with an earnest desire, for his sovereign order
to lay down our flesh in its native earth; and to enter, disincumbered of all
the burdens of mortality; and completely delivered and purified, from the
power and pollution of sin, under which we now groan, into the full and
everlasting "joy of our Lord."

Then will the course of our pilgrimage, through this vale of tears, close in
peace: -- and "having fought the good fight, and finished the work," which our
Lord has appointed to be accomplished by us, on earth -- and having thus
approved ourselves "faithful" in his cause and service, "unto death, we shall
receive the crown of immortal life, which he has promised, and which he will
give to all who believe in, and obey him, and who love his appearing." And
then, in his heavenly kingdom -- "washed from our sins in his blood, who loved
us, and gave himself for us; and advanced to the dignity of kings and priests
unto God and his father," -- we shall mourn no more for the awful desolations
of death, or under any of the lamentable effects of sin; but shall find "all
tears wiped away from our eyes," by the kind hand of our gracious God and
Redeemer; and "beholding his face in righteousness, and satisfied with his
likeness, we shall triumph in his praise, and in that fullness of joy which is
in his presence," through all the ages of a blessed eternity!

"Now unto the King eternal, immortal, invisible, the only wise God and our
Savior, be honor and glory, for ever and ever." AMEN!

FINIS.

