MR. HOLMES's DISCOURSE, RECOMMENDING THE Counsel OF Washington.

THE COUNSEL OF WASHINGTON, RECOMMENDED IN A DISCOURSE, DELIVERED AT CAMBRIDGE,
FEBRUARY 22, 1800.

BY ABIEL HOLMES, A.M. PASTOR OF THE FIRST CHURCH IN CAMBRIDGE.

COLUMBIANS! long preserve that peerless page,
Stamped with the precepts of your warrior Sage;
In all your archives be the gift enrolled,
Suspend it to your walls, encas'd in gold;
Bid schools recite it, let the priestly train
Chant it on festal days, nor deem the task profane;
When round your knees your infant offspring throng
To join the matin prayer, or evening song,
Those rites performed, invite them to attend
The farewell counsels of their good old Friend,
And say, he left you, as his last bequest,
These golden rules to make a nation blessed.
HONEYWOOD. Printed by SAMUEL HALL, No. 53, Cornhill, BOSTON. 1800.

BY a Resolve of Congress, and a Proclamation of the President, dated January
6, 1800, it was "recommended to the people of the United States to assemble on
the twenty-second day of February next, in such numbers and manner as may be
convenient, publicly to testify their grief for the death of General GEORGE
WASHINGTON, by suitable eulogies, orations, and discourses, or by public
prayers."

The Counsel of Washington recommended.
MICAH iv. 9. Now why do thou cry out aloud? -- is thy Counselor perished?


THE answer to these tender inquiries is legible in the countenances of all,
who compose this assembly. Yes, my fathers and brethren, my friends and
fellow-citizens, I there read the cause of your lamentation. WASHINGTON, your
COUNSELOR, is perished. The Friend, the Father, of our country is no more; and
ye have assembled to "testify your grief for his death." This sun marks the
anniversary of his nativity. -- Thus with the year
Seasons return; but not to him returns Milton.

this day. To other climes, illustrious Shade! have thou departed, where suns
no longer measure the duration of thy existence; where seasons no more revolve;
and where, we believe, thy felicity will be as interminable, as thy spirit is
immortal.

Already, my respected auditors, have we paid the merited tribute to the memory
of this revered and beloved man. In this very sanctuary, on the reception of
the melancholy tidings of his death, we indulged the spontaneous emotions of
sorrow; and, impatient of delay for legislative recommendation, we hastened at
once to mitigate our grief by our tears, and to commemorate the man, whom we
had always delighted to honor. On that mournful occasion, we contemplated him
in the various characters of the mighty man, and the man of war; of the
prudent, and the ancient; of the honorable man, and the counselor. What now
remains? Had not that funereal service precluded a delineation of his character
at this time; it would have been precluded by the very interesting and
instructive portrait of him yesterday exhibited in this house, and by the
tributary honors then offered to his memory. The academical exercises of
Harvard University, in honor of General WASHINGTON, consisting of Prayers and
appropriate Music; a Latin Oration by the President; a Discourse by Professor
Tappan; an Elegiac Poem, and a Funeral Oration, by members of the University;
were performed on the 21st of February.


Instead, then, of recapitulating what ye have repeatedly heard, and what has
already been the universal subject of Discourses and Eulogies throughout the
Union; indulge me in reminding you of the COUNSEL of WASHINGTON, and in
recommending it to your practical observance. A Discourse, embracing these
objects, will, if I mistake not, perfectly coincide with the leading design of
this solemnity. It will be honourary to the memory of the man, whose counsels
we recall to remembrance; it will testify our grief for his death; it will
furnish us with solace in our bereavement; and -- what is of vastly higher
importance, and will give unspeakably greater pleasure to the benevolent Spirit
of WASHINGTON, if a witness of this celebration, -- it will tend to the
promotion of our union and peace, of our liberty and happiness.

Thy counselor is, indeed, perished. But is wisdom no more in Teman? is
counsel perished from the prudent? is his wisdom vanished? Jer. xlix. 7.
No: Recorded in indelible registers, it is left, as an invaluable legacy to
our nation; and by it, he, being dead, yet speaks. It is, principally,
contained in his memorable VALEDICTORY ADDRESS to the people of the United
States, on his retirement from the presidency. And what can more tenderly
interest our attention to this counsel, than a consideration of the motive by
which it was dictated? "Solicitude for your welfare," said the retiring Sage,
"Solicitude for your welfare, which cannot end but with my life, and the
apprehension of danger natural to that solicitude, urge me, on an occasion like
the present, to offer to your solemn contemplation, and to recommend to your
frequent review, some sentiments, which are the result of much reflection, of
no inconsiderable observation, and which appear to me all-important to the
permanency of your felicity as a people. These will be offered to you with the
more freedom, as you can only feel in them the disinterested warnings of a
parting friend, who can possibly have no personal motive to bias his counsel."
If ye did, indeed, love the paternal WASHINGTON, if ye are sincere in
commemorating his death, this day; those words must touch every fiber of your
hearts, and insure a silent, may I not say a religious, attention to the
important advice which he then offered you, and which I am now to bring into
your remembrance.

On this his natal day, then -- a day brightened, indeed, by yonder sun, but
deprived of what has long given it its highest luster -- on this eventful day,
which, at once, commemorates the birth and the death of our common FATHER, let
us, like children assembled around the bed of an expiring parent, listen, with
all the eagerness of filial piety, to his last, last counsels.

Viewing the love of liberty as too congenial to Americans, to require his
recommendation to fortify or confirm it, our Counselor first invites our
attention to Unity of government. This, says he, "is a main pillar in the
edifice of your real Independence, the support of your tranquillity at home,
your peace abroad; of your safety; of your prosperity; of that very liberty
which you so highly prize. But, as it is easy to foresee, that from different
causes and from different quarters, much pains will be taken, many artifices
employed, to weaken in your minds the conviction of this truth; as this is the
point in your political fortress, against which the batteries of internal and
external enemies will be most constantly and actively, (though often covertly
and insidiously) directed, it is of infinite moment that you should properly
estimate the immense value of your National Union to your collective and
individual happiness; that you should cherish a cordial, habitual, and
immovable attachment to it; accustoming yourselves to think and speak of it as
of the palladium of your political safety and prosperity, watching for its
preservation with jealous anxiety; discountenancing whatever may suggest even a
suspicion that it can in any event be abandoned; and indignantly frowning upon
the first dawning of every attempt to alienate any portion of our country from
the rest, or to enfeeble the sacred ties which now link together the various
parts."

The reasons, on which this counsel is founded, are, that being, "by birth or
choice, citizens of a common country, that country has a right to concentrate
our affections; that the name of AMERICAN, which belongs to us in our national
capacity, must always exalt the just pride of patriotism, more than any
appellation derived from local discriminations; that, with slight shades of
difference, we have the same religion, manners, habits, and political
principles; that we have, in a common cause, fought and triumphed together; and
that the independence and liberty we possess are the work of joint counsels,
and joint efforts, of common dangers, sufferings and successes." How fixed the
principles, how uniform the counsels, of the great American Patriot! In his
Farewell Address to the Armies of the United States, 1783, "it is earnestly
recommended to all the troops, that, with strong attachments to the union, they
should carry with them into civil society the most conciliating dispositions;
and that they should prove themselves not less virtuous and useful as citizens,
than they have been persevering, and victorious as soldiers." May this
recommendation be sacredly regarded by the present armies of America, and by
all which may hereafter be raised for the national defense!
Persuasive arguments! calculated to bind citizen to citizen, and man to man,
and to cement the people of the United States into an indissoluble union.

But, however powerful these considerations, addressed to our sensibility, they
are greatly outweighed by those which, with deep discernment, the great
Counselor addresses to our interest. "Here," he demonstrates, that "every
portion of our country finds the most commanding motives for carefully guarding
and preserving the union of the whole." He renders it undeniably evident, that,
by an unrestrained intercourse of the North with the South, and of the South
with the North; of the East with the West, and of the West with the East; the
immediate and particular interest of each part will be promoted, and that "all
the parts combined cannot fail to find in the united mass of means and efforts,
greater strength, greater resource, proportionably greater security from
external danger, a less frequent interruption of their peace by foreign
nations; and, what is of inestimable value," that "they must derive from union
an exemption from those broils and wars between themselves, which so frequently
afflict neighboring countries, not tied together by the same government; which
their own rivalships alone would be sufficient to produce, but which opposite
foreign alliances, attachments and intrigues, would stimulate and embitter:"
and that "hence likewise they will avoid the necessity of those overgrown
military establishments, which are particularly hostile to republican liberty."
Under the impression of these truths, how justly does he assert, "that your
union ought to be considered as a main prop of your liberty, and that the love
of the one ought to endear to you the preservation of the other?"

Among the causes which may disturb our union, he mentions it "as matter of
serious concern, that any ground should be furnished for characterising
parties, by geographical discriminations -- Northern and Southern -- Atlantic
and Western; whence designing men may endeavor to excite a belief, that there
is a real difference of local interests and views." Misrepresentations of this
kind are one of the expedients of party to acquire influence; and they give
rise to baneful jealousies, against which our paternal monitor cautions us to
shield ourselves with peculiar care.

"To the efficacy and permanency of your union, a government for the whole," he
observes, "is indispensable. "There are four things which I humbly conceive are
essential to the well-being, I may even venture to say, to the existence of the
United States, as an independent power.

1st. An indissoluble union of the states under one federal head.

2dly. A sacred regard to public justice.

3dly. The adoption of a proper peace establishment. And,

4thly. The prevalence of that pacific and friendly disposition among the
people of the United States, which will induce them to forget their local
prejudices and policies, to make those mutual concessions which are requisite
to the general prosperity, and, in some instances, to sacrifice their
individual advantages to the interest of the community."

WASHINGTON's Circular Letter to the Governors of the several States, 1783.


No alliances, however strict, between the parts, can be an adequate
substitute; they will inevitably experience the infractions and interruptions
which all alliances, in all times, have experienced. Sensible of this momentous
truth, you have improved upon your first essay, by the adoption of a
Constitution of government better calculated than your former for an intimate
union, and for the efficacious management of your common concerns. This
government, the offspring of your own choice, uninfluenced and unawed, adopted
upon full investigation and mature deliberation, completely free in its
principles, in the distribution of its powers, uniting security with energy,
and containing within itself a provision for its own amendment, has a just
claim to your confidence, and your support. Respect for its authority,
compliance with its laws, acquiescence in its measures, are duties enjoined by
the fundamental maxims of true liberty." -- "All obstructions to the execution
of the laws, all combinations and associations, under whatever plausible
character, with the real design to direct, control, counteract, or awe the
regular deliberation and action of the constituted authorities," he ^ustly
observes, "are destructive of the fundamental principle of liberty, and of
fatal tendency. They serve to organize faction, to give it an artificial and
extraordinary force, to put in the place of the delegated will of the nation
the will of a party, often a small but artful and enterprising minority of the
community; and, according to the alternate triumphs of different parties, to
make the public administration the mirror of the ill-concerted and incongruous
projects of faction, rather than the organ of consistent and wholesome plans,
digested by common counsels and modified by mutual interests." We are
faithfully forewarned that such combinations are likely, in the end, "to become
potent engines, by which cunning and unprincipled men will be enabled to
subvert the power of the people, and to usurp for themselves the reins of
government."

"Toward the preservation of our government, and the permanency of our present
happy state," we are told, "it is requisite not only that we steadily
discountenance irregular opposition to its acknowledged authority, but also
that we resist, with care, the spirit of innovation upon its principles,
however specious the pretexts;" and allow it the test of time and experience.
We are specially counseled to remember, "that for the efficient management of
our common interest, in a country so extensive as our's, a government of as
much vigor as is consistent with the perfect security of liberty, is
indispensable." We are assured, that "Liberty itself will find in such a
government, with powers properly distributed and adjusted, its surest guardian:
and that it is little else than a name, where the government is too feeble to
withstand the enterprises of faction, to confine each member of the society
within the limits prescribed by the laws, and to maintain all in the secure and
tranquil enjoyment of the rights of person and property."

Here, again, we are "warned, in the most solemn manner, against the baneful
effects of a spirit of party;" and are instructed, that, while it generates
"the alternate domination of one faction over another, which is itself a
frightful despotism, and which leads at length to the more formal and permanent
despotism" of an individual, "it serves always to distract the public counsels
and enfeeble the public administration:" that "it agitates the community with
ill founded jealousies, and false alarms; kindles the animosity of one part
against another, and foments occasionally riot and insurrection:" that "it
opens the door to foreign influence and corruption, which find a facilitated
access to the government itself through the channels of party passions:" and
that "thus the policy and will of one country are subjected to the policy and
will of another." We are taught, that this spirit, however salutary in
monarchical governments, "in those of a republican form is seen in its greatest
rankness, and is truly their worst enemy:" and that, "there being constant
danger of excess, the effort ought to be, by force of public opinion, to
mitigate and assuage it. A fire not to be quenched; it demands uniform
vigilance to prevent its bursting into a flame, lest, instead of warming, it
should consume."

Another and a very essential article in the counsel, addressed to us, advises
us to pay a sacred regard to moral and religious duties. "Of all the
dispositions and habits which lead to political prosperity," says the pious and
patriotic Counselor, "Religion and Morality are indispensable supports. In
vain would that man claim the tribute of patriotism, who would labor to
subvert these great pillars of human happiness, these firmest props of the
duties of men and citizens. The mere politician, equally with the pious man,
ought to respect and to cherish them. -- A volume could not trace all their
connexions with private and public felicity. Let it simply be asked, where is
the security for property, for reputation, for life, if the sense of religious
obligation desert the oaths which are the instruments of investigation in
courts of justice? -- And let us with caution indulge the supposition, that
morality can be maintained without religion. Whatever may be conceded of the
influence of refined education on minds of peculiar structure; reason and
experience both forbid us to expect that national morality can prevail in
exclusion of religious principle. -- It is substantially true, that virtue or
morality is a necessary spring of popular government. The rule indeed extends
with more or less force to every species of free government. Who that is a
sincere friend to it can look with indifference upon attempts to shake the
foundation of the fabric?" How happily did WASHINGTON exemplify this part of
his counsel, in his official characters, as well as in private life! In his
orders to the American Armies, on the cessation of hostilities, 1783, he
instructs the chaplains, with the several brigades, to "render thanks to
Almighty God," for the successful termination of the contest. In his Farewell
Address to the Armies, he expressly acknowledges "the singular interposition of
Providence," in the course of the war, and devoutly "offers his prayers, in
their behalf, to the God of armies."

On his resignation of his military commission, he ^onsidered it "an
indispensable duty to close this last solemn act o^ his official life, by
recommending the interests of our dearest country to the protection of Almighty
God, and those who have the superintendance of them, to his holy keeping." On
his induction into the Presidency, he offers his "fervent supplications" to
God, for his benediction on the newly instituted government, and on those
employed in its administration; and remarks, that "no people can be bound to
acknowledge and adore the invisible hand, which conducts the affairs of men,
more than the people of the United States. Every step, by which they have
advanced to the character of an independent nation, seems to have been
distinguished by some token of providential agency."

With such humility and piety did he uniformly acknowledge the influence of
divine Providence, in all instances of success; and with such devotion did he
uniformly commend the interests of his country to ALMIGHTY GOD! In this trait
of character, how preeminently does WASHINGTON rise above the great TIMOLEON,
than whom few, if any, of the ancient heroes of Greece and Rome possessed
higher talents and virtues, or, in other respects, more nearly resembled the
Hero of America. Timoleon ascribed his success to Fortune alone; and, in the
speeches he made to the people of Syracuse, he frequently said, "That he was
very thankful to Fortune, who (designing to preserve Sicily) was pleased to
honor him with the name and title of its deliverer. And having built a chapel
in his house, he there sacrificed to Chance, and consecrated the house itself
to Fortune." Plutarch.
-- Had the name of GOD been placed in the room of FORTUNE, and Providence in
the room of Chance, the modesty of this excellent man would have received the
additional ornament of religion. But Timoleon saw not "the pure and benign
light of Revelation," Circular Letter.
which Washington justly appreciated, and to which he was peculiarly indebted
for his sublime virtues, and for his rational piety.




In close connection with this counsel to cherish religion and morality, we are
advised to "promote, as an object of primary importance, institutions for the
general diffusion of knowledge:" and are reminded that "in proportion as the
structure of a government gives force to public opinion, it is essential that
public opinion should be enlightened."

"As a very important source of strength and security," we are counseled to
"cherish public credit." While the execution of the advice given on this
subject belongs to your representatives, "it is necessary," as is justly
observed, "that public opinion should cooperate. To facilitate to them the
performance of their duty, it is essential that you should practically bear in
mind that toward the payment of debts there must be revenue; that to have
revenue there must be taxes; and none can be devised which are not more or less
inconvenient and unpleasant; that the intrinsic embarrassment inseparable from
the selection of the proper objects (which is always a choice of difficulties)
ought to be a decisive motive for a candid construction of the conduct of the
government in making it, and for a spirit of acquiescence in the measures for
obtaining revenue which the public exigencies may at any time dictate."

We are further advised to "observe good faith and justice toward all nations;
to cultivate peace and harmony with all;" as what is equally enjoined by "good
policy," and by "religion and morality." For the accomplishment of these
objects, we are taught that "nothing is more essential than that permanent,
inveterate antipathies against particular nations, and passionate attachment
for others, should be excluded; and that in the place of them, just and
amicable feelings toward all should be cultivated."

Having enumerated some of the many evils, which originate from such national
partialities and antipathies, among which foreign influence is expressly
noticed; the Counselor, as if lifting up a monitory voice, observes: "Against
the insidious wiles of foreign influence (I conjure you to believe me,
fellow-citizens) the jealousy of a free people ought to be constantly awake;
since history and experience prove that foreign influence is one of the most
baneful foes of republican government." Our detached situation, we are
reminded, invites and enables us to keep ourselves independent of other
nations. "Why," we are interrogated, "why forego the advantages of so peculiar
a situation? Why quit our own, to stand upon foreign ground? Why, by
interweaving our destiny with that of any part of Europe, entangle our peace
and prosperity in the toils of European ambition, rivalship, interest, humor
or caprice?"

We are advised to "take care always to keep ourselves, by suitable
establishments, on a respectable defensive posture;" and are justly taught to
believe, "that to be prepared for war is one of the most effectual means of
preserving peace."

We are instructed, in fine, that "there can be no greater error than to expect
or calculate upon real favors from nation to nation;" that "it is an illusion
which experience must cure, which a just pride ought to discard."

Such were the counsels of the venerable and patriotic Sage, whose death is the
subject of this day's lamentation. "In offering to you," said he, "my
countrymen, these counsels of an old and affectionate friend, I dare not hope
they will make the strong and lasting impression I could wish -- that they will
control the usual current of the passions, or prevent our nation from running
the course which has hitherto marked the destiny of nations: but if I may even
flatter myself, that they may be productive of some partial benefit, some
occasional good; that they may now and then recur to moderate the fury of party
spirit, to warn against the mischiefs of foreign intrigue, to guard against the
impostures of pretended patriotism; this hope will be a full recompense for the
solicitude for your welfare, by which they have been dictated."

Can counsels, springing from patriotism so disinterested, from philanthropy so
exalted, delivered too with modesty so unaffected, with eloquence so
persuasive, require aught else to impress them on your memories, to endear them
to your hearts, or to recommend them to your observance? Nothing, but the near
and tender relation I bear to you; a conscious obligation to do what in me lies
to promote your political and social, your moral and religious, improvement and
happiness; solicitude for your united and individual welfare, in conjunction
with that of our common country; and the animating hope, that the voice of your
Pastor will, on such an occasion as this, be attentively heard and regarded,
could either prompt, or authorize, me to add my humble recommendation to what
has the sanction of the name of WASHINGTON. But, impelled by a sense of duty,
and inspired by this interesting solemnity, I presume to ask a reiterated
attention to those counsels, on the observance of which your safety and
happiness are suspended.

Remember, my friends and fellow-citizens, they are the counsels of the
prudent, and the ancient; of the honorable man, and THE COUNSELOR. Remember,
they are the counsels of the man, who, during eight long years, jeoparded his
life on the high places of the field, in defense of your liberties; of the man,
who fought your battles to gain your independence; of the man, who, in yonder
encampment, "consumed so many anxious days, and watchful nights," to insure
your peace and tranquillity; of the man, who led your armies to victory and
triumph; of the man, who aided in the formation of your admirable Constitution
of government; of the man, who, for eight years, presided over your
confederated Republic, and essentially contributed to its prosperity and glory;
of the man, who, in the evening of his days, again girded on his sword, to
repel your enemies; of the man, who uniformly sacrificed his own interest and
tranquillity to the welfare of his country; of the man, whose whole life was a
continued series of patriotic exertions and services; of the man, whose first
and latest wish was, to see you free, and virtuous, and happy. If ye will not
regard the advice of such a man; if even the name of WASHINGTON will not endear
it to you; if, now your counselor is perished, ye can suffer his counsel to
perish with him; ye will forfeit all claim to the expectation of that
happiness, which his counsel was designed to promote, and merit all those
accumulated evils, which it was intended to prevent. Ye will deserve to be
severed by division, and rent by faction; and to become the prey of some
aspiring demagogue at home, or of some despotic sovereignty abroad. -- God
forbid, that such infatuation should be the cause of your slavery and ruin! If
ye mean any thing by the tribute, which ye profess voluntarily to offer, this
day; if ye came not hither to insult the ashes of the dead; if ye have the
least regard to your own best interests, to those of our common country, and of
generations yet unborn; ye will receive, with the tenderest sensibility, the
advice of wisdom, and resolve to honor the memory of your Counselor, by
observing it.

To this observance, then, let me invite all, of whatever character or
description, in this assembly. Each of us, my fellow-citizens, is interested in
whatever relates to WASHINGTON. If we cannot emulate his wisdom, we may follow
his counsel; if we cannot make pretensions to his greatness, we may copy after
his goodness; if we cannot aspire at his talents as a General, a President, or
a Statesman, we may imitate his virtues, as a Man, a Citizen, and a Christian.

Let us, therefore, unitedly resolve to pursue that course, which he has, with
equal penetration and patriotism, marked out for the security of our national
liberty and order, peace and happiness; and keep perpetually in view his own
noble and sublime example. Let the unity of government, "which constitutes us
one people," be ever a favorite object of our attention and zeal. Impressed
with a sense of its importance to the safety and interest, and even to the
existence, of the nation, let us exert our utmost endeavors to preserve it
inviolate. Laying aside local prejudices, let us treat all the citizens of
United America as brethren, and aim to become more and more cemented into one
great and happy fraternity.

Convinced that, to the preservation of our union, a general government is
indispensably necessary, let us cherish a cordial regard to the constitution
and government of the United States. If, my fellow-citizens, ye are, at any
time, invited to associate, "under whatever plausible character," for the
purpose of "directing, controuling, counteracting, or awing the regular
deliberation and action of the constituted authorities;" spurn, with patriotic
indignation, the man, who is capable of insulting your understanding;
impeaching your patriotism; and undermining your liberty. Should ye find
serious cause to complain of any evil either in the Constitution, or
Administration, of your government, seek redress in a constitutional manner;
for the Constitution itself provides for its own amendment, and for the
punishment of misconduct in those who administer it. -- Never forget, that "the
basis of our political systems is the right of the people to make and to alter
their constitutions of government;" Valedictory Address.
that ye have the frequent choice of your own rulers; and that, therefore, the
staff of power is virtually retained in your own hands. If any, whom ye elect
to offices of trust and authority, abuse your confidence, and pervert their
delegated power to sinister purposes; ye may remedy the evil, by choosing
better men to succeed them. But if, instead of this expedient, ye censure the
Constitution, and oppose the execution of the laws; ye take the surest method
to dissolve the union.

As a mean of promoting unity, and of thus preserving your liberty and
independence, choose such men only into public offices, as ye know to be
attached, from principle, to that Constitution, which your great Counselor
has warmly recommended to your confidence and support. -- If this advice is
not expressed, it is implied, in the counsels of WASHINGTON; and, which is
more, it is impressively inculcated by his own example. At the last election,
in Virginia, for the choice of a Federal Representative, the aged Patriot rode
the distance of ten miles, to give his vote for a man, whom he knew to be a
firm friend to the Constitution of the United States. Let this venerable Image
be before your eyes, whenever ye are about to give your suffrages at an
election; and, like a tutelar angel, guard you from contributing to the
division and ruin of your country.

Let your united influence be exerted to cherish public credit; and, to this
end, acquiesce in those measures, for raising a revenue, which the public
exigencies may require.

Toward all nations let us observe good faith and justice; and cultivate peace
and harmony with all mankind. Avoiding partial predilections for one nation,
and antipathies against another, let us blush to bear any other name, or to
sustain any other character, than the name and character of AMERICANS.

Institutions for the general diffusion of knowledge let us encourage and
promote, as essential to the stability of the government, and to the happiness
of the people. This part of the counsel of WASHINGTON, like the rest, was
exemplified in his own conduct. Uniformly a patron of learning, during his
life; he bequeathed in perpetuity, at his death, fifty shares, of one hundred
pounds sterling each, in the Potowmac Company, toward the endowment of a
National University, to be established within the limits of the district of
Columbia, under the auspices of the general government: and one hundred shares,
of one hundred dollars each, for the use of Liberty Hall Academy, in Virginia.


Above all, my brethren, let us sacredly observe the duties of Morality and
Religion -- duties admirably illustrated and recommended in the example, as
well as impressively inculcated in the counsel, of the great and good Man,
whose loss we lament. Like WASHINGTON, let us manifest our piety toward GOD,
by acknowledging his providence, and obeying his laws. Like him, let us
habitually aim to maintain the due regulation of our appetites and passions.
Like him, let us devote all our talents, and exert all our energies, for the
promotion of human happiness. Like him, let us "do justice, love mercy, and
demean ourselves with that charity, humility, and pacific temper of the mind,
which were the characteristics of the divine AUTHOR of our blessed religion;
without an humble imitation of whose example, in these things, we can never
hope to be a happy nation." Washington's Circular Letter.
Thus shall we become formed into good men, good citizens, and good Christians.
Thus, like WASHINGTON, we shall be worthy to live; like WASHINGTON, we shall
not fear to die; like WASHINGTON, we may close our own eyes with unshaken hand;
and, with our expiring breath, exclaim: O Death! where is thy sting? O Grave!
where is thy victory?

FINIS.



