DR. HITCHCOCK's DISCOURSE, ON THE DEATH OF General Washington.

A DISCOURSE, ON THE DIGNITY AND EXCELLENCE OF THE HUMAN CHARACTER; ILLUSTRATED
IN THE LIFE OF General George Washington, LATE COMMANDER OF THE ARMIES, AND
PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES.

IN Commemoration OF THE AFFLICTIVE EVENT OF HIS DEATH.

DELIVERED FEBRUARY 22, 1800, IN THE BENEVOLENT CONGREGATIONAL CHURCH IN
PROVIDENCE; And Published by Request of that Society.

BY ENOS HITCHCOCK, D. D. MEMBER OF THE SOCIETY OF THE CINCINNATI.

"Know ye not that there is a Prince and a great Man fallen this day in
Israel?" DAVID. "Moses died; and the children of Israel wept for Moses thirty
days." DEUTERONOMY. PROVIDENCE: PRINTED BY JOHN CARTER, JUN.

1800.

A DISCOURSE, etc.
2d SAMUEL, i. 19 and 27. THE BEAUTY OF ISRAEL IS SLAIN UPON THY HIGH PLACES:
HOW ARE THE MIGHTY FALLEN!

HOW ARE THE MIGHTY FALLEN, AND THE WEAPONS OF WAR PERISHED!


THE natal day of the FATHER OF HIS COUNTRY has once more occurred; but it no
longer brings with it the wonted joy and festivity of the season. The harps are
hung upon the weeping willows; the cheerful song converted into a solemn dirge.
Death, by a sudden and awful stroke, has deprived our nation of its beauty and
glory, and the world of its greatest ornament. Prompted by our own feelings,
and a conviction of duty, See note (A) in the Appendix.
we delayed not to lament the eventful crisis of human frailty, by suitable
tokens and expressions of sensibility and sorrow. Our temples were shrouded in
black, and our pulpits were vocal in his praise. Our nation this day assembles,
in obedience to the proclamation of his com-patriot, our illustrious President,
to pay, in unison, the last public office of mournful respect to the memory of
the man she delighted to honor. In Israel thirty days of incessant mourning
were solemnly passed on the death of Moses, their lawgiver and leader; and we
are told, that in Rome, badges of mourning were worn See note (B) in the
Appendix.
a whole year after the death of some of their favorite chieftains. The event
we have this day assembled to deplore is not merely a death -- it is the
departure of a WASHINGTON! The tear of affection and gratitude spontaneously
flows. The involuntary sigh heaves the patriot breast, and pours the full tide
of grief at the urn of its father and friend: and in such grief there is a
luxury unknown to fordid minds.

PATRIOTISM mourns the loss of her firstborn son. Our country laments the loss
of so much amiableness of disposition and character -- of so much might and
valor, which gave strength and stability to the state. But let us not lose in
unavailing sorrow the rational and moral improvement to be derived from so
afflictive a dispensation of Divine Providence.

To this end I have placed David at the head of this discourse, bewailing the
fall of Saul and Jonathan.

IT will not be necessary to enquire into the connected narrative of
transactions which produced the event he so deeply laments, and in such
pathetic language calls on the people to memorize. "The beauty of Israel is
slain; how are the mighty fallen!" and dwelling on the amiableness of the one,
and the valor of the other, he exclaims again and again, "How are the mighty
fallen, and the weapons of war perished!" The terms, "beauty" and "mighty," may
be considered as expressing the native goodness of disposition, and the amiable
virtues of the life; great natural energy of mind; a genius ready at acquiring
knowledge, and at discerning the fittest application of it; a spirit bold,
active and enterprizing; a mind capable of great and benevolent conceptions; a
character formed by noble exertions and heroic deeds. To lament fallen
greatness is but a natural expression of sympathy at beholding the splendid
ruins of human nature in her most ennobled sons; it is a dictate of
philanthropy, considering the importance of such characters to the happiness of
society.

A FEW thoughts on the true dignity and excellence of character will lead us to
a just estimation of its great worth and importance, and to an improved view of
the present occasion.

THE power and influence which characters, formed on the basis of real worth
and excellence, give the possessors over the community; the virtue and order
which their example sheds through society; the defense and protection which
their exertions afford the state, render them pre-eminent blessings to the
world, and make them the just objects of esteem and veneration while living,
and of sincere regret, but of grateful memory, when the Supreme Ruler of the
world sees fit to take them out of it. On the theater of this world there is a
field opened wide and extensive for the exercise of genius, and the exertion of
all the powers of man, either in the cabinet of national councils, or in the
field of national defense; in the advancement of science and the arts, or in
the improvements of civilized and secular life; besides the discharge of the
more private offices of friendship, and of domestic obligation.

As to the public and extensive services to which men, formed by nature to high
elevation of character, are called for the good of their country, we know, and
the world knows, their great importance and usefulness. Government, in the
present state of things, is necessary to the existence of society; and military
skill and prowess, with "weapons of war," are requisite for the establishment
of civil rights, and defense of civil order. How happy that country, whose
destinies, requiring the wisdom of patriotic policy, and the energy of the
intrepid warrior, gives birth to the paragon in whom both completely center!
Highly as the circling spheres bless the natural world, by the regular
operation of their established laws, does the union of these qualities reflect
their blessings on the political system. It constitutes "the beauty" of our
country, on account of native excellence; and "the mighty," on account of
pre-eminence of character among the great.

CIVIL institutions run parallel to the formation of society. Neither a sense
of religion, nor a perception of moral obligation, has been found sufficiently
powerful in any age, to preserve undisturbed peace at home; much less to check
the encroaching spirit of ambition or avarice from abroad. Hence arises the
necessity of restraines from civil law, to curb the licentious* and
unprincipled; and of military force for defense. Hence also the necessity of
great political and military talents, adapted to meet the exigencies of the
times. Nor has Divine Providence been unmindful of this. But in every age it
has raised up those whose abilities enabled them to be eminently useful in
their day. Most oppressed nations have been favored with some patriotic
deliverer. In Israel a Moses was raised up to deliver, and a Joshua to lead the
people; in Rome a Camillus; in Greece a Leonidas; in Sweden a Gustavus; and in
England a Hampden, a Russel, a Sydney. These were successful in preserving and
defending the state. But who of them, like a WASHINGTON, formed and established
an empire?

THE dignity of the human character does not consist merely in the possession
or exertion of great talents.

IT is not the adventitious circumstance of civil distinction, military
honors, or opulent conditions, that gives a title to it. There are instances,
not a few, of commanding genius, of vast mental resource, and of great and
brilliant deeds, all stained with the most pestiferous crimes: a heart black as
midnight darkness, with a head luminous as the midday sun. Deeds that would do
honor to the greatest, and actions that would disgrace the meanest of men,
sometimes constitute the mixed shades of the same character. Can such an
unhallowed mixture constitute dignity or excellence of character? Surely not.
We may admire the hero, but we despise the man.

TRUE worth and greatness of character is formed by the union of the head and
heart acting in concert; in upright principles, directing the judgment and
controuling the strong arm of power; in the fear of God, ever guiding to a due
regard to man. Actuated by these principles, the character will not be stained
by the aspirings of unhallowed ambition; but will gather beauty and luster from
opportunities for great and benevolent actions; and the more the motives of
action are examined, the more closely the character is scanned, the fairer will
they appear.

THE providence of God calls some men to act in high stations, and the
circumstances of the public require all their energies, either to form or
administer government, or defend the state. These are like a city placed on a
hill. The light of their example, or the blackness of their character, becomes
conspicuous in proportion to their elevation; and every private station becomes
a post of honor, when honorably filled. The effects of example are great in a
private station -- more so in the domestic state. How important then the duty,
and how great the blessings reflected on society, by the good and virtuous
example of those who are rendered eminent by high stations, and the
achievement of glorious deeds! Such services are peculiarly graced, and derive
supreme worth from that excellence of character which perfumes the most
amiable, and adds luster to the most illustrious. Not so much could the d^^ of
Vernon's fertile mount, descending on "the elevated lawn," See note (C) in the
Appendix.
enrich the plains below; not so much could the clear shining after rain
refresh the tender grass, as this moral excellence of character bless the land,
by extending its influence from north to south.

WE are here reminded of a circumstance that damps the usual joys of this day.

"THE beauty of Israel is slain; how are the mighty fallen!" No character so
good, no man so great, but he must fall by the hand of death. Prostrate in the
dust all human glory must be said. Descended from the same original stock, all
mankind are destined to the same end. The sentence of -- " Dust to dust" -- is
universal upon our race. In this warfare there is no discharge; in the grave no
distinction. In the repository of the dead we behold a mixed multitude, of all
ages, conditions and characters; the aged and the young, the rich and the poor,
the hero and the coward, the public magistrate and the private citizen, the
pious christian and the impious offender, who have promiscuously fallen before
all-conquering death. Such are the ravages death is constantly making upon our
race!

THE truth of these observations is verified in the afflicting instance of the
fall of the glory, strength and boast of our country.

YES, the princely soul of our beloved WASHINGTON has taken its flight! He is
no longer disturbed by the concussions of our jarring elements. The heavens
open wide their huge portals to receive his pure and ennobled spirit; angels
hail him welcome to his native seat; the immense temple of God becomes the
place of his residence forever. He has ceased from his labors, but his works
will long live. The inscription on the lofty marble will for a long time inform
the inquisitive traveller -- Here lies the venerable chief -- " First in war,
first in peace, and first in the hearts of his countrymen." The monumental
inscription shall mouldering time efface; but his heroic and benevolent deeds
are recorded on the tablet of the heart. While man lives, they will live; so
long as virtue has a name, they will be admired. Yea, his justly acquired fame
shall survive the wreck of nature; and wreaths of glory crown his head, when
time shall be no more.

THE historian will attempt a display of his virtues by a detail of his great
transactions; the poet will celebrate his name in polished and harmonic
periods; he will assemble the worthies of ancient and modern times, and by all
the arts of playful imagination faintly pourtray a WASHINGTON. The painter and
the sculptor will employ all their art to eternize his noble form, and majestic
mein, but can never fully express the characterestic virtues which were
enthroned on his brow. The eulogist will rack his invention to bestow merited
panegyric on a character whose depth it cannot fathom -- language will refuse
her aid, and eulogy itself grow faint upon his tongue.

BUT to record his virtues in our hearts, and transmit his name, with
veneration, to your children, is the claim of gratitude; and by raising a
spirit of emulation, may be useful.

EVERY thing respecting this illustrious man is now become important. The very
name of WASHINGTON is dear to us. The highest eulogium we could possibly
bestow, would be a correct account of his life and transactions. Here again we
must fail, and satisfy ourselves with a few of the outlines of a portrait
which, if filled up with plain facts, would present it in a transcendent
attitude. -- General WASHINGTON was born of respectable parents, in Virginia,
on the twenty-second day of February, one thousand seven hundred and
thirty-two. His education was not in the academic forums; but his native
powers, improved by close application under a private tutor, soon gave him a
respectable station among the arts and sciences; and universities of the first
rank in Europe and America have long deemed it an honor to have his name
enrolled in their list of literary titles. Indeed, his letters and other
compositions, both political and military, afford the best comment on his
literary acquirements. He appears to have early imbibed the principles of
religion. That he was nurtured in the habits of virtue, appears from their
attending him through all the public and private walks of life. He never lost
the respect of the son, See note (D) in the Appendix.
in the elevation of the commander in chief. Nor did patriotism diminish his
connubial and domestic affection. Amiable in the discharge of these duties, he
never for a moment lost sight of those ties that conferred the obligation upon
him.

EARLY habits of a virtuous tendency, an early acquaintance with the principles
of religion, and the exercises of piety, form the strongest barriers against
vice in youth. They lay the surest foundation for honor and usefulness in
life, respect in age, and comfort in death. A life commenced with such
principles and habits, a youth of such sobriety, fidelity and filial respect,
indicates a character to be distinguished afterward by worthy deeds; a career
of glory, supported and adorned by moral excellence, which shall end in an age
of tranquillity and comfort. In this instance we are not disappointed. We behold
the happy close of a life, which had been rendered glorious by the union of
virtue and talents, shining with undiminished luster. In whom has the virtue of
the youth, the magnanimity of the soldier, the pure zeal of the patriot and the
christian, ever appeared with so much grace and dignity, as in him to whom we
this day wish to assign a just tribute of respect?

IN a sound body dwelt a sounder mind; the latter improved by close application
in youth; the former by athletic exercises. His judgment, ever a prominent
feature in his character, ripened at an immature age into the able negociator;
See note (E) in the Appendix.
and his bold and enterprizing spirit, features no less prominent, into the
hardihood of the veteran soldier; and at the age of twenty he gained the
meridian of ordinary life. The western tribes of Indians, the French commander
at Fort Du Quesne, and the unfortunate British army in the gorges of the
Monongahela, all experienced in turn his uncommon address in managing a treaty,
or in covering the retreat of a shattered army in those vast wilds, ere
twenty-five years had rolled over him. Already had the government of Virginia
committed high betrustments to him. Already had he given strong proofs of his
piety See note (F) in the Appendix.
as well as of his patriotism and valor. He continued to justify their
confidence, and they to express their full sense of it. Thus honored in his
own country; thus esteemed among kindred citizens, how clear his title to that
honor and esteem! What then must have been their regret, when his health,
impaired by the rigor of service and severe fatigue, rendered it necessary for
him to retire from the service, in seventeen hundred fifty-nine?

FROM this time to the year seventy-five, we may perhaps most properly view him
as the American farmer, though employed in various public offices, besides a
seat in the Legislature. Situated on the summit of the very high ground called
Mount-Vernon, See note (G) in the Appendix.
he converts that beautiful spot into a prolific garden, variegated into a most
enchanting scenery. The arts of peace are less splendid, but more useful than
those of war. By agricultural arts and improvements he rendered an extensive
plantation a source of wealth to himself, and of instruction to others. This
favorite spot now became more dear than ever, by a happy connubial union with
the amiable and accomplished Mrs. CUSTIS, the assiduous sharer of all his
future anxieties, as well as partner of his joys. Domestic and agricultural
concerns now unite their friendly beams to speed his way in those delightful
pursuits.

IN seventy-four, we find him among the assembled worthies and patriots at
Philadelphia. The portentous cloud hangs over the land -- it is fraught with
ire. Soon does the lightening slash from beneath the dark curdling carr that
bears death and destruction to all hopes of reconciliation with a parent
country. Already possessed of the metropolis of Massachusetts, they issue
forth, and on the ever-memorable nineteenth of April, seventy-five, Lexington
and Concord present the malancholy visage of slaughtered citizens. With
eagerness our patriotic yeomanry rush to the encrimsoned field. But what is a
host without a head? Whither, O whither shall we turn, to find a leader whose
powers shall justify the hope of successful resistance? Behold, in the midst of
our patriot band one appears -- " Toto vertice superest." "A whole head above
the rest."

IT is a WASHINGTON! He is unanimously elected Commander in Chief of the armies
to be raised for the defense of the country. "It is perhaps his peculiar glory,
that there was not a single inhabitant of these States, except himself, who did
not approve the choice, and place the firmest confidence in his integrity and
abilities." But his native modesty induced him to express deep apprehensions of
his inability to perform the momentous duties which such a trust devolved upon
him. Obedient to his country's call, he evinced the motives of his acceptance
to be neither mercenary nor vain, by declining any compensation for personal
services.

BIDDING adieu to his compatriots in the great council of the nation, he
betakes himself to the field, where his abilities are more needed. The
respectful gratulations of all classes See note (H) in the Appendix.
of people, as he passed the country; the joy and exultation of the army on his
arrival at Cambridge, in July, are evincive of the instinctive confidence which
his name inspired. How well qualified he was to take the command of an
undisciplined, unprovided army, to reduce them to order, and to withstand as
large and well appointed an army as perhaps was ever sent out of Europe,
commanded by able and experienced officers, the event has proved. His
unimpeached conduct during an eight years war, attended with the most trying
circumstances, is an eulogium that can receive no addition, unless it be from
the uniform and invincible attachment of the officers and soldiers of his army
to his person during that period.

THOUGH not versed in the art military, like his foes, yet they were soon
taught to respect his judgment and fear his power; and what was wanting in
force, was supplied by policy. His unwearied industry, his uncommon method and
exactness, which gained him the respect and confidence of his own army,
rendered him formidable to that of his enemies. His silent, but easy manner of
doing business; his reserve, void of all haughty superciliousness; his quick
discernment of every character, and of every subject that was presented to him;
his firm and undeviating purpose, executed with moderation and humanity,
qualified him in the best manner for the command of a republican army. How
often the above qualities were usefully displayed during the struggle for
freedom, and how much the country is indebted for them, is best known to those
veterans to whom he often expressed his thanks for their essential services,
because they had the most opportunity of observing them.

BESIDES the great and heroic actions that came to public view, those worthy
sons who followed their leader will recollect many of the innumerable virtues
of the heart which transpired in the more private transactions. They will
testify to the kind, humane and affectionate conduct he always observed toward
the army; how careful to cherish life, where an imposing policy did not
absolutely require the contrary. They will never forget the deep impression
which these qualities made on them; while the irresistible majesty of his
presence See note (I) in the Appendix.
quelled the riotous, and reduced the refractory to order. His country's cause
is now all his own. Never for a moment did he flinch from danger, or attempt to
shield himself from being a conspicuous mark for his foes, though exposed to
the ten thousand invisible messengers of death, from the savage ambush which
routed one British army on the Monongahela, to the capture of another at
Yorktown. Amidst all these, and from the assassin's dagger, See note (K) in the
Appendix.
Divine Providence remarkably preserved him, till its high purposes were
accomplished in him. On his arrival at Cambridge, he found that the zeal of the
country, and not its strength in arms or ammunition, held the city besieged. He
applies immediately to organizing the army, and providing military stores.
Heaven smiles. See note (L) in the Appendix.
He succeeds in both. An anxious public expect an assault upon Boston, and grow
impatient for the time. But to conquer by delay, and expel by circumscribing
his enemies, is a more humane, and a safer policy. They leave their post the
ensuing March, to seek some more favorable spot for offensive operations.
New York is selected for the purpose. Here again they meet a WASHINGTON with
his army. The place is not tenable. A scene now opens that brings to the
severest test all the feelings of the man, and all the resources of the
general. Success is generally accounted wisdom, and the splendour of character
is sought in the successful enterprises of the warrior. But perhaps we should
find the most splendid rays of General WASHINGTON'S glory beaming from beneath
the dark and dreadful clouds of defeat, misfortune and distress; attended by
the shattered remains of a retreating army, and unsupported by an inefficient
government. We know not which most to admire, his caution or his intrepidity,
his moderation or his firmness, his penetration in judgment or his promptness
in decision, his patience in suffering or his unextinguishable zeal and
perseverance in the cause of freedom, through years of deep anxiety, and of
unparelleled trials and disappointments.

THE subject is now too complex to be analyzed into particulars in a single
discourse. Those of you who were then on the stage, remember the deep shades
that overspread the country; and those of you who accompanied him in his
hair-breadth escapes from Long Island, York-Island and its environs, with the
loss of Fort-Washington and its garrison, Fort-Lee and its dependencies; in his
retreat through the Jersies, pursued like a hunted hare by a large and
victorious army, while his own was constantly lessening by losses in action, by
sickness, and expiration of enlistments, and the country too far depressed to
support him. -- Those can best conceive the true dignity of his invincible
soul. We are now to view him on the western margin of the Delaware, looking
back with indignant eye to his pursuers, at rest in Trenton. The inhabitants of
the country desponding, say, "all is now lost." But his heroic spirit never
despairs. Oppressed with the weight of a sinking empire, the attic fire of his
breast enkindles afresh. He collects his little hardy band, destitute of every
comfort; the same fire flies through the ranks. They resolve to follow their
leader to victory or to death. In vain does the rolling torrent hurry on the
massy sheets of ice upon its turbulent bosom; in vain the sleety tempest from
the frozen north, adding new horrors to the darkness of December's night,
oppose the well concerted plan. Ere the morning sun had enlightened our
horizon, twelve hundred astonished Hessians yielded to his conquering arms. The
main body of the enemy at Princeton, leaving about five hundred, move on with
hasty march to retrieve the lost. The Delaware in his rear, a powerful army
fraught with vindictive rage in front, imposed a woeful dilemma. But he who
could inspire the daring hardihood to resist the force of opposing elements,
knew how to evade their grasp, and extricate his faithful adherents from the
fatal stroke. The succeeding night, leaving deceptive fires to lull the enemy,
a circuitous rout of seventeen miles presented them in their rear at Princeton.
A MERCER nobly dies in the contest. A WASHINGTON placed himself on middle
ground between the conflicting bodies, a mark for both. His example inspired a
general ardour. They rush on, and another victory ensues. An instant policy
covers the handful of invincibles, who had performed such wonders, on the
heights of Morristown, marking their way thither with blood, for lack of shoes:
and an army of eight thousand men are cooped up in New-Brunswick during the
winter, by the skeleton of his own.

AGAIN, committing themselves to the bosom of the swelling ocean, they attempt
to elude the penetration of our Argus with his hundred eyes; but in vain. Soon
does he meet them at the Head of Elk. Nor does the unfortunate and total rout
of his army on the Brandywine, the vexatious disappointment at Germantown, the
loss of Redbank and Mud-Island, after a most gallant desence; the distressing
failure of supplies of men, provisions and clothing, nor the faction raising
its serpent head in Congress to displace him, nor the imbecility of their
resolutions, shake the firm purpose of his energetic soul. With an army
exhausted by fatigue, reduced by repeated actions, epidemic disease, and more
dreadful sufferings, he huts them, in the month of December, in a forest at
Valley-Forge, about twenty miles from Philadelphia, whither the whole British
army had retired for more comfortable winter quarters. The distresses of the
army at this cantonment See note (M) in the Appendix.
had well nigh sunk his manly, his compassionate soul. We cast a mantle over
this distressing scene, as too painful for reflection.

SIR HENRY CLINTON left Philadelphia on the June following; our hero pursued by
a circuitous march of near one hundred and fifty miles, and overtook him on the
burning plains of Monmouth. A severe battle ensued, and his victorious arms
obliged him to fly and seek shelter in New York. Such was the perilous state of
the army, so deficient in numbers and supplies, and Congress perceiving that
their resolutions did not contain energy sufficient to draw them forth from the
country, that they entrusted their faithful General with the power of doing it
himself. "Maturely considering the crisis, and having perfect reliance in his
wisdom, vigor and uprightness," they invested him with powers bordering on
Dictatorship, on the 27th of December, 1776; and similar resolutions were
passed the two following years. This high betrustment of power was never
abused; but was ever used for the best purposes for which it was given. Such
was the confidence of his country in him! Such his integrity in the use of it!

DURING the above gloomy period, when the boldest heart needed support from
some quarter, it was oppressed by the reiterated defeats in Canada, with the
loss of Generals MONTGOMERY and THOMAS; the destruction of a fleet on Lake
Champlain; the possession of Rhode Island by the enemy; the evacuation of
Ticonderoga, and the wanton devastations of VAUGHAN, on the North-River.
Pressed by the fortuitous concussion of events on every side, he sends General
GATES to retrieve the northern department. He succeeds, and BURGOYNE with his
army surrenders. He projects, with indefatigable attention, an attack on
Stoney-Point, which, with Verplank's-Point, had yielded to the enemy: the deep
laid plan succeeds, and the garrison laid down their arms. General LINCOLN is
sent to protect Charleston, but surrenders to a besieging army vastly superior
to his own. He sends General GREEN to retrieve the disaster at Cambden, who
performs wonders in the South; and at length goes himself for Virginia, leaving
the remainder of his army at White-Plains, with so much address as to cover his
intentions from the enemy. The capture of Lord CORNWALLIS and his army closed
the military operations, and peace ensued.

THE time for disbanding the army arrived -- and now arrived the mighty trial
of patriotic virtue. Talk not of a Caesar! He was brave, but would have
enslaved his country. Say not that an Alexander conquered from Macedonia to
Egypt! He never conquered himself. He deluged countries in blood, but saved
none; and wept because his ambition was not yet satiated with conquest. -- It
is left for a WASHINGTON to give the noblest example of virtue, of religion,
See note (N) in the Appendix.
of greatness. He conquered for his country. He triumphed in their affections,
and at their feet he laid his hard-earned laurels. Like the illustrious Roman,
Lucius Quintus Cincinnatus, he laid-down, in peace, arms assumed for public
defense.

NOR were the energies of his talents less fitted to our situation in peace,
than to our exigencies in war: and this singular adaptation of talents to
circumstances, proved an eminent blessing to the United States.

THE Hero and Deliverer of his country, having restored to it that tranquillity
which he so much loved himself, returns to enjoy it with a greater relish on
his own domain. He is every where received with a tribute of applause; every
heart beats high with admiration, and every tongue is vocal in his praise. The
peaceful shades of domestic life were now doubly welcome to him. In the
cultivation of the earth, and various useful improvements, he made rapid
progress. Happy would he have been, if the calls of the public had suffered the
remainder of his days to glide away in this repose. But when the pressure of
common danger was at an end, the weakness of the federal government was more
fully perceived. The rare phenomenon of a political revolution is now to be
accomplished by deliberative assembly. The convention of the States for framing
a new constitution of government, place their late Commander in Chief in the
chair of state. His known and tried patriotism, and his eminent services to his
country, gave weight to his opinion in their deliberations, and contributed in
no small degree to the formation and adoption of the admirable system of
federal government we now enjoy, and greatly promoted the tranquillity and the
energy of its operation.

TWICE called by the unanimous voice of his country to administer the
government he had been so essential an agent in establishing, he sustained the
high station of President of the United States, with unbounded applause, during
eight years. The consciousness of his own integrity, like a brazen helmet,
warded off the shafts of envy; and he remained steadfast in pursuit of an
enlightened and pacific policy, See note (O) in the Appendix.
amidst the surges of discontented faction and foreign influence, like a huge
rock in the ocean, unmoved by the dashing of its raging billows. Having served
the public forty-five years, and nature claiming repose, he expresses his
earnest wish to retire from public life, in an address, which ought to form the
political creed of every son and daughter of the land. Americans! how venerable
this Legislator, Leader and Commander appears, in this valedictory address, can
be perceived only by reading it again and again.

BUT his repose is not long to remain undisturbed. The will of his country is
his own will; her exigencies impose an obligation upon him, which he cannot
resist. He obeys her call, under the threatening prospects of war from abroad,
and greatly accepts the appointment of Lieutenant General of the forces to be
raised for such emergencies. Happily, no such event has arrived. But the
morning lowrs, and rapidly brings on the important period that is to terminate
his glorious career -- Ah me! WASHINGTON is no more! On the 14th of December
last, he met death with the same fortitude that had marked his life, in the
sixty-eighth year of his age.

MY RESPECTED FRIENDS OF THE CINCINNATI,

To these imperfect lineaments of the character of the illustrious man who led
you to victory, to glory and freedom, your knowledge can add many more. Often
have you braved the dangers of the field, and the hardships of the camp, in
obedience to his command. Your obedience was always cheerful, because imposed
by duty and affection. Your dangers and sufferings were always ameliorated by
the example of your General voluntarily sharing them with you. You, Gentlemen,
have a double share in the common affliction occasioned by his death. He was
your beloved commander in Chief. He was your venerated President-General. The
best evidence of your profound respect for his memory, and your best
improvement of this mournful occasion, will be to preserve in your minds his
amiable and excellent virtues as a model for conduct in peace, as you did his
example of fortitude in war. May your life, like his, be virtuous; and may its
end, like his, be triumphant and happy.

MY LITTLE CHILDREN, AND YOUNG FRIENDS,

THOUGH you may never have seen the person of our beloved WASHINGTON, yet you
have often heard his name, and of the good he has done; and you are now
enjoying the fruit of his labors, in the opportunity you enjoy for
instruction. See note (P) in the Appendix.
He was once young, as you now are; and when young he was diligent in learning,
and amiable in conduct; and when old he reaped the fruits of sober youth. He
was beloved by all; he was virtuous; he was happy. We venerate his memory now
he is gone, because he was as good as he was great. Let his name be ever dear
to you, and never speak, never think of him but with gratitude, respect and
affection.

MY FRIENDS AND AFFLICTED FELLOW-CITIZENS,

THIS day has brought with it fresh testimonies of our loss -- a nation in
tears! It opens new sources of grief, by presenting the millions of his sons
assembled around the hearse, to take the last look of their parent, to pay one
more tribute of respect, to drop another tear of gratitude and affection for
their departed WASHINGTON.

WHILE we deplore an event that has deprived our country of its greatest
ornament, and of its best "weapon of war," let us offer up our most unfeigned
thanks to the Supreme Disposer of all events, for the continuance of so
distinguished a blessing to us for so long a time; and that he would be pleased
to afford divine consolation and support to his mourning relict. While we
recount his virtues, let us profit by them; and as we see the highest and the
lowest, the wisest and the weakest of our race, falling with equal facility
before the ^ell ravager of mankind, let us pass our time usefully and
profitably, that we may leave the favor of a good example behind, and that the
morn of eternal day may beam unclouded upon us.

Finis.
APPENDIX.
(A) Page 5. "We delayed not to lament the eventful crisis."
ON the 23d of December, the afflicting news of General WASHINGTON's death
reached this town. The author of the foregoing discourse would have deemed
himself deficient in duty and in patriotism, in omitting the earliest
opportunity to pay his* small tribute of respect to the memory of so much
worth; which he attempted, in an appropriate discourse, on the following
sabbath; a copy of which was requested for the press; but the publication was
omitted on account of the appointment of the 22d of February for commemorating
that event through the United States. The pulpit, the communion table and the
orchestre, shrouded with black; the cypress bows and festoons over the chancel
and the Venetian window, and around the columns and the urns, and the
emblematical mourning piece in front of the desk, showed the prompt feelings of
the congregation on the occasion.

(B) Page 6. "In Rome, badges of mourning."
It is related, that on the death of CINCINNATUS, the ladies of Rome wore the
cypress twelve months; and also for BRUTUS the younger.

(C) Page 12. "The elevated lawn."
At the bottom of the elevated lawn, on the banks of the Potomack, is placed
the family vault, where the mortal remains of our great WASHINGTON were
deposited.

(D) Page 15. "He never lost the respect of the son."
Hearing of the dangerous illness of his mother, in the spring of eighty-seven,
he immediately repaired to her, and left her not till she expired. His
assiduous and respectful attentions, which were the result of sentiment and
habit, were spoken of much to his honor. He came from her interment to
Philadelphia* to the convention for forming the present constitution, where the
author saw the lines of sorrow that deeply marked his countenance.

(E) Page 16. "The able negociator."
About the age of 21, he was sent by the governor of Virginia to treat with the
Six Nations and other western Indians, at the distance of 400 miles, in the
dead of winter, through a pathless wilderness, inhabited only by savages; and
to remonstrate to the French commander on the Ohio against their encroachments.
This enterprise he performed on foot, with his provision on his back. For the
judicious and able management of this business, he received the approbation and
thanks of his employers; and two years afterward, he performed that great
military exploit of rescuing the shattered remains of General BRADDOCK's army
from the horrid jaws of a savage ambuscade, of the danger of which he had
notified that unfortunate General. Though a very conspicuous mark for the
savage marksmen, he only received a ball through his ^oat.

(F) Page 16. "Strong proofs of his piety."
Though his inviting the Rev. Mr. DAVIS to perform religious service, and
deliver a discourse to the body of men he had the command of as (...) the age
of about 22, on a very important expedition, was no certain evidence of piety
in itself, yet all his other conduct, both in the public and private walks of
life, corresponding thereto, affords a strong proof of it; and that gentleman,
who permitted the above discourse to be published, has the following remarkable
note, dictated, no doubt, by the remarkable military talents he had already
discovered: -- "This young man," meaning Major WASHINGTON, "will one day be the
savior of his country."

(G) Page 17. "Called Mount-Vernon."
This high and commanding ground, situated a few miles below Alexandria, on the
Potomack, is called Mount-Vernon, in honor of Admiral Vernon. The area of this
beautiful mount is about 200 feet above the surface of that richly flowing
river; and furnishing a lawn of about five acres in front, and about the same
quantity in the rear of his buildings, falls off abruptly on both those
quarters.

(H) Page 19. "The respectful gratulations of."
As though inspired by one soul, all hailed him welcome on the way; public
entertainments were made to receive him at every stage; and the Massachusetts
Convention, then sitting at Watertown, sent a large deputation of respectable
characters to Springfield, to receive and escort him to Cambridge, where he was
received with inexpressible joy, and where he soon gave a new face to things.

(I) Page 21. "The irresistible majesty of his presence."
Among many other instances of the commanding influence of his presence, and
energy of his reproofs, a very noticeable one was at Prospect-Hill, where a
body of riflemen became mutinous. These men had then lately arrived from his
own country, which probably increased his indignation at their base conduct. He
rode into the midst of them, and by the energy of his address quelled and
reduced them to order.

(K) Page 21. "And from the assassin's dagger."
Among many other dangers out of which he was remarkably delivered, a timely
discovery was made in New York, in 1776, of a design formed against his life,
by corrupting one of his own guard.

(L) Page 21. "Heaven smiles."
By throwing into our hands the ammunition and military stores sent to supply
the enemy, which we so much needed at that time, and were not in our power to
command.

(M) Page 25. "The distresses of the army at this cantonment, had well nigh
sunk."
General WASHINGTON took this position in a forest, at Valley-Forge, about the
24th of December, 1777, the snow being about half-leg deep, with very few axes
to build their huts with. This cantonment General HOW called, by way of
ridicule, "the Indian-Town." It was sufficient, however, to keep him quiet
within his own lines, in Philadelphia, though the army was in an extreme state
of suffering, for want of provision and clothing. So great were their
distresses, that General WASHINGTON perhaps never felt deeper anxiety than on
their account. Being on a visit at headquarters, he enquired with great
solicitude how the soldiery fared, and how they supported their sufferings; and
when told, "with patience and fortitude," he exclaimed, the tears starting from
his eyes, " what will not these brave men endure for the good of their country!"

(N) Page 27. "Example of virtue, of religion."
In proof of this, many things might be adduced. The frugality and economy of a
table supplied by the public; the order, sobriety and moderation ever observed
at it, are evincive of virtuous habits, and of the influence of his presence in
restraining profanity, intemperance and licentiousness; for these never
polluted the social repast, nor offended the chastest ear. His religious
example shone in uniformly acknowledging an overruling Providence, ascribing
all his successes to that, and in calling on the army "to assemble at their
respective parades, to offer up their unfeigned thanks to Almighty God, for the
success he had granted them;" besides his attendance at public worship on the
sabbath, whenever the state of the army permitted, with great apparent
devotion. To the above may be added, his frequently calling on the officers and
soldiers, in general orders, to avoid vice and profanity. Of the many instances
of this, the two following are offered:

EXTRACT from GENERAL ORDERS, May 2d, 1778.
"While we are performing the duty of good citizens and soldiers, we ought not
to be inattentive to the higher duties of religion. To the distinguished
character of a patriot, it should be our highest glory to add the more
distinguished character of a christian."

EXTRACT from GENERAL ORDERS, July 29th, 1779.
"Many and pointed orders have been issued against that unmeaning and
abominable custom of swearing; notwithstanding which, with much regret, the
General observes it prevails, if possible, more than ever; his feelings are
continually wounded by the oaths and imprecations of the soldiers, whenever he
is in hearing of them. The name of that Being, from whose bountiful goodness we
are permitted to exist, and enjoy the comforts of life, is constantly
imprecated and profaned, in a manner as wanton as it is shocking. For the sake,
therefore, of religion, decency and order, the General hopes and trusts that
officers of every rank will use their influence and authority to check a vice
which is as unprofitable as it is wicked and shameful."

He was a stranger to religious prejudices, not from an indifference to
religion itself, but from a conviction of the benevolent designs of that scheme
of religion, which taught him to live and act as a christian, possessing the
feelings of a man, and not of a party. He was educated in the outward
profession of the Episcopal Church; but his candor toward all religious
denominations was manifested on all occasions. His answer to the address of the
Jews at Newport, will remain a lasting monument of this -- "And it is the glory
of the United States, that, with the star of empire, fixed therein is the
brighter sun of universal toleration."

(O) Page 29. "An enlightened and pacific policy."
The President of the United States rose with superior grace when he nobly
stood forth the independent assertor of their independence, and took a neutral
position among the nations at war. Convinced that justice and humanity required
it, no apprehension of personal sacrifice could shake his fixed purpose.

(P) Page 31. "The opportunity you enjoy for instruction."
To any one who was present, and saw the interesting and affecting exhibition
of 180 young masters and misses, with appropriate dresses, emblematical of
innocence and of mourning, no apology is necessary for this address. Nor will
it appear improper to any who consider the importance of the rising generation;
or the advantages they enjoy from the freedom of their country, through its
deceased patron.


