A SERMON, Delivered in Christ Church, Cambridge, IN MARYLAND; On the
TWENTY-SECOND of FEBRUARY, 1800, Being the Day of MOURNING appointed by
CONGRESS, FOR THE DEATH OF GENERAL GEORGE WASHINGTON, Late President of the
United States. By JAMES KEMP, A. M. Rector of Great Choptank Parish.

EASTON: Printed by JAMES COWAN

ADVERTISEMENT.
THERE is hardly any apology, that has been offered for publications of this
kind, which the author of the following sermon might not have brought forward,
on the present occasion. But he has thought fit to decline the^ all. -- When
Congress appointed thirty days of mourning for General Washington, it occurred
to him, that this was the number which the Israelites wept for Moses. Upon a
moment's reflection, he was forcibly strack with the astonishing coincidence
between the principal circumstances and events of their lives. More of these
might have been pointed out, but that would have extended the discourse to an
unusual size. -- It will perhaps, be objected, that any thing like a parallel
between an Inspired Prophet of the Lord, who was assisted, in the execution of
his commission, by an extraordinary series of miracles, and a M^n, who
accomplished exploits, however great, apparently by human means, is improper.
The author flatters himself, that it will be readily perceived, that he has not
attempted a parallel, but (...) those circumstances of similarity which are
certainly very striking.

Castle-Haven, March 5th, 1800.
A HYMN.
Great God! and is our Father gone!
Our Friend -- our Washington!
His cruel death now vanquished him,
Before subdued by none!
Weep -- weep his country! weep his friends!
This awful loss deplore!
Your Shield in war, your Light in peace,
Is now, alas! no more!
Yet gracious God! who to this land,
Such kindness did impart,
Let not a murmur at thy will,
Escape from any heart.
But for the mighty boon, we'll raise
Of gratitude the song,
So numerous were his glorious deeds,
That none ever lived so long.
His great example let us view,
Bright -- bright without a stain,
Till every soul, some portion may
Of Washington retain.
Then, though translated he may be
To some far brighter scene,
A happy land will long -- long show,
Where Washington has been. --
NOTE. The Author not having received any form of Prayer from the Bishop, took
the liberty to open the morning service with this Hymn, which seemed to make a
considerable impression upon his audience.

THE SERMON.
DEUTER. XXXIV. 8. And the children of Israel wept for Moses in the plains of
Moab, thirty days.


VENERATION for the memory of illustrious personages is a sentiment so
congenial to the human mind, that it h^s discovered itself, in some way or
other, in all ages and countries. In the days of ig^orance and idolatry, when
t^ere was neither light to guide, nor authority to control the wandering
imaginations of men, ^ancy^^g their heroes, their lawgivers and their s^g^s,
to be admitted to some share in the affairs of Heaven, they paid them divine
honors -- they implored their protection -- they deprecated their anger. This
was even the case among those nations of antiquity, who had made considerable
advances toward civilization and refinement. Others who were deeper sunk in
ignorance, or farther advanced in corruption, exhibited, in veneration of their
admired characters, every practice that folly could suggest, or stupidity
countenance.

The Jews, a nation selected from amidst the general corruption of mankind, as
a repository of the truth, with their minds under the direction and control of
laws and regulations dictated by Heaven, by no means abolished the custom of
venerating the memory of the deceased, but only prevented this veneration from
showing itself, by any sinful practices, or ridiculous exhibitions. Nor does
christianity, the intention of which is not to eradicate, but to correct the
natural propensities of the human mind, forbid, but even sanction, a rational
respect, and long remembrance of the virtues and services or great and
illustrious men. And then, with a benevolence peculiar to that lovely
institution, it places every thing in a way to improve the hearts of m^n, to
meliorate their condition here on earth, and to prepare them for a state of
more perfect happiness, when this world and all its customs shall have pa^sed
away.

The correspondence between the occasion which detained the Israelites, thirty
days in the plains of Moab, and that which has assembled us here this day, is
singularly striking. They had to lament their deliverer, their leader, and
their lawgiver. And how astonishingly were all these characters united in the
great personage, to whose memory we have this day met to p^y our grateful
tribute of respect!

Let us, only for a moment, advert to the principal circumstances of their
lives, and the great events of their conduct. -- When Moses was tending his
flock upon Mount Horeb, he was called by God, to rescue his nation from the
rigor of Egyptian bondage. An encroachment upon the rights of his country
called Washington from his farm on the banks of the Potomac. It is true, the
latter did not, like the former, hear the voice of God, but when he was
appointed to command the American army, the most hardy skeptic will scarcely
dare to doubt, that, in this appointment, Congress was directed by the finger
of God. If ever there was a time, when the minds of this venerable body of man
were totally divested of every passion -- every interested view, or ambitious
project, and actuated solely by the love of their country, it was at this
momentous period. The gallantry, and profound military skill, which he
displayed, in rescuing the remains of the vanquished army of Br^ddock from the
unrelenting arms of a savage foe, fixed every eye upon Washington, as the
fittest character to conduct the armies of America.

And here again, we have a wonderful coincidence between the manner in which
the Deliverer of Israel and of America accepted their commissions. Moses,
although he received his appointment from the Supreme Ruler of (...), yet his
mind was so impressed with the weight of the unde^t^ki^g, that he would fain
have shrunk from the task. When the unanimous voice of his country called
Washington to command, his soul, great as it was, labored under the pressure of
so vast ^ design, and had not a ruling maxim of his life, silenced both hi^
modesty and diffidence, he would, no doubt, have declined the appointment. This
maxim was, that it was the duty of a good man to be always ready, to exert all
his powers, and to risk his life and fortune in his country's cause.

Diffidence is the attribute of a great mind. Men of little souls and feeble
understandings, who are easily elated by honor or intoxicated by distinction,
will readily undertake any thing, but accomplish nothing. Whereas those, who
have minds capacious enough to see and duly appreciate the difficulties of
great undertakings, and who are urged on by no sinister motives, will seldom
fail to feel some reluctance in accepting important offices. From this
embarrassment Moses was relieved by the voice of God. And had not Washington,
from having viewed the cause in which he was about to embark in every aspect,
and feeling an entire conviction of its justice, and the purity of his own
motives, been persuaded that the Lord would be upon his side, his soul would
have recoiled at the prospect before him. But indeed, this was a principle
which, in every arduous undertaking, uniformly supported this pious man.

Moses was assisted in the execution of his commission, by the visible hand of
God. If it should be contended, that no miracles were wrought in favor of
Washington -- that his foes were neither infested with plagues, nor overwhelmed
by the sea, it will hardly be denied, that this singular personage was raised
up by the Supreme Being to accomplish such a mighty work, as was far beyond the
powers of common men. For let us only follow him through his military career,
after he took the command of the American army at Cambridge. To discipline this
body of men, unaccustomed to the strictness and order of a military life, and
with a high sense of their own importance: collected also from all parts of an
extensive continent, and possessing tempers almost as various as the climates
from which they came, was nearly as difficult as 'to link the jarring elements
in peace.' And all this too, was to be done in the face of a powerful foe.

The brave and undaunted soldier, whom no enemy can appal, nor danger subdue --
the great general who can arrange his army with skill, and lead it on with
gallantry in the field of battle, are characters, though justly held in much
^stimation, far inferior to that of Washington. It is not at Trenton, where
after contending with the elements, that seemed to be at war -- where after
subduing the Delaware, rolling on, terrible with ice, he led on, through frost
and snow, his half-naked army, and surprised and vanquished the enemy. -- It is
not on the plains of Monmouth, where he severely checked and compelled to
retire under the cover of night, a powerful foe -- Nor is it in Virginia, where
his skill and valor forced to capitulate, a general high in reputation, and ^t
the head of a brave army, that we see our ^ero moving in his most exalted
sphere. Had not his wisdom been commensurate with his valor, he might, in a
few months, have ruined the American cause. Had he been only c^lculated for
brilliant exploits in the field, he would have been an unfit person for the
trust reposed in him. But when we behold him with an army, most even of the
officers of which were unacquainted with the art of war -- when we find this
army sometimes almost without ammunition, and often indeed reduced to little
more than a name -- when we consider, that it was many times upon the point of
mutining for want of pay, and fit to perish for want of clothes -- and when we
reflect that this army kept in check a formidable foe, protected an extensive
country, in a great measure, from rapine, and finally surmounted every
obstacle, it is hardly possible for us duly to appreciate the merits of its
leader.

The war in America was of a singular nature. The Americans had not only to
contend with a nation far famed for warlike achievements, but under the
threats of punishment for rebellion, and almost at the point of the bayonet,
they had to form a system of government, and to reduce all things to order and
method. To prescribe regulations for an army was a novel task to those on whom
it devolved, and had they not wisely listened to the modest suggestions, and
adopted the judicious plans of Washington, all might soon have been lost. His
great soul was unweariedly employed in this arduous business. As difficulties
increased, it expanded, and for seven long years, which would have exhausted
the perseverance, and worn out the resolution of any but this wonderful man,
his mind was incessantly engaged. Like a torrent, which when interrupted in its
course, swells above its banks and at last overcomes every obstacle; so his
powers increased, as difficulties thickened or dangers pressed.

Let us now view the close of this varied and tumultuous scene. The enemy
subdued, and peace about to return to a land worn out with the horrors of war,
Washington stood at the head of an army, that had exposed their lives, hazarded
their he^lth, and injured their fortunes, in their country's cause. And this
army was unrewarded, and would have followed on, whithersoever he might have
wished to lead them. Had he possessed an aspiring and ambitious spirit, he
might have seized the reins of power, enriched his soldiers with the spoils of
his country, and himself become its Ruler or its Tyrant. But more like an angel
of peace, he soothed their discontents -- he appeased their anger. When he took
leave of his officers, the scene was interesting indeed! Those hardy veterans,
whom no enemy could move, or danger overcome, were melted into tears, when
about to part with their beloved Washington. And when he resigned that
commission, under which he had raised his country to independence and to glory,
he was more than illustrious. This was a point to which the eyes of the whole
world were directed with anxiety, and which will command admiration while the
world shall remain. Nay, methinks I see the spirits of the heroes of antiquity
hovering around to behold and to wonder at this scene!!

When we view the conduct of many great and popular Generals, who have subdued
countries, and overturned governments -- when we cast our eyes over the horrid
scenes of revolutions in other lands -- when we behold demagogues wading through
blood and slaughter to seize upon power, we cannot be thankful enough to the
Supreme Disposer of nations, for having raised up a Washington in this favored
country.

And now he returns to the caresses of his family, and to the tranquillity of
private life. But dear as this was to his soul, it was not long his portion.
His country had more services, that required the able hand of Washington. Here
I might still mark the similarity between the Lawgiver of Israel and of
America. Moses had not long rescued the Israelites from Egyptian bondage, until
he was called up by God into Mount Sinai, to receive a system of laws, both
civil and religious. It is true, when Washington was called from his peaceful
abode, no mountain smoked -- no thunder roared -- no voice was heard from
heaven. But as civil government is the ordinance of God, those, who are
instrumental in fixing the form and administering the offices of government,
are to be considered, in a high degree, as his agents. A constituti^n formed
amidst the distraction of war, was found, upon tri^l, to be inadequate to
secure the rights and promote the welfare of this vast and growing empire. And
when a new form of government was proposed, and finally adopted, the wishes of
all hearts were fixed upon Washington, for the administration of this
government. Faction, furious and intolerant as it often is, was afraid to show
its hideous face, where once his name was mentioned.

He now appears in a new character. His fame, as a general, had resounded from
one end of the world to the other; his integrity stood far above suspicion; but
it remained yet to be tried, how he would appear as a statesman. He began his
course, under many disadvantages. There was no beaten track to direct: there
were no fixed principles to govern: all things, and indeed all characters were
new. Heaven, however, always smiles upon the virtuous efforts of pious men. He
put this grand machine in motion -- he conducted it with a masterly hand. His
policy was founded in justice, his plans were formed by wisdom, and executed
with vigor. Having no (...), but the prosperity and glory of his country, he
was never p^rplexed by contending passions or clashing interests. Possessing a
clear judgment, and an extensive knowledge of the interests, passions, and
relations of his country; having been long habituated to view things in every
aspect, and to (...) the result of every measure, his administration soon
bec^^^ the wonder of other nations, and the glory of his own. (...) extensive
empire rose, under his paternal care, to reput^^ion and to wealth. Her commerce
extended almost over the whole world -- ^er agriculture improved -- arts and
sciences flourished, and there was nothing to be seen but one general slow of
prosperity among all descriptions of citizens.

While things thus prospered in America, those diabolical principles, which had
been secretly in operation, in several parts of Europe, ever since the time of
Voltaire, began to burst into open action, and the whole European world had
li^e to have been involved in one universal flame. It soon became an object
with the hostile powers, to endeavor to (...) assistance from America. And
such was their confidence, (...) their diplomatic (...), that they little
doubted of success. ^t this port^^^ous crisis, Washington, as if raised upon an
^^^inence, viewed with extensive prospect, the situation, the interest, the
(...) and the duty of his country, and finding that no obligation forbid, he
placed it in the pleasing, and advantageous position of neutrality.

This step having been deliberately taken, the intrigues of faction, foreign or
domestic, could neither surprise him at his post, nor force him from his
ground. Storms arose upon every side -- tempests beat -- and thunder roared,
yet he remained unmoved as a rock amidst the conflicting elements. Too wise, to
relinquish precipitately the advantages of peace, yet too brave, to dread the
horrors of war, he calmly demanded redress for the injuries done to his
country; and this redress the British nation was pleased to give. War between
America and that nation, was what the French had long been laboring to produce.
And finding themselves defeated, they attacked the character of Washington --
they insulted our government -- they plundered our commerce -- they abused our
citizens -- they disseminated their disorganizing and wide-wa^ting principles,
from north to south, from the shores of the Atlantic to the banks of the
Mississippi. They vainly hoped to raise a faction powerful enough, to crush
Washington, and with him the virtue, and the strength of America. Amidst all
this, he steered a correct and an even course, faithful to the principles of an
impartial neutrality. The unexampled prosperity, that attended his measures, it
might have been supposed, would have silenced opposition, and shamed faction
out of countenance. But as well might the Ethiopian expect to change his skin,
or the leopard his spots.

Having thus guided the helm of state, through many dangerous rocks and
tremendous storms, and pointed the course, that it ought to be steered; old age
advancing apace, he thought himself at last justifiable in retiring to the much
desired quietude of private life. Still like the great Patriarch, he calls the
whole family of America around him, to receive his parting advice. He points
out to them those evils, that would most endanger their welfare, and tells
them, that to be happy, they must be united, virtuous and pious -- And thus he
ends his political career.

After viewing his character as a general and statesman, we will now turn to
his religion. This I consider as a very important part of the duty of this day,
particularly at so perplexed a time as the present. New principles, and new
modes of conduct seem, every day, to be intruded upon (...), and indeed the
religious, as well as the political world seems to be agitated from one end to
the other. In such a state of things, for America to have possessed a Chief
Magistrate who adhered to the faith and the practice of christianity, is no
less a m^tter of triumph, than his loss is a subject of regret. Infidelity
seems to have made as bold attempts upon us, as ever the idolatry of the
surrounding nations did upon the Jews. And, it is much to be feared, that if we
had possessed no Washington and other eminent characters, to ward off its
attacks, it would have found too easy admission. Moses was only forty days
absent from the Israelites, when they made a golden calf. And had Washington
been withdrawn from us at one peculiar crisis, this house might have perhaps
been a Temple of Reason, instead of a Christian Church.

It was his religion, that gave the finishing stroke to his character. The
blustering warrior -- the impious statesman, will never find a place in the
roll of fame, at the head of which, will stand the name of Washington. Such was
his piety, that, on all occasions, he considered himself as an humble
instrument in the hands of God, to accomplish the purposes of his providence.
There are many here who have read, and some perhaps who heard the reflections,
which he made, upon the wonderful combination of circumstances, apparently
trivial, which saved the American army from destruction, by the treachery of
Arnold. W^o has forgotten the orders which he issued after the capture of
Co^nwallis? -- when he directed 'divine service to b^ performed in the several
brigades, with a serious deportment and that s^^^ibi^^^y of heart, which the
recollection of the surpr^^i^g and p^r^^^ular interposition of providence in
our favor claim^^.' H^ cros^d 'the last solemn act of his military serv^^es by
r^^omm^nding the interests of his dearest country to the pro^ection o^ Almighty
God, and those who had the superintenden^^ of them, to his holy keeping.' While
he sat in the (...) ch^ir, his speeches to Congress uniformly breathed a strong
spirit (...) piety; and when he had suppressed a dangerou^ (...) insurrection,
and the country enjoyed prosperity and peace, he proclaimed a day of fasting
and prayer to the Supreme Being, for his kindness and bounty to this land.
(...) ^umerous and important engagements, that claimed h^s (...), he ^ound time
to attend to the duty of public worship, and to reverence the Sabbath. And in
his farewell address, the testimony which he bore to the influence of religion,
upon both private and public happiness, ought never to be forgotten. We ought
to 'teach i^ to our children -- we ought to talk of it when we sit in our
houses -- when we walk by the way -- when we lie down, and when we rise up.'
Shall we ever again hear in the land where Washington lived, that religion is
only calculated for men of weak and puny understandings? -- That to attend
public worship is idle and unnecessary, or that institutions for religious
instruction are not among the strongest pillars of human society! Men of narrow
capacities or corrupted hearts, may not see the influence of these upon public
and private felicity, but Washington (...) of opinion, that it would require a
volume to trace all their connections. In private life he was no less amiable,
than he was illustrious in public. On both, his principles operated with
uniformity -- And when he came to die he had nothing to fear. His life, like a
river after passing over many a tremendous precipice, and through many a
winding vale, issued, calm and smooth, into the ocean of eternity. 'Mark, then,
the perfect man, and behold the upright, for the end of that man is peace.'

Thus lived, and thus died this great man. His country has much reason to be
grateful to Heaven for his services, and much reason to mourn his loss. His
military fame stood like a rampart around it, impregnable to foreign force. His
well-tried patriotism kept foreign incendiaries at a distance, and defeated the
machinations of internal faction. -- The splendour of his virtue eclipsed the
feeble lights of the illuminati -- they disappeared before it, like the stars
at the approach of the sun. But, alas! he is no more!! Methinks I see the
Genius of America weeping over his tomb, and uttering this melancholy
lamentation. Would to God, my Washington had lived, till this stormy scene had
passed, and peace again beamed upon the earth! Should war destroy my sons, and
waste my country -- should discord rend, or infidelity corrupt my citizens, to
whom shall I resort!!

But the influence of the good is not confined to the short period of human
life. As he has erected a Fabric of Liberty, which nothing but the vices or the
folly of his suc^essors can destroy, so he has left an example, which, like a
lamp suspended under the arch of Heaven, will afford light to America, for many
ages. When the mother, anxious for the future fortunes of her darling child,
shall prefer her daily orisons to Heaven; the will pray to grant him a portion
of the same spirit that Washington possessed. When the father shall apply his
care to form the character of his son, he will place before him the life of
Washington. When America shall want a person to command her armies or direct
her councils, she will look for one, who comes as near as may be, to the
character of Washington. Indeed, it would be exceedingly wise, on all
occasions, when we elect persons for any of the important offices of
government, to inquire how far they resemble this luminous example. We ought
not to conceive ourselves, for a moment in safety, if we allow vice to raise
its horrible countenance; or permit ourselves to be under the direction of
aspiring, wicked, or impious men. Should we disregard the blessings which God
has been pleased to bestow upon us -- should we sport with our dearest rights
-- and permit some sacriligious hand to lay hold of the helm of state -- should
we suffer his benign and holy religion to be trampled under foot; and modern
infidelity to seize upon its temples, 'angry Heaven will soon mark us out for
ruin, and war overwhelm us in the dream of vice -- vice! -- it is vice that
shakes the nerves of every state, freezes its veins, and withers all its
powers.'

Let us cultivate with care, and diligently instill into the minds of our
children, the amiable virtues of the christian religion, which extend their
friendly influence through every branch of public and private life. If the
faith of this religion govern the hearts, and its precepts regulate the lives
of those, with whom we trust our national concerns, unanimity will soon pervade
our councils -- wholesome laws will infuse health and vigor through the whole
body politic -- the rancor of party-spirit will subside -- contentions for
power, honor or interest will disappear -- every conflicting passion will be at
peace. 'The wolf will dwell with the lamb; the leopard will lie down with the
kid, and the calf, and the young lion and the fatling together, and a little
child shall lead them.' The sunshine of union and of peace will gladden the
whole land, 'and the Lord thy God will set thee on high, above all nations of
the earth. And all these blessings shall come upon thee -- Blessed shall thou
be in the city, and blessed shall thou be in the field. Blessed shall be the
fruit of thy body, and the fruit of thy ground, the fruit of thy cattle and the
flocks of thy sheep. Blessed shall be thy basket and thy store. Blessed shall
thou be, when thou come in, and blessed shall thou be, when thou go out.'


