FUNERAL Eulogy and Oration.

Lieut. William Steel, commanding at Fort Trumbull, having received orders
from Maj. General Hamilton to pay funeral honors to the memory of General
WASHINGTON; expressed a desire to unite for that purpose, with the militia and
citizens. The proposal was readily accepted, and a committee chosen to make the
necessary arrangements. The following Eulogy and Oration constituting a part of
the funeral solemnities were delivered at the Presbyterian church on the 11th
inst. before an immense audience, and are now committed to the press at the
request of the Committee.

EDITOR.
New London, Jan'y 20, 1800.
EULOGY, BY GENESIS J. HUNTINGTON.
HAD I language at command, and the time and my tears would permit me, to
display, in just colors to your view, the great, the precious, the extensive
blessings, of which we in common with our country, so largely participate; I
might, by an easy and natural transition, lead you to the contemplation of the
character of this greatest and best of men, in the celebration of whose
obsequies, we, my afflicted friends, are this day, with one voice, and, I
trust, with one heart, and a pious sensibility, engaged.

THE sacred altars of our holy religion, the graceful appendage of mirth, in
seasons of festivity and joy, and the only solid support and consolation, in a
day of tribulation and gloom, like the present, are neither removed, nor
defiled with unhallowed hands; our rulers are from ourselves, and the men of
our choice; we sit under our own vine and fig tree, without molestation or
fear; the solacing endearments of domestic society, and the pleasures of the
broader and more expanded circles of social intercourse, are undisturbed; the
hard-earned fruit of the husbandman's toil is not snatched from his hand, by
the ruthless grasp of violence; the useful artisan finds in his labor, a reward
for his ingenuity and industry; in his returns the merchant admits a
compensation for his sagacity and enterprise -- our eyes are, every where,
delighted with the swelling canvas, the busy street, the bending harvest, and
the cattle upon a thousand hills: of this assemblage of public and private
happiness, how large a portion shall we ascribe to the virtues, the talents,
and the unexampled patriotism of this favorite instrument of indulgent Heaven?

At an important epoch of our history, when our country was threatened with
the deprivation, of its invaluable rights, of every thing dear to enlightened
freemen; when, in the infancy of our national existence, we were called, in
Providence, to contend with a power grown gray in the field of Mars; when our
infantine stature and armor excited the ridicule and contempt, with which the
fling of David was viewed by his renowned and boasting antagonist; in this
defenseless and almost hopeless condition, how did we cling to the buckler of
our mighty Chieftain? his name was indeed then, as it has often since been
emphatically styled, a Host; in him our imbecility and all our wants were
forgotten, or disregarded, or more than supplied by the confidence which he
inspired; on him expectation reposed, as if he had been, as was Cyrus,
expressly named, in prophecy, the shepherd of Israel and the Lord's anointed --
the progress and vicissitudes of an arduous struggle, through eight long
campaigns, unfolded the rich treasures and ample resources of his capacious
mind; in the profound discernment, the consummate prudence, the unremitting
perseverance and undaunted fortitude of our American Fabius, the Sage and the
Hero were equally conspicuous; it was reserved to his exit, in the last scene
of the drama, to astonish and instruct an admiring world, with the magnanimity
of the man: that power which intoxicates ordinary minds, when it ceased to be
useful to his country, retained no charms in his esteem; having finished the
task assigned him, he exultingly resigned his high command to the hand which
gave it, and surpassing all his former glory, and rising above himself, he
became once more the citizen. Who was conversant with that charming
transaction, and did not follow, with a thousand blessings, this revered man to
the delightful shades of his long wished for retreat? in these blissful abodes,
the venerable seat of his ancestors, he enjoyed a compensation for all his
toils, in the possession of a conscious integrity, and the gratifying
reflections on his devotion to the public good. Here he fondly hoped to spend
the rest of his days, in tranquillity and usefulness, dividing by a just
distribution, and a wise economy, his precious time and plentiful income, to
the claims of justice and charity, hospitality and religion.

Alas! how short is human bliss, how transitory all sublunary enjoyments!
hardly was it realized that we had no more a foe without, when a state of
things was perceived within, more dreadful than war itself; the band of our
union was so nearly dissolved, that an attempt to draw it closer, would have
served but to betray its weakness -- jealously and distrust, the deadly bane of
government, had poisoned our political atmosphere -- a dark cloud arising over
our heads, portended a direful explosion -- countenances gathered paleness --
fightings without could have given a kind relief to more alarming fears within
-- to advance or recede, or be stationary, appeared almost equally presumptuous
-- between dejection and despair there remained but a single step -- when the
voice of millions, united as the voice of one man, called to the father of his
country -- to hear the voice of his country in distress, was to obey -- love,
ardent and disinterested as his, left him no choice -- the delights of
Mount-Vernon, whose every circumstance conspired to content its beloved tenant,
where the only strife was emulation to please -- even this paradise lost its
enchantment -- behold the darling of the people once more on the stage of
public action -- every heart expanded, every face brightened at the spectacle
-- the dignity peculiar to himself, with which this prodigy of virtues and
graces filled the Chair of State -- the wisdom and purity of his administration
-- his second triumphant return to the walks of private life -- his entire
possession of himself on the near approach of death -- these are themes on
which I forbear to dilate -- of these your thoughts must be full. That the
spirit of divine wisdom directed the paths of this truly great man, the
undeviating rectitude and uniform tenor of his life pronounce, in a style, that
cannot deceive -- to this evidence other proofs might be adduced, that in all
his ways he acknowledged God -- and must, then, so much goodness, as well as
greatness, be prostrated in the dust? you answer, he is gone to receive the
reward of the servant who had faithfully improved many talents -- that a part
of his blissful employment may be the guardianship of a country he so dearly
loved. Dear man! could the love of a whole nation have prevented, the shaft of
death had never reached you -- but he is gone! -- for the loss of so much
virtue it is virtuous to weep -- forbid not, my friends, your hearts to swell
-- your tears to flow -- my voice is too feeble to express his praise.

FINIS.
ORATION, BY LYMAN LAW, ESQUIRE.
Friends and Fellow Citizens,
IN obedience to those feelings which are ever excited in the human heart, at
the loss of a friend, a benefactor and a father; we are now assembled, to pay
our last public tribute of affection and veneration, to the memory of our
beloved WASHINGTON. And I doubt not, but upon this occasion, we shall give free
indulgence, to that voluntary sympathy, which is so rapidly spreading, from
heart to heart, throughout the continent of America, and will as soon as the
sad tidings reach the trans-atlantic shores, wrap even Europe in a sable
mantle. For when virtue expires, nature receives a shock, and the plaintive
moan is echoed through the world! I apprehend however, fellow citizens, that it
will not be expected from me, that I attempt to pourtray the character of our
virtuous chief; for that task is too important, and sublime for me to
undertake. Let it therefore suffice, if I make a few remarks, on the propriety
of the solemn pomp now before us; and point out a few of those general traits,
in the character of our venerable deceased, which seemed to raise him aloof
from his fellow men, and shed an unknown dignity and luster on the human race.

IN touching on the character of the deceased, I shall confine myself merely to
a comparative view of him, with others who have been eminently distinguished in
the world. And although I should be unwilling to tarnish the glory of any man,
which has been fairly and honorably acquired; whether he be living in history
only, or is now active on the stage of life; yet I deem it no robbery or
diminution of their glory, to say they all fade in the comparison. All other
great characters of which we have any knowledge, have been distinguished for
some one, extraordinary talent or virtue, which has given them celebrity and
fame, when compared with common men. Of this class history, and many living
characters, afford us numerous examples, and at the loss of these ornaments of
society there will ever be a partial mourning, for they are valuable and
important in society -- perhaps a nation may deplore the loss of a great
general, counselor or judge: science may lose an able supporter, and a liberal
patron: religion may lament the loss of a pious and a virtuous man, nay a
doctor deep skilled in the science of theology: or even the humble walks of
life, may lose a kind friend and bountiful benefactor: yet the grief in all
these instances is limited, for their talents and their virtues are
circumscribed.

BUT never until the time of WASHINGTON, has a character appeared so richly
adorned, with all the great and noble virtues of which humanity is susceptible.
He is not like other heroes, sages or patriots, whose names are enrolled in the
book of fame; for no history can polish his glory, and even malign censure,
dare not pluck a sprig from his well earned laurels. Heaven seemed to have
formed the man WASHINGTON, out of its choicest materials, and robbed, as it
were, humanity of its virtues to form one perfect man. Being thus endowed with
superlative virtues and talents, he was introduced, on the stage of life, and
assigned a part in a scene which had never before been acted in the the nations
of the earth. Passing over the earlier parts of his life, let us view him at
that important crisis, when he managed the sublime and happy conflict between
an infant, weak and inexperienced nation, and a haughty, imperious and
overbearing kingdom! Armed with that panoply, which Jehovah had made for him,
bold in the cause of justice, and secure in the smiles of his God, like David,
though a stripling in the arts of war, he baffled the Goliahs of Great Britain,
and led in triumph her armies, at his chariot wheels. Even amidst the dangers
which for seven bloody years, marred the peace and felicity of the American
people; behold the virtuous chieftain conducting the infant America, through
perils and dangers before unknown. And through all this struggle which gave
birth to America, self-composed and collected, his active and pervading mind,
could, even in the greatest difficulties resort to avenues of prudence and
safety. Even at that awful moment when Providence seemed to have withdrawn his
protecting hand! at that dark hour, when despair had seized the American bosom;
when the eagle of our country drooped its extended wings in token of grief! Say
ye patriots, who had the honor of fighting under his banners, did his dignity
lessen? did his valor and wisdom appear less active and sublime, than when
success danced on his helmet, and glistened on his sword? Your answer is no --
for with a fortitude and equanimity, peculiar to himself, he met danger
undismayed, and soared above the adversities of life -- Nay more, that
firmness, temperance and majesty, which uniformly distinguished him, became
more conspicuous in the hour of difculty and distress. Nor was this mighty man
like other great men, elated with success; but his keen mind, reviewing the
past and foreseeing the future, made him calm and tranquil, even in his glory;
and ever displayed such a dignified majesty as assimulated him more to the
gods, than mortal man. Thus by his wisdom, having protected the infancy of his
country, and supported her by his single arm; having trained up a numerous host
of hardy and well disciplined soldiers to be her future bulwark, and ratified
the birth and independence of his country; behold the resplendent virtues,
attend him to the mild and peaceful walks of private life! And here let me ask,
where is the man, WASHINGTON excepted, who with the same opportunities, would
not have derived some personal advantages to himself? who would not have
acquired wealth? or perhaps by force of those armies which at the close of the
last war, were devoted to his name and person, would have established himself
lord paramount of the country he saved? This our hero spurned; having devoted
himself to the cause of justice, having rescued a sinking nation, the great
object of his heart being accomplished; he retired to the sequestered vale of
life, to enjoy in common with his fellow citizens, that peace and happiness his
valor won. Above the reach of mercenary views, beyond the power of adulation,
behold him gently settling on Mount Vernon, like Noah's ark on the mountain of
Arrarat, a sure presage that the storm was over.

TOO important however to remain long a private citizen, see him again step
forth, at the voice of his country to conduct the august councils of our
nation. See with what alacrity, he again abandoned the gentle pleasures of
domestic life, to make that people virtuous and happy, whom his valor had made
independent. -- Was it glory that again induced him to come forth and guide the
devious mazes of our national councils? Surely not, or the experiment was
hazardous and uncertain, and his laurels were yet blooming with their freshest
verdure -- Was it the desire of wealth, which prompted him to obey the second
call of his country? No; for he had uniformly declined accepting any
compensation -- But it was that same virtue, which at first made him risque his
life in the cause of freedom and justice, which influenced him to accept the
chair of state, and conduct his beloved nation to happiness and honor -- and
when he had firmly established a government, which was calculated to ensure and
perpetuate national felicity; having given the first example that true liberty
is compatible with government and law, he again with redoubled luster retired
from public cares; having left a benizon to that people, whom he had fostered
in infancy, and instructed in manhood. And here it would seem that his public
career must end -- and it would my friends, had not this godlike man, even in
the wane of life, at a period, when by the common laws of nature, ambition
slumbers, and happiness is ultimately blended, with quietude and ease, at the
remote appearance of hostilities, to the country he loved, once more stepped
forth, and grasped the sword of his earlier days to inspire millions and deter
the foe. Here then behold a climax of glory, honor and reputation, which the
deeds of four thousand years, has never equalled! At last perfectly composed,
and prepared for the event, he is translated in a moment, from this earth, to
the bosom of his God, ready to give a full account of those talents committed
to his charge, and receive the meed of a well spent life, accompanied, with
well done thou good and faithful servant.

YES, fellow citizens he is no more! His body now slumbers in the dark chambers
of death! his shield is broken! his sword fallen from that once nervous arm!
That voice which once commanded the listening attention of the senate, is
silent! yet his name stands written at full length in the volume of fame, and
will continue so long as nature endures, the first of heroes, patriots, sages!
and his virtues still live, and will ever continue to live, in the memory of an
affectionate and grateful people.

HOW becoming is it then in us, to pay all due honors to his memory -- we all
feel as though we had seen him -- we know him as our earthly father; esteemed
him as our friend, and revered him as our protector -- we were of his family --
for he recognized us as his children; and nothing but unbounded parental
affection, could have induced him to have undergone the fatigues and dangers
which he did, to promote our happiness and secure our safety. The emblems of
grief, which are now exhibited before us; the deep toned thunder of cannon
which are now proclaiming the sad tidings! The drooping standards, which once
waved in triumph round his head -- the solemn procession, which is the last
kind office we can afford the dead! All, ought to inspire us with manly sorrow,
and impress our hearts with grief; for while the United States are sympathising
in sorrow, at the general loss, were we to refrain, would be paying an ill
compliment to our own virtue, humanity and gratitude.

BUT, my countrymen let us not despair -- for although WASHINGTON is visibly
departed from us; yet his spirit, shall hover over the city which bears his
immortal name, and henceforth be the Guardian Genius of these United States!
And may it ever inspire future patriots with the same virtue, integrity, and
honor, which so eminently characterised his whole life.

FINIS.
NEW LONDON: PRINTED BY SAMUEL GREEN. 1800.


