AN ORATION, DELIVERED JULY 4 th, 1800.

AN ORATION, DELIVERED AT DEERFIELD, ON THE FOURTH OF JULY, 1800.

By CLAUDIUS HERRICK.

PRINTED AT THE REQUEST OF THE HEARERS.

GREENFIELD, MASSACHUSETTS: PRINTED BY THOMAS DICKMAN.

1800.

IN addition to the quotations, made in the following Oration, I have
introduced into it, both from Newspapers, before me, and from recollection,
parts of sentences -- whole sentences, and, in some places, several sentences
together, as best suited my purpose.

C. HERRICK.

AN ORATION.
THERE is no Nation, perhaps, on earth, whose history is so well known, or can
be traced, in its progress, from its commencement to the present time, with so
much precision, as that of our own. While the nations of Europe, retracing
their footsteps, from their present grandeur and improvement, through the mazes
of revolutions and conquests, back to the middle ages, lose themselves among
feudal clans and gothic hordes; Americans, in their history, behold civilized,
enlightened men laying the foundation of their empire -- forming communities --
instituting social regulations -- erecting governments -- resisting the
encroachments of tyranny, and at length uniting their disjointed communities,
under one general system of laws and government, wisely framed -- happily
administered, and effecting the great objects of social institutions, security
of life, liberty, and property.

THE spectacle is altogether novel. Social man is exhibited, in a new attitude.

GOVERNMENT has here arisen, and grown up, from convenience, necessity, and
experience, in the hands of men, well informed, and civilized. Government, thus
instituted, amended, and confirmed, the result of long experience, must be
salutary, and suited to the real necessities of society. Theories in
government, framed in the closet, by the mere book philosopher, and ill adapted
to the state of man, have rarely scourged any part of the United States.

EUROPEAN nations have conquered, and in their turn been conquered, and blended
with each other. Hence perplexities, in tracing political events, to the
variously complicated causes, which produced them. In our own country, events,
in our political affairs, can be traced to their specific causes. How far the
influence of the mother country extended, and how far our own choice and
necessities had agency, in producing them, can be clearly ascertained.

OUR history is doubly interesting, in this point of view. Experiments have
been made, within the compass of our knowledge -- their effects are clear, and
these results, alone, are properly denominated political wisdom.

IN tracing the history of our nation, we notice many critical periods --
trying situations, and deliverances from danger. Passing over, with many
others, the difficulties, which we encountered and surmounted, and the
interesting scenes, through which we were carried, during our contest, with
Great Britain; I shall confine myself to events, subsequent to that period.

IN all popular governments, there exists a perpetual struggle to produce, and
to prevent revolutions. The wicked and aspiring, irritated by that neglect, to
which their own characters destine them, clamor against good men, and public
measures -- stir up the jarring elements of faction -- mount the storm, and
direct it, to effect their revolutionary purposes. Good men counteract their
pernicious projects, and restrain their ambition.

THAT the government be wisely framed, and faithfully administered, avails
nothing. If real grievanances have (...) existence, evil minds, ever bent on
mischief, are ready to give currency to surmises, and reality to pretended
abuses. The best men will be villified, and measures, eminently useful and
salutary, will be opposed and decried.

THIS is the unavoidable condition of republican governments. The wicked, the
turbulent, and the factious, "grow, with their growth, and strengthen, with
their strength." The truth of this position, history, and universal experience
attest. We may say further; our own particular experience proves it.

IT is with reluctance, I mention the name of that person, who fills a
distinguished office in our government as the leader of that formidable
faction, which menaces our government with a dreadful overthrow. I am well
aware, that with caution, and not without the fullest evidence of wickedness,
ought we to speak evil of the rulers of our people. But the truth ought not to
be withheld. Our danger is too threatening, for us to remain silent and
inactive. Yes -- the man, who stands a fair candidate for the presidential
chair, is, and ever has been opposed to that excellent Constitution, which has
proved our national bulwark; and to that wise administration of our government,
which has proved our political salvation.

THIS correspondent of MAZZEI, at that time, in France, plunging himself into
all the mazes of modern philosophism, discovered, upon examining the
constitution, insurmountable obstacles in it, against the introduction into his
own country, of those newfangled doctrines, in the science of government, for
which he had contracted so strong a predilection. His partisans, therefore, in
this country, were immediately instructed to procure certain amendments to that
instrument, which would have robbed the government of all energy, and deprived
it of the power of selfpreservation.

BUT this champion of republicanism, does not stop with this first patriotic
effort.

LET us recollect the famous letter to MAZZEI. Whether this letter was written
by Mr. JEFFERSON, is doubted by some. If I mistake not, it is little to the
purpose, to say, he is following the example of WASHINGTON, in a case somewhat
similar. The fact is, that, in the only material circumstance, the case is
totally dissimilar. The charge against Genesis WASHINGTON, was for conduct, while
in office -- That, against Mr. JEFFERSON, for conduct, before. But, admitting,
that Mr. JEFFERSON'S not disavowing this letter is no proof of his being the
author; still, to me, the evidence is conclusive. Is it not morally impossible,
that the great body of the Antifederalists, as well as federalists, should have
mistaken Mr. JEFFERSON for the author? The Antifederalists, in general,
consider him as holding the first rank in their party. Many of them have been
on terms of intimate acquaintance with him. They know, with as much certainty,
as he himself does, whether he wrote the letter, or not. If Mr. JEFFERSON were
innocent, would these men have been so long silent? Would they not have stepped
forward, and publicly vindicated his character from so heavy a charge?
What are the leading features of it? They are the following -- That "an
Anglo-Monarchico-Aristocratic party has arisen in this country, who are
endeavoring to wrest from us our dearbought liberties, and whose avowed object
is to impose upon us the substance, as they have already given us the form of
the British Constitution." Who are the men here stigmatized, with traitorous
epithets, and who are about to wrest our liberties from us? They are the whole
band of federalists, with WASHINGTON and ADAMS at their head, who were the
original framers, and have been since the firm supporters of our constitution
-- by whose wisdom and patriotism, the machinations of our enemies have been
frustrated, and a perpetual tide of prosperity has flowed in upon our country.

WE cannot mistake the meaning of the "substance," and the "form, of the
British Constitution," which, WASHINGTON and ADAMS, and their supporters have
endeavored to impose upon us. The Federal Constitution, and the general
principles, and measures of our government, are directly aimed at.

THE conclusion of this letter ought to be particularly noticed -- "It is
sufficient that we guard ourselves, and that we break the lillipution ties, by
which they have bound us, in the first slumbers, which succeeded our labors."
Can language be plainer? Can a deep rooted hatred to our constitution, and a
premeditated design for its destruction be expressed in language more explicit?
Yet this man has sworn to support this very constitution. Educated under the
old wholesome notions of our religion, such a contradiction might perplex us;
but an oath in the creed of a Jacobin Philosopher, is a mere "lillipution tie,"
which may be conscientiously violated.

THE constitution was adopted. Experience proved its utility and excellence.

BAFFLED in their attempts to effect its overthrow, the Antifederal chief and
his followers, next, directed their efforts, and virulence, against the
administration.

WHEN the French Revolution had begun to convulse the civilized world, the
federal party descried its true nature and tendency. They saw that its
principles, carried into effect, would ultimately prostrate every social
establishment; and that it was the true policy, and interest of their country
not to espouse its cause. The antifederal party, on the contrary, contended
that the cause of the revolution, was the cause of liberty, and of the equal
rights of man. Acts of partiality, toward France, the most glaring, were urged
upon our government, which in their operation would, inevitably, have involved
us in the quarrel. Mr. JEFFERSON arrived from Europe, and imported that system
of war, against England, and alliance offensive, and defensive, with France,
which was the great desideratum, with the Antifederalists.

WAR was proclaimed between France and England. As we then sustained extensive
commercial, and political relations, with these two nations, what course of
conduct should be adopted toward them, became a momentous question. The
counsel of Mr. JEFFERSON was for war -- that of Mr. HAMILTON for a firm
neutrality. When the former perceived, that his counsel was likely to be
rejected, he labored, to the utmost, to induce the President not to decide,
himself, upon the question of neutrality; but to convene Congress, and refer
the decision to them. WASHINGTON, ever directed by a guardian Providence,
foresaw the hazards of such a reference. Warranted by the powers of his office,
he made the decision.

THE proclamation of neutrality was issued. Chagrined at this odious measure,
the war-party raised their clamors against it, from one end of the continent,
to the other. The French minister Genet, who arrived soon after, remonstrated
against it.

ANTIFEDERAL presses, and democratic societies leagued their efforts, and
virulence against it. No expedient, which disappointed intrigue could devise,
was omitted, for raising popular indignation against this proclamation, and for
preparing Congress to reverse it.

THE efforts of the friends of war, and their chief, were, however, unavailing.
Congress approved the proclamation of the President; and the great body of the
people discerned their true interest, in the preservation of peace. Thus, was
our favored country rescued, from that infamy, and wretchedness, into which
Jacobin counsel was hurrying her, headlong.

BUT behold, with astonishment, the unparralleled perseverance of the wicked.
Disappointed in their designs of war, and in their opposition to the
proclamation of neutrality, the Antifederalists labored, incessantly, in
conjunction with the French Apostle of liberty, to reduce it to a mere nullity.
Pretensions were brought forward, by the French Minister, which would
eventually have prostrated our national sovereignty -- placed us, under the
guardianship of France, and involved us, immediately, in a war with England.
And as no one can have forgotten, his patriotic labors were seconded, by the
Antifederalists, to the utmost of their power.

WASHINGTON, again, foresaw the extent of the evil meditated against us. The
pretensions of the rash, and insulting French minister, and his antifederal
abettors, were manfully resisted. A system of national independence, and fair
neutrality, was adopted -- the peace of our country, was preserved -- our
national councils were saved from the ascendency of Jacobinism, and we were
preserved from the scourge of those revolutionary principles, which leave
naught in their train, but carnage and desolation.

FRUSTRATED in their designs against the government, and the administration,
the Antifederalists waited, only for an occasion, to commence their attack,
anew. In this, they were soon gratified, by the aggressions of England, on our
trade. The passions of the multitude were excited -- their indignation roused,
and the war party confidently promised themselves, that they should shortly
triumph, over the system of peace and neutrality. When popular passions were
thus wrought up, to a pitch of frenzy, when popular clamors were, daily,
increasing, through the country; WASHINGTON, endowed with uncommon foresight,
and unequalled firmness, opposed himself to the threatening torrent -- arrested
its career, and gave the country time to recover, from its delirium.

MR. JAY was sent to England. -- Our differences were amicably adjusted. Thus
the war-party, recommending an immediate decision by the sword, were again
defeated, and our country saved, not only from the horrors of war, but from
being linked, with the awful, and bloody destinies of France.

WERE we not accustomed to the absurdities, of the Antigovernmental party, we
might be surprised at the following.

WHEN England committed depredations on our trade -- war! immediate war! with
that haughty nation, was trumpeted, throughout the United States. But when our
government had exhausted the means of conciliation, with France, and was told,
by her vile rulers, that it must purchase peace, with tribute, and, pointing to
the ruins of Venice, threatened us with her fate, should we refuse compliance
with their wishes; this same heroic party, actually, recommended the tamest
submission, and even opposed, and thwarted every vigorous measure, which was
necessary to protect our commerce and to maintain our national independence.

IT may be useful to reflect, for a moment, upon the probable situation of our
country, had the Antifederal Chief, and his party effected their designs of war
against England, and an alliance offensive, and defensive, with France.

HORDES of Frenchmen would have infested our land. Their secret machinations
would have paved the way, for the prostration of our government. Their
fraternal embraces would have been, ultimately, to devour.

IN the sad catastrophe of Switzerland, let us read our own destiny. Feeble
were the marshalled bands, which covered that country, with carnage and
devastation; but legions of emissaries, with the siren song of liberty and
equality, on their tongues, penetrated their councils -- their armies, and even
their cottages, to diffuse their poisonous tenets, and sow sedition.

LULLED into security, by that hypocritical cant of friendship, which is
characteristic of the Gallic revolutionizers, her magistrates -- her generals,
and her citizens were secretly infected, with the frenzy of liberty, and
revolution. Rent asunder by faction and discord, a handful of French Brigands,
led by a savage, dignified, by the name of General, triumphed over veteran,
and, hitherto, invincible armies; and Switzerland, till this time, the seat of
every harmless amusement -- the abode of innocence, contentment, virtue, and
happiness, submits to the iron yoke of France -- to the forces of that Nation,
on whose standards, is inscribed "havoc, and spoil, and ruin, are my gain."

IN Belgium, Holland, Italy, and Germany, the disorganizing principles of
France were the precursors of her Armies.

NATIONS have beheld, with astonishment, their impregnable fortresses
surrendering, and their embattled legions submitting, to forces, comparatively,
despicable. The intrigues of emissaries, corrupting their generals, and
seducing their troops, have, alone, been able to explain the phenomenon.

WRETCHED is the condition of every Nation, which has courted the fraternity of
the Gallic Vandals. An alliance has been but another name for servitude.
Subjugation, the most degrading -- exactions the most insupportable, have
invariably followed. Such would have been our inevitable fate, had the counsel
of the Antifederal Chief and his party, prevailed. We should now, probably, be
fighting the battles of the Atheist, and of the sworn foe to every virtuous
establishment of the world. Our Sabbath would have become a French Decade. --
Our Colleges, Academies, and schools, been filled with the sophisters of
impiety and anarchy. -- The Guillotine, erected at the corners of our streets,
would, ere this time, have sacrificed, in hecatombs, the friends of order, of
our constitution and government. But our Rulers, vigilent for the public
welfare, defeated the machinations of the wicked -- we escaped the fangs of the
Tiger -- we still are free, and may be happy.

TILL within a short period, the Antigovernmental party ardently wished, and
strenuously endeavored to bring about war, with England -- fraternity with
France, and the subversion of our own Constitution and Government. Now, their
plan is changed. Opposition, inseparable from the party, now assumes a
different shape. War with England is not now the rage. The usurpation, and
tyranny of BUONAPARTE, that great Apostle of liberty and equality, seem not to
be altogether relished. Fraternity with France is, therefore, less sanguinely
wished for.

BUT the long and deep laid plan of bringing about a totally new order of
things, so far from being abandoned, is pursued, with increasing vigor.

THE opposition, made to our government, is not the mere accidental sally of
the moment. -- It has been long premeditated -- it is unrelenting, and never to
be relinquished, until the overthrow is complete.

PROOFS of this are in no measure wanting. Some of them, I have already adduced
-- others will be mentioned directly.

A REPRESENTATIVE government can stand, only by public confidence. The Despot,
with an armed soldiery at his command, and leagued with those, whose interest,
and importance depend upon his favor, may support his throne, though he wield
an iron scepter, and be detested by his subjects. But a government, dependent
upon the suffrages of the people, will fall into disgrace, and vanish, like a
shadow, if its officers be villified, and their measures rendered obnoxious.

THIS subject is well understood, by the Antifederal party. They have assumed
the character of the friends of the people -- the guardians of their rights.
They have affected to take a middle station -- to ward off the blows which
threaten the people, and to lighten the burdens imposed, by government. They
have represented our Rulers as sacrificing the interests of the people, and the
welfare of our country, to their own pride, and ambition -- of aspiring to
monarchy, and even to despotism. Is there a single, important measure of our
government, which they have not labored, industriously, to render unpopular,
and odious? If their representations have any truth in them, our government is
the wickedest, that ever scourged the world -- is deserving of the execrations
of mankind, and ought to be hooted from the Universe.

LET us be more particular. The debt of the United States is, now, about
seventy millions of dollars. We are struck with surprise, upon reflecting, that
our government has organized itself -- assumed an immense debt, the price of
our independence -- suppressed two insurrections -- purchased peace of the
Barbary powers -- redeemed our citizens from slavery -- sustained an expensive
Indian war -- protected our frontiers -- fortified our ports and harbors --
created a very considerable navy -- suffering, at the same time, immensely in
the defection of our revenue, by the plundering of our commerce -- still that
our whole national debt is so comparatively inconsiderable. Yet, when it is
thought necessary, for the good of the country, by its long tried friends, to
make a small addition to it, although arrangements have been made, for its
gradual diminution, it is made the rallying point of sedition, and popular
clamor, by the Antifederal party. Is this unadulterated patriotism? Or the
insidious cant of hypocrisy, designed to weaken confidence in the government,
and to effect its overthrow?

THE expense of the navy has been another source, of violent declamation.
Government, say its opposers, to the agricultural part of the community, is
secretly sapping your interest, and drawing off your property, for which you
have no adequate compensation. Multitudes have believed this sophistical rant,
and government has been looked upon, with the eye of jealousy.

HAD the counsel of the Antifederal party prevailed, we should have been
utterly defenseless, and wretched. -- Our harbors unfortified -- our vessels
unarmed -- not a single frigate to protect our commerce, nor our coasts -- our
trade annihilated -- our citizens captivated and imprisoned -- our revenue from
imports reduced to a pittance. -- To supply which heavy taxes must have been
imposed upon the people. -- The factious would have had recourse to arms. --
Civil commotions, and war, with all its attendant horrors, must, inevitably,
have followed.

ANOTHER instrument, artfully used, by the Antifederalists, to rouse popular
indignation, against the government, is the Alien and Sedition laws. Clamors,
of tyranny -- cramping genius -- infringing the liberty of the press, have been
echoed through the country. "But can shackles, thrown upon the calumniator, and
venomous writer, give concern to the lover of truth, to the honest writer?
Against laws prohibiting poignards, will any rebel but the assassin?"

WHAT can be the object of these men, in rendering these laws obnoxious? Are
they insensible of their necessity, to prevent those awful changes, and
revolutions, in which, the want of confidence, in our Rulers, will, inevitably,
involve us? It is easily explained. It is a part of that deep laid plan, of
opposition, and warfare, which has been long waged, against our constitution
and government.

I WILL now come directly (...) your feelings -- tothose things, which involve
your dearest interests. Mr. SEDGWICK will not be taxed, with ignorance, nor
with want of discernment. It is his opinion, as it is of other members of
Congress, just returning from the seat of government, that it is now a
question, whether the federal or antifederal party is the strongest.

MR. SEDGWICK thus proceeds: "Suspicions have been created, against our
government, the effects of which, have become extensive and alarming. Your
danger, which is great, though not desperate, I have thought it my duty to
proclaim to you. God grant, that I may be mistaken, in the magnitude of this
danger. But I do most solemnly declare, that my conviction is perfect, that it
cannot be averted, but by being more extensively known, than at present, in
this part of the United States."

CAN we possibly discredit this representation? Would such a man, in such a
manner, sound the alarm of danger, if our prospects were those of peace, and
safety?

THE momentous crisis has probably, now arrived, which will decide the fate of
our country. Should a majority, of the State Legislatures, and a majority, of
Congress, still remain (...) and Mr. ADAMS, or Mr. PINKNEY be chosen to the
presidency, we may, still, enjoy tranquillity, and all the blessings, which
have, heretofore, resulted from our social, civil, and religious institutions.
But should Jacobinism gain the ascendency; let every man arm himself, not only
to defend his property, his wife, and children, but to secure his own life,
from the dagger of his Jacobin neighbor. Let him prepare himself, not for a war
of honor, nor of conquest, but of passions -- of bitter animosities, and cruel
revenge.

NEWYORK, and Pennsylvania are, rapidly, falling into the Jacobin scale.
Several of the States are, decidedly, Jacobin. Virginia has, audaciously,
passed resolves, disapproving of the laws of Congress. Proofs have passed in
review, before us, of a fixed design to prostrate our government, and that it
is now, unrelentingly, pursued. Men* who have, carefully, noticed Jacobin
operations, have proclaimed our danger. By an avowal of Jacobin themselves,
saving our country, and saving our government, are widely different. And will
Federalists still slumber? Will they amuse themselves, with hopes of safety,
while combustion is enkindling, under their habitations? Let them wake to their
duty -- defend our social institutions -- support men of integrity, and tried
virtue, and vindicate our constitution and government, against the
machinations, and calumnies of Jacobins. Our enemies are artful, active, and
persevering. We cannot hope for safety, but by similar activity, and vigilance.
Should we become disunited -- insensible to our situation, and heedless of our
danger, while the Jacobins are secretly ripening their plots; the knell of
revolution will soon startle us, from our lethargy.

THE war, of elements, convulsing the solid globe, strikes us, with
consternation. Far more direful, is the war of fiery passions. Dreadful will be
the collision, of the two great parties, in the United States.

LET the friends of peace, and social happiness, be again exhorted, to stand at
their posts, and, in firm union, support our Federal Government, lest they
lament, too late, their remissness, and blindness to their danger.

MAY the Ruler of the Universe save us, from the horrors of a civil contest;
and from that terrible inundation of miseries, which the tide of Jacobin
revolutions, has spread through every country over which, it has rolled its
crimson waves.


