A Discourse DELIVERED AT WELLS, On the 22d February, 1800; OCCASIONED BY THE
LAMENTED DEATH OF General George Washington.

BY MOSES HEMMENWAY, D. D. PASTOR OF THE FIRST CHURCH IN WELLS.

"HEU PIETAS! HEU P^^^CA FIDES! INVICTAQUE BELLO DEXTERA. -- VIRGIL.

PORTSMOUTH, (NEW HAMPSHIRE,) PRINTED AT THE UNITED STATES' ORACLE-OFFICE, BY
CHARLES PIERCE, 1800.

ADVERTISEMENT.
If the publication of the ensuing Discourse should be blamed, after so many
better ones, on the sad occasion, have been published, let not the whole blame
be laid to the Author; who consented to it, with reluctance, in compliance with
the importunity of those, whom he was loath to disoblige.

A Discourse, etc.
AGREEABLY to the recommendation of the great Council of our United States,
seconded by that of the Senate, and Representatives of this Commonwealth, we
are convened, this day, publicly to testify our grief "for the death of GENERAL
GEORGE WASHINGTON," with decent formalities of mourning suitable to the
sorrowful occasion, and expressive of the honor and respect, due to the memory
of so illustrious and worthy a personage, and of those sentiments, with which
the mind of all ranks and orders of men among us, seems to be so deeply and
extraordinarily affected.

As it has been requested that a discourse suitable to the occasion be publicly
delivered, the words of king David, spoken on an occasion somewhat similar,
occurred to mind as no improper motto. "KNOW YE NOT THAT THERE IS A PRINCE AND
A GREAT MAN THIS DAY FALLEN IN ISRAEL?" 2 SAMUEL III. 38.

They were occasioned by the lamented death of Abner, the chief captain of the
host of Israel; and, I think, they may be adopted by us at this time with great
propriety. A great man indeed has fallen: yea, may we not say in sober truth
that a greater, than Abner, is this day fallen in our nation: An important
pillar in our political building has given way, and sunk to the ground; and
United America has very sensibly felt the shock through its whole extent and
trembles at the fall. Since the sun has shone on these regions, a death so
lamented has never been known among us.

Had the counsels and decrees of Heaven concurred with our wishes, this day had
been celebrated, as formerly, as a day of rejoicing, and grateful commemoration
of the day, which, sixty-eight years ago, gave birth to one, whom God raised up
to be a distinguished honor and blessing to his country, and a great example to
the world of those virtues and other shining accomplishments, which give
dignity to human nature. But the sovereign Disposer of all events has turned it
into a day of mourning. THIS GREAT MAN IS FALLEN. Having served his generation
by the will of God, he is gone the way of all the earth, and sleeps in the
tomb, never to wake and rise again till the heavens are no more. And we join
sincerely with our fellow citizens in expressing our sorrowful resentments of
the great loss the nation and the world have sustained, of the frown of heaven
upon us, and also the great respect and veneration we have for one, whose
extraordinary talents, virtues, and achievments had been so long, so honorably,
and successfully displayed in the service of his country in its highest offices
and departments. We take up the lamentation of the mourning prophet, The joy of
our heart is ceased; our dance is turned into mourning; the crown is fallen
from our head; woe unto us that we have sinned.

But let us mourn like christians, with humble, patient, unrepining submission
to God; who, though surrounded with clouds and darkness, governs the world with
perfect wisdom, righteousness, and goodness. He gives, and he takes away,
blessed be his name; yet sentiments of submission forbid us not to have, and
decently express the feelings of humanity. This we would now do, not in the
wild effusions of passion, but by modest, sober, unaffected tokens, and
language of deep and serious concern.

Without entering upon a detail of those accomplishments, which are requisite
to form the character of a GREAT MAN, perhaps no man of the age, certainly no
one in these parts of the world has a more universally acknowledged right to a
high rank among the most illustrious characters in the world, than he, whose
death we are now called to lament; whose great abilities and virtues, were
displayed in a series of heroic acts and achievements, which will doubtless
immortalize his name. The pen of the historian, will we trust, do justice to
his character, which has also been emblazoned in the many splendid and eloquent
panegyrics, which have been pronounced, throughout the United States, in honor
to his memory. If it be expected that something be now said on this subject;
yet, I know you do not expect that it will be done with that beauty and energy
of thought and language, which others have exhibited. You know the Speaker has
not talents for this, nor does his ambition prompt him to so vain an attempt.
But the honor he has for the name of the illustrious WASHINGTON constrains him
to arise and call him blessed. A heart impressed with deep concern does not
much regard ornaments. A mourning habit needs not splendid embellishments; nor
need a funeral discourse affect to shine in a fine dress.

External distinctions, indeed, of which many make much account, are but the
trappings of greatness. The true dignity of man is to be estimated from the
accomplishments of the mind and virtues of the heart, exerted for great, noble,
and useful purposes. Our WASHINGTON, however, possessed in a high degree those
advantages, which outward distinction gives a man, in the eye of the world.

The family from which he descended was honorable He was born in Westmoreland
County in Virginia, in a parish, which beat^ the name of his family.
; but in no external respect was it more honorable than in having so
illustrious a branch spring from it. Besides possessing an affluent fortune,
his personal accomplishments were extraordinary. In his countenance, which some
think is no small index of the mind, majesty and comeliness were, I am
informed, admirably blended. It was very commanding, and engaging. Penetrating
sagacity, conscious integrity, and goodness were there so lively expressed,
that it seemed a mirror of those qualities, which strike the beholder with
reverence and love.

But the accomplishments, which are seated in the mind and the inner man of the
heart, and in which he had few equals, were an early presage of future
greatness. So conspicuous were his talents for great public services, that,
when he was little more than twenty years old, he was, though so young,
employed to conduct an important negotiation, and discharged his trust with
judgment and fidelity. At this early period he began to gather the laurels of
military glory in the defense of his country. Holding a Major's commission in
the army, he gained an advantage over a superior enemy; and afterward, when a
colonel under the unfortunate Braddock, who not hearkening to his advice, fell,
and his army was defeated on the banks of Monongahela, our WASHINGTON was
honored as the instrument, under God, of bringing off the shattered remains of
that army; and it may not be unworthy of notice, that, in a public address
delivered about this time, he was spoken of, as one, who seemed designed in
providence to be a Savior of his country; words, which have been verified in a
more remarkable manner, than was probably thought of, at the time they were
spoken.

When he had no longer occasion to employ his military talents in the service
of his country, he was a magistrate of the county, a Judge of the Court, and a
Member of the Legislative Assembly.

But it was upon occasion of the disputes between Britain and its American
colonies and the war, which was in consequence of them, that his superior
talents and heroic virtues were drawn forth and presented to view in their full
luster. Then he entered on a new and shining career of military glory. Having
been chosen a delegate to the Congress, which the breaking out of the war had
called together, he was unanimously chosen chief commander of the American
Army; and took a commission for the execution of this most arduous and
hazardous office, at the call of his country; and, in defense of its invaded
rights and privileges, shrunk not from standing foremost in the post of danger
and exposing his life and its dearest interests in the perilous contest. In the
discharge of this high trust for eight years, in which the difficulties,
dangers, and hardships he endured were inconceivable by those, who did not
experience them, he displayed the abilities, wisdom, unbroken fortitude, firm
resolution, incorruptible fidelity, and integrity of a great and accomplished
Captain. Nor was his clemency and humanity toward enemies, when the fortune of
war had put them in his power, less conspicuous than his courage and conduct in
repelling their hostilities. Such was also his kindness and tenderness toward
those, whom he commanded, that he was revered and loved by them as a father.
Though he was, it is said, one of great sensibility, as most great men are, yet
he had such uncommon government of himself, that the very trying and provoking
scenes, with which he was often exercised, very seldom occasioned any visible
discomposure of spirits. An achievement truly heroic. "He that rules his
spirit is better than the mighty who takes a city." And when by means of his
valor and conduct, with that of the other brave officers, and soldiers under
him, the war was, by the blessing of God, brought to a happy and triumphant
close, and peace, liberty, and independence secured to United America, then,
with a magnanimity and generosity scarce to be paralleled, he gave up his
commission to the Congress, and fell into the rank again with private citizens,
resolutely refusing to receive any compensation for the toils and dangers of
eight years spent in the service of his country, except what should accrue to
him from the applauses of his own conscience, from seeing his fellow citizens
enjoy the fruits of his toils and travail, exp^essing their high grateful sense
of his services, and from the hope "that God would think on him for good
according to all that he had done for his people." We may say, as Mr. Jefferson
said several years ago, in war we have produced a WASHINGTON, whose memory will
be adored, while liberty shall have votaries; whose name will triumph over
time, and will in future ages assume its just rank among the most celebrated
worthies of the world.

But it was not long before he was again called forth, from the shades of his
retirement, for further services of the highest importance. The independency of
the American States being gained and recognized, it was soon found necessary
that a more strong and energetic form of government be established, which
should embrace, and be a firm band of union to the whole system of American
States. To form this a convention was appointed, to be composed of men of
approved wisdom and virtue, delegated from the several parts of the union. To
this convention, WASHINGTON was delegated; and unanimously chosen President of
that venerable council of sages, by whom our excellent federal constitution was
framed, which has been highly approved by the most eminent civilians, and of
which we have experienced the happy effects equal to our most sanguine hopes.

When this constitution, in the framing of which he had borne so distinguished
a part, having been accepted by the people, came to be organized; by the
unanimous votes of the electors he was once, and again chosen to the highest
place of honor and authority; and ascended to it with the universal
acclamations of all ranks and orders of the people. And his administration
realized the exalted hopes and expectations, which his abilities and virtues
had raised. And the President appeared in the cabinet with the dignity of a
great and accomplished statesman, not inferior to the general in his military
line.

After sixteen years had been devoted to the service of his country, under the
heavy burdens with which its highest and most arduous offices were loaded, he
resigned the reins of civil government, as he had before resigned his military
commission. It would have been agreeable to the general wish of the people, if
they could have longer enjoyed the advantages of his wise and faithful
administration; and he would doubtless have had another unanimous election, had
not his advanced age craved repose from the cares and toils of office, so
strongly, that he excused himself from standing candidate for it.

But when his country's wrongs and grievances, of which no redress could be
obtained by peaceable negotiation, called to arms, and he perceived that the
public eye was looking up to him for his help, he immediately complied with the
unexpected call, and took upon him the command of the army to be raised for the
defense of the nation. And had his life been prolonged, in the present critical
situation of affairs, we should have hoped for important advantages from his
wisdom and influence. -- But these hopes have now vanished with his expiring
breath. WASHINGTON, whose life, from his early youth to hoary age, has been so
distinguished in the service of his country, as to gain him the title of the
SAVIOR AND FATHER OF HIS COUNTRY, is taken from us, and that at a time when
his services seem to be peculiarly wanted. His breath is gone forth, and, in
that very day, his thoughts and cares for us are all perished.

Before we finish this sketch, it must not be omitted that he was a serious
professor of the christian religion, It is said that while he commanded the
army it was his daily practice, like Col. Gardener, to devote an hour to
private religious exercises.
and held in utter abhorrence the principles of that vile, atheistical,
Epicurian Philosophy, which has corrupted the minds and morals of so many, and
produced incalculable mischief in the world.

You are sensible that what has been said concerning this great man, whose fall
occasions a general mourning, cannot be from a personal knowledge, but from
such credible information as one in these distant parts, and so low a station,
has had access to; I think nothing has been said but what is consistent with
truth. And more might have been said, with equal justice, respecting his most
amiable and exemplary deportment, in the private walks of life; such was the
man to the honor of whose memory the solemnities of this day are observed.

These honors we are all sensible can add nothing to him. And the chief view,
we are to have in commemorating these things, is (besides expressing due
respect to the memory of one, who has served his generation with so much
fidelity and success) to give God the glory that is due to his name, who raised
up and formed this his servant to be a fit instrument, in his hand, to
accomplish the great things, which he has done for us. Far be it from us to
give that honor to any creature, however dignified, which is due to God alone,
of whom, through whom, and to whom are all things.

Are we not loudly called, this day, to humble ourselves under his hand, who
has so sorely smitten and wounded us, and made so great a breach upon us? When
a great man falls, of whom it may be said, as was said to David, "Thou art
better than ten thousands of us," whose great wisdom and influence, were likely
to guide, unite, and animate a people in pursuing those measures, which would
promote their true interest more, than could be expected from myriads of
ordinary men, the quenching of such a light ought to be considered as an
alarming frown of Providence. It darkens our day; and all who are wise to
discern the signs of the times should lay it to heart with suitable concern.
The Lord has taken away the mighty man, the man of war, the judge, the prudent
man, the ancient, the captain of thousands, the honorable man, the counselor,
and the eloquent orator. Help Lord for the faithful fail.

Should we not then humbly enquire wherefore our God is contending with us; our
sins doubtless are the procuring cause of our calamities; shall there be evil
in the city and the Lord has not done it? And is it not our iniquities which
cause him to hide his face from us? Among numberless other provocations of
divine displeasure, which are too visible among us, have we not abused our
prosperity, as an encouragement to a presumptuous security, and insensibility
of our dependence on God? We then need not wonder if he frown upon us. When the
Psalmist said, in his prosperity, that he should never be moved, but that his
mountain stood strong, it immediately follows, "Thou did hide thy face, and I
was troubled." Again have we not been too ready to trust in man and make flesh
our arm? and when our undertakings have had success, have we not sacrificed to
our net, and burnt incense to our own drag, giving that honor to the
instruments, which is due only to the supreme agent? We do well to honor those,
on whom God puts distinguishing honor, endowing them with superior gifts and
virtues, and making them guardian angels of a nation; as such, we honor the
memory of that GREAT MAN, whose fall we lament. But God forbid that we should
make an idol of any creature, our God is a jealous God. If we give his glory to
another, we provoke his jealousy to take away our idol, and show us that those,
whom we adore as Gods, must die like men. All flesh is as grass and all glory
of man as the fading flower of the field. Let not the wise man glory in his
wisdom, neither let the mighty man glory in his might, let not the rich man
glory in his riches. Surely man in his best estate is altogether vanity.

Of this we have lately had awakening and repeated admonitions. We had scarce
put off our mourning for our excellent governor, His Excellency Increase Sumner
Esquire*
when the fall of a greater man renews our grief; and we have the more reason
to be alarmed, at these sad visitations, when such men are taken away at such a
time as this, when our prospects are darkened by those clouds, which with
portentous aspect have been gathering ove^ us; and the setting of such
luminaries must increase the darkness. God grant that it be not a presage of
further calamities.

How are all the glories of this world eclipsed by the mortality of the
greatest men! In what a striking light must their folly appear who set their
affections and found their hopes on things, which are so soon to fade and
utterly fail! And what contempt has God poured upon the grandeur and glitter of
wordly honor and riches, not only by soon stripping the possessors of all this
false glory, but also by often bestowing it on the basest of men, and so as it
were exposing it to open shame. But though the wicked are sometimes exalted to
the summit of earthly greatness, their triumphing is short. Their end is fast
approaching. Death will soon lay all their glory in the dust; and how great
will be their fall! The wicked are driven away in their wickedness, and their
name shall rot. But the righteous has hope in his death; his end is peace; his
memory is blessed; He shall be had in everlasting remembrance.

Such was his end, for whose death a nation mourns, and whose name is honored
as the friend of man, the patron and defender of the liberties and rights of
his country. He received the sudden summons with a mind raised above fear. "I
am not afraid to die," said he, with his expiring breath, and then closing his
eyes and mouth, with his own hands, closed a useful and glorious life with that
serenity of mind, and composure of countenance, for which he had been so
remarkable while passing through the successive and changing scenes of his life.

With growing dignity behold him rise,
Great while he lives, but greater when he dies.
The solemnities of this day, I have said, can add nothing to the dead; but, by
a wise improvement, they may be profitable to us; and our coming together in
this house, which is become a house of mourning, may be better than to go to
the house of feasting. For this end we should not only contemplate with due
honor the characters of those, who have shone with distinguished luster, as
public benefactors, but a noble emulation should be enkindled within us to
imitate their virtues. It was not merely possessing great talents that made
GENERAL WASHINGTON so much greater than others, but it was his improving them
so eminently for the good of mankind. Let us go and do likewise; though we
expect not to rise to the height of his greatness, yet let us endeavor in our
narrower sphere to serve God and our generation with diligence and fidelity. To
him, who improves well what he has, more shall be given, and though his
beginning were small, his latter end may greatly increase.

When we see that the life of the greatest, the most honorable, and useful men
is but a vapor, like that of others, which soon vanishes away, sometimes when
we most need the benefit of their talents, virtues, and influence, we are
loudly admonished not to put our trust in any of the sons of men. They who seem
most worthy of our confidence may, we find, break like reeds when we lean upon
them, and pierce our hearts with sorrow and disappointment. God is our only
sure refuge, and present help, in time of trouble. His name is a strong tower
to which we may fly and be safe. Under his protection we may hope to escape
those evils, of which we seem to have reason to be apprehensive, in consequence
of the breaches he has made upon us. We shall not suffer shipwreck, if God
takes our helm to steer us safe through the rocks of danger, though the under
pilots of the state should be washed overboard and drowned in the most
dangerous and tempestuous season, the stormy wind is obedient to him, and will
fulfill his word. Though WASHINGTON is dead, GOD lives and reigns, the king
eternal and immortal. Let the earth rejoice, clouds and darkness are round
about him, but righteousness and judgment are the habitation of his throne.
Alleluia for the Lord God omnipotent reigns; and if we seek him he will be
found of us. He is with us while we are with him. This God will then be our God
forever and ever. Happy is the people that is in such a case, yea happy is the
people whose God is the Lord.

FINIS.

