EULOGY ON WASHINGTON.

EULOGY ON General GEORGE WASHINGTON. A SERMON, DELIVERED FEBRUARY 22d, 1800,
IN THE NORTH DUTCH CHURCH, ALBANY, BEFORE THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF
NEW YORK, AT THEIR REQUEST:

BY JOHN B. JOHNSON, One of the CHAPLAINS of the HOUSE of ASSEMBLY, And one of
the MINISTERS of the REFORMED DUTCH CHURCH, in the city of ALBANY.

ALBANY: PRINTED BY L. ANDREWS, PRINTER TO THE STATE. 1800.

Office of the Clerk of the House of Assembly, Feb. 25th, 1800.
REVEREND SIR,
I have the pleasure of enclosing to you, a concurrent resolution of the Hon.
the Senate and Assembly, passed the 24th, and 25th, inst.

I am with sentiments of perfect esteem, Sir, your most obedt servt. JAMES VAN
INGEN.


The Reverend JOHN B. JOHNSON. STATE OF NEW YORK. In Assembly, 24 th, February,
1800.
RESOLVED, that the thanks of the Legislature be given to the Rev. JOHN B.
JOHNSON, for the discourse which he delivered in honor of the memory of the
late General GEORGE WASHINGTON, on the 22d inst. at the request of the two
Houses, and that he be requested to furnish the President of the Senate, and
the Speaker of the Assembly with a copy of the same for publication.

Ordered, That Mr. LAMB and Mr. LANDON deliver a copy of the preceding
resolution to the Hon. the Senate and request their concurrence.

By Order.

JAMES VAN INGEN, Clerk.
In Senate, February 25th, 1800.
RESOLVED, That the Senate do concur with the Hon. the Assembly in their said
preceding resolution.

Ordered, That Mr. SANGER and Mr. SAVAGE deliver a copy of the preceding
concurrent resolution to the Hon. the Assembly.

By Order.

ABRAHAM B. BANKER, Clerk.
ALBANY, March 4 th, 1800.
Mr. PRESIDENT and Mr. SPEAKER,
In obedience to the wishes of the Legislature, communicated to me by
concurrent resolution of both Houses, I now do myself the honor to enclose you
a copy of the discourse delivered before them on the 22d ult. for the purpose
mentioned in the said resolution. Permit me to embrace this opportunity to
express the high sense, which I entertain of this flattering testimonial, and
to reciprocate to the legislature my grateful acknowledgements for the
favorable expression of their approbation.

I have the honor to be, Gentlemen, with profound consideration, your most
obedient servant, JOHN B. JOHNSON. The Hon. STEPHEN VAN RENSSELAER, Esquire.
President of the Senate. The Hon. DIRCK TEN BROECK, Esquire. Speaker of the House
of Assembly.


CHRONICLES, XXIX. 28. HE DIED IN A GOOD OLD AGE, FULL OF DAYS, RICHES AND
HONOR.


IN the course of the Providential dispensations of Almighty God, our nation is
called to contemplate an event, which arrests the powers, and awakens the most
pathetic sensibilities of the human heart. Already, for a considerable time,
have our eyes witnessed the tokens of general mourning, and our ears been
assailed with the language of public grief. From every part of our common
country, does the plaint of sorrow arise, and every gale, as it passes by, is
loaded with the groans and sighs of a distressed people. Not only do our
sanctuaries of justice and of law, and our sacred asylums of religion, mourn;
not only do our officers of state, our distinguished citizens, and the war-worn
veteran, appear in the badges of woe; but all, from the aged who remembers the
deeds of former times, to the youth who anticipates the future; all of every
description and every rank, feel an oppressive heaviness at the heart. And,
when we look around upon this great and respectable assembly, and mark the eye
suddenly suffused with the tear of sad recollection; when especially we reflect
that on this day, a whole nation, moved by the impulse of one great sorrow, is
engaged in the observance of solemnites, of which these before us form a part,
we are constrained to conclude, that some disastrous change has occurred, that
some dreadful loss has been sustained.

What then thou nation highly favored of heaven! what has produced this
universal appearance of distress? From thy loftiest mountains, and thy
loveliest vales, why ascends to the sky, the plaintive concert of weeping,
lamentation and woe? Has the enemy rolled like a flood upon thy peaceful
shores, and threatened to deluge with crimes and blood, thine extensive plains?
Are thine old men devoted to death, thy daughters to shame, thy sons to
slavery? Has the arm of tyranny seized upon thy rights, and extinguished the
hallowed flame upon thine altars of freedom? -- No! -- But the leader of our
armies -- the founder of our infant republic -- the guide of our councils --
the patriot, who united and swayed all hearts -- is no more! The great, the
illustrious WASHINGTON, the pride of his country, the ornament of mankind --
sleeps in dust!

Draw near, ye companions of his toils, ye who fought by his side, who were
animated by his patriotism, and breathed his martial spirit; draw near, ye
counselors, who shone in the cabinet, and assisted his efforts by your wisdom
and your virtue; draw near, ye sons and daughters of America, whose sacred
birthright he defended with his sword, and guaranteed by the bulwark of his
impregnable name; draw near, with solemn step to his tomb. Here, behold once
more, your hero, friend, father; and while the copious tear bedews your cheek,
and the strong beat of the heart, checks your utterance, look a long -- a
painful -- a last adieu. August in death, "his form has not yet lost all her
original greatness." Firmness, prudence, valor, resignation, still are seated
upon that countenance, now fixed and pale, where they lately shone in the most
vivid expression; for they presided over all the emotions and energies of his
heart. But the immortal spirit has returned to God who gave it, and left the
earthly habitation to assimilate with its native dust. That eye no more beams
on virtue, with the cheering ray of friendship; nor with its piercing glance,
unnerves the strength of vice, and overawes the confidence of base ambition.
That great heart, which always beat in unison, with the impulse of patriotism,
and glowed with love for his country, is now lifeless as the tongue of calumny,
and cold as the clay which surrounds it. His arm is deprived of its vigor, and
his sword, the terror of our foes, sleeps harmless at his side. That singular
assemblage of virtues and of talents, which constituted the unprecedented glory
of his character -- which was more than a host for the defense of a nation's
rights -- more efficacious than the force of law, sanctioned with the dread of
penalty, to repress the licentious daring of faction -- and which, under the
guidance and patronage of Providence, asserted our liberties, and achieved our
independence -- is now, unexpectedly removed from the terrestrial sphere, which
it illumined and adorned. It can now no longer be displayed in the wisdom of
counsel, in the splendour of action, in the consummation of great design. Placed
beyond our view, it flourishes and expands in those regions where mortal puts
on immortality, and perfection is added to perfection.

While therefore as men, and as Americans, we lament the loss which our country
and the world has sustained, let us mingle the tears of joy with the tears of
grief, and with the sadness of sorrow unite the sentiment of gratitude -- that
humanity is susceptible of such excellence, and that America can boast such a
transcendant character, as appeared in that illustrious personage, whose exit
we deplore, but whose pre-eminent greatness we can never cease to admire. Let
us not forget to praise that Almighty and Merciful Being, who is good, both in
what he gives and in what he takes away. Let us thank him that WASHINGTON has
been continued so long with us; and that he has died in a good old age, full of
days, riches and honor.

Through numberless toils, and imminent dangers, he has been preserved, by the
protection of Providence, to be a most distinguished instrument of blessings to
his country. At the commencement of his bright career, at the origin of that
grand movement, which gave birth to a nation, and laid the broad basis of a
mighty empire; what impenetrable darkness hovered over the prospects of
adventurous hope! What certain destruction seemed to threaten the bravery which
should dare to resist oppression! At that eventful crisis, when insult and
wrong goaded a patient and suffering people into desperation, and urged them to
seek redress by an appeal to arms, America called upon her WASHINGTON, and
placed her interests under his guardianship. Go, unfurl my banners -- fight my
battles -- seek the post of danger -- gain lasting renown by victory -- or die,
covered with glory. He bowed, and received the shining blade from her hand, the
insignia of office from her authority, and the honor of high responsibility,
from her unlimited confidence, in his virtue. Already does the lambent flame
begin to play around his head -- pledge of that splendour which was soon to
irradiate and encircle his name. Already does his country feel the animation of
hope, and anticipate an early and successful issue of the eventful contest.

But before this hope could be realized, he must first ascend those "steep
acclivities of fame," where the deathless laurel had never yet been plucked by
mortal band. Who can justly estimate and duly praise that disinterested and
sublime magnanimity, which, had it met with final defeat, must have encountered
death, and more hateful ignominy? For, the noblest motives, the purest
principles of action, and the very heaven of virtues, when marshalled against
tyranny, cannot fail to be detestable to tyrants, and devoted to infamy by
their adherents and their slaves. What would have been the unhappy fate of that
hero, whom God and man now delight to honor, had not success crowned his
exertions, I leave you to gather from the rewards of defeated patriotism, in
other ages and among other nations. But nothing moves his firm mind. The danger
of infamy vanishes, and the hedious spectacle of ignominious death, appears
invested with the badges of renown, when he turns his eye upon his country. The
scene before him is truly grand; but it is the grandeur of terror. It is the
ocean tempested into fury, and shrouded with the mantle of sevenfold night!
Such a scene, nothing but fortitude, rendered invincible by trust in God, could
have contemplated with composure, much less have launched into it, with the
dependant interests of millions yet unborn.

A mighty kingdom, rich in resource, proud in the prowess of her arms, terrible
to the nations of Europe, pours into the bosom of our country, her trained and
intrepid bands. To oppose this front of menacing danger, he had an army, not
destitute indeed of patience, of principle, and of native valor; but, collected
from the plough, and the various employments of domestic tranquillity, where
was that strict dicipline, that consummate military knowledge, that prompt and
accurate obedience to orders, the effect only of experience and martial habit,
which communicate to an army the identity of one soul, and the momentum of one
great exertion? All was wanting with those whom he led to the field. All must
be supplied by his ever-active valor, by the wisdom of plan, by the choice of
position, by the all-important precautions of his unfailing prudence, by a
fortitude which disaster could never depress, nor prosperity elate, by the
unwearied and wonderful effects of a quick, comprehensive, divining genius, in
a word, by inspiring his fellow soldiers with a confidence which no
disappointments could shake, and no suspicions undermine.

Th^se faculties and qualifications, ever prepared to (...), displayed
themselves during the continuance of (...) war, with exhaustless energy and
undiminish^^ (...). Now his vigilance seizes the most favorable moment to
defeat the enemy by surprise; or, in avoiding battle, to conquer him by delay.
Now he exerts his undaunted fortitude -- deaths surround him, -- thick darkness
covers -- destruction threatens his country. Now, we see him exercise his large
and consummate knowledge of the human heart, in silencing murmurs, in allaying
fears, in rekindling hope, in communicating to a small, destitute, defeated
army, a portion of that greatness which upheld, and that patriotism which
inflamed his soul. He was the spring which moved, the very spirit which
informed and actuated that system of measures, which wrought our political
redemption. Had he then fallen, who but could have predicted the disastrous
consequences? Then, you my fellow citizens, would have fallen -- thou my
country -- never more to rise! Had he then fallen, the American eagle, who
hovered with sublime wing over the standard of freedom, would have dropped the
immortal wreath from his beak, and the thunders from his grasp, and been no
more a bird of war.

But that God, who loved our country, protected her most favored son. The
winged death which prostrates thousands, on his right hand and on his left,
harms not him; for the ANGEL of the LORD of HOSTS interposes his shield, and
averts from the bosom of our chieftain, the perilous stroke.

He lived to see the prospects of hope brighten into reality. After
experiencing the various fortunes of war, be saw his country victorious; rise
resplendent among the nations, and repose upon the bosom of peace. Through
eight years of toil, embarrassment and blood; led by the unexampled
perseverance, unbending fortitude, unerring prudence, and ardent patriotism of
her beloved WASHINGTON, she advanced with augmented greatness, with increasing
prowess and splendour, to independence, liberty, glory. On her progress, the
eyes of the just and good, of every clime, were fixed, with the most painful
solicitude. On the great result, the nations of the earth gaze with growing
wonder. Such a combination of virtues had been displayed; such feats of valor
had been achieved; such exhaustless hatred to tyranny, and such unquenchable
love of liberty had pervaded the country, that the whole series of events
connected with the revolution, and their splendid consummation, proclaimed the
distinguished interference of Heaven.

But while many partook of the acquired renown, WASHINGTON shone the most
magnificent object of a nation's love, and a world's admiration. Victory, he
had won in the field; but he had gained a more noble conquest over the hearts
of his countrymen. The flood tide of his fortune was now full, and could have
borne him to empire, accompanied with acclamation and surrounded with fame. --
But, no darkness gathers upon the disk of his glory. High authority, he
possessed, but he exercised it only for the public good. Great power, he
wielded, but after the ends for which it had been conferred were accomplished,
he deposited it, with the badges of supreme command, on the altar of his
country. The laurels which covered him, now shot forth into bloom, and he
retired from office, "bearing his blushing honors thick upon him." -- Sublime
spectacle! more elevating to the pride of virtue, than the sovereignty of the
globe, united to the scepter of ages! Enthroned in the hearts of his
countrymen, the gorgeous pageantry of prerogative, was unworthy the majesty of
his dominion. Eulogy, by Thomas Pain, Esquire. of Boston.
Ambition had no place in his heart, or now, it would have protruded its
aspiring front. Ambition -- shrunk into timidity at his frown, and crouched to
the earth, whence it sprang. Ambition -- was infinitely beneath the towering
sublimity of his mind; for his pure heart was fixed on heaven. Had he been
swayed by the selfish principles, which roused the soul of a Caesar; which
animated the bravery of an Alexander; which nourished the guile, and governed
the conduct of a Cromwell; with equal eclat your battles might have been
fought, and your victories won; but the great object of your contest would have
been lost; perhaps, lost forever. But that effulgence of military character,
which in ancient states, has blasted the rights of the people, whose renown it
had brightened, was not here permitted by the hero from whom it emanated, to
shine with so destructive a luster. See the Eulogy before mentioned.


No! his sword thirsted not for blood. His arm was not lifted up for conquest.
While he fought for the defense of all you hold most dear, the havoc necessary
for attaining success, he sincerely deplored. Amid the din of arms, the carnage
of death, and the hottest rage of battle, he listened to the still small voice
of humanity in his breast. In the midst of his most brilliant exploits, his eye
was turned toward the shades, and his heart panted for the tranquillity of
domestic scenes. He lived to gratify this ardent, inherent desire; and with the
unaspiring dignity of the first of citizens, returned to his humble retirement,
pursued by the tears, the prayers, the affections of an emancipated, a grateful
people. There repose, thou magnanimous hero! There feast upon the sweet
recollection of the past, and the delightful hope of the future. There
cultivate those virtues which always governed thine own great heart; and
cherish that divine religion, which afforded thee unfailing support in the
severest emergencies; and which thy conduct and thy deathless name, honor with
perpetual eulogy. There, let the growing splendors of thy greatness,
continually surround and guard the retreat of hallowed solitude.

But no! Heaven saw fit to counteract this predominant inclination -- for the
orb of his glory was not yet full. Heaven had made him for distinguished
usefulness -- had raised him up and furnished him with the most admirable
qualifications, for enlarging the sphere of human happiness. Again he is called
upon by his country; again he deems it the voice of God. His most favorite
pursuits are instantly abandoned, and he appears once more, with the renewed
and swelling-applause of the people whom he loved, on the splendid theater of
action. Again -- but why need I represent him presiding over those
deliberations of the collected wisdom of America, which gave birth to a
constitution, free in its principles; wise in its division, arrangement and
balance of power; admirable for the energy which it communicates to authority,
and for those wholesome restraints, to which that authority is subjected: a
constitution, not only the admiration of the present age, but destined to
command the reverence of posterity, to the latest generations? Why need I
mention, that, after a free people had sanctioned with their high approbation,
this sacred charter of their rights, he was chosen by unanimous suffrage, to
fill the chair of Chief Magistrate; to give the first impulse to a grand and
comprehensive system; to enter upon a new and untried field of operations; to
expose his untarnished laurels to the mildew of calumny; and under the burden
of increased years, to wield, to adjust, to harmonize the various interests of
a widely-extended empire? Shall I endeavor to delineate the features of that
wisdom, which was quick to discern, and of that prudence, which was prompt to
pursue, the only path of safety and honor, amid the jealousies and contentions
of rival nations, and the commotions of the most astonishing revolution, that
ever shook and appalled the earth? Must you be informed, that like the angel,
"who rides in the whirlwind, and directs the storm," he reigned over the
inflamed passions of men; and by the mighty magic of his influence, restrained
and assuaged the tempest of faction? Standing upon the broad basis of his own
impregnable virtues, he could hear unmoved the censures of mistaken zeal, and
pity, while his duty obliged him to oppose, that blind affection and stupid
gratitude, which would have plunged our country into the whirlpool of European
politics? Need you be told, that he did not aim at popularity, riches, glory;
but that the invariable object of his pursuit, was the real interests of his
country? Yes, Americans, the peace which we now enjoy, and the tranquillity
with which we are blessed, are, under the kind Providence of Heaven, to be
ascribed to that anticipating wisdom, that rectitude of principle, that
undeviating justice, which were conspicuous in all the prominent features of
his administration. And, whatever variety of sentiment, excited by
circumstance, or produced by time, may have transiently prevailed in the
breasts of his fellow-citizens, and diffused a foreign tinge over the face of
society, the opinion was never uttered, nor conceived, which dared to impeach
the invulnerable purity of his intentions.

Though continually "admonished by the increasing weight of years, that the
calm of retirement was as necessary for him, as it would be welcome," yet he
continues with unabated vigilance, and unwearied labor at his arduous post,
until the improved state of things made his duty compatible with his repose.
Again we see him seek the solitude on which his heart was unalterably set.
After communicating to you the maxims of sound policy and the instructions of
good advice, which were the result of long experience and mature research; and
after expressing the grateful sense which he entertained of his country's love,
and calling down upon her bosom the blessings of the ETERNAL, he divests
himself of his high authority; and bowing under the vast burden of his honors,
retires beneath the shades of Vernon -- and soon finishing his earthly course,
arises to receive his heavenly crown.

But he has departed in a good old age, full of days, riches and honor. The
annals of nations are not adorned with so illustrious and finished a character.
We see and admire particular traits of excellence, in men of renown, who
flourished in the days of former times. But, which of them exhibits such a
consistent and harmonious whole, as is here presented to our contemplation? To
the splendid round of official duties and civic virtues, which displayed
themselves, without effort, and without ostentation, in the beautiful tenor of
his life, he added as the crown of all, a regular and exemplary respect to the
GOSPEL of JESUS; a uniform and sincere piety to GOD. Religion was the star of
superior radiance, which reflected a celestial and inextinguishable luster
through the constellation of all his virtues. On every proper occasion, he
acknowledges an overruling Providence, and ascribes to its guidance and
defense, the success of his efforts and the independence of his country. See
his farewell orders to the Army.
In his circular letters to the particular States, he speaks in the highest
terms of eulogy respecting the word of revelation, and in the highest
expressions of honor, respecting the Divine Redeemer. He knew that his talents
and exaltation came from God, and he was not ashamed to acknowledge before the
world, the author of his benefactions. Hear him again, in his parting address,
dictated by the warmest affection for his people, earnestly inculcate, with all
the fervor and authority of parental concern, the necessity of morality and
religion to the prosperity of nations, and the necessity of religion to the
existence of morality. He knew, from long experience, that their influence upon
the soul was a feast of delight. In the midst of his most urgent employments,
even during the tumults of war, you behold him conscientious and regular in
devoting a certain portion of every day to retirement. This uniform retreat, we
have reason to believe was sacred to meditation and to God. The unhallowed foot
of officious presumption, was forbidden to intrude; and the sweet insinuations
of friendship were never suffered to steal upon those hours, consecrate to
heaven. He stands a monument for the admiration of the world, for the
instruction of future ages, for an example to heroes, legislators and kings.

I speak not of those wise political maxims, those rules calculated to make a
nation great and happy, which lie scattered through his writings, but are more
particularly bequeathed to us in his valedictory address. I need not repeat his
animated exhortations to the observance of justice, to the love of liberty, to
the extension of literature, to the exercise of fraternal affection, to the
cultivation of the principles of our union. I need not mention his excellent
advice, to guard against the poison of party asperity; the stratagems of
ever-working, ever lying faction; the danger from cumbrous, unnecessary,
overgrown military establishments; the contagion of foreign influence, and the
enchantment of intimate foreign connection: for he, though dead, yet speaks,
and his warning voice is heard in deep toned majesty from the tomb.

Fellow Citizens, he loved you to the last. He bore your interests on his
heart, when he encountered the hostility of peril. The welfare of his country,
was the theme of his prayers, whenever he bowed in the presence of his God. The
recollection of her triumphs, and the prospect of her happiness, smoothed the
path of his age, and gilded the gloom of his departing hour.

Illustrious shade, farewell! first of men, thy name is immortal. Father,
Deliverer, Friend -- the aged patriot mourns thy loss! The valiant youth,
erewhile animated by thy virtues, looks with speechless agony upon thy grave,
and clasps his hands in the extacy of grief. Thy bereaved country, in vain
stretches forth her arms, to give thee a last embrace -- Borne down by sorrow,
she rests against the tomb, which preserves the ashes of her departed
chieftain. Father, Hero, Friend, once more farewell! Time, who shall crumble
into dust, the monumental marble, which deathless gratitude consecrates to thy
memory, shall continue to brighten the splendors of thy fame; and WASHINGTON
SHALL LIVE FOR EVER -- in the HEARTS OF HIS COUNTRYMEN, and in the BOSOM OF HIS
GOD.

FINIS.

