A SERMON, DELIVERED AT TOPSFIELD JANUARY 5, 1800. OCCASIONED BY THE DEATH OF
George Washington, COMMANDER IN CHIEF OF THE AMERICAN ARMIES, AND LATE
PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES.

BY ASAHEL HUNTINGTON, A. M.

Thine, O Lord, is the power and the glory; and in thine hand it is to make
great. DAVID. PRINTED BY JOSHUA CUSHING, SALEM.

1800.

The Patrons of the following Discourse will heartily receive it, with the
affectionate desire of the Author that they may assiduously imitate the
conspicuous virtues of the illustrious WASHINGTON deceased, to whose memory it
is respectfully inscribed.

A SERMON.
1 SAMUEL, xxv. 1. And Samuel died, and all the Israelites were gathered
together, and lamented him, and buried him in his house at Ramah.
DAVID, by divine direction, addressing himself to the nobles and judges of the
earth, denominates them gods -- "I said, Ye are gods, and all of you children
of the Most High." Though he thus dignifies them with the appellation of "gods,
and children of the Most High," yet to them he adds the solemn and humiliating
declaration -- "Ye shall die like men." Though "it is appointed to all men,"
princes and judges, as well as their subjects, "once to die," yet it is
suitable that the death of men, sustaining different characters, should be
noticed with different emotions and tokens of respect. Though our feelings
often forbid us to speak evil of the dead, yet we always perceive that society
sustains a greater loss in the death of a virtuous, desirable and useful man,
than in the death of one who was pernicious and forbidding. If we ascend to the
great personages who fill the most important offices, and whose conduct has
great influence on the public mind, our feelings will know a difference between
the death of a Moses, a Joshua or a Samuel, and the death of an Ahab, an Hazael
or a Jeroboam. Those remarks suppose we wisely estimate the character and worth
of men.

The death of that public character, whose influence has been employed in the
promotion of public happiness, will be lamented; while the death of him, whose
influence has been pestiferous, and destructive of public tranquillity, will
not excite grateful testimonials of respect and sorrow. These remarks, it is
conceived, find support as we turn the pages of inspiration.

Solomon says, "The memory of the just is blessed; but the name of the wicked
shall rot." Respecting Jehoiakim, king of Judah, of whom it is said "his heart
was but for covetousness, and to shed innocent blood, and for oppression, and
for violence -- thus says the Lord concerning Jehoiakim -- The people shall
not lament for him, saying, Ah! my brother -- they shall not lament for him,
saying, Ah! Lord, or ah! his glory; but he shall be buried with the burial of
an ass, drawn and cast forth beyond the gates of the city." Because of his
wickedness, his death shall not be noticed with tokens of respect and
lamentation; as said of the wicked, "his name shall rot." But "the memory of
the just is blessed -- the righteous shall be in everlasting remembrance." If,
therefore, the memory of the just and great is blessed -- if all Israel
lamented the death of Samuel, and others, because of their singular integrity,
and extensive usefulness to their tribes -- then shall not all our interested
countrymen deeply lament the recent and sudden decease of the venerable and
beloved man, who was the "chariot of" our American "Israel, and the horsemen
thereof?" Shall not we, my brethren, as a part of this great community, mingle
our tears with our bereaved fellow citizens, and join our hearts to the general
voice -- "Ah! Lord, and ah! his glory?" The death of one so eminently useful
deserves to be noticed with national lamentation.

The important services he has rendered his country, are a good reason why "his
name should be blessed, and held in everlasting remembrance."

On this occasion I have chosen, for the guide of our meditation, the passage
which informs us of the death of Samuel, and the lamentation which it excited
through all the tribes of Israel. "Samuel died, and all the Israelites were
gathered together, and lamented him."

In pursuing this subject, I shall attempt to show why it was proper for all
Israel to lament the death of Samuel; and, as we proceed, I shall apply these
reasons for lamentation to ourselves, and to the people of the United States,
who are now, by the holy providence of God, bereaved of the ILLUSTRIOUS CHIEF
of our armies.

The first reason we assign for this general mourning for Samuel is, on account
of the purity of his morals, and the unblamable propriety of his conduct on all
occasions. He was not only amiable in his moral character, and highly
respectable on this account, but his memory was especially dear because of the
happy influence of his virtuous example on the general manners of society.
Being th^^ an instrument of public good by his commendable example, his life
was precious -- his death calamitous, and hence to be lamented by a grateful
people. These reasons for lamenting the death of Samuel apply to the case now
in view. The memory of the great character whose death is announced, deserves
to be dear to us on account of the amiableness of his morals, and the unvarying
propriety of his conduct in all the important stations in which he has been
called to act. Who has ever dared to reproach him as a man of corrupted morals,
or indecent demeanor? Who, that has been honored as a companion in his most
social hours, that could ever charge him with rude hilarity, with rustic and
boisterous mirth, and with immoral and degrading conversation? The universal
testimony of his most intimate acquaintance supports the most refined
gracefulness of his manners, and the singular dignity of his appearance, even
in the social circle, and when least under the criticism of the public eye.

Though he was long familiarized to the field of war, and a daily witness of
the too fashionable vices of his martial brethren, yet he never degraded
himself by an imitation of their follies. His uniform example was a constant
lesson of solemn reproof. The common vices of the camp, such as intemperance
and profanity, were known to be so extremely ungrateful to his moral taste,
that those most easily beset with these sins felt his presence as a most
powerful restraint. We have not only the pleasure to speak thus explicitly in
favor of the purity and dignity of the moral character of the Man whom all the
people delighted to honor, but we have farther reason to rejoice, in the
belief that he ever acted upon moral principle.

When Commander of our armies, and when President of our nation, he often
publicly declared his full belief in the universal and righteous providence of
God. This his belief was ever expressed in terms indicative of an humble sense
of dependence. His acknowledgments of favors were also expressive of the
temper of a grateful heart.

The benign influence of religion on the order and happiness of society, was a
subject which engaged his devout contemplation, and on which he has expressed
himself in the most pleasing terms. In his Farewell Address, which we now read
with solemn thoughtfulness, he observes, that " religion and morality are
indispensable supports to political prosperity -- that these are the great
pillars of human happiness -- that they have an intimate connection with private
and public felicity -- and that if a sense of religious obligation desert the
oaths which are the instruments of investigation in courts of justice, there
can be no security left for property, reputation and life." These sentiments
harmonize with divine truth -- that "godliness is profitable to all things;"
and show, that a deep sense of its worth had a fixed residence in his heart.
For these reasons, his death calls for our sincere lamentation. "His memory is
blessed," and his name deserves to be held in our "lasting remembrance." The
advantages derivable to society, from his moral instructions and example, are
innumerable, and inestimably great. This remark will appear just, if we recur
to the pernicious influence on society of a bad example in men who have filled
eminent stations; of which the world has witnessed many instances, and had
fatal experience.

Look through the history of the Jews, and when did a vile and immoral
character preside over the nation, and the ill effects of his example were not
felt through all their tribes?

Immoral kings were a mean of leading many of their subjects to idolatry and
vice. It is said of Jeroboam, that he not only sinned himself, but "he made
Israel to sin." We might name many other kings, of Judah and Israel, whose evil
example was destructive of the morals of society; and also many instances of
the kind in more modern times. The common discernment of the world has
remarked, that a vicious prince will render vice fashionable in his court; and
a vicious court will disseminate vice through the various parts of the state or
nation. That the national court impart something of their own cast of mind, and
give currency to certain modes of conduct, amongst the people, may appear from
the two following instances: -- When Oliver Cromwell assumed the government of
England, and had the address to create a court after his own image, a great
part of the people appeared to partake of his fervent spirit, and of his
impetuous and ungovernable temper. Wh^^ Charles the Second, who soon succeeded
Cromwell, was restored to the throne, he soon made it evident that he was
devoted to riotous pleasures, and to degrading indolence. His indecent and
vicious morals had a ruinous influence on the court, which soon became the very
nursery of vice. The theaters also, which were established for the cultivation
of good morals, and for the excitement of commendable emulation and refinement,
were prostituted to the exhibition of scenes of impurity. Thus a vicious king
corrupted the morals both of the court and the stage, from which sources
immorality had an alarming prevalence through the nation. His reign gave
countenance to men of deistical sentiments, some of whom were eminent for their
abilities, and came forth with all possible freedom in support of their cause,
being encouraged, in their attacks on divine revelation, by the demoralizing
opinions and practices of their prince and his favorites at court.

Again: That irreligious rulers give currency to vice among their subjects, has
received recent confirmation. We have lived to pass the degenerated period,
when the legislature of the great and dreadful republic gave their cheerful
assent to such profane sentiments as these -- "That death is an eternal sleep
-- that reason dethrones both the kings of the earth, and the kings of heaven
-- that man, when free, wants no other divinity than himself -- and that every
republic, but a republic of atheists, is a chimera." Under the influence of
such opinions, they have proscribed the holy Sabbath, and all the institutions
of the gospel. The natural effects of this licentiousness of the national court
have been already realized. All the vile passions which agitate the human mind
have received encouragements Vice, in all its most extravagant forms, has
triumphed over social order and religion. " The wicked walk on every side taken
the vilest men are exalted."

In connection with the above observations, as to the pernicious influence of
immorality in princes, and men of eminence in society, we remark, that had our
illustrious and departed PATRIOT, when Commander of our armies, or President of
our national court, exhibited an example of vicious morals* and disregard to
the institutions of religion -- had be been devoted to pleasure; and a
supporter of dissipation, she unhappy and ^^^nous effects would have been felt
through every part of our nation. But his example being the reverse of this, i.
e. most amiable, dignified, and worthy of universal imitation, the advantages
hence resulting have been inestimably great. In this view of his character, his
death we lament; "his memory is blessed," and his name will live in the
grateful and lasting remembrance of his countrymen.

In this connection we may see our obligations to unite in thankful praise to
Him by whom princes and judges rule," in that he has again raised to the
Presidency of our nation one who is explicitly attached to the religion of the
gospel, and whose virtuous example is also a pointed condemnation of immorality
and vice.

2. Samuel lived in the time of a great revolution in Israel -- while an
important change took place in their government. In their revolution Samuel was
an eminent character. His wisdom and integrity shone conspicuously. He was held
in high estimation by the people, as one faithful to the trust reposed in him,
and as an unshaken friend to their true interest and happiness. Though, in the
fervency and extravagance of party spirit, some dared to oppose the measures
which he recommended -- though some spoke evil of his dignity, and insinuated
that he was a man of corrupt designs -- yet, when he was dead, they became
convinced that he was wise in counsel, and that his intentions were good. All
the people remembered his advice, his virtues and his usefulness, and hence
lamented him as a father in Israel, and a friend thereof.

Our deceased PATRIOT and friend lived, like Samuel, in a time of great
revolution. He has been looked to, in a time of universal alarm, danger and
anxiety, as a most conspicuous and useful man; and his important services have
exceeded in value the supporting anticipations of his warmest friends. Were we
to attempt a particular delineation of his virtues, and a representation of his
usefulness, in the time of our revolution, the subject would beggar all
description. Our greatest efforts must close in the language of the queen of
Sheba when she came to survey the glory of Solomon -- "The one half of the
greatness of thy wisdom is not told, for thou exceedest the fame that I have
heard of thee." Let us therefore come down to humble expressions, and content
ourselves with saying, that his eminent usefulness is acknowledged by all
classes of our citizens, and that nothing can be added in his praise, which
could excite an higher sense of his worth than is now engraven on the hearts of
his countrymen. If all Israel had reason to lament the death of Samuel, all our
united tribes are called to mourn the departure of our beloved CHIEF, in the
grateful remembrance of his services.

If some, in the time of public tumult, party spirit and prejudice in Israel,
dared to reproach the conduct of Samuel, whose whole life was as irreproachable
as that of any man with whom the world has been honored; then, though some
have presumed to blame the administration of him for whom we now mourn, we are
not to consider this as a singular instance of vile passion in man, nor as
evidence against the venerable accused, that he was defective as to wisdom, or
depraved in his designs. Those who have wickedly represented his intentions as
vile and pernicious, will probably learn their error and guilt with regret; and
perhaps some will come to this sense when it is too late, there being no more
space for repentance.

3. Under the direction of Samuel, the Israelites had great success against
their enemies. It is said, "The hand of the Lord was against the enemies of
Israel all the days of Samuel." He was a faithful servant of the public. His
wisdom and exertions were a mean of the preservation of his country, when
threatened with ruin by invading foes. He was an eminent instrument, in the
hand of Providence, of their success against those who violated their rights.
The people had a grateful remembrance of his invaluable services, and hence
indulged undissembled lamentation at his death.

The world has been astonished at the success of the American arms, under the
wise arrangements of our highly-favoured Commander, who is now no more. His
faithfulness in the cause of his country is confessed by all who have come to
the knowledge of his history. We honor him, as having been a conspicuous
instrument, in the hand of kind Providence, of our salvation, when oppressive
enemies sought our ruin. He has not borne the sword in vain, but with great and
happy success, against foreign enemies, the enemies of the wilderness, and the
still more unreasonable enemies of our happiness who have arisen among
ourselves. His inestimable labors have endeared and will perpetuate his name.

The evident benevolence which excited him to submit to the toils of war, and
to burden himself with the high responsibility attached to his civil
administrations, show him to have been an enemy to vile oppression, and an
immutable friend to the interest and happiness of his country. As Samuel's
whole life rendered it evident that he was not seeking to enrich himself with
the property of his people, no less noble has been the conduct of our renowned
Philanthropist, whose services are now ended. That to increase his property was
not his object, in all the cares, toils, dangers and sufferings in which he
engaged, and which he supported with wisdom, fortitude and perseverance, for
the good of his country, it is evident, in that he would accept no
compensation. It is true, he was able to support himself upon his own property;
but is it common that men are willing to labor for nothing because they are
affluent? Do we often find it the case that men of fortune are unwilling to add
to their stock, by receiving a full reward for their services? Let captious
prejudice say what it will, we are bound, by the laws of charity, to call this
refusal of compensation benevolence. It looks like "love which seeks not her
own," and is to be considered in this light. This refusal of compensation is
still one of the least of the evidences of his disinterested love to his
country. He made a much greater sacrifice than this, in relinquishing the
charms of retirement, and in subjecting himself to the toils and hazards of the
public offices to which he has been called. If, therefore, we are capable of
gratitude, we shall exercise it in a view of these benevolent services. If we
love that which is great and good, we shall admire this nobleness of soul. If
worth of character can excite our esteem, and the death of such, our grief, we
shall weep on the tomb of our GREAT and HONORABLE FRIEND.

4. Samuel was a great Civilian, and was known as a judge in Israel, throughout
all their tribes. "He went in circuit from year to year to Bethel, and Gilgal,
and Mizpeh, and judged Israel in all those places." He was acknowledged as wise
and impartial, and was highly respected by the people. It is said, "All the
people greatly feared him." Being so generally known, so eminently just and
useful, and so highly respected, his death came near to every heart -- it was
afflictive, and excited general lamentation. The people recognized him as a
righteous judge and father in Israel, and they lamented his decease, as for a
father dead.

Our great Civilian, and our Leader in arms, who now sleeps in death, was known
through all our tribes. All classes of men seemed to be acquainted with him,
and suffered no other to rival him in their affections. His wisdom and his
integrity were indisputable, both in the cabinet and in the field of war. His
usefulness was eminent, both as a lawgiver to our country, and a defender of
our rights. We felt interested in his honor and happiness -- we were profited
by his services -- we delighted in showing him respect, and we had no fear of
exciting envy in any who were less noticed. Hence, how can it be otherwise than
that his death should solemnly affect us? How natural is it to lament over him
in the language of the king of Israel over the departing prophet -- "O my
father! my father!"

5. There followed the revolution in Israel, or the change of their government,
a great and threatening division amongst the people. Their political ideas were
extremely confused, and their passions were all in arms. The people were
divided into two great and powerful parties: Saul was at the head of one, and
David was the leader of the other. Samuel, in this season of alarm and
distress, gave an example of moderation, wisdom, and fortitude, which deserves
the admiration of the world. He reproved the malevolence, the envy and the
mercenary intentions of those who deserved such rebuke, with all the solemnity
and faithfulness of an angel from heaven. He put himself forward, as a terror
to evil doers, with all the majesty of an armed host. Who, therefore, can
sufficiently admire the wisdom of his counsels, and form a just estimate of the
worth of his services? It is fully probable, that he was the mean, in the hand
of Providence, of saving the tribes of Israel from incalculable loss of blood
and treasure. Like an angel of peace, his wisdom and mediation saved them from
distresses and woes indescribable. How deep and real, therefore, must have been
the lamentation at his death!

These remarks on Samuel apply with equal truth to "America's Favorite Son,"
whose memory will ever be dear to us all. He has lived to see envy, party
spirit and prejudice rise up amongst ourselves, after a very important
revolution in our favor. He has seen the passion and unsubmissive spirit of
party arise with weapons of war to oppose the administration of government. He
has seen the order and tranquillity of the nation most alarmingly threatened,
by those who have loved strangers rather than those of their own house. His
wisdom, stability, and perseverance in constitutional righteousness, in these
seasons of tumult and danger, have been blessed: they have been a mean of
restoring order where confusion began to spread its miseries. He has displayed
himself as became one whom kind Providence had raised up to be a minister of
God for good to the people, and to bear the sword of justice and order not in
vain -- to rebuke the madness of disobedience, and to protect the friends of
order and civil happiness. In the sense in which Samuel was a Savior of
Israel, our PATRIOT and GUARDIAN, who has now ceased from his labors, was the
Savior of his country. As Samuel's wisdom, counsels and virtue were a mean of
preserving disordered Israel from total confusion, and universal wretchedness,
so his discernment and efforts have probably been a mean, in the hand of
Providence, of our preservation from seditions, tumults and blood. His name
shall live in the hearts of his countrymen. He shall be held in remembrance of
those yet to be born. Fathers shall speak of his important services, with
gratitude and admiration, "to their sons and to their sons' sons." His memory
is and will be "blessed."

6. The Israelites lamented for Samuel, because they felt their need of his
future counsels and labors. The civil commotions in Israel continued at the
time of his death. Saul and David each had their parties and adherents. It was
a day of great darkness and terror. They were threatened by their powerful
enemies, the Philistines. This with the riotous and party spirit of their own
nation, excited great alarm and anxiety. Not only their enemies from abroad,
but the violence of party among themselves, threatened the ruin of the state.
Saul continued to pursue David, with envy, malevolence and murder in his heart.
David and his men were hunted in the woods of Palestine -- they were oppressed,
and chased in their minds -- they were valiant in battle -- there was reason
why the people should tremble in fear of the fatal issue of these
circumstances. The people felt their need of the wisdom, experience, fortitude
and prudence of Samuel, to moderate, direct and tranquilize the public mind,
which had now become restless and passionate.

We feel our need of the continued services of our wise and experienced Leader
in counsel and arms, who is now silent in death, having finished his course.
His prayer was, "that man might no longer be the enemy of man;" but this his
benevolent supplication is not yet answered. The world is in trouble -- a
martial spirit has pervaded the nations -- those with which we have intercourse
are paraded in arms. We have enemies abroad -- we have the discontented and
mutinous at home -- the storm gathers around us, and threatens to burst its
thunders on our heads.

We are in danger of being drawn into the vortex of war, and its miseries.
While we pray that the God of armies, and the God of mercy, would save us from
these woes, we have to lament the loss of one who has been honored as an
instrument of our country's salvation, in perilous times; whose aid and
experience we still need; whose wisdom and valor had acquired universal
confidence, and whose very name inspired the sons of America with fortitude and
hope.

7. The Israelites mourned for Samuel in the remembrance of his warnings and
exhortations against political jealousies, and sedition. In a time of
disaffection toward their government, and when many were indulging complaint,
Samuel received direction from the Lord to "protest solemnly unto the people,
and to show them the manner of the king," or the unhappiness of that
government, under which they sought to place themselves. "Nevertheless, ^he
people refused to obey the voice of Samuel" in this respect; though he was
faithful in his admonitions, and showed himself a friend to their best
interests. Our celebrated Civilian, deceased, has solemnly admonished his
fellow citizens against seditious principles, and a riotous opposition to the
established government. The following sentiments are his: "The very idea of the
power and the right of the people to establish government, presupposes the duty
of every individual to obey the established government. All obstructions to the
execution of the laws, all combinations and associations, under whatever
plausible character, with the real design to direct, control, counteract or
awe the regular deliberation and action of the constituted authorities, are
destructive of this fundamental principle, and of fatal tendency." This
admonition is fitted to suppress licentious politics, and to direct public
opinion in the way of sobriety, order, and civil happiness. And such is the
state of man, that popular opinion is in constant need of such direction,
because its frailties greatly expose it to a wrong bias; and, when this is the
case, it can easily subvert the best mode of government, and trample on those
laws which promise safety to the public. Under such warnings of our enlightened
Instructor, who, "though dead, yet speaks," let us watch against a seditious
spirit, and those irritating jealousies which sap the foundation of public
tranquillity, and which tend to involve in irreparable disorders and sufferings.

8. All the Israelites lamented the death of Samuel. Let us put emphasis on the
word all, and consider the reason why all Israel were afflicted by this event.
Samuel was a public benefactor: he had wrought in the service of his country,
and spent his life for its good. All had derived advantages from his wisdom,
and from his faithfulness to their interests and happiness. Universal
testimonials of respect and mourning at his death were a tribute due to his
memory, and suitably expressive of the public sense of his worth. We are called
to mourn, with all our brethren of the United States, the decease of our most
worthy and honorable Friend, as for a public benefactor. From his youth he
devoted himself to the service of his country, and has spent an invaluable life
in the promotion of public happiness. He has sustained the most arduous
offices, and filled them with singular dignity, not with an ultimate view to
acquire the applause of men, but to procure lasting advantages for his people.
His benevolent purposes have met with surprising success. We have all derived
benefits from his wisdom, his labors and sufferings. His life was a blessing
to every individual in United America, and we all owe him a weighty and
pleasing debt of gratitude. His unremitting exertions at the head of our
armies, and in the chair of state, have been a distinguished mean of the
establishment and preservation of our rights and liberties, civil and
religious, which we hold as valuable beyond all computation.

The arms of death have now embraced this our great and honorable Friend --
who has submitted to numberless perils and toils for our good -- who has
traversed the bloody camp to protect us, and give us liberty -- who has left
the sweets of retirement, and placed himself at the helm of government, to save
us from wreck and torture -- who has showed himself the friend of God, the
friend of man, the friend of his country, the supporter of that religion which
is necessary to our present and ultimate happiness -- and who has exhibited a
public example of all those virtues which dignify the character of man, and
render social intercourse desirable. Let our nation therefore be clad in
sackcloth, for "the mighty man is fallen" -- the beauty and delight of our
Israel is no more. "Ye daughters" of America, "weep over him who has clothed
you with scarlet, and with other delights, and who has put ornaments of gold
on your apparel."

9. Public mourning for Samuel, and mourning on such an occasion as now invites
our grief, is suitable, because it is but a just acknowledgment of the virtues
and worth of those whose death is thus lamented. It is an evidence of public
gratitude for what they have done for the good of their country, and for the
benefit of the world. Beside, public testimonials of respect for the memory of
those deceased, who have been eminently virtuous and useful, has a favorable
influence on the living. It operates as an encouragement to the living to
imitate the example of the honorable dead. A man first in the command of an
army, or one high in the seats of civil administration, must feel a depression
and discouragement, on finding the services of the virtuous and faithful in
office rewarded with public ungratefulness and complaint. The cares, toils and
responsibility of such offices, when filled with wisdom and dignity, ought to
be supported with the candor, affection and gratitude of the public mind. When
it is made evident that public gratitude is excited toward those who have
served their country with wisdom and fidelity, in the most important offices --
when the labors and anxieties of such offices are rewarded with the affections
and confidence of the people, who arise at their decease, and pronounce their
memory blessed -- then encouragement and support are given, both to the warrior
and civilian, amidst all the hazards and weariness of office.

Hence let the affectionate respect which appears through our country, for the
memory of her departed Guardian and Friend, be considered as proper and
important, not only as it is a tribute due to his worth, but on account of its
favorable influence on the living. Let those who now, or may hereafter, fill
the important offices which he has borne, be encouraged to seek for the wisdom
which directed him, and to imitate all his virtues. And may they and all the
people pray, in imitation of the prophet Elisha, that a double portion of
WASHINGTON's spirit may rest on his successors in office. While we remember his
most important services, and retain an high affection for his name -- while we
look up to his worth as beyond our estimation, and indulge in impressive
accents of sorrow at his death -- it becomes us to acknowledge the
righteousness of that providence which has laid him in his tomb. "Shall we
receive good at the hand of God, and shall we not receive evil?"

Our Heavenly Benefactor is to be praised in that he has raised one to the
head of our national concerns, in whom all those virtues remarkably centred
which qualified him for office, and rendered him so universally and peculiarly
acceptable to the people. In this view of divine goodness, and the favor
granted us, we may adopt the sentiments which were entertained in the
contemplation of Solomon's wisdom and excellence, and which were expressed in
these words -- "Blessed be the Lord thy God, who delighted in thee, to set thee
on his throne, to be king for the Lord thy God; because thy God loved Israel to
establish them forever, therefore made he thee king over them, to do judgment
and justice."

We close with observing, that the death which we now lament gives us a solemn
lesson on human frailty. The "prophets lived not forever." "Samuel died, and
all Israel lamented him, and buried him in his own sepulcher at Ramah."
WASHINGTON, our friend and benefactor, is dead, and laid in his own tomb at
Mount Vernon. He, who has stood protected while thousands have fallen around
him, has now past the vale of death, after a short indisposition. He, who was
raised to the summit of human glory, dies like other men. He, who has made
legions of invading foes to submit, must himself submit to the irresistible
power of the king of terrors. He, whose person was admired, and whom multitudes
sought to behold, is now hidden from the eyes of mortals, and left to moulder
back to dust. He, who gave laws to millions, must himself submit to the decrees
of his Maker. Thus "the world is passing away" -- the glory of kingdoms is
fading. "The wise and reverend head" must lie on a level with others. In the
judgment of the Great Day, there will be no distinction, but that which arises
from different tempers of heart: Though the death of the righteous cause grief,
yet to them it is gain. While their memory is blessed on earth, their spirits
ascend to the perfect and endless enjoyment of God. Glory and praise to the
riches of that grace which brings the departed saint to the triumphant song --
" O Death, where is thy sting? O Grave, where is thy victory?"

To serve God with faithfulness in the different spheres of action in which his
providence has placed us, is the great business of life -- the way to a happy
death, and to an eternal rest with Christ, in his kingdom of unfading glory.

May we be thus wise, and blessed of God, through Jesus Christ. AMEN.

AN HISTORICAL SKETCH.
"THE ancestors of General Washington came from England in the year 1657. He is
in the third descent after their migration. He was born the 11th of February
(old style) 1732, at the parish of Washington, in Westmoreland Country,
Virginia. His education was principally conducted by a private tutor. Before he
attained his twentieth year, he was raised to the inspection of a military
district in Virginia, with the rank of Major. In 1753, when he was little more
than twenty-one years of age, he was appointed an agent to treat with the
French, who had made encroachments on the territories of the then British
colonies at the westward. He was entrusted with plenary power for the
management of this important business, and pursued the duties of his mission
with singular industry, wisdom and address; but had not the happiness to
prevent a war between England and France. The next year, 1754, he was appointed
Lieutenant Colonel in the Virginia regiment. The chief colonel dying the same
year, without joining the regiment, the command and rank of Colonel devolved on
him. He formed a plan to establish posts for the defense of the frontiers, at
the confluence of the Allegany and Monongahela rivers. Pursuing this object,
with only 400 effective men, he was met with an army of the enemy, computed at
1500, and after a gallant and well-managed defense, in which more than one
third of his men were killed and wounded, he was obliged to capitulate. He,
however, secured the important condition of retiring with the honors of war;
but his men were brutally plundered by the Indians.

"In 1755 the British government sent Genesis Braddock with an army to repel these
invaders. Washington was received as Aid-de Camp to Genesis Braddock, with the
rank of Colonel." President Davies, in a sermon preached to Capt. Overton's
company of volunteers, who were raised in Virginia for this expedition, bore
this honorable and prophetic testimony in favor of the since Commander of the
American armies: -- Said he, "I point out to the public that heroic youth, Col.
Washington, whom I cannot but hope Providence has hitherto preserved in so
signal a manner for some important service to his country."

In this year was the memorable battle and defeat of Braddock, at the
Monongahela. Genesis Braddock was killed, and all his officers, who were obliged
to be on horseback, were killed or wounded, excepting Col. Washington; who
displayed great fortitude and military skill in saving the wreck of this
mutilated army. Soon after this, on account of his singular merit, he was
honored with the command of all the troops raised and to be raised in
Virginia. He continued to display his military talents in the defense of the
frontiers. In 1758 he commanded a van brigade in the capture of fort Du Quesne.

The success of this campaign having secured tranquillity to the middle
colonies, and his health being extremely impaired, in 1759 he resigned his
appointment.

He gradually recovered his health -- married Mrs. Custis, a respectable young
widow -- settled on his estate at Mount Vernon, and gave his attention to
agriculture. After he left the army in '59 he was constantly a member of the
Virginia Assembly, a magistrate of his county, and a judge of the court," until
the year 1774, when he was elected a delegate to the first Continental
Congress. In 1775 he was appointed Commander in Chief of the continental army.
From this time he submitted to more than "Herculean labors" in watching the
movements of an insidious and powerful foe, and in bringing his variable and
undisciplined army to the most promising point of resistance.

Under the most depressive circumstances -- in want of a regular force
competent to the exigences of the day -- in want of food, clothing and pay for
his suffering companions in the field -- his magnanimity and trust in
Providence supported his hope. The sufferings of his army, in the want of a
generous and promised subsistence, excited repeated mutinies among the
soldiery, and awakened the most threatening discontents among many of his
officers. These seasons of most imminent danger aroused his powers of oratory,
in which there was unparalleled persuasion, which sustained our cause, and
saved our country.

The magnitude of the cause which he was engaged to support, and the unequalled
trust he had taken on himself, must have lain with inexpressible we^^^^ ^n his
mind. He sustained this mighty burden, until the ever-memorable victory at
York-town, which afforded him a partial relief. This event (the capture of lord
Cornwallis and the British army under his command, which took place in October,
1781) laid a foundation for peace between the United States and Great Britain.
Peace was realized in 1783. In 1787 General Washington was elected President of
the General Convention which formed the constitution of the United States. The
first Congress, under the new constitution, convened March, 1787, and on the
30th of April GEORGE WASHINGTON was declared President of the United States. He
was reelected to the Presidency in 1793. In '97 he retired* from public
service, having declined being considered as a candidate for the future
suffrages of his fellow citizens. In '98 he was appointed General and Commander
in Chief of the Armies of the United States, of which he accepted; in this,
giving the most impressive evidence of his benevolence to his country, and that
the greatness of his mind was above the punctilios of rank. -- He died December
14th, 1799, Aet. 68.

FINIS



