ADELAIDE OF WULFINGEN. A TRAGEDY IN FOUR ACTS. (EXEMPLIFYING THE BARBARITY
WHICH PREVAILED DURING THE THIRTEENTH CENTURY.)

FROM THE GERMAN OF KOTZEBUE.

NEW YORK; PRINTED FOR CHARLES SMITH AND S. STEPHENS. 1800

DRAMTIS PERSONAE.
Sir HUGO of Wulfingen, a knight of the holy cross against the Saracens. Sir
THEOBALD of Wulfingen, a knight of the holy cross against the Pomoranians, and
Vandals: -- son of Sir HUGO. ADELAIDE, wife of Sir THEOBALD. sons of Sir
THEOBALD, 6 and 7 years old.
WILIBALD, OTTOMAR,
BERTRAM, an old boor. CYRILLUS, an abbot of the Premonstrantes. MISTIVOI,
chief of the Heathen tribe. A MONK. A CHILD. Squires, Followers, etc. etc.
ADELAIDE OF WULFINGEN.
ACT I.
The stage represents an open place in a Heathen Village. In the back ground is
an Idol overturned, and near it on an eminence, a cross erected. The Idol is
naked. and has a lion's face. On its breast it bears a bull's head, in its
right hand a club or battle-axe* and on its head a bird like a goose. On both
sides are the remains of dwellings -- some plundered and burning, others still
smoking, and half demolished. Sir THEOBALD of Wulfingen and his SQUIRE, making
their way over the ruins. Theobald ( Returns his sword into the scabbard, and
throws himself breathless upon a hillock.) ENOUGH! Enough of toils and carnage!
Sound my herald! Sound a retreat to you merciless mob! I commanded you to
fight, and ye have murdered. I pointed your swords against the breasts of men
in arms, and ye have plunged them into the hearts of sucking babes. -- Oh God,
whose all-seeing eye has brooded with an awful gloom over the horrors of last
night, here do I stand before the rising sun, the image of thy Majesty: -- Here
do I stand, and with self-acquitting conscience swear, that sacred to me have
ever been the duties of my order. -- Blood has stained this sword, yet may
every drop which has issued from the breast of a woman or a child, fall on my
soul in liquid fire! Ah! what distant cries of anguish strike my ear! the
shrieks of women! the screams of infants! -- Away, Bevys! I too have a wife, I
too have children. Away, Bevys! thunder to the cowards, to cease the carnage of
defenseless people, and let thy mace fell to the earth him who dares to
disobey. (the Squire goes) Oh! suffering Redeemer! There, amidst the carcases
of the vanquished, have they fixed thy cross. The blood of the slain still
trickles down the hill. True, it is but the blood of the heathens, yet surely
the blood of men. And can these smoking ruins be an acceptable sacrifice in
thy sight? My heart expands. An irresistible voice calls loudly to me: "They
were all thy brethren."


A CHILD with tattered clothes and dishevelled hair, is running affrighted
past. Chi. My mother! where is my mother?


The ( Starts) Boy! who is it thou seek'st?


Chi. ( Crying) My mother! my mother!


The. Heavens!


Chi. Oh! they have killed my father and my little sister. My youngest brother
lies yonder bleeding to death. -- Where Is my mother! Where Is my mother!


The. Come to my arms, poor wretch!


Chi. There stood our hut; all is gone. Oh! how it burns! Our little garden is
covered with ashes. Where can I go? -- Mother! Mother! (Runs away, and is still
heard at a distance, calling in a tone of distress for its mother.)


The. Hoo! How I shudder through my whole frame! How my bristling hair raises
the helmet from my head! -- Boy! Boy! cease thy cries. Thou criest the courage
from my heart. -- What is this courage? Boldness to encounter, or patience to
endure? Perhaps both, and here both forsake me! Oh! what then is courage, if a
whining child can thus unnerve a hero's arm? My knees totter when I catch a
fading eye, and the groans of the dying make a very woman of me. It Is well the
battle is over. I could not fight now.


The SQUIRE returns. Squ. All is silence. The streets are covered with carcases
of men, women and children. The honor of the Almighty is avenged. -- The
sanctuaries of the idols are demolished. The holy cross is seen on every side.
But few heathens have escaped, some hundreds, with the chief of their tribe,
are our prisoners. Our band returns triumphant and laden with rich booty.


The. Booty did them call it? Call it pillage -- pillage which I do not wish
to share.


Squ. Not far from the village too, I found the monk, who accompanied us upon
our expedition. I could not but laugh at the good man. In the heat of the
battle he had climbed the highest oak, and was slily peeping through the
branches. I told him that the danger was all over. Instantly he descended from
his covert, and is following close at my heels.


The. Fierce as a boy to blow the blaze, and fearful as a boy to skulk into a
corner when it spreads around, has ever been their way. How strange are my
sensations! An invisible hand tears away the cloud of artifice, and truth
already dawns in the horizon. Would I were at home with the partner of my soul!


The MONK enters. Monk. Praise be unto God! hail noble knight! the Lord was
with your sword. Fallen are the proud heathens, and demolished their abominable
idols. My eye is moistened with a pious tear -- a tear of heavenly joy, when I
behold the emblem of the holy cross, erected by your valiant arm.


The. Give me then your testimony, that I have honorably fulfilled my vow --
You well know how your Abbot, by the pious zeal, which flowed from his lips, by
papal bulls, by absolution, and promises of blessing, persuaded me to this
excursion. Give me your testimony in his presence, that I have fulfilled the
word of a knight.


Monk. That will I -- I will relate to him what miracles of valor you performed
in our holy cause before my eyes.


The. ( in a tone of derision) Pardon me, good father,! 'Twas beneath your eyes.


Monk. And he shall double your absolution, shall extend it to your children,
and bless you through a thousand generations.


The. It Is well. Then I shall be blessed enough. Now with the hand of a knight,
take the irrevocable oath, that as long as this arm can wield a sword or lance,
it never shall again contend for the church, or for God, as you call it.


Monk. Sir knight, sir knight, you forget yourself.


The. I do not -- little as I ever shall be able to forget the scenes of
horror, which last night I witnessed. I hold you at your word. Did you not give
your testimony that I had fulfilled my vow? Have not I, have not my ancestors
yet done enough? Have you forgotten, that for three and twenty years, I have
been fatherless? -- that Hugo of Wulfingen went to the holy land against the
Saracens, and there probably found his grave?


Monk. A blessed martyr, if his blood flowed for the glory of God.


The. And yet my tears, and the tears of my mother, flowed for him.


Monk. Pearls in the crown of the just.


The. Fine words you have at command, good father.


Monk. The words of the church's servant: his testimony and his blessing, bear
the soul aloft, as upon the beams of light, to heavenly bliss. Shielded by
them, no angel will obstruct your way. But if your choleric valor cannot brook
empty words -- it is well, sir knight, to you belong deeds. Arise! Fight for the
honor of your God! Is your army already weary? Is your sword already gorged?
Behold, all the tribes which dwell upon the coast, are lost in careless
indolence, and where perchance one fugitive escaped your arm, he has poured
dismay and terror into every trembling heart. Arise! rally your followers! away
to fresh victories!


The. Spare your lungs, good father, I abide by my oath. Of what avail can
these base conquests be to God, to you, my country, or myself? God needs no
champion -- I could once have reckoned among my followers many a valiant
warrior, to wield the sword or battle axe. What are they now? Robbers, who
spare neither age nor sex, and then cast lots for plunder.


A Follower of Sir THEOBALD enters. Fol. Sir Knight, we are conducting to your
presence the chief of the tribe which we have conquered -- Here is his banner.
( presents a long staff, on the point of which is fixed the image of a bear, or
any other wild beast.) A proud and stubborn man.


Monk. Has he blasphemed?


Fol. Not so, he speaks but little, yet each word is a command. His impressive
tone, his hoary locks, and his dignified mien, constrain the most stubborn to
submission. He comes.


MISTIVOI enters, guarded and in chains. Mis. Whither will you lead me? Why do
you drag me over the bodies of my brethren, and the smoking ruins of my former
dwellings? Is it not alike to you where I die? Slay me, I Will go no further.


Gua. Bend thy knee before that cross.


Mis. Never!


Monk. How! Dare thou insult our God?


Mis. Never did I insult your God, nor should I, had I been your conqueror.
Never did I bend my knee before your God, nor will I, though I am your slave.


Monk. Hear, sir knight, he attacks the honor of God. At the foot of the holy
cross, let his blood, drop by drop --


The. Reverend father, I heard no attack. (half aside) Old man, I venerate thy
pride.


Monk. Sir knight, I command you, in the name of God --


Mis. Is this your knight? Is this he, who like a dastard, falls when it is
dark, on a defenseless tribe? Is this your knight? Is this he, who only draws
his sword to plunge it in the hearts of infants?


The. (grasping his sword) Man! But thy chains protect thee.


Mis. Why hesitate? it is but one murder more. Or do thou think it a less
honorable deed to butcher an infirm old man, than a poor helpless babe?


The. Rude man, thou do mistake me.


Mis. Oh! I know thee well. The groans of the dying too plainly tell me who
thou art. How they all stand staring at me! Some with scorn, others with
compassion. Scorn I can return: Compassion hurts me.


The. Take off his chains and leave us. (guards obey.)


Mis. I know not, knight, is this benevolence? Have you thus rid me of my
fetters that I may die at liberty? -- Then take my thanks Or is it mockery?
Will thou make me feel, that even when free from chains, my arm can do no more.
Then woe be on thy head! The first firebrand which I sieze, shall hurl thee to
destruction.


The. I meant to dive into thy soul. I longed to converse coolly with thee. I
wanted to find means to calm thy boiling blood. For this I took away thy chains.


Mis. Coolly! -- Art thou mad? I had seven sons -- they are all fallen. I had
three daughters -- thy villains have defiled and murdered them. I had a wife --
a wife, who for forty years had shared my joys and sorrows -- there she lies,
weltering in her blood -- Coolly! Coolly! I was chief of this tribe, revered
and loved. Young and old assembled round me on festivals, and called me father.
Even last night, I stood in the circle of my friends, and hailed the setting
sun. Today I stand alone -- bereft of children -- bereft of wife -- Coolly!
Coolly! I had a peaceful dwelling, fertile fields, and thriving flocks. My
house is now a heap of ruins, my fields are all laid waste, my flocks are
bleating for their shepherd.


The. (extremely agitated) Hold!


Mis. ( observes him closely, and after a pause) Young man! thy outward fashion
seems assumed, perhaps imposed. What had I done to thee? We had never seen each
other. I had never injured thee. Why did thou fall on me and mine, when we
had lost all our cares in sleep? Have thou too children? Have thou too a heart?


THEOBOLD is abashed and silent. Monk. We took arms by command of our God, to
erect his holy cross among the heathen, to conduct the blind into the path of
light, to convert wolves into lambs, and unite them to the flock of the Lord.


Mis. Then should you have approached our lonely huts, with the palm of peace
in your hands, and the honey of persuasion on your lips. Then should ye have
preached the word of truth, and sent conviction to our hearts. Had ye done
this, perhaps we had willingly followed your instructions.


Monk. Do thou not acknowledge, then, our God's omnipotence, and your idol's
nothingness? Behold! -- There in the dust it lies; the holy cross is reared on
high.


Mis. Shallow boaster! Mortal hands have formed yon image; Mortal hands have
formed this cross. -- Mortal arms have levelled that with the earth, and
planted this upon the hill. Why talk of thy God and of our God? We have but one
God. And must the blood of hundreds then be shed, because one chooses a cross,
another a lion's face, as the symbol of the Invisible?


Monk. Hear, sir knight, he blasphemes.


The. Peace, Monk, revere his age.


Monk. If thy heart pay less regard to God's honor than to his, it is well.
Think then, at least of all the dreadful ravages, which for a long train of
years, have been committed on our lands by these rude barbarians, ever since
Henry the Lion* and Bernard of Ascania, were no more. Think of the poor
christians, who have been forced by them to bear the galling yoke of slavery.
Think of the wives and children whom they have made widows and orphans.


Mis. Thou lie. Never has my little tribe, since I have governed it, advanced
beyond its peaceful limits -- Thou lie. -- Never have my subjects gained
subsistence by plundering their fellow creatures. Thou lie. Never have
christians languished in our dungeons. I myself possessed but one. He was old,
and more my friend than slave. Nor did I either force or betray him hither. I
bought him of my neighbors.


Monk. A christian! Merciful God! Where is he? Whither has this sheep strayed?
Has it not heard the voice of the shepherd?


The. ( Who, throughout this scene, has appeared to have been deeply immersed
in thought, now approaches the old man with exalted, yet timorous, mien, and
offers his hand) Can thou forgive me?


Mis. (Throwing back his hand) Never! Thou have robbed me of all, and were I
now to forgive thee, thou would fill up the measure of thy cruelty -- thou
would grant me life.


The. But if I repair all that I am able to repair; if I replace thee in thy
rights, collect thy scattered subjects round thee, release the prisoners, lay
the bloody booty at thy feet, rebuild thy huts --


Mis. ( Raising his eyes toward heaven) Oh! my wife, my children!


The. (Stands as if struct dumb. -- A solemn pause ensues. -- Then with warmth)
Oh that the departed breath of life would but obey my voice! Yet thou, old man,
whose silver locks inspire my soul with reverence unutterable, thou were not
merely a husband and a father; thou were the head of a far larger family. On
thy lips hung doctrines of wisdom and of peace. To thee they were indebted for
ease and comfort; without thee they must have perished. Take back this staff,
this ensign of thy dignity. Still make thy little people good and happy, and
become a member of our church.


Mis. Young man, in thy eye beams the goodness of thy heart. I understand thee.
This was not thy cruelty. (With a glance toward the Monk) Thou were but the
instrument -- ( Presenting his hand) I forgive thee. The blood of the slain be
not on thee, nor on thy children, I take back the staff, drenched in the gore
of my friends. I take it, to do good, while my weary foot still rests upon the
brink of the yawning grave. But my faith I never will renounce. I am old. My
days can be but few. Already is the potter kneading the clay from which my urn
is to be formed. In the belief of my fathers have I lived: In the belief of my
fathers will I die.


Monk. Hear, sir knight! He blasphemes.


Mis. But to thee be full permission granted, to send men into my territories,
who may peaceably announce those doctrines, of which they affirm themselves
possessed. To my people, too, be full permission granted, to adopt those
doctrines. If they but fulfill their duty toward me and their brethern, I shall
be silent.


The. I am satisfied -- But one condition more -- Thou have mentioned the
purchase of a christian slave. My duty, as a knight, forbids me to leave him
among heathens.


Mis. I go in search of him. But ere I leave thee, stranger, give me thy name.


The. Theobald of Wulfingen.


Mis. And he, with whom thou speak is old Mistivoi; and as a proof that he
no longer feels resentment, he divides this ring. (Draws a ring from his
finger, and breaks it) Take this, and if ever thou again approach these
dwellings, thou, or thy son, or grandson, let him send to me the half of this
ring. Then will I acknowledge the bond of hospitality now made between us, and
receive him in my hut -- when I again possess one. ( after a pause of
heartfelt sensibility) Farewell!


The. (Bursts into his arms) Farewell! Be my friend.


Mis. I am thy friend. The blessings of thy God and of my God be showered upon
thee! Trust me, youth, such men as we shall meet again, whether before the
throne of Jehovah, or in the blissful habitation of Radegast. Goes.


The. ( Leans mournfully against a tree) Be not ashamed of such a tear. Let it
flow uncheck'd. It Is a tear that well becomes a knight -- What virtue, but may
be found in this heathen? I took his all, and he forgave me. Blush, christian,
blush!


Monk. Sir knight, be on your guard. A heathen's virtue is but mere hypocrisy.


The. [ peevishly) Pshaw! Mutter thy litanies, and count thy beads. Thou shall
not subdue my faith in human nature.


Monk. This is the language of the tempter. Son of the church, steel thy heart!
Armor of the Lord, shrink not from thy faith! Have you then, sir knight,
forgotten the oath, which you swore before our pious abbot, at the altar? Have
you forgotten the solemn protestation, that you would exterminate this cursed
race? And yet live many hundred prisoners. Yet lives the proud imperious
Mistivoi.


The. Yes, and shall live. I have fulfilled the dreadful vow; of this you have
yourself given testimony. Not one more drop of guiltless blood shall now be
shed.


Monk. Is this the language of a christian hero? Will you not rather restore
their idols, and offer sacrifice to them, even at the foot of the holy cross?


The. Beware of derision, reverend father. Do you wish the propagation of the
gospel? well! This too is provided for. You heard the agreement made between
Mistivoi and myself.


Monk. An agreement with a heathen! A bond between Christ and Belial! You
promised to save all that could be saved. You promised to return the costly
booty, which was destined for our pious abbot and the church. -- Where then,
are all your mighty plans? -- You would clothe our altar. You would melt the
impious ornaments of all their idols into golden chalices, silver censers,
images of saints --


The. I understand you, reverend father. The booty shall be valued, and the
loss made good from my own property.


Monk. Sir knight, I thank you in the church's name, but --


The. Not another But, lest I repent, that the cross upon my mantle, was
received from the hands of your abbot. But yesterday my zeal began to cool, my
resolution wavered.


Monk. To cool -- and wavered! You see, sir knight, how busy Satan --


The. Satan had nothing to do with it, good father.


Monk. How so, sir knight, how so? By what means?


The. By what means! Why should I be ashamed of the confession? By the tears of
my wife. My Adelaide gazed at me with such anxiety, followed me so mournfully
through every passage, heaved such deep sighs from her bosom -- and when the
servant entered with my armor, she burst into a flood of tears -- but when I
braced on my corselet, sorrow quite overwhelmed her -- she threw her arms
around my neck --


Monk. Sir knight, can you be turned (aside) by the toying of a woman?


The. No, good father. I know my Adelaide. It Is true I raised her from the
humble cottage, to make her the companion of my life; but in her veins flows as
noble blood, as if her ancestors had been a race of heroes. -- Never has one
thought, unworthy of her present rank, reminded me of what she was. How often,
when I have been summoned to the field, has she, with her own hands buckled on
my harness, and with a cheerful mien gone with me to the castle gate! But
yesterday, unaccountable presages seemed to labor in her breast. Her parting
kiss was bathed in tears, and with a voice of heartfelt sorrow, she bade me to
spare the unfortunate, but most to regard myself.


Monk. To spare! Truly she was mighty generous. Are not these the very
heathens, who, some eight years ago, in one of their excursions, dragged her
father into bondage?


The. True, and Adelaide has mourned his loss, but not by renouncing her
humanity. The mean sensation of revenge is foreign to her.


A FOLLOWER of Sir THEOBALD enters with BERTRAM. Fol. Sir knight, this is the
Christian slave sent by Mistivoi.


The. Come nearer. How long have thou been a prisoner?


Ber. Eight years. No -- but five years. The three last, spent in Mustivoi's
hut, have not been years of slavery.


The. From what part of our country came thou, that I may return thee to thy
master?


Ber. I am a boor in the demesnes of Wulfingen. My master is Sir Hugo of
Wulfingen. --


The. Whose son now stands before thee.


Ber. Then you must be Sir Theobald. Heaven bless you, noble sir!


The. Thy name?


Ber. Bertram.


The. (Starts) Bertram! Heavens! Had thou a daughter?


Ber. ( Alarmed) A daughter! -- No -- Yes --


The. Is Adelaide thy child?


Ber. ( Extremely agitated) Adelaide! -- Yes -- That is my daughter's name. Is
she alive?


The. ( Clasps him in his arms) Adelaide is my wife!


Ber. ( Cries aloud) Your wife!


The. My good, my much loved wife!


Ber. God of heaven! How is that possible?


The. To virtue and to beauty all is possible. I one day found her at a well.
'Twas not long after the heathens had carried thee off. She was weeping. I
asked her the reason of her grief. "I am an orphan," answered she, "ere I could
lisp, I lost my mother; and but a few days since, the Vandals robbed me of my
father." Her words, her tears, sunk deep into my heart. I went -- and I
returned. I saw her often, yet never saw her enough. -- My uncle had fixed upon a
lady of high birth to be my wife -- but all in vain! Already was I bound in the
soft chains of love. I laughed at ancestry and riches. I led my Adelaide to the
altar. -- Thanks be to heaven, I never, for a moment, have repented such a
choice! Come, old man, thou shall be a witness of our happiness. Thou shall see
grandchildren. --


Ber. (Always alarmed) Grandchildren!


The. Two sweet lads, if I be not blinded by a father's fondness. But why do
thou thus tremble? Why do thou thus wildly roll thy eyes around? Has the yoke
of bondage made thy heart insensible of joy? Or how? Do thou think thou shall
be less my father, because blind fate has made thy son-in-law a knight, and
thee a boor? -- Fear it not. Thou art the father of my wife. I will revere
thee. My children will revere thee. Thou shall pass the remainder of thy days
in undisturbed tranquillity.


Ber. I thank you, sir knight. Allow me another question.


The. Call me son.


Ber. Is your father yet returned from Palestine?


The. Alas! No. Why do thou dash this wormwood in my cup of joy? For twenty
years I have had no account of him. Doubtless he fell a sacrifice to the fury
of the infidels, with many another knight, who went into the holy land. --
Thousands of tears have I shed for him, as a child, on the lap of my mother; as
a youth, on the grave of my mother; and as a man, on the bosom of thy daughter.
-- Let us quit the subject. Be the rest of this day dedicated to joy! Heavens!
What a full measure of delight awaits my Adelaide! How much was she deceived by
all her frightful omens! I go to sound an immediate retreat. Hold thyself in
readiness. In a few minutes we bend homeward. --


Goes with the Monk. Ber. What have I heard? -- Wretch that I am! Shall I then
be reconducted to my brethern, only to plunge an affectionate couple into
irrevocable misery? Has God prolonged my days, only to involve me in a contest
the most horrible, between religion and humanity? With a single word, I crush
four innocent fellow creatures, drive them into wretchedness, and bring down
the ban upon their heads. -- No. -- I will be silent. I Will tear my tongue from
my mouth. -- Adelaide! My dear good Adelaide! -- Oh! Why was I not allowed to
die here in peace? ( The sound of a trumpet is heard at a distance) The signal
of retreat! But 'ere I go, another tear upon the neck of generous Mistivoi.
Would it were the last that I am doomed to shed on earth!


Staggers over the ruins, leaning on his stick. SCENE. A Room in the Castle of
Wulfingen.
The fat Abbot CYRILLUS enters and looks round. Cyr. Not a mortal to be seen.
For ever locked in her chamber, for ever kneeling to her crucifix, or among her
maids with loom and spindle, or instructing her two boys! -- Is this virtue, or
is it her humor? Perhaps both. Perhaps too, neither. The title of noble lady
has inflamed the daughter of a boor. She has somewhere heard of such a word as
honor, a glittering toy, of which she shortly will be tired. Could I but arrive
so far as to discover that the language of my eyes was no longer
unintelligible, that when I gazed at her with melting tenderness, she no longer
looked at me with such -- how shall I express it -- such stupidity, such apathy
-- could I arrive so far as to see her eyes cast upon the earth, when in my
presence, then -- my game were won. If the knight allow me but sufficient time,
if father Benjamin will but obey my orders in kindling his breast with
enthusiasm, in dragging him from one nation to another, from one contest to
another, in holding Heaven before his eyes, whenever his zeal flags -- and if,
in spite of all his intrepidity, some lucky heathen spear at last should reach
his heart -- Ha! What a golden opportunity! To console the mourning widow! To
creep into her heart beneath the mask of pity! -- But hold! Who comes? I was
almost too loud.


WILIBALD and OTTOMAR hop into the room. Will. God bless you, father abbot!


Ott. God bless you.


Cyr. I thank you, children. Where is your mother?


Will. I don't know.


Ott. ( Consequentially) But I do.


Cyr. Well, let us hear then, my little fellow.


Ott. But what will you give me, if I tell you?


Cyr. Are you so covetous? Will you do nothing unless paid for it?


Ott. O yes, to poor people. But my father says you are rich, and have more
than you want.


Cyr. Does he say so? It seems then, I must bribe you.


Will. Bribe! Fie, brother!


Ott. How can I help it, if he calls it so?


Cyr. Look, Ottomar! what a pretty picture!


Ott. ( Grasps eagerly at it) Who is that man, with a great key?


Cyr. Saint Peter.


Ott. What can he do with that key?


Cyr. He can open the gates of Heaven. Now, tell me where your mother is.


Will. You Have taken a bribe. Now you must tell.


Ott. No. -- There father abbot, take your picture back^ My mother is gone to
the village, to draw water from the well.


Cyr. She herself! Could she not send any of her servants? Are there not
springs close to the castle gate? You must be lying, boy.


Ott. Do you know what I did lately, when great Bevys, my father's squire, told
me I lied?


Cyr. Well?


Ott. I struck him on the face.


Cyr. And what did great Bevys do?


Ott. He ran to my father and told him. But my father was not angry. Runs away.


Will. And my father was right. Runs after his brother.


Cyr. Like parents, like children! ADELAIDE enters with two water-pitchers, and
places them before the door. Heaven bless you, noble lady!


Ade. And you, reverend abbot!


Cyr. Is it then true? I thought that Ottomar had lied.


Ade. That he dare not, even though in jest. What was it that you would not
credit?


Cyr. (Pointing to the pitchers) Your descending to the employment of a menial.


Ade. Does this surprise you, reverend abbot? You may perhaps mistake it for
ostentation, since I have so many servants, and an industrious wife may be
employed to better purpose, than in bringing water from the well. I will
explain this, reverend abbot. To you my birth is not a secret. Eight years are
on this day elapsed, since I went down with the same pitchers to yonder well.
My tears were mingled with the water; for you may remember, at that time the
Vandals had just robbed me of my father, the only prop of my poor helpless
youth. Sir Theobald saw me, loved me, and made me the happiest of women. Shall
I not celebrate this day? Long as I live, these pitchers shall retain their
place among my bridal ornaments. Never do I fail, upon this day, as soon as I
have finished my morning prayer, to visit yonder well. My reason tells me that
it is to recollect my former lowliness. My heart tells me that it is to call to
my remembrance, the first words, the first looks of my dear Theobald.


Cyr. This is commendable, noble lady. But beware lest your affection should
become idolatry.


Ade. Oh! that my affection were capable of increase! Am I not indebted to him
for every thing? Without him* what had I been? A deserted orphan, turned out
into the wide world, and exposed to every violence. The tears of sorrow flowed
into these pitchers, and for eight years I have shed none but tears of joy. Oh!
that my affection were capable of increase! Oh! that this heart could love more
fervently!


Cyr. ( Aside) Torture!


Ade. (Depressed) For the first time, in all these happy years he is absent on
this day. But, he is fighting for our holy church, and I must hold my peace.
What think you, reverend father? May he soon return from this excursion?


Cyr. As it happens, noble lady. He swore to me that he would level with the
earth the heathen villages which lay beyond the Elbe, and destroy the
inhabitants with fire and sword. If he should find the wretches unprepared, he
may with ease at once annihilate them. If not, the days may be prolonged to
weeks.


Ade. (Raising her hands and eyes) Protect him, God of battles! It Is thy holy
name for which he fights. Cover him, ye angels, with your wings. Conduct him
back victorious, to the bosom of his affectionate wife, to the arms of his
children!


Cyr. ( Aside) Here am I again alone with her, and not a single syllable comes
forth at my command.


WILIBALD runs into the room. Will. Mother! The guard upon the tower has blown
his horn.


OTTOMAR hops forward. Ott. Mother! What a many men on horseback! They make a
dreadful dust.


Ade. Has not the sentinel discovered who they are?


Will. They Are too far off.


Ade. Go then, children. Climb upon the turrets, and when they are nearer, come
to me again.


The boys run away. Cyr. ( Somewhat afraid) It Is not -- one would hope -- any
hostile surprise. --


Ade. Oh fear it not, reverend abbot. My husband has no quarrels with his
neighbors. Perhaps they may be guests: Then I am only sorrow Sir Theobald is
abroad. -- Perhaps too they may pass on the left to Ermersdorf.


WILIBALD and OTTOMAR enter with a shout of joy. Both. Mother! Mother! My
father's coming! My father's coming!


Ade. My Theobald!) Bursts out at the door, followed by Wilibald and Ottomar.)


Cyr. (As if thunderstruck) Ten thousand devils! -- Father Benjamin! Father
Benjamin! This is culpa gravis. The Premonstrantes make very nice distinctions
between culpa levis, media and gravis.



ACT II.
The stage represents a place in front of the castle of Wulfingen. In the
back-ground is a part of the castle, surrounded by a moat, over which is a
drawbridge that falls when the curtain rises. ADELAIDE, CYRILLUS, WILLIBALD
and OTTOMAR, pass swiftly from the Castle-gate, over the bridge. Adelaide. OH!
That I may not be deceived!


Will. ( hopping and springing) No, mother, no! The guard on the tower knew my
father's armor perfectly, and the white crest upon his helmet; and father
Benjamin was trotting behind him on the mule.


Cyr. I congratulate you, noble lady.


Ade. Reverend Abbot, I thank you. Run, children! climb upon the hill, and tell
me when they approach.


Both -- ( running up the hill) Huzza! my father's coming! My father's coming!


Cyr. (concealing his vexation beneath a smile) What transport these children
feel!


Ade. Oh! Mine is not more sedate. Willingly would I run with them, over every
stone, were it but becoming in a wife. And why should it not? Custom and
fashion are fell tyrants, and they impose their bondage even upon love and
tenderness. Children! can you distinguish nothing?


Will. (holding his hand above his eyes) The sun dazzles me.


Ott. (raising himself upon his toes) Ottomar's so little, mother.


Cyr. (in a tone of derision) It would seem as if the knight had been paying a
friendly visit.


Ade. ( emphatically) He has, I cannot doubt it, done his duty: and that he has
done it in so short a time, deserves your thanks as the author of the
expedition, and mine as the expectant wife. Wilibald, can you see nothing?


Will. Dust, dear mother, a great deal of dust, and amongst it something
glitters like arms.


Cyr. (in a tone of derision) If they raise as much dust on their return, as at
their departure, it is a happy sign that no one can have lost his life in the
excursion.


Ade. ( smiling) I know not, reverend abbot, what inference I am to draw from
your remarks. Do you mean to attack the honor of Sir Theobold: Or why do you
insult my ear with such discourse?


Cyr. Not so, noble lady --


Ade. Not so, reverend abbot. I am not disposed for any interruption to my joy.
Wilibald, can you still discover nothing?


Will. (claps his hands) Huzza, dear mother! It is my father! It is my father, I
know his gray horse: and great Bevys is riding behind him, and father Benjamin
upon the mule like a bear upon a beam.


Ott. I see them all too, mother.


Ade. I thank thee, O God, that thou have listened to my fervent prayer, and
thrown my dark presages to the winds.


Cyr. Presages, noble lady! Have you ever felt their influence?


Ade. Presages, or thick blood, or nervous terror -- call it what you will.
With fearful heart I always have surveyed the steed which was to bear my
husband to the heat of battle. But never have I felt what yesterday oppressed
me. Methought a world was laid upon me! -- Methought a gulf divided me from my
beloved Theobold! -- Heaven be praised! 'Twas but ideal. My imagination catches
such quick alarm.


Cyr. Be not so quick in your conclusions. Presages are the warnings of the
Almighty. It Is true; your husband now returns in health. For this we render
thanks to God and to St. Norbert. Yet is there nothing but life, for which you
tremble? I know full well, fair lady, that strict fidelity lies nearer to the
heart of one who loves like you. How if -- (which heaven forefend, but our
tempter is ever on the watch) -- how if Satan, in an enticing moonlight night,
should have availed himself of some fair heathen, to ensnare the pious knight.
I have seen these fiery dames. Lust is their idol: Modesty can find no
sanctuary with them; and Sir Theobold, as they say, inherited warm blood from
old Sir Hugo.


Ade. (smiling) Reverend abbot, if you would not mistake the jest, I should
freely tell you, that you bear poison on your tongue -- but hark! I hear the
sound of horses' hoofs already echo through the valley. Come, children! Quick
-- to meet your father.


She runs with WILIBALD and OTTOMAR to the side where THEOBOLD approaches. Cyr.
Damnation! She is armed on every side.


Sir THEOBOLD bursts into ADELAIDE 's arms. Behind him enter the MONK, BERTRAM,
etc. etc. Ade. (throwing her arms round Theobold's neck) My husband! So soon
returned!


The. ( rallying) Not too soon, I hope.


Ade. ( the same) Banterer! I could almost answer -- yes --


Cyr. ( aside) And I could almost burst.


The. Never have I made so good an expedition! Heaven bless you, reverend
abbot! -- I bring thee, Adelaide, a present more valuable far than all thy
jewels.


Ade. Yourself.


The. Would thou make me vain? I have long been thine. No. I restore to thee
a stolen treasure, which has cost thee many a tear. May he and and I forever
share thy love! Look round -- does thy heart guess nothing?


(Ade. ( Spies Bertram, who, till now, has been standing, full of terror, among
the attendants, and flies into his arms) My father!


Ber. ( returns her embrace, but sorrsw and confusion overspread his
countenance) My dear daughter!


Ade. Oh! This is more than all my warmest hopes. -- Almighty Providence! I
have no words to thank thee. -- Grant me tears! Oh! Grant me tears -- And is it
really you, whom I thus fold in my arms? Alas, I feared that you had long since
sunk beneath the weight of age and grief. I cannot look at you enough. You are
just the same, except that your hair is somewhat greyer -- Oh! God! I have no
words. My thanks are swimming in these tears -- Dear farher, I am married --
These are my children. Come hither Wilibald and Ottamar -- This is your
grandfather. Embrace his knees, and beg his blessing.


WILLIBALD and OTTOMAR kneel before BERTRAM. Ber. ( carressing them by turns,
and raising them) -- Rise! Rise! If the blessings of an old man -- who loves
you as his children -- has any influence with the Almighty -- I bless you --
God shield you from every misfortune -- or give you strength to bear it!


Ade. How can misfortune enter in your thoughts at such a happy hour? All my
wishes are fulfilled.


Will. Dear grandfather, kiss me.


Ott. And me too, dear grandfather.


Ber. (kissing them) Sweet boys! (mournfully) Poor good children!


The. Why poor, honest Bertram? What is wanting to their happiness? Reverend
abbot, such a scene as this might draw down angels from the throne of God.


Cyr. Fie, sir knight! To compare such earthly joys to the blissful
contemplation of the Highest.


The. Pardon a layman, to whom the enthusiasm of religion has not yet lent
wings, to soar into the third heaven.


Cyr. Enthusiasm, do you call it? You heap levity on levity. But I pardon you,
for the sake of that good work which you have done. Your return was very sudden
-- Doubtless you have rooted out the heathen tribes, overturned their altars,
abolished their idols, and brought their gold and silver chalices for the
service of the church.


The. I have done all that I could: I have done more than I ought. My oath, as
a knight, bound me, with fire and sword to exterminate the heathen idols and
erect the holy cross among them. Father Benjamin can testify I have fulfilled
my oath.


Cyr. It Is well. But as the angel of the Lord assuredly was with your arms, why
did you not proceed to all the neighboring tribes, spreading destruction
throughout the heathen territories?


The. Because -- hear it once for all, reverend abbot, -- because my sword
shall never fall again on those, who never injured me. If they be sheep, which
wander in the desert, let the right path be pointed out to them, but let them
not be led to slaughter. I, at least, have no desire to be the butcher.


Cyr. Knight --


The. Abbot --


Cyr. Do you pretend to dictate to the church?


The. (discontented) Oh, no! reverend abbot, I know my duties, and fulfill them
-- But will you not participate our joy? Look round and read in every eye, the
wish to spend in pure tranquillity a day, which heaven has so singularly marked.


Ade. What can be the matter, my dear father, you seem uneasy?


Ber. I am not well.


Ade. Quick! Come in. You want rest. Today, so many different sensations have
crowded on each other --


Ber. True! True!


Ade. Come then. Lean on me, that I may bring you to a quiet chamber.


Ber. Not in this castle, my dear Adelaide. I am not used to live within huge
walls and towers. Let me return my old hut.


Ade. Your hut is in ruins, uninhabited, and exposed to every blast. Allow me
the pleasure of attending on you.


Ber. ( with forced acknowledgment) I must be left alone -- or I shall die at
your feet. I will have no other dwelling than my former hut.


The. Your will is to your children a command. I will this instant dispatch my
people to repair your hut, and provide it with every convenience. Meanwhile,
use the best chamber in my castle, and let a cheerful meal complete the
pleasure of this day* Reverend abbot, is it your pleasure to follow us?


Cyr. When I have fulfilled the duties of my office.


The. Till then, farewell.


THEOBALD and ADELAIDE follow BETRAM. WILIBALD and OTTOMAR, with the retinue,
follow them. Cyr. ( looking at the Monk with extreme gravity) -- Well, father?


Monk. ( with great humility) What does my worthy superior command?


Cyr. Yes, pretend that you have executed all my plans, and justified my
confidence in you.


Monk. My conscience acquits me.


Cyr. Indeed! Then I wish you joy of an easy conscience. You know not, I
presume, how much I wished for time, how much I wished to plunge Sir Theobald
from danger into danger, if possible to cause his death -- at least his absence
for many weeks. You know not these were my only reasons for promoting the
excursion? -- Speak! --


Monk. How can I be ignorant that such were your intentions? Yet have I done
every thing to prolong the expedition. I have not been content with empty
words. I seized a sword, I plunged into the throng, and ofen was besmeared with
hostile blood.


Cyr. Yes, forsooth,! You have done so much, that nothing now remains for me to
do, and I perhaps may wait in vain whole years for such an opportunity. Will
you not retire to rest after your numerous fatigues -- You will scarcely
recognize your cell -- it is so long since you forsook it. Goes.


Monk. I have done my duty. We must pray to God to bend their hearts, and grant
his aid to all these good intentions. Goes.


Sir HUGO of WULFINGEN, in the habit of a pilgrim, appears upon the summit of
the hill, which rises opposite to the Castle. Hu. Ha! There it is! There is
Wulfingen! -- Hail, castle of my fathers! Hail, ye moss grown towers! In
blooming manhood I forsook you. In drooping age I now again behold you. I left
these gates, accompanied by a hundred valiant warriors: the swords of the
Saracens have slain them, and I return alone. ( Descends the hill, and, for a
few moments, surveys the castle with violent emotion.) All is as I left it. No
stone is broken: no tree is fallen. I could almost fancy that the swallows'
nests against the wall were still the same. -- There, in the shade of yonder
towering oak, I, for the last time, pressed to my heart my weeping wife, and
blessed the child that hung upon my knee. There, beneath the roof of yonder
straw-thatched cottage, I for the last time held the infant in my arms, the
offspring of my crime, the source of my never-ceasing anguish. Alas! what a
crowd of sensations, which have slept for three-and-twenty years, wake in this
solemn moment! Great God of Heaven! I thank thee, that thy angel, through so many
perils, has thus brought me to the habitation of my fathers, were it but to lay
my sapless bones with their's. -- How my heart beats! Even more than at the
storm of Ptolemais. Each tree, each stone could I ask, is my wife, and is my
son alive? -- The windows of the castle are forsaken: the bridge is down: No
reaper in the field. Here peace must reign, or the plague must have exhausted
its fury. -- Thou guardian angel of my latter days! whisper to me whether joy
awaits me in this castle: or, shall I turn again to Palestine, and seek some
heap of earth, where the poor pilgrim may repose in peace for ever?


WILIBALD and OTTOMAR come from the Castle. Ott. Come, Brother! I Will show you
the nest, that I found yesterday.


Will. Is it high? Must one climb?


Ott. No. It Is only in a low bush.


Will. Then I don't want to see it.


Ott. Why not.


Will. Where there is neither trouble nor danger, there can be no pleasure.


Hu. Two sweet boys! my heart throbs.


Ott. Look brother, at that man with a long beard. Let us go.


Will. No. We'll speak to him.


Ott. I Am afraid.


Will. Then go, and look for your nest. (To Hugo) Who are you, old man?


Hu. A pilgrim from Palestine.


Will. From Palestine! Do you bring any news of my grandfather?


Hu. Your grandfather! Who is your grandfather?


Will. (With pride) The valiant Sir Hugo of Wulfingen. Have you ever heard of
him?


Hu. (Scarce able to contain himself) I believe I have.


Will. ( Contemptuously) You believe you have! You have not heard of him, or you
would not have forgotten it.


Hu. (Turning aside and trembling with joy) Oh! God! What a boy is this! And
this is my blood! -- Compose thyself, old man. Thy hour is not yet come.


Ott. ( To his brother) What is he muttering to himself?


Will. I believe he is thinking of some lie.


Hu. Allow me to ask a question, my dear boy. Who is the knight, that dwells in
yonder castle?


Will. Sir Theobald of Wulfingen, my father.


Ott. ( Raising his voice above Willibald's) And my father too.


Hu. ( Turning away -- with the utmost possible energy) God of Heaven! I thank
thee. -- One question more. You spoke of your grandfather, who went to
Palestine. (With tremulous utterance) Have you then still -- a grandmother?


Will. No. She has long been dead.


Hu. ( Trembles, and slowly repeats the words) Has long been dead! ( Aside,
sorrowfully) Margaretta! ( Endeavors to compose himself) Dear children, I am
faint and weary. Dare I beg a crust of bread, and a cup of wine*


Both. Directly! They are running to the castle.


Hu. And if your father would allow me a night's lodging in the castle --


Will. I Will ask my mother. My father's just returned from battle, and asleep. I
daren't wake him. Ottomar, stay here till I come back.


Ott. ( Running after him) I will not stay alone with that long-bearded man. both
go.


Hu. Oh God! Have then the sufferings of three-and-twenty years at last
appeased thee? Is it then true, that I shall yet find happiness? Have thou,
too, forgiven me, oh! Margaretta, my acknowledged wife? Did thou not quit
this world, with a curse upon my head? Yes, I am unworthy of the bliss, which
now awaits me. Let me but have happy tidings of my Adelaide, and angels may
envy my old age. -- What boys! Scarce could I refrain from folding them in my
arms. Of what race may their mother be? Early has she sown the seed of love and
honor in their hearts. God reward her for it! -- Right glad I am, that no one
here can recognize me. The hearts of my son and daughter-in-law will lie open
to me. I shall try their kindness and their hospitality. I shall see if
Theobald still remembers his old father, if he wishes his return, if he will
shed a tear for his death. What a scene, if all should happen as I wish! -- Let
me only be upon my guard, lest a father's heart too soon betray itself.


ADELAIDE comes with WILIBALD and OTTOMAR. The Boys. There he is, mother! There
he is!


They run to him with a cup of wine, and crust of bread. Hu. Heaven reward you,
noble lady! And you too, good children!


Ade. You are welcome, old man. If my boys have understood you right, you are
come direct from Palestine.


Hu. Noble lady, it is true. I have passed through Greece, Bulgaria and
Hungary. For five long months, I have contended against hunger, thirst, and all
the hardships of this life. Often has Heaven been my roof, and the cold earth my
bed. Often have I sought, whole days in vain* a spring where I might quench my
thirst -- a hut, where I might beg a piece of bread.


Ade. How, at your age, could you attempt so long a journey?


Hu. My earnest wish to see my native country once again, to die where I was
born, to have my eyes closed by the hands of my children. --


Ade. Have you children, too? Oh! How will they rejoice!


Hu. So says a father's heart.


Ade. Each day of absence, when friends meet again, is a fresh drop in the cup
of joy. Be thankful to Heaven, old man, for such bliss as yours is dealt with a
sparing hand. My husband, also, had a father, who, more than twenty years ago,
followed our emperor to the holy land. There probably he perished. Have you, in
your travels, never heard the name of Sir Hugo of Wulfingen?


Hu. Sure have I, noble lady. Still more, I bear a message from him to his son.


Ade. ( With fire) Indeed! -- Speak! Does he live?


Hu. He lives.


Ade. And your message --?


Hu. I can confide to none but Sir Theobald.


Ade. Enter then with me.


Hu. Pardon me, noble lady. I have made a vow never to enter house or castle
till the sun has set.


Ade. Run, then, children! Wake your father, and tell him instantly to come
here. (They go) May I be a witness of your conversation?


Hu. I request it.


Ade. At length, our fervent prayer is heard. Oh! that we still may hope to
sweeten his declining days!


Hu. Pardon my curiosity, fair lady. It arises not from forwardness. Dare I ask
from what race Sir Theobald chose his worthy wife?


Ade. ( Somewhat confused) Dare I answer you, from women-kind?


Hu. I do not understand you.


Ade. I mean, that if domestic virtues flourish but in one generation, I can
have no pretentions to them. -- My ancestors possessed no castles: Their names
were never known in heraldry. But if fidelity, piety and virtue, have any claim
upon a knight's affections, I will not change my heart for that of any noble
lady.


Hu. (somewhat struck) Then you are not of noble origin? --


Ade. No, old man -- yet not on that account ignoble -- I am but the daughter
of a boor. My father has no other title than -- an honest man.


Hu. ( aside) Now old fool! Again stumbling over childish prejudice! After
being twenty years in search of wisdom, on the first, the happiest occasion,
reverting to thy nurse's whims!


Ade. My declaration seems to have surprised you. -- Perhaps you are acquainted
with Sir Hugo's sentiments upon this subject. Will he think me unworthy to be
called his daughter?


Hu. Fear it not, noble lady. As far as I can answer for him, he is incapable
of such injustice. At first it may have some effect, and bring a frown upon his
forehead; -- for you know not how difficult it is to shake off the prejudices
of our childhood -- Proud, and assured of having trod them under foot, still at
every turn they rise again. Yet sure I am, Sir Hugo's forehead will be clouded
for one moment only. And when he sees and hears, that you, by steadfast love
deserve your husband's heart, that you fulfill with diligent attention, the
duties of a mother, he will not deny his blessing on the union.


Ade. Your consolation crowns my happiness. Yes, the purest tenderness alone,
once joined our hearts, and for eight years it never has been interrupted.


Hu. ( Almost forgetting himself) Then may heaven pour out its choicest
blessings on you! (recollecting himself) This I may freely beg in Hugo's name.


Ade. (with uplifted hands) Oh! all ye hosts of heaven! conduct him to our
arms, quick as our wishes. How happy will I make his latter days! With what
care and tenderness will I watch over him! How will my prattlers hang upon his
knees, play the dull hours away, and read his smallest wishes in his eyes!


Hu. ( aside, deeply affected) Oh, God! Dash from my lips this tempting cup of
joy, lest in my intoxication, I forget my gratitude to thee!


Ade. There comes my husband.


Hu. ( aside) steadfast, old man!


Sir THEOBALD enters with WIILBALD and OTTOMAR. The. Where is the pilgrim, who
has named my father? Welcome with this hand: thou art the messenger of God.


Hu. Sir knight, I greet you. The Lord be with you, and with your house.


The. Thou have known my father: Speak: My heart yearns to hear thy message.


Hu. For more than twenty years, Hugo of Wulfingen has been my friend. I have
fought at his side in Parthia, Media, Mesipotamia, and Persia. Often, with
fraternal love, we bound each other's wounds, inflicted by the sabres of our
enemies. Often, with fraternal love, we shared the last dry crust, the last poor
draught: until the wayward chance of war divided us. For when the emperor
Frederick died, he went toward Askelon with English Richard, surnamed Coeur de
Lion. There was the battle between Saladin and us. Fierce and bloody was the
contest. Many a valiant knight was left upon the field. Among the rest your
father was supposed to have fallen* and I spent many tedious years in vain
enquiries after him. At length, weary with toil, I, eight months since resolved
on my return to this my native land, when unexpectedly, I found old Hugo among
the sultan's prisoners in Babylon.


ADELAIDE and THEOBALD (Cry aloud) A prisoner!


Hu. Thus it is Sir knight. He pines away in grievous thraldom. How was his
visage altered! Scarce could I recollect the features of my friend. His cheeks
were sallow -- his eyes sunk -- his beard long and knotted. With tears he threw
his arms and chains around my neck, lamenting that he saw no end to his
miserable days. He showed me his bed: It was a stone -- a potsherd filled with
water was his drink -- a little rice was all his meagre diet.


The. Oh, my unhappy father!


Hu. "Alas, said he, dear Robert, thou see the base condition in which I
languish, the chains that gall my hands and feet. But how my body is exhausted
by the noontide heat, and labor, to which I am not enured; how the blood gushes
from my back upon my keeper's whip: how the cold dews, and the unwholesome
damps of night within this prison, rob me of sleep, of health and peace --
this, friend, thou do not see."


The. Hold, I beseech thee, hold! Each word is a dagger to my heart. Adelaide
weeps.


Hu. "Thou, continued ^e, thou happy man, art now returning to thy native
country. May the Almighty be thy guide! But should thou pass my castle,
commend me to my wife, if she be still alive, and my son Theobald. Paint to
them all that my age is forced to suffer. Awake in their bosoms the feelings of
a wife and son, that they may quickly gather all that heaven has bestowed upon
them, and hasten to relieve from cruel bondage, a husband and a father.
Meanwhile, farewell, I shall count the days of thy pilgrimage, and on this
stone will I pray, the long, long nights, that angels may direct thee on thy
way."


The. Thanks, worthy old man, thanks for thus faithfully fulfilling his
directions, Quick! What is his ransom?


Hu. ( shrugging his shoulders) Ten thousand gold bizantines.


The. It Is much: it is very much. But God will lend his assistance. We must sell
our castles, my dear wife, we must convert every thing into money, and do the
utmust we are able.


Ade. With all my heart, dear Theobald! This moment I will bring my jewels,
golden clasps and bracelets.


Will. And you shall have my dollar too.


Ott. (sorrowfully) Have I nothing to give?


Hu. ( aside) My heart will break.


The. ( embracing Adelaide) I thank thee, my good wife. I thank you, children.
This moment binds my heart to you forever.


Hu (aside) And mine too.


The. We will retire to a cottage, and till the earth. Bread we shall never
want, and instead of luxuries, let us feast on the delightful expectation, that
we shall liberate my poor old father. I hasten to the abbot. He has long
coveted my demesnes. When he knows my wants, he will pay but niggardly. It
matters not, if he will only give us what we want directly.


Hu. ( aside) I can hold no longer.


The. Enter, old man, and refresh yourself with what my castle contains. My
wife will let you want for nothing. See! here comes Bertram -- let him be a
partaker of our joyous hopes.


Hu. ( aside) True, it is Bertram. Oh that I durst but call to him: Where is my
daughter?


BERTRAM comes from the castle. Ber. You have left old Bertram quite alone.


The. Come hither. Grieve and rejoice with us. This pilgrim brings accounts of
Sir Hugo, my father. He is a slave in Babylon. But this day I Will sell my castle
and demesnes, cast all at the Sultan's feet, and conduct my father back in
triumph.


Ber. (fixes his eyes attentively on Hugo) How is this? -- Sure I am not
deceived -- Those features --


Hu. Thou art not deceived -- I am he.


Ber. ( throws himself with a loud cry at Hugo's feet) -- Sir Hugo! -- my
master.


At these words all start, utter broken syllables, half articulated sounds of
joy, astonishment, and admiration, and surround the old man. THEOBALD and
ADELAIDE hang upon his neck, while WILIBALD and OTTOMAR embrace his knees --
The curtain falls. END OF THE SECOND ACT.
ACT III.
A saloon in the castle. On the walls hang eight pictures, large as life, the
ancestors of the race of Wulfingen. Sir HUGO, clad in armor, enters with
BERTRAM. Hu. Here we are secure. Here we shall not be overheard by monks or
women. Come nearer! Answer me Read the question in my eyes.


Ber. ( with fearful hesitation) You wish for information of your daughter?


Hu. Tedious babbler. How can this climate make these men so cold? Speak!
Speak! Be not so sparing of thy words.


Ber. Ah!


Hu. A sigh! I understood thee. She is dead -- Another soul is gone, to
denounce vengeance against me, at the throne of God.


Ber. Would to God she were dead!


Hu. What say thou? Is she dishonored?


Ber. Sir knight, prepare yourself for a recital -- To you the world is not
unknown -- You are well aware what chance -- fate -- Oh God! my tongue denies
its office -- Your hair will bristle toward heaven, your blood congeal with
horror in your veins.


Hu. To whom do thou say this* I have lived full sixty years. For
five-and-thirty I have been a knight. -- Since I forsook the cradle, I have
been the sport of fortune, have learnt to distinguish truth from error -- If
she be not dishonored, speak! I am prepared for all.


Ber. For fifteen years your daughter was educated as my own. She increased in
stature, beauty, worth. She enchanted every youth, attended on my age, and
managed on my wife's decease, my little household. Never did any one suspect
her to be other than the real daughter of old Bertram. My wife died, and
carried the secret with her to the grave. I alone was able to solve the mystery
of her descent. I knew your sentiments, Sir knight; I resolved never to
withdraw the veil which covered what was past; and as she now had reached a
proper age, I cast my eyes around, in search of some good lad, who would
promote her happiness.


Hu. Right, old man! such was my wish.


Ber. The inscrutable designs of Providence have willed it otherwise -- Once,
on a festival in honor of our guardian saint, the villagers proceeded early to
the abbey leaving behind them only the old men. To my daughter too, I granted
permission to accompany her friends, as I myself was unable to attend her. The
neighboring Vandals had waited for this moment, when all our strength was
absent. They fell upon our village, where not more than fifty persons were
left, plundered our dwellings, drove away our cattle, and took the old men
prisoners who had staid behind -- among the rest myself. Eight years past away.
I was a slave among the heathens -- my daughter dead to me, and I to her. But
this morning -- (Oh! why have I survived it?) -- but this fatal morning I was
released from bondage by your son. I came, and found your daughter -- in the
arms of her brother.


Hu. ( Starts like a man, who suddenly espies a phantom but has courage enough
to run toward it, and unmask it, The muscles of his face, for some moments,
express an inward struggle, which, however, soon subsides. That serenity which
ever accompanies firmly-rooted principles, resumes its place in his
countenance, and he turns to Bertram) Well, proceed.


Ber. ( astonished) Proceed -- Pardon me, sir knight -- anguish has robbed you
of your senses, or you have not understood me.


Hu. Nor one, nor the other. I still am waiting for the dreadful story which
will cause my hair to bristle toward heaven.


Ber. Blessed Virgin! is not this dreadful enough? -- Your son the husband of
your daughter -- your grandsons sprung from incest -- your family subjected to
the churches ban! --


Hu. Is Adelaide faithless? Is my son a robber? Are my grandsons villains?


Ber. Oh no, no! There lies all the misery. They love each other with such
strong affection, and yet must part forever. They have children too, who
resemble angels, and these little innocents they must resign to scorn and
infamy.


Hu. Must! -- And who shall force them?


Ber. Heavens! Can you ask, sir knight? Are you a christian, and would suffer
this abomination?


Hu. Why not? Old man, thy scruples I can pardon. Papal superstition has
instilled them, ignorance of the world has nursed them, and custom given them
gigantic strength -- But let us view a little closer the shadow which so much
startles thee. What mischief can ensue from this connection? Two hearts,
attached by a double tie, what increase can their love, their happiness admit?
A mother by a brother, are not the children still more precious? -- Are not the
parents still more enviable?


Ber. All true, sir knight. But --


Hu. Hold: The picture is not half complete. I have but painted them within the
castle: let us now look without -- Can a good father and a tender husband be a
bad neighbor? -- Can he covet his neighbor's property, who, with this wife,
and these children, thinks himself far richer than a prince?


Ber. Just and true, sir knight. But the sin --


Hu. Sin! Whom does it affect? Not me. Perhaps thee. Be easy, old man. This
phantom too, I dare be sworn, I can dissolve. Yet, there are higher duties,
thou will say, than I have mentioned. -- Duties toward God --


Ber. Alas! There it rests --


Hu. Hold again! -- Will he pray less fervently? and mark! his prayer is not
the urgent and insatiable coveting of riches and of honors. It Is gratitude
which streams from a contented heart. Will he fight less bravely for his
country and the church, than the vagabond whose courage is not fired by any
thought on wife and child? Will he, with less piety receive the holy sacrament,
when he beholds the companion of his life devoutly kneeling by his side? Will
the pangs of conscience, in his last hour, assail him, because true to the
impulse of nature, he has given to his native land two useful citizens, to the
world two honest men, to heaven two angels? -- No! no! no! -- With joyful
assurance will he appear, accompanied with his wife and children, before the
throne of the Almighty* receive his sentence without trembling, and join his
voice to the halelujah's of the blessed --


Ber. But God's absolute commandment that we should not --


Hu. I know what thou would say. God's first commandment was the happiness
of us his creatures. -- This commandment is as old as the creation. It extends
to every nation, every religion. What Moses, through the mouth of God,
established for the welfare of a single state, what, perhaps, may really
promote the welfare of every state, must, at least, be subject to exceptions,
and never was a case more worthy of exception -- Here, then, old man, give me
thy hand with confidence, and let this secret be concealed forever. Still let
Adelaide be Bertram's daughter. -- Rejoice with me, at the happiness of our
children -- Rejoice, and be silent.


Ber. As God may have mercy on me in my dying hour, I cannot, sir knight, I
cannot. That inward consciousness of an avenging God rises in opposition to
your arguments. You have addressed my senses -- they are weak -- address my
heart, and I will listen to you.


Hu. Thy heart! -- Shall I paint the misery which thou bring'st upon us all?
Shall I describe the horrible distressess of my children, and my grandchildren
-- the despair of thy old master? -- Shall I -- (unwillingly I do it) shall I
remind thee of the many kindnesses which I poured first on thy old parents, and
since on thee?


Ber. (falling and embracing his knees) Oh, no, dear sir! To you I am obliged
for all. It Is written in my heart. But pay more reverence to God than man --
Sacrifice the temporal rather that risk the eternal. Oh! could you feel the
pangs of hell, which rage within me, you would have compassion on me. Oh! that
I could erase the tale of horror from my recollection! At least, let me shake
the burden from my heart at the confession chair. Our reverend abbot --


Hu. (with grim ferocity) Peace! Listen to me for the last time. If the misery
of my children, the distresses of their boys, the despair of thy benefactor,
can have no effect upon thee -- hear this solemn oath, which, on the word and
honor of a knight, I pledge in the ear of the Almighty. If, with a single
look, a syllable, or sign, thou dare to hint at this our secret, with my own
hand I Will plunge my sword into thy heart.


Ber. Do with your servant as may be your will. -- My last breath shall bless
you. But my troubled conscience orders me, in terms more dreadful than your
oath, to ensure the salvation of my soul. As yet your children may do penance
for their sin, and through temporal misery ascend to spiritual bliss. But tell
me -- what can I answer* when your son appears before the dread tribunal of the
Judge, and thus accuses me: "This man was privy to it. He concealed the impious
secret. He robbed me of the only means by which my soul could have been rescued
from damnation."


Hu. Hear me, Bertram. Will thou be easy, if my son, when told of all, should
think as I do?


Ber. (scrupulously) Then -- perhaps -- I might --


Hu. Go, then, and send him hither.


Ber. How? -- would you --


Hu. I will myself disclose the secret to him? but at first without a witness.
Be thou at hand, and wait till called.


Ber. (as he leaves the saloon) Oh, all ye saints! -- Have pity on a poor old
man, bending beneath the weight of conscience! Goes.


Hu. Such are the cursed fruits of superstition! But what must I expect in this
approaching hour? Theobald must be tried, ere I venture the discovery. Should
he be so weak as to prefer the dogmas of a monk to the everlasting law of
nature -- should his head and heart too be swayed by bigotry, let my tongue be
silent, and let Bertram die. It Is better that one, already on the brink of the
grave, should be a victim to his blindness, than that my whole race should fall
a sacrifice to prejudice, and sink forever.


Sir THEOBALD enters. The. You have sent for me, my father.


Hu. My son, come nearer. We are alone. I have much to ask of thee, and much to
say to thee. I left thee a boy, occupied in climbing among the wood, and
stripping the hazel of its nuts. Thou art now become a man and thy amusement is
to break a lance in combat. Have thou acquired fame at any tournament?


The. Twice, my father. At Worms and Regensburg. Both times in presence of our
Emperor.


Hu. It Is well. Have thou ever been engaged in honorable quarrels, and settled
them as well becomes a knight?


The. Thrice for my friends, and for myself but once.


Hu. Why that once, and against whom?


The. Against Conrad of Rudolsheim. His servants had been guilty of disorders
in a neighboring village, had seized a woman, and destroyed a house, and he
refused reparation.


Hu. When did thou make peace with him?


The. When he was conquered.


Hu. It Is well. Have thou never lost thy shield?


The. Never, my father.


Hu. It Is well. Have thou any wounds?


The. Five.


Hu. All on thy breast?


The. ( rather hurt) All, my father. ( with exalted heat) In the abbey of
Ermersdorf hangs a hostile banner. I placed it there.


Hu. It Is well. Who instructed thee in arms?


The. My uncle.


Hu. Who conferred knighthood on thee?


The. Luke Henry, the Lion, of Brunswick.


Hu. It Is well. Thus far, it is all right well. Embrace me.


The. ( embracing him) And now, my father --


Hu. Hold! Our account it not yet settled. How long is it since thy mother died?


The. Nine years. She expired in my arms, and was buried with the bones of our
fathers.


Hu. ( turning away) Margaretta! (to Theobald) Did she die calmly?


The. Calmly, and full of hope. She died as she had lived. She blessed yourself
and me. ( extremely moved) -- Oh! my father! -- Will you open all my wounds
afresh?


Hu. It Is well, Who gave thee instructions in religion?


The. Father Bernard, a monk of the Premonstrantes.


Hu. This is not well. Which of thy duties is to thee most sacred?


The. My father, I have not considered this. To me they are all sacred.


Hu. Right, my son, but not all of equal weight. Duty toward God is the first
duty -- next honor -- then love -- and then the church -- Or, make thou no
distinction between God and church?


The. The church is in the place of God.


Hu. But is not always the mouth of God -- Hear me, my son. Receive and ponder
my discourse. After sixty years of cool experience, a father now addresses his
only, his beloved son, whose happiness will ever be his warmest wish. Today or
tomorrow, I may be gone. With a lie upon my tongue I durst not look into
eternity -- Hear me, ye spirits of my ancestors! You I summon as witnesses of
truth. Strike me with icy dumbness, and spit sharp venom on me, if this last
branch receive destructive doctrines from me (kneels down) And thou, eternal
being, whom I worship, take from me the bitterness of this hour, and let it
overtake me on my deathbed! -- Praise be unto thee that I have found him an
intrepid knight: But let me find him likewise resolutely steadfast -- with a
heart equal to his courage. Let me find him iron toward prejudice -- wax
toward love and honor.


The. Your discourse, dear father --


Hu. My son, more than three hundred years are passed away, since Hans of
Wulfingen built this castle. He was the first of all our race, whose own valor
girded on his loins the sword of knighthood. Our emperor, Conrad the first,
dubbed him in the year nine hundred and twelve, upon the very field, where he
had shed his blood, in fighting for his native country against Hungary. He
married Wulshild of Sickingen, and from love toward her, he called this castle
Wulfingen. He was slain in a quarrel for an image of Saint Paul, which his
attendants had secretly suffered to be stolen. This, his son, (pointing to the
second picture) Egbert of Wulfingen, was accused of having murdered one Count
Baldwin. The sacred tribunal before which he was tried, obliged him to attest
his innocence by the sword, He was slain, but his last breath affirmed the
accusation to be false and villainous. ( Pointing to the third picture) his
son, Maximilian of Wulfingen asserted, at some jovial banquet, that the image
of the Virgin Mary, which worked miracles at Emmerick, was a pious fraud. He
was in consequence, secretly assassinated by the instigation of the monks --
(pointing to the fourth picture) His son Henry of Wulfingen, not profiting by
the example of his father, dared to utter some unmeaning words against the
pope's authority, was subjected to the ban, and forsaken by his friends, died
brokenhearted. ( pointing to the fifth picture) His son Albert of Wulfingen,
fearful and weak from the example of his fathers, and the education of a monk,
gave half his fortune to the cloisters, endowed the church with many of his
best demesnes, died with a relic in his hand, and was almost cannonized -- (
pointing to the sixth picture) His son Herman of Wulfingen, went on an
excursion to convert the heathens to our christian faith. His heart betrayed
him. He became attached to a fair heathen, and was compelled to leave her,
because she continued faithful to the idolatry of her forefathers. He married
Maria of Simmern, who bore one son, but ill supplied to him the place of the
good heathen. He arrived at a discontented old age, and died. ( pointing to the
seventh picture) My grandfather, Otto, of Wulfingen, from some long smothered
resentment, was assaulted by three villains of the house of Leinengen, as he
was returning, somewhat weary, from the chase. They slew him, and took refuge
in a Benedictine cloister, where, for a sum of money, they were pardoned in the
name of God, and not a mortal dared to bring an accusation. ( pointing to the
eighth picture) My father, Francis, of Wulfingen, wishing to revenge his
father's death, and enraged in a just cause, struck a lay brother of the
Benedictines, was subjected to the ban, excommunicated, and died in misery.
Well can I recollect the grief of my poor mother! But of that no more. I
myself, my son, I myself have completed this number of unhappy beings, whom
superstition has plunged into destruction. -- I am not ashamed to tell thee,
that for one moment, I have been a villain -- and what man is without such
moments? One only wicked deed has been to me the source of endless agony. Thy
mother was a good woman, though beauty was not her inheritance. She loved me
while I was but her friend. It was not in my power to press her with ardour to
my bosom. For her I seldom felt desire, and often avoided her embraces. Whether
she were ever conscious of what passed within me, I am ignorant. She herself,
(God reward her for it) she herself never uttered one harsh word to me, never
received me with a frown, and forced from me, my whole respect. Bint this was
all -- My love -- (stammers) I must disclose it as a warning to my son -- my
love was often bestowed on prostitutes, and every woman but my wife, inflamed my
passions. -- Once, on a parching summer's day, I met a lovely creature in the
field. Her name was Rosamond. She was an orphan. She had nothing left in this
wide world, except her honor -- and of that I robbed her -- Thou start'st,
thou shuddrest -- Right, my son. Let this moment never be eras'd from thy
remembrance -- Heaven is my witness I had ever been an upright man -- except in
this one instance. Do thou see the tear that starts into my eye? Of these I
have shed millions, yet each still scalds my soul as if it were the first. The
poor creature bore a girl in secret and expired. I entrusted the unhappy fruit
of my transgression to an honest boor, whose wife had lately been delivered of
a dead child. He swore eternal secresy, and reared the forsaken being as his
own daughter -- My peace of mind was gone. In motion, or on my pillow, the
palid image of my Rosamond was floating in my sight. In motion or on my pillow,
her dying groans assailed my ear. To regain tranquillity I vowed an expedition
to the holy land against the Saracens, forsook my wife, my child, and country,
to follow our emperor Frederick, the Red-beard, and in the name of God, to
murder men, who never had offended me. Often as I plunged my sword into the
vitals of a Saracen, I fancied that his blood would cleanse me from my sin. In
vain! I writhed myself, in anguish, on the holy tomb. In vain! I imposed severe
penance on myself, and went through many a weary pilgrimage. In vain! nor
scourge nor absolution, could avail to cure the viperous sting of conscience --
At length I was dangerously wounded in a skirmish, and taken prisoner by the
sultan of Babylon. There, for twenty years, I languished in the fetters of the
infidels, till at last, with other knights, I was ransomed by the emperor of
the Greeks. Weary of a delusive world, full of anxious wishes to behold my
family and home, I took a pilgrim's staff, and am this day returned -- I find
my wife no more, and my daughter (keenly rivetting his eye upon his son) -- in
the arms of her brother.


The. ( petrified with horror) Thunder of heaven! ( after a pause, during which
he is agitated by the full force of this discovery) Oh! my wife! my children!


Hu. (closely surveying him aside) It Is well -- Speak, my soul -- What will thou do?


The. Take my life, or let me have my Adelaide.


Hu. Impossible! Thou know the prohibition of the Almighty.


The. Then, let the Almighty punish me. Why did he suffer me to feel affection
for her? I cannot lose her?


Hu. Do thou not tremble at the rigor of our church?


The. I laugh at its rigor and its ban, He that robs me of my wife, can plunge
me into no deeper misery.


Hu. Thou must renounce her. I command it.


The. I cannot, my father.


Hu. My curse be upon thee!


The. I cannot, my father,


Hu. The curse of thy mother be upon thee from her grave.


The. And if every stone should curse me, every gust of wind should breathe
damnation on me, it matters not I cannot -- She is my all -- And my children.


Hu. It Is well, it is right well. Embrace me, my son.


The. (astonished) How, my father!


Hu. Heaven be praised! Thou have fulfilled my every hope. Be at ease. I wished
to prove thy sentiments. -- Adelaide is thy sister, but therefore is not less
thy wife. Were such a marriage in such circumstances sinful before God, he
would have planted natural abhorrence in the hearts of both. What is wholesome
to society at large, is not always a law for a solitary instance. Be of good
courage, then, my son, trust in God, love thy wife, endeavor to make thy
children honest, and deserve the blessing, which, in this hour, from the
fullness of my heart, I bestow upon thee.


The. Heavens! My father! my dear good father! You awake me to new life. You
restore to me my senses -- Alas! They were almost gone forever.


Hu. Yet must Adelaide suspect nothing of all this. A woman's nerves would be
too weak for such a shock. In a woman's soul superstition is too deeply rooted.
She would forever think herself the vilest sinner* and by pious penitence
embitter her own days, as well as thine and mine. Let her be as heretofore, the
daughter of old Bertram, and, except ourselves and him, let no one ever dive
into the secret. Where is he, that he may enter into this our bond, and chain
his oath to ours. Come nearer, Bertram. ( opens the door.)


BERTRAM enters. Hu. ( seizes his hand) Old man, congratulate me. I may now
rejoice in satety at my children's happiness.


The. (embracing him) Though thou art not the father of my Adelaide, I never
shall forget, that to thy instructions I am obliged for my good, my faithful
wife --


Ber. (still always sorrowful) Then you know all?


Hu. He knows all. Thy doubts are removed. May the sin fall upon me, upon him
and his children!


The. Disperse those hypochondriacal whims, remember the passed, but in order
that we may rejoice in our present happiness, forget all, only not the love we
have for thee.


Ber. My good, noble sire -- Yes, I will be tranquil -- if I can. Ye are a pair
of pious, honest knights -- Ye will not trick me out of my eternal happiness.


Hu. May God deprive me of mine -- though firm in my faith -- We walk not on
the paths of darkness. ( draws his sword) Come! lay your hand upon this sword,
and repeat the oath of eternal secresy.


(THEOBALD and BERTRAM repeat the oath. THEOBALD with a firm, but BERTRAM with
a trembling voice.) Hu. I swear by God, and all the saints! that this tongue
never shall reveal the secret of Adelaide's birth. If I break this promise, may
the eternal punishment annexed to perjury, fall upon me! may absolution never
restore my peace of mind! may the torments of conscience follow me,
whithersoever despair may drive me! may it follow me to my deathbed, and
torment me in my last moments! May I pray in vain, and when I pray for death,
may it be to no purpose. May no sacrament, no priestly benedictions have power
to discharge me from this oath! May the grave to which they once will carry me,
also be the grave of my secresy, I swear it -- so help me God. Amen. ( sheathes
his sword) It is done. Embrace me both. The feeling of rest, which these
three-and-twenty years was strange to me, returns this day to my bosom: the
serene view of a happy old age brightens again this day. I feel so happy, every
thing around me appears in a more pleasing light. Come, my son! come to the
arms of my double daughter! Exeunt Theobald and Hugo

BERTRAM -- alone. Woe's me! What have I done! What shivering pervades my
views! -- What anxiety of hell lays hold on me! my oath was blasphemy! -- Old
sinner -- the grave already opens before thee -- a dreadful crime bows thy
neck! -- I am the concealer of incest -- thunder clouds are hanging over me --
lightening dazzles my eyes -- what mountain can conceal me from the sight of
the all-seeing judge! ( sinks upon a chair, pause) weak old man! thy brains are
distracted -- Cool thy blood, thou see ghosts. Throw a glance upon yonder
pious couple, on yonder children of innocence, but one glance of humanity, it
needs no more -- What fiend, if he had served in hell for thousands of ages,
what fiend would venture to draw upon him the curse of those babes! -- But am I
not threatened by the damnation of the church! Will they not vomit me out of
its bosom? Give me up a prey to the torments of conscience in my last hour?
Conscience? have I only a conscience? Are not Hugo and his noble son partners
in the deception? Does their example contribute nothing to my ease? -- Ah!
tripple chains of love fetter those innocent hearts, the luster of wordly
things dazzles their eyes, eternity vanishes before their view -- Eight years
have elapsed, and God has suffered this crime to pass unpunished, no lightening
has struck this castle -- no hail devastated Wulfingen's fields, the husband,
the brother, the wife, the sister -- the offspring of incest -- all are alive,
wake every morning to new happiness -- praise their maker with sincerity of
mind, yet nothing has happened to them. God marked the brother as a murderer,
why not the incestuous man? -- Audacious being! do thou venture to question
God's forbearance? to dive into his secret counsels -- Miserable wretch! art
thou perhaps chosen to put a stop to those horrors? and yet dare to be
silent? -- look forward to your last hours, when thou will pray for
consolation, when the priest requires thy confession, and before thou can
utter one word, an evil spirit strangles thee! When thou art panting for the
holy sacrament, and receive it but to eternal punishment! When thou continuest
in thy sins, and the devils carry thee before the Almighty's throne! -- Away
compassion! -- Away, fear of man! -- I must save my soul! I must save my soul!
rocks are laying upon me! abysses open below me! (sinks down) holy virgin pray
for me!


Enter the ABBOT CYRILLUS. Cyr. God's blessing upon thee pious Bertram.


Ber. God has sent you hither.


Cyr. What ails thee! thy looks are wild, as if oppressed by heavy sins.


Ber. Ah! I am tormented by the tempter.


Cyr. Then throw thyself into the bosom of the holy church, and thou will find
repose. What is it that torments thee?


Ber. Venerable man! thou art pious and learned, do a work of compassion, and
solve a doubt. -- It is well known to thee that I was eight years among the
heathens, many horrid and wicked deeds have I there witnessed, and when I
sometimes threatened the sinners with God's punishment; I was laughed at, and
refuted by reasoning as they called it.


Cyr. Reason without faith, is a staff upon the ocean, an anchor upon the main
land.


Ber. Among them resided a young couple united by sympathy and love, encircled
with sweet children. Peace dwelt beneath their roof, unsullied virtue in their
hearts, and yet this couple -- (would you have believed it, reverend abbot?) --
were brother and sister!


Cyr. ( Strikes a cross) Oh God! How long suffering art thou, that the torrents
of thy clouds, and Sodom's liquid sulphur have not yet consumed every dwelling
of abomination! And thou, old man, dare to ascribe virtues to such people --
sinners, who wantonly transgress the most sacred commandments of our God; who,
like the sons and daughters of men in the time of our father Noah, daily
provoke the Lord to vengeance? Do thou not know that these seeming virtues
are the wiles of the deceiver? -- I see -- (and my heart bleeds) I see that the
heathen has corrupted thee. Haste! haste! thou wandering chicken! Flee for
refuge beneath the wings of the mother church! Chasten thy body by fasting and
mortification! Ave Maria, ora pro nobis!


Ber. ( Very much agitated) Then you think, right learned sir, that if a true
believing Christian, -- by chance -- without knowing it -- should have married
his sister, such a marriage ought not to be valid.


Cyr. Holy Norbert! thou offendest my ear by such a question, -- Incest --
scarce dares my tongue pronounce the word.


Ber. Forgive me, reverend abbot, if I wish to dive to the bottom of this
matter. Now, if for many years an union, like this, had been to the surrounding
country an example, if hopeful and well-educated children --


Cyr. Hold! I shudder. Woe, woe be on the offspring of incestuous intercourse
-- Or, think thou then, that sin is less a sin, because the dreadful
consequences are not visible to short-sighted mortals? Think thou that a
thief is less a thief, because he revels in apparent peace upon the profits of
his spoil? -- who is able to fathom the long suffering of God? Who is able to
unveil his wise designs, if his arm be slow in launching the avenging bolt?


Ber. Oh reverend sir! Answer me but another question. What must he do, who is
privy to a sin like this?


Cyr. Go, and deliver up the guilty to offended justice, lest, at the latter
day, he be condemned together with them.


Ber. But if they be his benefactors --


Cyr. Who is his first benefactor? God. Who has the first, most sacred claim
upon his duty? God.


Ber. But if he be bound to keep this secret by an oath --


Cyr. Woe be unto him, who has, in the delirium of his sins, been led away to
such an oath! Mistake not. God is not mocked. Has not the church alone the
power to bind and to absolve? To break this oath would be the first step
toward repentance.


Ber. ( Beyond himself, kneels down) Oh reverend abbot! Hear the confession of
a miserable sinner.


Cyr. ( Observing him attentively) No, Bertram -- This place is not proper for
the dispensations or our holy office.


Ber. Hear me, for God's sake, reverend sir! You have wounded me in my most
tender part! You have pierced my conscience! You have poured glowing fire
through all my bones! For God's sake hear me! Alas! If -- oh, if at this
moment, the angel of death should seize me, and I should be called to render up
my spirit, laden with this weight of sin, without confession and absolution --
Oh! have compassion on me, reverend abbot! You are a servant of the Almighty,
and one may, at any time, converse with the Almighty.


Cyr. Proceed, then.


Ber. It Is now some twenty years ago, that early in the morning, Sir Hugo
walked into my hut. But a few hours before, my wife had been delivered of a
dead child. "Bertram," said he as he threw back his cloak, and showed a
newborn infant, "I know thee to be honest, and I place confidence in thy
honesty. Behold this girl. She is the fruit of an unhollowed hour, when I
forgot the faith, which I had sworn for ever to my wife. Her mother is no more.
The child is helpless. Take care of it. Let it be reared as thy own daughter.
Here is money for the purpose"


Cyr. Just Heaven! The scales fall from my eyes. This child --


Ber. Is Adelaide.


Cyr. The wife of her brother.


Ber. And mother of two boys.


Cyr. Wretch! And thou did not hinder --


Ber. Reverend abbot, you forget I was a prisoner.


Cyr. (Checking himself) Is Adelaide acquainted with this dreadful story?


Ber. She believes me to be her father.


Cyr. Holy Virgin! Holy Norbert! What a discovery! (Aside) Excellent this will
answer.


Ber. What think you first of doing reverend sir?


Cyr. (With feigned humility) I am a weak mortal, like thyself. Judge not, and
ye shall not be judged. I hasten to the temple of the Lord, to watch, this
night, at the steps of the altar, and chasten myself with fasting and
mortification. Perhaps, God may be pleased to favor his servant with a
revelation of his will.


Ber. I beg then, reverend sir, that you would grant me absolution.


Cyr. Appear at the confession-chair tomorrow after matins, and I will then
impose some penance on thee, that thou may, with a pure heart, receive the
holy sacrament.


Ber. Willingly, oh how willingly would I wound my back with the sharpest
scourges -- would I kneel till the flesh was worn from my knees, -- would I
fast until my body was a skeleton, -- if I thereby could rescue the unhappy
pair from everlasting damnation. Goes


Cyr. Joy! Joy! The day is won. The period of silence is now at an end. I laugh
at her rigid looks. I laugh at her unshaken fidelity. Shall I, like a fool, any
longer stammer forth these distant hints? No. With open front will I declare my
passion. Some degree of courage always will be felt, when addressing one who is
not totally devoid of guilt. -- Welcome, old Bertram, welcome! Hail to thy
devout simplicity! It brings me nearer to the goal of my desires, than love,
though armed with cunning. Goes


END OF THE THIRD ACT.
ACT IV.
The same saloon as in the third act. CYRILLUS and ADELAIDE enter. Cyr. At
last, noble lady you have understood my wink.


Ade. ( Rather hurt) Your wink, reverend abbot! -- You must be disposed to
jest. A pious priest* an honest wife -- and a wink! How can these agree!
Secrets I have none, even at the confession-chair.


Cyr. Emblem of virtue! You misunderstand me. Methought that to us both the
time seemed long, and therefore my wink. The knights are sitting with full
goblets, and relating tales of chivalry and war. My garb ordains sobriety in
me. My ear is more accustomed to the psalter. You too are out of place, when
seated at these revels. The horrid descriptions of stabbing and of hewing, of
murder, and of fire, must hurt your tender heart. Can you then think me wrong
if, for the sake of milder conversation, I have drawn you hither.


Ade. Did you observe how my boys, with open mouths, hung on Sir Hugo's words?
Did you observe, how my spindle even sometimes fell upon my lap, when he
recounted, in such admirable terms, his feats among the Saracens? I attend with
rapture to such dangerous exploits, when related by a humble knight, I feel a
pleasure in the pain. I hold my breath, and listen to his every syllable. Nay*
more than once, I started from my seat with a loud shriek, when my heated
imagination saw the faulchion sweep within a hand's breadth of his head.


Cyr. Like a child when listening to its nurse's tales.


Ade. And as happy as that child.


Cyr. Such stories serve but to inflame the fancy, and to cause bad dreams.


Ade. A bad dream is pleasant too, for the sake of waking


Cyr. Fair lady, you are fond of contradiction.


Ade. I hope my husband is not of the same opinion.


Cyr. Your husband! every third word must be your husband. Do you live, then,
for him alone?


Ade. I should think so, reverend abbot.


Cyr. And, on his account, renounce all sociable virtues?


Ade. That were wrong. Nor, does he require it. But where can I find
opportunity to exercise them? since the last tournament, at Regensburg, I have
not left our castle. Here no one ever visits us, except our stern old uncle,
who prefers the pictures in this room, to all the conversation of a simple
woman.


Cyr. Then, to my visits you pay no regard?


Ade. Your visits, reverend abbot! Why, yes. Have I ever been uncivil to you?
And even if I were, your office teaches you to bear with the failings of your
flock.


Cyr. Yet not to hold my peace, but by good advice endeavor to amend them.
Your conduct to me borders on disdain, ( with a look of tenderness) and I have
not deserved it from you.


Ade. Nor was I conscious of it. The reverence which your office must exact --


Cyr. Is of little value to the heart.


Ade. Have you a heart too? I thought it was your duty to renounce it, when you
received the tonsure.


Cyr. My duty! Yes. Yet it will often rebel against my inclination. Ail these
oaths and ceremonies are but a farce, to catch the multitude. The church is not
so cruel to her children. To be an example to the world we must appear to be
poor, chaste, and obedient. But to require, that, in private too, this oath
should be inviolable, were to magnify the monk to an angel.


Ade. ( Seriously) You teach a doctrine which I never heard before.


Cyr. Noble lady, understand me right. I mean to say, the virtue of a mortal
must be reckoned in proportion to his strength. I myself can solemnly swear,
that since I wore this sacred garb, I never have departed from my duty. ( With
increasing tenderness) But there are master pieces of creation, to which all
vows, and all religion are in vain opposed, where the eye forgets itself, the
mouth becomes a liar in its prayer, and the heart enters on its rights.


Ade. (With cold humility). Reverend abbot let us return to the knights.


Cyr. No, noble lady. That I must not suffer. My looks must long have been no
riddle to you. Long have I been unable to conceal my trouble and confusion.
Your image follows me to the mass, the confession-chair, and to the altar. (
Seizes her hand) Fair lady, I love you.


Ade. ( With the full sensation of that dignity which is the constant companion
of virtue) What have I done, sir, that has inspired you with audacity to naake
so infamous a declaration? Have I ever been forgetful of my duty? Have I ever
borne the semblance of a painted harlot? Have my eyes ever wandered round me?
Has any unguarded word ever betrayed an unchaste heart? -- And you dare to avow
your love to me -- dare, in the presence of God, surrounded by the spirits of
my husband's ancestors, to attack that nuptial fidelity which I vowed in your
hands.


Cyr. Be not enraged, fair lady --


Ade. Enraged! No. I despise you, and haste into Sir Theobald's arms, that I
may complain of the indignity, which has so daringly been offered to the
companion of his bed.


Cyr. ( Hindering her attempts to go) Hold, Adelaide! as yet my eye is beaming
with affection. You know how nearly a rejected passion is allied to hatred, and
revenge. Beware!


Ade. Leave me sinner! Thou art a dishonor to thy habit, and cover'st villainy
with the venerable mantle of religion.


Cyr. ( Holding her fast) With a single epithet I can annihilate thee.


Ade. Where can slander find an epithet, able to annihilate virtue?


Cyr. Incestuous.


Ade. You have lost your senses.


Cyr. Thou art thy brother's wife.


Ade. You have lost your senses.


Cyr. Never were they clearer. Thou need'st but ask old Bertram. Thou need'st
but ask thy (what shall I call him father-in-law.) At once wife and sister --
at once aunt and mother. A goodly family in truth! --


Ade. Forget not, sir, that you must render full account of what you now
declare.


Cyr. Account! Why not? Do you suppose that there is any want of proofs? One
word may suffice, You are the offspring of a happy hour, in which Sir Hugo
revelled on the charms of some poor wench. Bertram was but your foster father.
The heathens carried him away, and you become your brother's wife.


Ade. This is too much. Remember that I am a wife and mother, that you are
plunging a soul into despair. Retract your dreadful declaration, or produce
some testimony of its truth.


Cyr. Are you not satisfied with the confession of old Bertram, which he,
tormented by his conscience, has entrusted to my ear?


Ade. Heavens! It is not -- cannot be.


Cyr. It Is even thus, fair lady. Yet need you feel no fear, while I remain your
friend. Collect yourself. All may yet be well. Away with that rigid look! Learn
to know and esteem my heart. You can no longer be Sir Theobald's wife. I must
report what has happened to the holy chair at Rome, but you well know, that all
depends upon the mode in which I report it, I will contrive, that instead of
being punished, you shall be fixed in the neighboring nunnery at Siegmar, for
your life. -- This nunnery, my beauteous Adelaide, is by a subterraneous road,
connected with my abbey. The abbess is my friend, Yeu shall want nothing, and
your affectionate Cyrillus will esteem himself a happy man, in sweetening your
solitary hours.


Ade. Scum of infamy! hence, thou infernal hypocrite! Revere my misery! Revere
the sufferings of virtue -- Thou never shall degrade me to a deed unworthy of
that title.


Cyr. Exasperate me no. Remember that your fate rests in my hands.


Ade. Say in the hands of God.


Cyr. Do you still resist my love? Are you determined to drag me by compulsion
to a vengeance the most horrible?


Ade. Begone, villain! Obey the devil, whom thou servest.


Cyr. Enough! As you are deaf to the voice of a friend, hearken to the priest
of God -- In the name of the crucified, I pronounce damnation on you! In the
church I pronounce its ban upon you! Cursed be Theobald, and his incestuous
wife! Cursed be their children, and their children's children! Let no true
believer have compassion on their hunger and their thirst. Let fire and water
be denied them through the holy Roman empire! Let him be defiled who dares to
touch them! Let this castle, the seat of rank abomination, be demolished, and
not one stone left upon another! Let the armor of the knight be broken at his
feet! Let him and the partner of his infamy be chained together to a pile of
wood, and vomit forth their sinful souls amidst the flames, to the glory of
God's commandments! Then, headstrong being, when the fire shall have reached
thy hair, and when the smoke already chokes thy utterance, then call in vain
for succor and relief to the despised Cyrillus. With the smile of satisfied
revenge, I Will listen to thee, and withdraw the glowing coals, to feast upon thy
lengthened sufferings. Goes.


Ade. Heavens! what is the meaning of all this? -- My joints totter -- My head
swims -- I cannot yet conceive the horrors of my situation. I fancy all a dream
-- and look around for some kind soul who can relieve me from it. But in vain!
-- Whichever way I look -- or here -- or there -- despair is standing with a
ghastly grin. -- Bertram's dubious conduct now too plainly verifies the dire
assertion! -- Oh! from the summit of happiness and peace, thus, in a moment,
plunged into the bottomless abiss of desolation! -- Nor I alone -- my husband
-- children -- Heavens! -- My children! -- Is there then no possibility of
saving them? -- will not one sacrifice atone for all to God and to the church?
I am ready -- I Will fly into the deserts -- waste my life in dreary solitude --
mourn in distant cloisters -- mercy only, mercy on Theobald, and his guiltless
children! -- On me alone fall the vengeance of the Lord! -- against me alone,
who, forgetful of myself, dared to exchange the lowly cottage for the grandeur
of the castle, be the arm of the Lord stretched out -- not against him, that
generous youth, who, in the fullness of affection, led a poor orphan to his
bridal chamber, and now finds the grave of his repose in the arms of his
sister! -- Away! away! Adelaide, through night and darkness -- Haste! Fly till
thy wounded feet can no longer support thee! -- Away to deserts! -- Bury
thyself within some holy convent, that he may never hear thy name again --
Alas! it is all in vain! -- This hypocrite, this monk pronounced a curse upon my
children, and my children's children. -- A mother's wretched fate will not
alone content him. He will annihilate us all! -- Oh! to whom may I, without
sin, confide my misery? -- but soft! who comes? -- Away! -- away! away! into
the garden! Every one who dwells within this castle is a companion in my guilt!


(As she is going, she encounters Bertram, and sinks with a shriek to the
earth.) Ber. Oh! the unhappy creature knows already! -- ( throws himself at her
side and endeavors to revive her). My daughter! My dear daughter!


Ade. (recovering) Ah! Repeat that name! -- Give me life again -- Declare once
more I am your daughter.


(BERTRAM silently raises her.) (Seizes his hand hastily) Come hither, father!
It was false. Was it not? -- That Monk is full of poison. -- Poisonous wicked
lies! -- Were they not, my father?

(BERTRAM is silent.) You do not answer. Perhaps you do not understand my words
-- He has dared to say that I am not your daughter -- and I love you so
tenderly!

(BERTRAM atempts to speak, but cannot.) You want to speak, I understand you.
'Twas silly to torment myself for such a reason. -- Your Adelaide is but a
child.

(BERTRAM throws his arms round her neck, and sobs.) With what affection do you
share your daughter's grief! -- Who can now doubt that you are my father? --
Peace! Peace! -- 'twas but a phantom! -- It Is past, and I am well again.

(BERTRAM turns away, raises his hands, and prays in silence.) He is praying. I
ought not to disturb him. But my heart! My heart! It will burst from my bosom.
Dear father! Let me only hear one syllable. With one single syllable I will be
content. I own that my alarm is folly, yet -- think -- your child is now before
you.

(BERTRAM sobs and continues to pray.) Good heavens! Is it then so difficult
but once to call me daughter? While I was little, when at any time you held me
on your knee, and I was playing with your beard, I Have often heard you say:
"Dear child, thou art my only joy." And now surely I cannot have offended you.
-- Oh, quick! -- Call me your daughter! -- Quick! my father! Think but, if that
were true which the vile monk declared -- Your poor Adelaide -- and the poor
litttle children --

(BERTRAM remains in his former position, weeps bitterly, and is scarce able to
stand.) (Raising her voice to the highest pitch of anguish) -- Yet speak! --
Father! father! -- Oh! speak to me! -- (shaking him) Call me daughter! For
God's sake! call me daughter!

Ber. (falling to the earth) No! Thou art not my daughter!


Ade. (wringing her hands in despair: bursts through a side door into the
garden) Oh, God! Oh, God!


Ber. ( raising himself with difficulty) The cup is empty to its last dregs.
I Will follow her. Despair has hurried her away, and may perhaps lead her to the
edge of some steep precipice, or to the river's brink. I Will follow her, and if
my search be vain, plunge after her. Goes.


Sir HUGO, Sir THEOBALD, and CYRILLIS enter. Hu. ( in jocund humor) How,
reverend abbot! could you vanish thus, ere you had pledged a welcome to me, in
the goblet ornamented with my arms? You pious men, are not in general averse to
wine.


Cyr. Wine cheers the heart of man. My heart is bleeding, and is dead to every
joy.


Hu. Bleeding! what may have happened to it?.


Cyr. The abominations of the world have wounded it.


Hu. Oh! think not of them. The world will neither go worse nor better than it
did a thousand years since, and will, another thousand hence. It turns round,
and stumbles over good and bad. The bad we generally ourselves throw in its way.


Cyr. Sir knight, detain me not. The bell has rung for vespers.


Hu. No longer than is needful to present you with some gifts, which I
collected for your abbey when in Palestine. A thorn twig from the crown of
Christ, green and unwithered: a splinter of the holy cross, on which a drop of
blood has fallen, that no hand is able to wash off. -- And a piece of the
garment, for which the soldiers cast lots. Enter, and receive these relics
from the hands of my son.


Cyr. Not from his, nor from your hands, Sir knight.


Hu. (...)! -- Well -- as you please. What has entered your head now?


Cyr. Have you patience to hear me?


Hu. Yes, if you be not too tedious. For, the wine sparkles in the cup.


Cyr. Stretched at midnight, sleepless in my cell, I felt a strange oppression
at my breast, and big drops stood upon my clay cold brow.


Hu. You had eat too much before you went to bed.


Cyr. Scoffer! know that I speak in the name of the Almighty, Already I had
prepared to leave my couch, and enter on some penance, when suddenly a more
than mortal light illuminated my cell. I lighted up my eyes, and lo, the angel
of the Lord stood before me in snow-white raiment. His forehead was covered
with a cloud. in his right hand he held a sword. Then I fell down on my face,
and prayed.


Hu. (Smiling) Well! what said the heavenly messenger?


Cyr. (Significantly) He said: "Among thy flock are tainted sheep, and from the
hand of the shepherd, shall I require their souls in the last day."


Hu. Was this all?


Cyr. ( More significantly) He said: "Sin has lifted up her head. The seed of
destruction has taken root. The dark ages, which went before the flood, are
come again."


Hu. Well! Further!


Cyr. ( Rivetting his eyes upon him) He said: "Men have transgressed the holy
law of marriage. They have become the seducers of innocence, and have given
their daughters to be wives unto their sons."

HUGO and THEOBALD are thunderstruck. Now, sir knight! why thus altered?
Whither is your sportive scoffing humor fled? Will you hear me more? He said:
"Arise! Arm thyself with the church's ban. Report this abomination to the
sacred representatives of Saint Peter, that he may snatch the incestuous wife
from her brother's arms, that he may destroy all, which has been generated in
the lap of sin, that he may utterly extinguish this race which is a shame unto
the righteous, that he may give both the root and branches to the flames, and
scatter the ashes to the four winds of Heaven. Goes.


Hu (After a pause) We are lost, my son. God has given us into the hands of a
blood-thirsty monk.


The. Heavens! How is it possible --


Hu. How! Bertram is perjured -- that is evident. The appearance of the angel
is a pious fraud.


The. Then shall this sword be plunged into the hoary traitor's --


Hu. Hold, my son! First rescue, then revenge.


The. Alas! How is rescue possible? He is gone, to bellow forth our wretched
story, poisoned with all his rancour, to the fanatic priests at Rome. Nothing
now remains, but to close the gates of our castle, and fight till its huge
walls shall tall upon our heads.


Hu. No, My son. That were only unavailing rashness. The Roman church will call
on every knight throughout the empire. All our neighbors, friends, relations,
must direct their arms against us. What can thou oppose to such a force?


The. Resolution to die. Resolution, with this hand. to slay my wife and
children, and then to bury myself beneath the ruins of our castle.


Hu. It Is well. I rejoice to find thou art a man. Be this our last resource.


The. Our last and only resource. I hasten to make preparations, to provide
ourselves with victuals, to repair our walls, collect my followers --


Hu. Be not so rash, my son. (Reflecting) Has fate, then, left no other means?


The. None bat ignominious flight.


Hu. Ignominious! Why ignominious? Is a hero less courageous, if he forsake the
uncertain shelter of an oak, because the approaching lightning threatens to
rend it from its base?


The. Enough! Let us fly. Let us turn our backs upon this castle, and, in some
distant country, seek a hut large enough to hold a loving couple, small enough
to escape the eyes of our pursuers. -- Heavens! What a thought darts across my
mind! -- Mistivoi! Honest! old Mistivoi! ( Draws out the half of the ring) My
father, this token of hospitality was given me by a heathen. Little did I
imagine, I so soon should use it.


Ha. No, my son. Flight brings us no nearer to our purpose -- peace. Flight is
impossible, at least so long as Adelaide is unprepared. What pretense could
thou urge for her following thee? To conceal the truth from her would be
impossible, and to disclose it, highly dangerous. Thou know my thoughts upon
this subject. She is a woman.


The. True -- but a woman far above her sex; noble and exalted in her
sentiments, pious without superstition, steadfast, and resolute in danger. And
do you reckon nothing in her love for me?


Hu. All, my son. But thou know not how firmly prejudices, which have been
instilled in childhood, are rooted in the soul of woman, and the more firmly*
the less they are loosened by an acquaintance with the world. Have thou not
today confessed to me, thyself, that it was only the last bloody scene of
desolation, which had proved to thee the cruelty and injustice of excursions
for our church? -- No. I have hit upon another plan. Thou know, that, to
defray the expenses of my journey to the holy land, I mortgaged Rappach and
Simmern to the abbey. Let us find the abbot, and, as the price of secrecy, make
him a full donation of these two villages. The avarice of a priest will secure
to us what zeal for God's honor never will tolerate.


The. But how, if he refuse --


Hu. 'Twill then be soon enough to think of other means. Come! Let us haste,
ere in the rage of blind fanaticism, he has roused against us, the whole body
of the church. (As he goes) Fool that I was, to think that I could bribe a monk
with relics! As if they wanted help to make as many as they pleased! -- They
go


The stage remains clear for a few minutes. ADELAIDE, with dishevelled hair,
downcast head, and cheeks pale as death, slowly enters the saloon. A wild
rolling of her eyes, and, at intervals, a faint contracted smile, betray the
absence of her reason. Ade. Still am I left alone. -- Every living creature
shuns me. -- I was-in the garden: -- The birds flew from me: -- Not a butterfly
came near me: -- Every flower I touched sunk shrivelled to the ground. -- I
looked toward Heaven: -- The sun withdrew behind a cloud. -- What is to become
of me? -- I am the most desolate wretch on earth. -- Who will have pity enough
to kill me? -- ( Looking wildly at the pictures) What men are these around me.
with swords girt on their sides? -- All stare at me -- and yet the blades start
not from their scabbards. ( Kneeling before the picture nearest to her) Have
compassion on me, thou that look so sternly at me! -- Rid the earth of a
monster! -- Or, if thou think thy sword too noble to be stained with my
incestuous blood, lift up that foot, and, with its iron armor, tread on my
neck, as on a poisonous worm. -- I ask in vain! -- It Is my doom, to linger
here, a pray to all the agonies of conscience. -- If I could but prey -- if any
one would but prey for me. -- Where are my children? -- ( Shuddering) Children!
Have I children? -- Have I a husband? -- I am not a mother. -- I cannot be a
mother. -- What I have born has been the brood of hell. Satin's grin was
mingled with the first smile of my babes. -- Guide them hither, great Avenger,
that I may sprinkle these massy walls with their brains, collect their
scattered limbs, consume their bones with fire, and give them to the hurricane,
to sweep the dust aloft! -- (Sinks exhausted upon a seat. -- A pause) Where am
I? -- My eyes are dim. -- Methinks it must be evening. -- All is so still -- so
still! -- No bird is singing. -- Not a gnat is humming. -- The sun sets. --
Tomorrow, perhaps, he will throw his earliest beams upon my grave, and kiss a
tear from my dear brother's cheek. -- Where will they dig my grave? -- Beneath
the lime-trees toward the East? -- Oh no! -- Among the nettles, under the wall
of our churchyard. -- They will fix a small black cross upon it. -- "The Lord
have mercy on her soul." -- Yes. -- Die -- I will die -- I, and my poor
children. Without him I cannot live; with him I must not live. -- God will
judge us. He will cleanse their tainted souls for millions of years in
purgatory, and, at last, receive the innocents among his angels. -- The idea
dawns. -- To die! -- No evil spirit has inspired that thought. ( Kneels) Holy
mother of God! Behold, a sinner kneels before thee in the dust! Mercifully
deign to look upon me, and if the dark design of death, which broods within my
soul, be not the delusion of my own brain, or the instigation of the tempter,
oh! vouchsafe some miracle to me, thy handmaid! Steel my breast, nerve my hand,
and arm me with some instrument of murder, that I may discover, thou art with
me!


WILIBALD and OTTOMAR enter. Will. ( with a dagger in his hand) Mother! mother!
look at this dagger -- My grandfather took it from the Saracens -- See how it
glitters.


Ade. ( dreadfully alarmed) I am heard!


Will. Only look, mother! only look!

(ADELAIDE rises trembling, starts at WILIBALD, walks slowly to him as if
intending to catch something by surprise, and snatches the dagger from his
hand.) ( Affrighted) Dear mother it is sharp!


Ade. Is it so?


(She looks wildly at the dagger, at her children, and then again at the
dagger. By degrees her wildness softens into sorrow. She heaves deep sighs, and
at length weeps.) Ott. (creeping to her and fawning) Dear mother, what is the
matter?


Will. Are you ill, dear mother?


Ade. Ill! very ill -- weak, very weak. Blessed mother of the Crucified,
complete thy miracle! Oh strengthen me*


Ott (pulls Wilibald sorrowfully) Come brother!


Will. Come, and let us pray for my mother. going.


Ade. (hastily intercepting their way) Whither would you go? -- Back! -- (
Drags them to the front of the stage,) Back! spawn of hell! -- This aim is
consecrated by the Lord -- An! Ye shall not escape it. Immortal strength is
given to this hand! -- Tremble! -- Your hour is come!


Ott. ( creeping behind Wilibald) Oh brother! What does she mean?


Will. Dear mother! my father will be coming soon -- Let us go to meet him.


Ade. Father, said thou? -- Who is thy father? -- Ha! Viper! -- Must thou
still recall it to my mind? (lifts her arm) -- Hold! Come hither, Wilibald --
Come hither Ottomar -- Tell me -- Have you said your prayers today?


Both. Oh yes, dear mother.


Ade. What was your prayer?


Will. That God would be merciful to us.


Ade. (bursts into tears) God be merciful to you!


Ott. You're crying, dear mother.


Ade. Answer me further. Have you, since you said your prayers, done nothing
wrong?


Will. I Have done nothing wrong, I Am sure, mother.


Ott. ( stammering) I -- I took a bird's egg from one of the village boys. I am
very sorry for it.


Ade. Kneel down, and beg God's forgiveness.


Ott. ( kneels) God will forgive me: for I Will give him all the first nest I
find.


Ade. (in a tremor) There -- It Is done! -- The moment is arrived -- Guide my
arm! oh God! -- Let me but reach the heart at once -- that I may not see the
struggles -- that I may not hear the groans -- Away! away! Quick! ( She flies
at Wilibald with the uplifted dagger, and sinks at his feet deprived of
strength. The dagger falls from her hand. She throws her arms round the
children, presses them close to her heart, and weeps bitterly.)


Both. (hanging on her neck and carressing her) Dear mother!


Ade. In vain does the stern sense of duty exact the murder of these sweet
innocents. They are the fruit of infamy, an abomination both to God and man.
Look! ye inexorable judges, look at this guiltless smiling face -- In truth, if
Satan be concealed behind this mask, no wonder he so easily seduces saints.
This child has robbed another of an egg. This is the heaviest transgression*
and he heartily repents it.


Ott, I do indeed, dear mother.


Ade. He has prayed too, this morning. His prayer was not the gabble of a vile
dissembling monk. 'Twas that pure praise, which God has prepared for himself,
from the mouths of infants. No -- in the eye of God, you are forgiven, you and
your parents: for they knew not what they did. Come, children, -- Help your
mother to seek consolation in your father's arms. (As she is going* she
suddenly starts trembling back) Woe be upon me! What am I about to do? Some
infernal spirit is trying to delude me -- is trying to rob me of my last and
only consolation -- happiness hereafter. 'Till now I have been ignorant, and
the mercy of my judge will pardon me. But the next embrace must be eternal
death -- In vain does the tempter whisper to me: "'It Is but fraternal love. A
sister sure may clasp a brother to her heart." Begone, ye lures to sin! -- I
cannot command my heart. It Is the heart of a fond loving wife -- a sister's
love is foreign to it. -- God has passed his heaviest denunciation upon incest.
-- Did not the abbot say this? -- Did he not curse me and my children? -- Did
not the holy Virgin arm me by a miracle? -- Was it not the finger of the
Highest, which pointed to the sacrifice, ordained to be offered to him by my
hands? -- Oh temporal and eternal welfare of my children, the most sacred of a
mother's cares, what will become of you, if, in this hour my strength forsakes
me? -- Come nearer, my pretty ones. Tell me what you mean to do, should you
ever become men?


Will. I Will be a brave knight, like my father.


Ott. So will I, mother.


Will. I Will do good to the poor, protect widows and orphans, and rescue the
oppressed: for my father says, these are the duties of a knight.


Ott. I Will do all this too, mother.


Ade. Will you indeed? -- Alas! no. You never can be knights -- No one will
engage with you -- No one will draw his sword against you -- Your name will he
erased from heraldry -- The badge will be torn from your helmets -- Your horses
will be slain -- Your armor broken, and your shield trodden upon. Overwhelmed
with ignominy, you will fly the lists, and curse the breasts which gave you
suck. You will take refuge in deserts and in forests: will turn your backs on
the demesnes of your forefathers, and be pursued into every quarter by the
church's ban -- The pious man will strike a cross when he espies you at a
distance -- The dastardly assassin will, unpunished, plunge a dagger in your
hearts, and give your Carcases for food to ravenous vultures -- No -- ( seizes
the dagger) No! Rather shall you perish by a mother's hand -- Never shall any
base poltroon be able to attack you! -- Never shall your name be marked with
infamy! Never shall whispering slander tell your mother's crime! Ye shall not
wander in the wilderness, scratching the earth for food, suing to the clouds of
heaven for drink, cursing the creator and your own existence. My soul was pure
and undefiled when I conceived you. My soul is pure and undefiled in this sad
hour -- Oh God, their spirits came from thee. Thou gave them to me. Take them
back, and hereafter let me find thee at thy throne (quivering and almost beyond
herself) Why do you tremble, children? -- Why do you look at me so fearfully?
-- Do not tremble -- You will be happy -- You have prayed -- You have done
nothing wrong -- Come hither, Wilibald, -- Embrace me -- Embrace your mother
once again.


Will. (embracing her) Dear mother --


Ade. (plunges the dagger into his back to the hilt) -- Farewell! beloved
child, farewell!


(WILIBALD sinks, with a faint groan, at his mother's feet, writhes his body,
and expires.) Ott. (shuddering) Oh, my brother!


Ade. ( fixing her eye instantly upon the corpse) There! it is done! But another
struggle! -- But one convulsion more! -- Now he is dead -- the spirit gone --
its tenement momentary -- There soars the liberated soul -- Its chains are
broken -- A more than mortal luster folds it -- And see -- an angel takes
charge of him -- leads him with friendly guidance to the throne of God -- There
he stands! -- Sweet babe! -- Why art thou there alone? -- Where is thy brother?


Ott. (who in the mean time has crept into a corner, kneels, and raises his
little hands) Dear mother, let me live?


Ade. ( violently startled) Ha! -- What sobs in the dark there? -- Speak! --
Answer me!


Ott. (in a tone of supplication) It Is little Ottomar.


Ade. Thou still here! and alone! -- Where is thy brother?


Ott. Oh! -- There he lies.


Ade. It Is false! -- Can thou not hear his call? Art thou deaf to thy
brother's voice?


Ott. I hear nothing, dear mother.


Ade. Hark! -- Again -- And now a third time! Look up! He is smiling on us --
He beckons: He calls! -- Quick! Quick! follow him.


( She stabs him in the breast several times.) Ott. ( strikes both hands upon
the wound, and creeps toward her on his knees) Oh! Mother! Oh! poor little
Ottomar --


Ade. Away, basilisk! ( stabs him once more -- he falls and dies) Ha! that was
well aimed: that hit the vital part! He moves no more! -- Not one more sigh --
Triumph -- Triumph -- I have torn them from the claws of Satan -- There they
hover hand in hand -- Their voice is hymns of praise, their raiment light --
Triumph -- Triumph -- I laugh at the church's ban, and at its threats -- The
sacrifice is offered. God look down, well pleased. ( throws the dagger from
her) Away! -- Away -- to chapel -- Away to supplication and thanksgiving --
(spies blood upon her hands) Hold! This is blood -- Thus I dare not pass the
thresholds of the temple -- Thus stained with blood, I dare not sprinkle myself
with consecrated water, nor strike the token of the holy cross upon my bosom --
I will wash myself -- I will go down to the well, where my beloved waits.
(Stumbles against Wilibald) What is this? -- Gently! Gently! Hist! The children
are asleep -- Oh that I may not have been too loud -- See! -- This poor boy
must have some horrid dream -- His mouth seems contorted, as if he were in pain
-- Poor child! The gnats will not suffer him to sleep -- They have stung him
till he bleeds -- Stop! Stop! (tears off her veil and covers Wilibald) There,
little slumberer! Sleep in peace! But what have I left for this? -- Shall I for
this boy's sake, tear my veil? -- Is it not large enough to cover both? -- Why
do you lie at such a distance from each other, as if some storm had cast you
hither?? -- Let me bring this close to his brother -- Gently -- softly, that he
may not wake --


[ She carefully lifts up the body of OTTOMAR, lays it near that of his
brother, kneels, covers both with the veil, and is busy in observing on every
side that no hole is left.] Sir HUGO and Sir THEOBALD enter. The. What art thou
doing, Adelaide?


Ade. Hist! Hist! I have sung the boys to sleep.


( She raises the veil and discovers the bloody bodies.) The. Jesus Maria!


( He staggers backward to the nearest pillar, against which he leans, without
strength. His whole frame quivers. His countenance is horribly convulsed. His
eyes are rivetted upon the bodies, and he sheds not a tear.) Hu. Heavens! Too
late! Wretched being! What have thou done?


( He stands with both hands claspt, and fixed to the spot.) Ade. ( with the
smile and air of insanity) I sung a pretty hymn -- The holy Virgin taught me --
and while I sung the sweet boys dropped asleep.


Hu. Alas! She raves! --


Ade. Hist! -- Speak lower, grey-beard -- I Will go into the garden -- I Will pluck
flowers -- violets, roses, pinks and lilies. I Will scatter them upon my cherubs
-- and when they wake, with pleasant odours round them, they will reward their
mother with a kiss for all her care -- Sit down here, old man -- Beware, lest
any breath of wind disturb the veil -- Or any gnat come near to sting them --
Hush! -- In a moment I return --


Hu. ( after a pause, looks at his son, then at the bodies, and then toward
heaven) Almighty God! Oh, let this sacrifice to superstitious madness, be the
last, and receive these guiltless souls among thy holy host of angels!


( He kneels and blesses the children. The curtain falls.) FINIS.

