THE NATURE AND IMPORTANCE OF CHRISTIAN WORSHIP; CONSIDERED IN A SERMON,
PREACHED, JULY 4th, 1800, (...) the DEDICATION of the NEW MEETING HOUSE in the
Southwest part of Charlton. Erected by a number of INHABITANTS, belonging to
CHARLTON, STURBRIDGE and DUDLEY. BY ERASTUS LEARNED, A. M. Pastor of the
Congregational Church in CHARLTON. Published by particular Request.

PRINTED AT WORCESTER, BY ISAIAH THOMAS, JUN. August -- 1800.

CONSIDERING the very short time the Author had for preparing the following
Discourse, he relies on the candor of those who may read it, to excuse its
imperfections. That it may serve to illustrate the Nature, and enforce the
Importance of Christian Worship -- especially among those, at whose particular
request it was delivered and is now published: And that they may long enjoy
unity and peace in maintaining Christian Worship, in the House they have
erected, and dedicated to that service, is the sincere wish of the

AUTHOR.

A DEDICATORY SERMON.
JOHN IV. 23. But the hour comes, and now is, when the true worshippers shall
worship the Father in spirit and in truth; for the Father seeks such to
worship him.
TO worship God is a duty, that has been generally acknowledged by mankind;
and, in all ages and countries, there have been institutions of religion. It is
a duty enjoined by reason, and enforced by divine revelation. Even those, who
were favored with no written revelation of the will of God, might clearly see,
by the visible things which were made, his eternal power and godhead, and be
left without excuse, if they neglected to worship and adore him. And frequently
are we called upon, in the Scriptures, to attend to this important duty. The
Psalmist exhorts; O come, let us worship and bow down, let us kneel before the
Lord our Maker, for he is our God. Our Savior has said; thou shall worship the
Lord thy God. And the Apostles have taught us, both by precept and example, Not
to forsake the assembling of ourselves together, for divine worship, as the
manner of some is. But, notwithstanding mankind have been in all ages,
generally agreed, in considering divine worship as an important duty, it is to
be lamented that religious institutions have, at the same time, been so
generally abused. A small acquaintance with the history of mankind, will show
us, that great indeed have been the mischiefs of mistaken zeal; of zeal
contending, not only about doctrines, but places and modes of religious
worship. Religious institutions, which were designed to promote love to God,
peace on earth, and good will to men, have been perverted, by superstition and
enthusiasm, to the purposes of discord, and bloody persecution. Our blessed
Savior, knowing what was in man, seems, in the passage here cited from the
Gospel, to have intended totally to prevent these evils, by plainly declaring,
that neither particular place nor mode of worship, should be of any intrinsic
value under the christian dispensation; that the local and peculiar worship of
Judaism was to give way to a worship of a more exalted nature; that the hour
was now come, when the true worshippers should worship the Father, in spirit
and in truth: Not with the painful rites and ceremonies required by the law,
which were only shadows of things to come; but with that more sublime and
spiritual worship which should suit the genius of Christianity; for the Father,
says he, seeks such to worship him.

The text, considered in its connection, discovers to us, not only the nature of
Christian worship, but also the reason of God's various dealings with the
children of men; that, "while he sits enthroned in the glories of unchangeable
wisdom, he condescends to the weakness of his creatures, and adapts his laws to
their various situations and capacity."

"At the time of the migration of the Jews from Egypt," says a learned Divine,
See Family Lectures, Vol. II, Sermon, LXXXII.
"the whole world was sunk into idolatry. They alone were blessed with the
knowledge of the true God: Yet even they were perpetually relapsing into the
absurdities of idol worship. Hence that load of peculiar ceremonies was imposed
on them; all tending, by various means, to one great end; that of keeping them
pure from idolatry, of separating them from the worship of the Pagan nations
that surrounded them, and of confirming them in that of the true God. To this
end, the temple was built and the worship established at Jerusalem. Hither the
whole nation was obliged to resort at stated times, to prevent their relapse
into idolatry. The Samaritans were a sect, who had divided from the Jews, and
for the same ends had built a temple on Mount Gerizim, where they likewise
periodically performed the ceremonies enjoined by the law. These ceremonies,
and this separation of the Jews from the Gentiles, were designed by Providence
to be continued till the coming of Christ. But now a glorious change was to
take place. The world was, by this time, prepared, by higher degrees of
knowledge, for the reception of the Gospel. This was the hour appointed, for
the Sun of Righteousness to arise, for his light to be spread over the face of
the whole earth. Every circumstance and ceremony was now to be done away that
tended to keep up the former separation; nothing was to be established, but
what tended to the general union of mankind; and the peculiar, the local and
periodical worship of Jerusalem, was to be swallowed up in that more spiritual
dispensation, which was designed to produce universal peace and charity."

This being the design of Providence, in its various dispensations, we may only
attend to the occasion that introduced the words of our text, in order to
discover at once its meaning and propriety.

As our Savior journeyed from Judea to Galilee, he passed through Samaria.
Being fatigued with his journey, he sat down by a well and sent his disciples
into the city to procure some provisions for their refreshment. While they were
gone, there came a Samaritan woman to draw water. Our Savior says unto her,
woman, give me to drink. Knowing him to be a Jew, by his dress, or dialect, she
was much surprised at his request. She thinks it strange that he did not
manifest the same obstinate temper toward the Samaritans that the Jews had
constantly done. She wonders that he should condescend to ask this kindness of
her; for it was the pride of the Jews, "that they would endure any hardship and
suffering, rather than be beholden to a Samaritan." How is it, says she, that
thou, being a Jew, asks drink of me, which am a woman of Samaria; for the
Jews have no dealings with the Samaritans. Their discourse being thus
introduced, our Lord improves the occasion, to instruct her in spiritual and
divine things. He acquaints her of the water of life, that grace of God, which
refreshes the thirsty soul and prepares it for eternal felicity. He opens to
her memory many of the scenes of her past life, and convinced her that he was a
Prophet, or one that was endued with extraordinary communications from the
Divine Being. Anxious for further instruction, she wisely improves the
opportunity to inquire concerning that dispute which had so long kept up the
most bitter enmity between the Jews and the Samaritans. Our fathers, says she,
worshipped in this mountain; and ye say, i. e. the Jews say, that in Jerusalem
is the place where men ought to worship. It was agreed between the Jews and
Samaritans, that (...) ought to be worshipped some where, and that ^^^^gious
worship was a matter of very great importance. But the subject of variance was,
where, i. e. in what particular place they should worship God. Jesus says unto
her, woman, believe me, the hour comes, when ye shall neither in this
mountain, nor yet at Jerusalem worship the Father: -- But the hour comes, and
now is, when the true worshippers shall worship the Father in spirit and in
truth; for the Father seeks such to worship him.

The Jews and Samaritans were both expecting the hour to come, when, either by
some divine revelation, or some signal providence, this matter should be
decided, either in favor of Jerusalem or of Mount Gerizim. But how differently
was it decided from the expectations of either party! The object of worship is
indeed still to continue the same. The Jews worshipped God under the character
of a Father, and so did doubtless the Samaritans. This part is still to remain.
But a period is now put to all niceness and all differences about the place of
worship. The dissolution of the Jewish economy, and the erecting of the
evangelical state, "have set this matter at large," as one expresses it, so
that it is a thing perfectly indifferent in what particular places men worship
God. The worship of God is not now, under the Gospel, appropriated to any
particular place, as it was under the law; but it is required, that men pray
every where, lifting up holy hands without wrath and doubting. Our reason
teaches us to consult decency and convenience, in the places of worship; but
our religion gives no preference to one place above another, in respect of
holiness and acceptableness to God.

It is now required of all that worship God, that they worship him in spirit
and in truth. A change has taken place in the nature of the worship. Christians
worship God, not in the ceremonial observances of the Mosaic institution, but
in spiritual ordinances; consisting less in external parade, but animated and
invigorated with a divine power and energy. The worship, which Christ has
instituted, is rational and intellectual, and refined from those external rites
with which the worship of the Jews was clouded. There is also, under the
Gospel, a change in the temper and disposition of the worshippers. True
christians worship God in the spirit. They depend upon the holy spirit of God,
for strength and assistance, yielding their souls to his influences and
operations. They devote their own spirits to, and employ them in, the service
of God. They worship him, with steadiness of mind, with pure affections, and
with all the powers of their souls. They also worship him in truth; i. e. with
sincerity of heart; without any disguise or hypocrisy. They have truth in the
inward part, as the Psalmist expresses it. They regard the power more than the
form of Godliness; they aim at the divine glory, more than to be seen of men;
and draw near to God with a pure heart.

Several reasons may be offered, why mankind should worship God in spirit and
in truth.

1. Because, under the Gospel, they only are the true worshippers, and they
only will be accepted. The Father seeks such to worship him. This implies
that such worship is necessary in order to meet with the approbation of Heaven.
When God comes to judge the world by Jesus Christ, it will not be of any
importance, where mankind have worshipped the Father; but in what manner they
have done it: -- Whether they have put on the external sanctity of the
hypocrite; or, whether they have worshipped in spirit and in truth. Again,

Our Savior has observed, that God is a spirit, and offered that as another
reason, why he should be worshipped in spirit and in truth. The spirituality of
the divine nature is a very good reason for the spirituality of divine worship.
If we do not worship God, who is a spirit, in spirit and in truth, we neither
give him the glory due unto his name, nor can we reasonably hope for his favor
and acceptance.

Thus we see, that the words of our text were designed to show, that the time
had already come, when men should no longer confine their worship of God, to
any particular place, nor adhere to any particular mode, but should worship the
Father in spirit and in truth: That the whole "universe is his temple, and all
space his abode;" and that one particular place, in itself considered, is no
more acceptable to him than another; that the sincerity and purity of the heart
is what God chiefly requires.

But as, in avoiding one extreme, it has too often been the fate of mankind to
run into its opposite; so here, this declaration of our Savior in the text,
which implies only the abolition of the ceremonial law, and the establishment
of a more pure and spiritual worship, has been frequently misapprehended, as
being an express license for neglecting all external ceremonies in religion,
and even all public worship. But the examples of the Apostles and primitive
display of Christ, are sufficient to convince mankind, that our text was never
designed to destroy all public institutions of religion; but to show the purity
and spirituality of that worship, which, under the Gospel, should succeed the
pompous and local worship of the Jews. We have not only the examples of the
first christians assembling for public worship; but we re positively commanded,
not to forsake the assembling of ourselves together as the manner of some is.
And indeed, while we are in our present imperfect state, it will be found
necessary, on impartial inquiry, to attend to the public institutions of
religion, in order to accomplish that great purpose of worshipping God in
spirit and in truth.

Let us then inquire into the necessity and usefulness of public worship.

1. The public institutions of religion are necessary; because without them,
mankind in general would relapse into a state of barbarism and a total
forgetfulness of all religion. "I believe," says an excellent writer, Rev. JOHN
BROWN, Chaplain to the Bishop of Carlisle.
"it is no breach of truth or charity, to affirm that a great part of mankind
are so immersed in business or pleasure, that they seldom turn their thoughts
on God, seldom recollect either their obligations to him, or their dependence
on him, except only when they are drawn by the stated returns of public
worship. Some indeed are so hardened that they are deaf to every call; but much
greater numbers are swayed by the power of custom, and yield to the rules of
decency, when they would scorn those of duty." Assembling together affords also
opportunities for moral and religious instruction to those who would otherwise
receive none. "In all Protestant countries, the elements of natural religion,
and the important parts of the evangelical history, are familiar to the lowest
of the people. This general diffusion of knowledge amongst all orders of
christians, which will appear a great thing when compared with the intellectual
condition of barbarous nations, cannot fairly, I think, be ascribed to any
other cause, than the regular establishment of assembling for divine worship."
See PALEY's Moral Philosophy, Chapter IV.
In these assemblies, there are none perhaps, who receive not some temporary
impressions of religion, which, though they work not their entire and full
effect, though they be soon choked by the cares and pleasures of the world,
yet keep those cares and pleasures from swallowing up the soul in a total
degeneracy. Others, perhaps, are awakened from the delusion of sin, to a sense
of the importance of piety and religion, are roused from their lethargy of
soul, to listen to the warning voice, which bids them return to the right way
and walk in it. These reasons bind all the members of a community to uphold
public worship by their presence and example.

But besides the direct necessity of public worship, in order to improve the
minds and morals of mankind, there are other valuable advantages to be derived
from the immediate attendance on this duty.

1. Joining in prayer and praises to their common Creator, has a sensible
tendency to unite mankind together, and to cherish and enlarge the generous
affections. When they acknowledge themselves sprung from the same original,
"preparing together for the period of all worldly distinctions, reminded of
their mutual infirmities, and common dependency, imploring and receiving
support from the same great source of power and bounty, having all one interest
to secure, one Lord to serve, one judgment, the supreme object of all their
hopes and fears to look toward, it is hardly possible, in this position, to
behold mankind as strangers or enemies, or not to regard them as children of
the same family assembled before their common Parent, and with some portion of
the tenderness that belongs to the most endearing of our domestic relations."
It is not to be expected, however, that any single attendance on divine worship
should produce any considerable or lasting effect of this kind; but the
frequent return of such sentiments and feelings as are naturally excited by the
presence of a devout congregation, may soften many unkind passions, and produce
in time, with the blessing of God, a most extensive and permanent benevolence.

Again, "Assemblies for the purpose of divine worship, placing men under
impressions, by which they are taught to consider their relation to the Deity
and to contemplate those around them, with a view to that relation, force upon
their thoughts the natural equality of the human species, and thereby promote
humility and condescension, in the highest orders of the community, and inspire
the lowest with a sense of their rights." Mankind are apt to make too great
distinctions with respect to the different situations of men in the present
life. Honor, wealth and power are too much the idols of the world. -- But all
classes and distinctions of men uniting together to worship and adore their
common Lord and Master has a happy tendency to improve the character of both
high and low, and to impress on their minds a sense of their natural equality.
Ruler and subject, rich and poor are distinctions that will continue among men
no longer than during the continuance of this short life; and those
distinctions are almost lost, when mankind are considered in a relation to the
great Creator and Governor of the universe. Great then must be the utility of
public worship, being calculated to produce such happy effects. But beside
these great effects, we must not forget the powerful influence of example in
the public worship of God. By example, I mean, not only that which excites
imitation in the external acts of worship; but, "that sympathy of soul so
strongly prevalent in human nature." The passions of mankind are contageous.
Fear, hope, grief and joy, shining forth in the countenance of our fellow
creatures, strike themselves into our hearts, and awaken corresponding feelings
in the soul. Thus the sight of a congregation, seriously united in worship,
naturally inspires additional degrees of piety and reverence.

From this brief display of the subject before us, we discern the necessity and
utility of public worship, even in accomplishing that great purpose of
worshipping God in spirit and in truth. And in consequence of the truths
brought to view, in the preceding discourse, I shall now add a few observations
adapted to the occasion of our assembling together, at this time, and then
close. And,

1. We may observe, that as God, under the Gospel, has required us to worship
him in spirit and in truth, without confining his worship to any particular
place or mode, we should exercise mutual forbearance and charity toward all
christians, though they may not unite with us in the same place and mode of
religious worship. As we live in a land of civil and religious liberty, all
christians have a right to consult their own convenience in choosing their
places for religious worship; and their own consciences with regard to the
mode. Though the convenience of an individual, or of a few, ought, many times,
to be sacrificed to the public good; yet when a number of christians can
consult their own convenience without any injury to others, they have an
undoubted right so to do; and this right ought to be secured to them by the
laws of their country. And if the laws will not permit them to enjoy this
right, they are forced to suffer, in this particular, an unreasonable
deprivation of liberty.

Besides: Too great an attachment to particular places and modes of worship has
been often attended with pernicious consequences. It has cherished a spirit of
pride and vain glory, and expelled christian charity and all those amiable
virtues, which ought ever to reign in the human heart. Different sects and
denominations of christians, who have placed their whole religion in their
peculiar places and modes of worship, "have branded each other with the most
odious names, and conducted toward each other with such mutual hatred and
uncharitableness, as became a reproach to the pure and holy religion they
professed." Churches and societies of different opinions with regard to the
externals of religion; and even members of the same church and society cannot
be happy, without exercising mutual forbearance and charity. We are here in an
imperfect state, and liable to deception and error. The different capacities
and different opportunities of improvement among mankind, render it impossible,
in the present state of things, that there should be an entire uniformity of
sentiment. But I consider one thing only as necessary for christian charity;
and that is a pure and upright heart. When the serious and regular conduct of a
man, and his attachment to divine institutions, evinces his conformity and
obedience to God, we ought to grant him the same liberty which we are willing
to take to ourselves, of enjoying unmolested his own opinions. Charity and
liberality are most amiable virtues; but modern liberality has degenerated into
licentiousness. Many call themselves liberal, because they disregard all
religion themselves, and wish to have others do the same. Such persons are
generally the most severe on the characters of others; especially, of those,
who differ from them in their views of religion. A harsher word than liberal,
would better describe their temper and conduct. True liberality springs from a
generous and benevolent soul; and consists in treating every honest and upright
man, with a suitable degree of tenderness and respect. We ought never to
condemn a man, merely for his particular sentiments, unless they are
accompanied with a manifest contempt of religion, or a vicious life: But, when
this is the case, when men advocate licentious principles to countenance
licentious practices, it is perfectly consistent with charity and liberality to
consider and treat them as enemies, both to the private and public happiness of
mankind. But where an upright conduct evinces an upright heart, charity and
tenderness toward such a character should be ever kept alive in our breasts:
And when a church or society is composed of such characters, though they may
not be perfectly uniform in sentiment, yet, mere difference in opinion is no
reasonable bar against union and fellowship. Again,

2dly. We may here observe and admire the wisdom and excellence of the
christian institution, in not appointing its proselytes the observance of any
particular place or mode of worship. The Jews were commanded to worship the
Father at Jerusalem. But the time has long since come, when an end was to be
put to all distinction of place. "The Jewish ceremonial law, being appropriated
to the use of one people, assembled in one place, tending only to the purpose
of a temporary separation, had, in these respects, its relative propriety and
excellence. On the contrary, the christian religion, being designed for the
service of all mankind, of every age and nation, has, with equal wisdom, left
the particular places and modes of worship to the consent, and various
circumstances of different times and people." So that divine worship, performed
in different places and under different forms, may be equally acceptable to
God; if he be worshipped by them in spirit and in truth. Again,

3dly and lastly: We may observe, that the subject we have been considering is
perfectly consistent with the design of this day's solemnity. We have assembled
at this time to separate this house from common uses, by a solemn public act,
and to consecrate it to the public worship of ALMIGHTY GOD. Although one place
in itself considered, is no more acceptable to God than another; and he regards
the disposition of the worshippers more than any, and every thing else; yet we
may presume that dedicating places designed for public worship is an acceptable
service unto him. It manifests our reverence for God and his institutions; and
may procure blessings which would not otherwise be conferred. For though God
dwells not in temples made with hands; though his immensity cannot be
confined within consecrated walls, but is every where present to those who
worship him in spirit and in truth; yet, the holy spirit has thought fit to
ascribe to places, consecrated to his solemn worship, the honor of his peculiar
residence. Thus he is said to have dwelt between the cherubim of the mercy
feat. The temple is called his house, his court, the habitation of his
holiness, the place where his honor dwelt. And we find a respect, suitable to
these high characters, paid toward the temple at Jerusalem, by the greatest
examples of piety, and enjoined as a religious duty.

Our blessed Lord, the Author of our holy religion, far from discouraging such
reverence, manifested his concern for it, by an act of zeal the most
extraordinary of any that appeared in his whole life. In the reproof of crimes
in general he was meek and lowly. Even the blasphemies and indignities offered
to his own sacred character, he bore without resentment or complaint. But when
he saw the house of prayer, his Father's house, profaned, his resentment
enkindled and broke out into a "holy transport of indignation" against the
offenders. With a scourge of small cords, he drove them in haste from the
temple, unwilling to see a house, dedicated to the service of God, polluted by
the iniquities of the people. And to christian temples we ought to manifest a
suitable degree of reverence. We cannot surely imagine that irreverence shown
to the worship Christ himself has instituted should be without offense to him,
who was so highly provoked with that, shown to the worship of the former
dispensation. Places set apart for religious offices, show that the honor of
religion is thereby intended. They are calculated to give men an awful sense of
the duties they are to perform, and to put them in mind, that, as those places
are separated from common uses and dedicated to God, they should also, with
becoming seriousness, dedicate themselves to his service.

Besides: We may hope for peculiar blessings to follow in consequence of this
sacred act. When Solomon dedicated the temple of Jerusalem, the glory of the
Lord filled the house of the Lord. And may we not hope that in consequence of
the same solemn act, God may hereafter fill this house with the glory of his
power and grace?

As worshipping God is a duty enjoined by reason, and enforced by divine
revelation, may it be strictly attended to, by all who are in connection with
this society; and may they all remember, when they approach him in the duties
of his sanctuary, to worship him in spirit and in truth; for the Father seeks
such to worship him. For this solemn duty may they always be prepared, by
impressing on their minds, the most respectful ideas of that infinite Being,
who is the object of their addresses. And during their attendance on his
service, may they retain an awful sense of his majesty and presence. As often
as they here assemble to present themselves before the Most High God, may they
leave, as much as possible, the world and its concernments behind them, and, on
the wings of holy contemplation, elevate their hearts to Heaven. And when they
return from the duties of this place, now sacred to religion, may they retain
the religious impressions they may here receive. -- May they not think
themselves retired from God; but may they hold a sacred intercourse with him,
by an attention to him in their whole conduct; by acknowledging him in all
their ways; by considering his will as their guide, his providence the object
of their dependence, his favor the aim of their ambition; and by rendering him
continual homage in the uniform obedience of a good life. To this obedience and
the happiness consequent upon it, may this house of prayer, now dedicated to
God, prove happily subservient. May it be a mean, under divine providence, of
uniting many in the worship of God, and of recommending and promoting rational
piety. May the instructions, which may here be delivered, be a mean of
reclaiming sinners; of confirming the righteous; of elucidating the doctrines
and enforcing the duties of the Christian system; and, of exhibiting religion
in its native beauty and excellence, which, when free from superstition and
enthusiasm, appears possessed of every moral excellence; the object of esteem
and veneration.

To Conclude: -- May that supreme, all propitious Being, to whose service we
now dedicate this temple, and without whose favor and blessing their labor is
but lost that built it; may he vouchsafe to favor the hopes of its founders; to
prosper this work of their hands upon them, by shedding down his blessings, and
by imparting to every worshipper within these walls the effectual influences of
his grace. May the seed of true religion, here sown, spring up, and, watered
with the dew of heaven, be abundantly productive of the fruits of the spirit,
of love, peace, gentleness and every Christian grace. May the beauty of
holiness appear in the conduct of all who may worship in this place. May they
here be directed and find the way that leads to everlasting life. And may this
which is now set apart as the house of God be to those who worship in it, the
gate of heaven; that all who worship in this temple made with hands, may be
admitted hereafter to that holy temple above, where God unveils his peculiar
glory; there to unite with angels and the spirits of just men made perfect, in
celebrating the praises of God and the Lamb, forever and ever.

AMEN.

