A DISCOURSE, DELIVERED APRIL 1st, 1800, IN THE BRICK PRESBYTERIAN CHURCH,
BEFORE THE NEW YORK MISSIONARY SOCIETY, AT THEIR ANNUAL MEETING.

BY WILLIAM LINN, D. D. One of the Ministers of the Reformed Dutch Church in
the city of New York.

NEW YORK: PRINTED BY ISAAC COLLINS, NO. 189, PEARL-STREET. 1800.

At a meeting of the NEW YORK MISSIONARY SOCIETY, April 2, 1800.
On motion,
RESOLVED, That the thanks of the SOCIETY be presented to Dr. LINN, for his
Sermon preached before them last evening, and that he be requested to furnish a
copy thereof for publication.

Extracted from the Minutes, JOHN N. ABEEL, Clerk p. t.

THE CHRISTIAN's ZEAL FOR THE CHURCH.
PSALM CXXXVII. 5. 6. If I forget thee, O Jerusalem, let my right hand forget
her cunning. If I do not remember thee, let my tongue cleave to the roof of my
mouth; if I prefer not Jerusalem above my chief joy.


THE penman of this psalm is unknown. He was, probably, some holy prophet,
priest, or Levite, who penned it during his own and his brethren's captivity in
Babylon. It has ever been justly admired; and attempts have been made by some
of the first poets to render it into English verse. We regret that he who
excelled all others in sacred poesy, and who has given an admirable translation
of this psalm, in its Jewish form," should have asserted, that it could not
well be converted into Christianity; Dr. Watts's Miscellaneous Thoughts.
and has, consequently, omitted it in his system for divine worship. It appears
to admit of an easy and useful application.

AS Jerusalem was a type of the Christian church on earth, and of the general
assembly of the firstborn on high, so the captive state of the Jews, the
scoffs which they endured from their enemies, the affectionate remembrance of
their former privileges, and their prospects of a glorious restoration, well
represent the afflictions of the Church, and her final triumph; together with
the exercises of the pious under these considerations. The words which have
been read are beautifully and forcibly expressive. To manifest the most tender
concern for the distress of Jerusalem, and anxiety for her deliverance, the
form of an imprecation is adopted. If I forget thee, O Jerusalem, let my right
hand forget her cunning. If I do not remember thee, let my tongue cleave to the
roof of my mouth; if I prefer not Jerusalem above my chief joy. Rather than
string their harps for the purpose of mirth, they wish that they might lose
their skill in playing; rather than cease to mourn their desolate condition,
and look forward to the return of prosperity, they wish to be deprived of the
use of their faculties.

THESE words teach us, my brethren, what ought to be our sentiment and conduct
with respect to the extension of the gospel of Christ; and they afford a proper
subject of discourse on this occasion. They have been preferred, because
Christians appear more to need excitement than information as to their duty.
There is not one of us who does not believe that a time will come when the
Christian religion will prevail over the whole earth, and that we are under
obligation to promote this; but we are too seldom aware of the means in our
power, and too disinclined to use them. In one word, while we assent to the
necessity and benefit of missions, they are either not undertaken, or not
supported, for want of a missionary spirit.

THE design then is, simply, to describe the temper and practice of those who
can sincerely speak the language of the text.

IN the first place, The enlargement of the Church is to such, an object of
their highest desire. If I prefer not Jerusalem above my chief joy. To this,
riches, honors, and pleasures yield in estimation, and with the greatest
reason. The glory of God, and the welfare of mankind are the leading principles
which govern the Christian's heart; and these are advanced in proportion to the
success of the gospel. Every sentiment of gratitude, and every benevolent
feeling unite in diffusing the knowledge of the love of God to our lost world.

THIS contributes to the temporal happiness of men, by enlightening their
minds, subduing their evil passions, and directing them in the discharge of the
duties which they owe to the great Author of all, and to one another. That so
much misery is found on this earth arises from the partial and imperfect
prevalence of the Christian religion. Even where it is professed, it is either
misunderstood, or corrupted, or the power of it is not felt. Its real tendency
is to produce righteousness and peace; and we are assured that this will be the
effect when the nations generally embrace it; that nation shall not lift up
sword against nation, neither shall they learn war any more.

THE mere politician considers a nation happy when her commerce is extensive
and secure; when she is tranquil at home, and commands respect abroad; he sees
in the revolutions of empires only the workings of human passions, and he
fondly anticipates a time when civil rights being well understood, and free
governments established, a melioration shall take place. But he who prefers
Jerusalem above his chief joy, calls that people happy whose God is the Lord;
he views every revolution as connected with and subservient to Messiah's reign,
and that on this ultimately depends the happiness of the great family of
mankind. The fault lies in the innate corruption of our nature. That only which
can and will effectually regenerate the world is the religion of Jesus Christ.

BUT when we consider that the redemption of Christ is the way which God has
provided for the recovery of fallen men to holiness and happiness; that without
the knowledge of this they must suffer endless misery in a future state, how
awfully important to publish the tidings of salvation! The reflection that the
greater part of our race are living in ignorance of the true God, in suspense
as to what awaits them after death, or in anticipation of divine wrath, and
must finally sink under everlasting despair, will excite the most lively
emotions in the pious heart. By the best calculations, Millions. Europe
contains 153 According to Zimmerman, 144,130,000 Asia, 500 Africa, 150 America,
150 Total 953 The number of Roman Catholics Millions. is computed to be about
90 Protestants, 24 114

If we deduct this number from the other there remain 839 millions who do not
profess the Christian religion, besides the inhabitants of the newly discovered
countries.


If I forget thee, O Jerusalem. Nothing is so constant in my remembrance,
nothing gives me such deep sorrow as the perishing condition of my
fellow creatures.

Is he, my brethren, esteemed a benefactor of mankind who breaks the yoke of
tyrants, and secures to a people civil freedom? Much more ought he who delivers
them from the captivity of sin and satan. Is he entitled to reward who
introduces the arts of civilization? Much more is he who teaches the heavenly
art of living to God, and prepares citizens for the New Jerusalem. Is he the
friend of the poor and miserable who visits, and cheers by his bounty, their
gloomy abodes? Much more is he who directs the laboring conscience where to
find peace, and points to life and immortality through the Savior. The
progress of the gospel is an object of the highest importance to the temporal
and eternal welfare of our race, and it is an object of the highest desire to
all who feel the spirit of the text.

IN the second place, Such will encourage and strengthen one another in this
glorious work. While they are not unapprehensive of the difficulties which they
must necessarily encounter, they will not be disposed to magnify these, and to
dwell upon them so as to discourage themselves and others. Every enterprise is
attended with difficulties. The Christian has nothing to do with these, when
the path of duty is evident, but to foresee and prepare to meet them; leaving
the event to God who does according to his will, and before whom the mountains
often become a plain.

IT has been said, by way of discouraging the attempt to send the gospel to the
Heathen, that now is not the time which God has fixed for their conversion.
Whence has this information been obtained? Who has released Christians from the
obligation to make constant and unwearied exertions? Are not the means and the
end connected? And when the former are faithfully used, have we not reason to
believe that the latter will follow? Yea, when the proper methods are
vigorously pursued, may it not be said, that the time is come?

IT has been objected that it is in vain to send the gospel to a people, until
they are civilized? But how are they to be civilized? Will not the person who
teaches them the things which belong to their everlasting peace, teach them
also the arts of civilization, and inculcate the duties of sobriety and
industry? Will their meeting together for divine worship, and the instruction
of their children have no effect? Will not these gradually check their roving
disposition, and soften their ferocious nature? So far from waiting until a
state of civilization precede the preaching of the gospel, that these must go
together; or rather, the reception of the Christian religion will naturally
produce the other.

AGAIN, It has been objected that multitudes on the frontiers, and even in the
interior places of our country, are destitute of religious instruction; and
that these first demand our attention. It cannot be justly said that they are
so destitute as the savages in the wilderness. Many of them once lived under
the gospel; and they either have, or might have now the means of salvation. The
holy scriptures, which testify of Christ, are accessible to them. Besides
missionaries are sent among them by most of the Christian denominations.
Granting their condition to be pitiable, is not the condition of others more to
be deplored? Should we not fly to save those first who are in the greatest
danger of destruction? Who have the best claim to our benevolence? Those who
are deprived of every way of relief, or those who will not use it when in their
reach?

IT has been farther started as a difficulty that proper missionaries cannot be
procured. Such persons seem to forget that "the Lord of the harvest" has
promised, and that he will send forth laborers into his harvest.

THESE objections will not deter those who are intent on the work. They are
answered by referring to the grace of the Redeemer, and by an appeal to
repeated experience. Had the Apostles been affrighted by dangers of this sort,
they had never gone forth into all the world. Had Paul consulted with flesh and
blood, he had not been debtor both to the Greeks, and to the Barbarians; he had
never preached the gospel from Jerusalem and round about unto Illyricum. Let
any missionary to the islands of the South Sea, to Africa, or to the Indians on
our borders, produce such a catalogue of hardships as this; Of the Jews five
times received I forty stripes save one. Thrice was I beaten with rods, once
was I stoned, thrice I suffered shipwreck; a night and a day have I been in the
deep: In journeying often, in perils of waters, in perils of robbers, in perils
by mine own countrymen, in perils by the heathen, in perils in the city, in
perils in the wilderness, in perils in the sea, in perils among false brethren;
In weariness and painfulness, in watchings often, in hunger and thirst, in
fastings often, in cold and nakedness. 2 Cor. xi. 24 -- 27.
-- What a holy zeal actuated this great Apostle! These various and numerous
sufferings, enough to appal the stoutest heart, did not check his career. He
has left them on record, as if to shame the indolence and timidity of those who
complain, or to show what can be endured for the cross of Christ.

THE institution of such societies as of late years have taken place, embracing
the different denominations, has a happy tendency to encourage, to animate, and
to give efficacy to their efforts. The influence of a single man is often
great; the influence of a number striving together for the same cause is still
greater, and renders success almost certain. The expression used in the address
of one of the Missionary Societies in Britain, Edinburgh.
conveys a noble and affecting idea; a general movement of the Church upon
earth. When this army marches to battle under Jesus the Captain of salvation,
their victories will be irresistible, rapid, and universal. Gird thy sword upon
thy thigh, O most mighty, with thy glory and thy majesty. And in thy majesty
ride prosperously, because of truth, and meekness, and righteousness: And thy
right hand shall teach thee terrible things. Psalm xlv. 3, 4.


IN the third place, Those who feel the spirit expressed by the Jewish captives
in the text, will make the cause of the Church matter of earnest and repeated
supplications to the throne of grace. As the success of the gospel is uppermost
in their thoughts and what they most fervently desire, so they will plead with
God that every obstacle may be removed, and that "all flesh may see his
salvation." "Ye that make mention of the Lord," says the prophet, keep not
silence; and give him no rest, till he make Jerusalem a praise in the earth.
Isaiah lxii. 6, 7.


HOW consolatory to Christians to know that though some of them may be deprived
of other means of affording assistance, yet they can all help by their prayers!
And what encouragement to Missionaries struggling with difficulties, that they
have access to Him who hears prayer, and are assured that they are
continually remembered by the faithful in every part of the world!

BESIDES the secret addresses to God, those who are truly engaged for the
promotion of the Redeemer's kingdom, will meet together, and unite in their
supplications. To this exercise a blessing is promised. Hear the words of our
Lord! I say unto you, That if two of you shall agree on earth as touching any
thing that they shall ask, it shall be done for them of my Father which is in
heaven. For where two or three are gathered together in my name, there am I in
the midst of them. Matt. xviii. 19, 20.
This is what makes the concerts of prayer so necessary and useful. They
originated in Britain immediately upon the institution of the Missionary
Societies, and the example in both was followed here. The same spirit which
leads to the one will lead to the other.

THESE societies for missionary efforts, and for prayer, are the more pleasing,
and promise to be attended with the greater advantage, because they consist of
those of various denominations. Differing in things small and unessential, they
agree as touching one thing that they shall ask. Our Father who art in heaven,
bring thy people more and more to one mind in extending the gospel of thy Son,
and in answer to their joint requests, let the work be done for them!

ONCE MORE, Let me mention that those who manifest the temper which has been
described, will cheerfully contribute of their worldly substance. Without this,
our desires are insincere, we do but dishearten and weaken one another, and our
prayers are unacceptable. The Apostle, in commending the liberality of the
Churches of Macedonia, says, they first gave their own selves to the Lord, and
unto us by the will of God. All who truly devote themselves to God, will devote
the means with which they are favored to the promotion of his cause. They will
consider themselves not as proprietors, but as stewards; that wealth is given
them not to live in ease, and roll in splendour, but that they may employ it in
the service of Him who is Lord of all.

"Lo, I dwell," said David, in an house of cedars, but the ark of the covenant
of the Lord remains under curtains. 1 Chronicles. xvii. 1.
How similar his words in another place to those in the text! Surely I will not
come into the tabernacle of my house, nor go up into my bed; I will not give
sleep to mine eyes, nor slumber to mine eyelids, until I find out a place for
the Lord, an habitation for the mighty God of Jacob. Psalm cxxxii. 3, 4, 5.
I feel criminal," as though he had said, in possessing, and cannot enjoy this
costly mansion, nor any of the luxuries with which I am surrounded, until
provision be made for the ark of God. The prophet Haggai, when he reproved the
people for their neglect of building the Lord's house, said, Is it time for
you, O ye, to dwell in your ceiled houses, and this house lie waste. Ah, how
differently do some who call themselves Christians act! While they live in
splendid houses, ride in chariots, and fare sumptuously every day, they hardly
bestow a thought on the millions who perish for lack of knowledge. Even the
crumbs which fall from their tables, the superfluities of fortune, are refused.

THE objection has been sometimes made, that were there an opportunity of
establishing missions in this country, Christians are not sufficiently numerous
and wealthy for the purpose. A little consideration will teach us, that the
only danger is in the want of union and zeal. If united, they can accomplish
more than they are aware of; and if zealous, abundant means can be produced. Do
we not find individuals and companies purchasing immense tracts of land,
establishing banks, building palaces, and freighting vessels with the richest
treasures? Whence all these things? Whence do men derive the means for these
enterprises, and yet when solicited to give for religious uses their right
hands forget their cunning? They are withered and cannot be stretched forth? Is
it not because they forget Jerusalem, and set her prosperity below their chief
joy? Infidels may sneer, and carnal professors start alarmed as though they
feared to be robbed of their gods, but let them know that accursed is every
thing which is not subservient to the cross of Christ; and that whosoever
sacrilegiously withholds from God, his money shall perish with him, the rust of
it shall witness against him, and shall eat his flesh as it were fire.

BUT there is no necessity for such demands upon Christians as would deprive
them of a single convenience or even comfort in life. There is an abundance for
the work, of what the possessors cannot possibly enjoy; yea, of what is a
burden to them, and may be a real injury to their posterity. None will
understand me as inveighing against industry and enterprise in the concerns of
this world, or against a liberal provision for our households. Suffer me,
however, to say, and to ask every one in this assembly to mark it, that the
honor and advantage of wealth lie singly in its proper use. It makes eminent
when it is made the instrument of eminent good.

WHEN God requires our souls, whose shall those things be which we have
provided? When at death, O man, thy right hand shall forget her cunning, and
thy tongue cleave to the roof of thy mouth, will it be a pleasure to reflect
that thou never usedst either for the glory of God? Had thou remembered
Jerusalem, and preferred her above thy chief joy, thou would have had a place
there; but now thou art shut out, and thy short-lived joys are followed by
endless torments!

ADMITTING that the rich worldling should still withhold his gifts, there is no
occasion for despair. All who are impressed with the importance of the design
will contribute time after time, according to their ability; and God will
graciously accept and prosper the willing mind. He knows the desolations of our
Zion, he will fulfill the desires of the mourners, and he will do good, in his
good pleasure unto Zion, and will build the walls of Jerusalem.

AFTER this brief discussion of the subject, bear with me a little longer, my
brethren, while I endeavor to apply it more particularly to the business for
which we are assembled this evening.

WHEN so many parts of the earth are buried in darkness, the light which we
enjoy should raise our gratitude to God who has thus distinguished us. Our
privileges call also for a suitable improvement of them. More is expected from
us than from the unenlightened heathen; and if we continue in impenitence, our
condemnation will be more highly aggravated. Let us remember these words of our
Lord; This is the condemnation, that light is come into the world, and men
loved darkness rather than light, because their deeds were evil. John iii. 19.
Let us tremble at the woes he denounced against Chorazin, Bethsaida, and
Capernaum, on account of their unbelief, after all the mighty works which had
been done among them. O sinners, the gospel which we wish to publish abroad,
has been often published to you. What reception have you given it? Are you
still strangers to faith in the righteousness of Christ to justify you before
God, and to the influences of the holy Spirit to renew and sanctify your
nature? Be alarmed at your condition, and be entreated to embrace without delay
the salvation which is offered to you. Unless we have been brought to feel our
own sin and misery, and to flee for refuge to that plan of recovery which God
has revealed, it is not to be expected that we will be solicitous to proclaim
the glad tidings to others. Only the love of God shed abroad in the heart will
cause bowels of compassion. Only this will excite a real concern that the Lord
may gather together the outcasts of Israel.

WITH the institution of a Missionary Society in this city, the principal
object of which is to send the gospel to the Indian tribes, you are well
acquainted. The transactions of the Society have been published annually; and
the progress which has been made will appear from the report of the Directors
at this meeting. It is necessary, at present, only to say, that the missionary
who was sent to the Chickasaw Indians The Chickasaws are settled on the head
branches of the Tombeckbe, Mobile, and Yozoo rivers, in the northwest corner of
Georgia. Though they are not numerous, yet their peaceable disposition and
unvaried friendship for the United States; the mildness and healthiness of the
climate; there being no Missionaries among them, and their neighborhood to
several powerful nations; have induced the society to prefer them as the object
of their first efforts. Should success be granted, access will be obtained to
the Creeks, Cherokees, and Chacktaws who are now favorably disposed for the
reception of Missionaries.
has been formally and kindly received; that he returned last fall, with the
approbation of the chiefs, in order to remove his family; that the Directors
employed, during the winter, an additional person as a catechist, and who is
also a mechanic; and that both these persons with their wives and twelve
children began their journey, in the state of Vermont, on the 13th day of last
month, and are now on their way to the Chickasaw country. The whole company
consists of seventeen souls. One of the Missionaries, by consent of the
Directors, has taken with him as a member of his family, a young man skilled in
husbandry.
They have been furnished with passports, and every necessary document. O
Shepherd of Israel, lead the flock in safety to the place of their destination!

HAVING thus effected a permanent residence for persons who carry with them the
joyful found of the gospel, and the arts of civilized life, we believe that
temporal and eternal blessings are about to be extended to these poor heathen.
The support of these missionaries and of others who may be employed, as the
prospect brightens, will require constant donations from all who prefer
Jerusalem above their chief joy. At first it seemed matter of experiment, and
some doubted; but every encouragement which can be rationally expected is now
given. If we contributed formerly, when there was neither Missionary, nor
certain object of his labors in view, how much more when God has directed to
both, and granted success!

FREQUENTLY has been pled before you the cause of poor children, and your works
praised you. On a late occasion, you committed to us the sacred trust of
expressing your griefs for the loss of the man whom you delighted to honor, and
we received your indulgence. The orations delivered Feb. 22d, 1800, on the
death of General Washington.
Fain would we, this evening, clear ourselves of the blood of men. Terrible are
the yells of the savage when he darts from his ambush on his foe; but
infinitely more terrible his screams of agony in a future state, to those who
suffer him to perish through neglect. You white people knew the will of the
Great Spirit, but you would not come and tell us. You came indeed into our
woods, and took away our hunting grounds. You brought us rum, and exchanged it
for our furs. You taught us to lie, and to cheat, and to swear; but you sent us
none to teach us how we might be happy when we were gathered to our fathers.
How severe such reproaches! and alas, how justly merited by some who bear the
Christian name!

THE collections made on the evenings of prayer are small. It is at the annual
meetings the Society solicits, and places considerable dependence for aid. A
sermon is preached as a mean of engaging our own hearts in the duties of
religion, of animating one another in our noble undertaking, and of affording
an opportunity to all who love Jerusalem to contribute their gifts. Peace be
within thy walls, and prosperity within thy palaces. If I forget thee, O
Jerusalem, let my right hand forget her cunning. If I do not remember thee, let
my tongue cleave to the roof of my mouth; if I prefer not Jerusalem above my
chief joy.

I CANNOT better conclude this discourse than by directing your attention, my
Christian brethren, to the encouraging prospects which appear for the Church
from the missionary spirit which has gone forth, and the glorious promises in
the word of God. Encouragement may be drawn from the very calamities which are
come upon the earth, and that flood of impiety which has threatened to
overwhelm us. These latter days have been foretold, and are a sign of the
coming of the Son of man. The Lord, in his own time, and we trust soon, will
"turn again the captivity of Zion." The harps will be snatched from the
willows, and highly strung to his praise.

BUT whatever prosperity we expect to attend the Church, at certain periods, in
this world, she may be said to be in captivity until the whole plan of
redemption is completed; until the glorious appearing of the great God, and our
Savior. Look forward to that joyful time. Then, O ye redeemed, will your
afflictions be remembered only to increase your delight. Then will the rivers
of Babylon be exchanged for the pure river of the water of life; the willows
for the tree of life; and you will ask for the harps of angels to sound the
praises of your God and Redeemer.

REPORT OF THE DIRECTORS.
IN their report of November 14th, 1799, the Directors stated, in general, the
arrival of the Missionary, the Rev. Joseph Bullen, among the Chickasaw Indians,
and their favorable dispositions toward him, although he had not been
formally acknowledged by the nation. They have it now in their power to
communicate to the Society, the very pleasing intelligence, that his reception
has been friendly and flattering even beyond expectation. The Indians appear to
have vied with each other in their kindnesses to him, and his son who
accompanied him; and to have listened with respect and reverence to his
religious instructions. It will readily occur that during Mr. Bullen's short
residence in the Indian country, viz. from the 20th May till the 4th of
September 1799, no great progress in the work of his mission could reasonably
be expected. The difference of language and of manners, the impossibility of
procuring proper interpreters, and the difficulty of procuring any worthy of
confidence; the state of Indian society, and the jealousy of the Indian temper,
are obstacles which time, patience, and perseverance are necessary to remove.
Yet, under all these discouragements, added to the affliction of broken health,
and the severe sickness of his son, Mr. Bullen appears to have labored with
fidelity, and not without effect. One of the Chickasaw chiefs has been
prevailed upon to set up the worship of God in his family: Others are cheerful
in promoting the introduction of the gospel into the nation; and the negroes,
of whom it possesses considerable numbers, have discovered much anxiety to
learn the things which belong to their peace. Several of them came miles to
hear Mr. Bullen preach and catechize, and some of them seemed so to embrace the
word of life, that he thought himself warranted to administer baptism to one
family, viz. a father and four children.

The Indian diet and mode of living in general disagreeing with his
constitution, so as gradually to impair his health and strength so far as to
incapacitate him for the comfortable discharge of missionary duties, and his
son having been brought, by disease, to the brink of the grave, Mr. Bullen
thought it requisite to leave the country for a while and return home. He took
his departure accordingly on the 4th of September, with the regrets of the
chiefs and nation. He was escorted a considerable distance on his journey, and
parted with them after receiving their earnest solicitations to come back as
speedily as possible. Two addresses to the board of Directors, one from Wolf's
friend, the head man of the nation, and another from General William Colbert
and Major George Colbert, both chiefs of influence, officially requested that
Mr. Bullen might return without delay, and bring his family to settle among
them They also requested that the board would send some other persons who could
teach them some of the arts of civilized life, and promised lands during their
continuance in the country, and such other succors as it should be in their
power to give.

In consequence of this application, the Directors thought it their duty, and
of high importance to the objects of this Society, to attempt the formation of
a small religious settlement in the Chickasaw country. For this purpose they
have connected in the mission with Mr. Bullen and his family, Deacon Ebenezer
Rice and his family. With Mr. Rice, both from respectable information, and
personal interview, they have every reason to be satisfied, as a man of
evangelical principles and experimental godliness, and one well qualified to
assist Mr. Bullen as a catechist. Besides his usefulness in catechizing, Mr.
Rice, from his mechanical skill, will be able to assist the Indians in the
construction of houses, mills and looms. From his family and that of Mr.
Bullen's jointly, they will learn agriculture and several of the domestic arts.
While the females will be of eminent service in instructing the Indian women. A
number of persons of other occupations were willing to accompany the million.
But the Directors, having adopted, as a fundamental principle, the resolution
of not employing any who should not be primarily devoted to the propagation of
the glorious gospel, and with whom improvements, merely civil, should not be a
secondary object, and having nothing to convince them that the applicants are
of this description, were obliged to decline the offer.

Mr. Bullen, therefore, and Mr. Rice, with their families, agreed to go, by
themselves, on the noble and generous enterprise. They set off on the 13th
instant, and are now prosecuting their journey.

The number of persons belonging to the Mission is as follows: Mr. Bullen, his
wife, five children, and a young man named Harris, whom he was permitted to
take as a member of his family, 8 Mr. Rice, his wife, and seven children, 9
Making in the whole, 17

The Directors were desirous of sending a blacksmith, but have not yet been
able to obtain such a one as they would deem suitable. As soon as they can
accomplish this, the establishment will be sufficient, in their judgment, at
least for some time.

They have also authorized Mr. Bullen to employ as a teacher under him for one
year, a person of piety and soundness in the faith, and have voted a
compensation of 100 dollars.

The expenses of the mission are as follows: Allowance to Mr. Bullen for his
first journey, in addition to the first appropriation, Dls. 76 Allowance for
services rendered by his son, 50 Do. outfit and journey to the Chickasaws, 300
Do. for advance on salary, 275 Do. to Deacon Rice for outfit and removal, 200
Do. do. in advance of one half year's salary, 100 1001

The annual expense of the mission, exclusively of incidental charges, and
including the cost of the schoolmaster, is Dls. Mr. Bullen's salary, 375 Mr.
Rice's do. 200 Schoolmaster's do. 100 675 Making in the whole a sum of six
hundred and seventy-five dollars.

The Directors enjoy particular satisfaction in representing to the Society
that their resources are fully adequate to this expense; The income of their
productive capital is estimated at Dls. 350 The annual contributions amount to
250 The monthly and annual collections, on an average to about 400 1000

The present state of their funds is subjoined. Dls. Cts. 35 Insurance shares
cost 1993 76 Deduction for Balance due the Treasurer 123 32 1870 44 Probable
amount due by members, 229 56 2100 00

Hitherto, it is evident, the Lord has helped. And it would be ungrateful to
omit, in the record of his mercies, the prompt and cheerful assistance which
has been afforded to the mission by the government of the United States.

After so pleasing a commencement, it would be inexcusable in the Directors not
to contemplate the extension of their plans. In this delightful labor, they
will gladly exert themselves, and confidently expect the support not only of
the Society, but of those who pray for the peace of Jerusalem.

JOHN M. MASON, Sec'ry.
New York, March 31st, 1800.
Officers and other Directors for the ensuing year.
OFFICERS.
JOHN RODGERS, D. D. President. JOHN H. LIVINGSTON, D. D. Vice President. Mr.
DIVIE BETHUNE, Treasurer. Rev. JOHN M. MASON, Secretary. Rev. SAMUEL MILLER,
Clerk.
OTHER DIRECTORS.
WILLIAM LINN, D. D. JOHN M'KNIGHT, D. D. Rev. JOHN N. ABEEL, Rev. PHILIP
MILLEDOLER, PETER WILSON, L. L. D. JOHN BROOM, Esquire. Mr. JOHN BINGHAM, GEORGE
LINDSAY, Esquire. ANTHONY POST, Esquire. LEONARD BLEECKER, Esquire. GEORGE WARNER, Esquire. Mr.
JOHN MILLS.
Donations to the Society will be thankfully received by Mr. DIVIE BETHUNE,
Treasurer, or by any other of the Directors.

FINIS.

