A Funeral Oration, ON THE DEATH OF General Washington, DELIVERED IN THE GERMAN
LUTHERAN CHURCH, Philadelphia: AT THE REQUEST OF CONGRESS, ON THE TWENTY-SIXTH
OF DECEMBER, 1799.

BY MAJOR GENERAL LEE.

Philadelphia; Printed by JOHN ORMROD, No. 41, Chesnut-street. 1800.

To all to whom these Presents shall come, Greeting:
I CERTIFY, That the annexed writing, beginning at the word "that," in the
fourth line, is a true extract from a Resolution of both Houses of Congress,
approved by the President of the United States on the 24th of last month, and
deposited among the rolls in my office.

IN FAITH WHEREOF, I Timothy Pickering, Secretary for the Department of State
of the United States of America, have signed these Presents, and caused the
Seal of the said Department of State to be affixed hereto, (L.S.)
at Philadelphia, this third day of January, A. D. 1800, and in the
twenty-fourth year of the Independence of the said States.

TIMOTHY PICKERING.

CONGRESS OF THE UNITED STATES, MONDAY, THE 23d OF DECEMBER, 1799.
Resolved, by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States,
that there be a Funeral Procession from Congress Hall to the German Lutheran
Church, in honor of the Memory of GENERAL GEORGE WASHINGTON; on Thursday the
twenty-sixth instant, and that an Oration be prepared at the request of
Congress, to be delivered before both Houses on that day; and that the
President of the Senate and Speaker of the House of Representatives, be desired
to request one of the Members of Congress to prepare and deliver the same.

IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES OF THE UNITED STATES, Tuesday, the 24th of
December, 1799.
THE Speaker informed the House, that conformably to the resolution of
Congress, the President of the Senate, and the Speaker of the House of
Representatives had requested MAJOR GENERAL HENRY LEE, one of the
Representatives from the state of Virginia, to prepare and deliver a Funeral
Oration before both Houses, on Thursday the twenty sixth instant, in honor of
the Memory of GEORGE WASHINGTON, late General of the Armies of the United
States; and that Mr. Lee had been pleased to accept of the appointment.

[Extract from the Journal.]

JONATHAN W. CONDY, CLERK.

FUNERAL ORATION, etc.
IN obedience to your The two Houses of Congress.
will, I rise your humble organ, with the hope of executing a part of the
system of public mourning which you have been pleased to adopt, commemorative
of the death of the most illustrious and most beloved personage this country
has ever produced; and which, while it transmits to posterity your sense of the
awful event, faintly represents your knowledge of the consummate excellence you
so cordially honor.

Desperate indeed is any attempt on earth to meet correspondently this
dispensation of Heaven: for, while with pious resignation we submit to the will
of an all-gracious Providence, we can never cease lamenting in our finite view
of Omnipotent Wisdom, the heart-rending privation for which our nation weeps.
When the civilized world shakes to its center; when every moment gives birth to
strange and momentous changes; when our peaceful quarter of the globe, exempt
as it happily has been from any share in the slaughter of the human race, may
yet be compelled to abandon her pacific policy, and to risk the doleful
casualties of war: What limit is there to the extent of our loss? -- None
within the reach of my words to express; none which your feelings will not
disavow.

The founder of our foederate republic -- our bulwark in war, our guide in
peace, is no more. Oh that this was but questionable! Hope, the comforter of
the wretched, would pour into our agonized hearts its balmy dew. But, alas!
there is no hope for us: our Washington is removed forever. Possessing the
stoutest frame, and purest mind, he had passed nearly to his sixty-eighth year,
in the enjoyment of high health, when, habituated by his care of us to neglect
himself, a slight cold, disregarded, became inconvenient on Friday, oppressive
on Saturday, and defying every medical interposition, before the morning of
Sunday, put an end to the best of men. An end did I say -- his fame survives!
bounded only by the limits of the earth, and by the extent of the human mind.
He survives in our hearts, in the growing knowledge of our children, in the
affection of the good throughout the world; and when our monuments shall be
done away; when nations now existing shall be no more; when even our young and
far-spreading empire shall have perished, still will our Washington's glory
unfaded shine, and die not, until love of virtue cease on earth, or earth
itself sinks into chaos.

How, my fellow-citizens, shall I single to your grateful hearts his
pre-eminent worth! Where shall I begin in opening to your view a character
throughout sublime. Shall I speak of his warlike achievements, all springing
from obedience to his country's will -- all directed to his country's good?

Will you go with me to the Banks of the Monongahela, to see your youthful
Washington, supporting, in the dismal hour of Indian victory, the ill-fated
Braddock, and saving, by his judgment and by his valor, the remains of a
defeated army, pressed by the conquering savage so? Or, when oppressed
America, nobly resolving to risk her all in defense of her violated rights, he
was elevated by the unanimous voice of Congress to the command of her armies:
Will you follow him to the high-grounds of Boston, where to an undisciplined,
courageous and virtuous yeomanry, his presence gave the stability of system,
and infused the invincibility of love of country: Or shall I carry you to the
painful scenes of Long Island, York-Island and New Jersey, when combating
superior and gallant armies, aided by powerful fleets, and led by chiefs high
in the roll of fame, he stood the bulwark of our safety; undismayed by
disaster; unchanged by change of fortune. Or will you view him in the
precarious fields of Trenton, where deep gloom unnerving every arm, reigned
triumphant through our thinned, worn down unaided ranks: himself unmoved. --
Dreadful was the night; it was about this time of winter -- The storm raged --
the Delaware rolling furiously with floating ice forbad the approach of man.
Washington, self collected, viewed the tremendous scene -- his country called;
unappall'd by surrounding dangers, he passed to the hostile shore: he fought;
he conquered. The morning sun cheered the American world. Our country rose on
the event; and her dauntless Chief pursuing his blow, completed in the lawns of
Princeton, what his vast soul had conceived on the shores of Delaware.

Thence to the strong grounds of Morris-Town he led his small but gallant band;
and through an eventful winter, by the high efforts of his genius, whose
matchless force was measurable only by the growth of difficulties, he held in
check formidable hostile legions, conducted by a Chief experienced in the art
of war, and famed for his valor on the ever-memorable heighths of Abraham,
where fell Wolf, Montcalm, and since our much lamented Montgomery; all covered
with glory. In this fortunate interval, produced by his masterly conduct, our
fathers, ourselves, animated by his resistless example, rallied around our
country's standard, and continued to follow her beloved Chief, through the
various and trying scenes to which the destinies of our union led.

Who is there that has forgotten the vales of Brandywine -- the fields of
Germantown, or the plains of Monmouth; every where present, wants of every kind
obstructing, numerous and valiant armies encountering, himself a host, he
assuaged our sufferings, limited our privations, and upheld our tottering
republic. Shall I display to you the spread of the fire of his soul, by
rehearsing the praises of the hero of Saratoga, and his much loved compeer of
the Carolina's? No; our Washington wears not borrowed glory: To Gates -- to
Green, he gave without reserve the applause due to their eminent merit; and
long may the Chiefs of Saratoga, and of Eutaws, receive the grateful respect of
a grateful people.

Moving in his own orbit, he imparted heat and light to his most distant
satellites; and combining the physical and moral force of all within his
sphere, with irresistible weight he took his course, commiserating folly,
disdaining vice, dismaying treason and invigorating despondency, until the
auspicious hour arrived, when, united with the intrepid forces of a potent and
magnanimous ally, he brought to submission the since conqueror of India; thus
finishing his long career of military glory with a luster corresponding to his
great name, and in this his last act of war affixing the seal of fate to our
nation's birth.

To the horrid din of battle sweet peace succeeded, and our virtuous chief,
mindful only of the common good, in a moment tempting personal aggrandizement,
hushed the discontents of growing sedition and surrendering his power into the
hands from which he had received it, converted his sword into a ploughshare,
teaching an admiring world that to be truly great, you must be truly good.

Was I to stop here, the picture would be incomplete, and the task imposed
unfinished -- Great as was our Washington in war, and much as did that
greatness contribute to produce the American Republic, it is not in war alone
his pre-eminence stands conspicuous; his various talents combining all the
capacities of a statesman with those of the soldier, fitted him alike to guide
the councils and the armies of our nation. Scarcely had he rested from his
martial toils, while his invaluable parental advice was still sounding in our
ears. when he who had been our shield and our sword, was called forth to act a
less splendid but a more important part.

Possessing a clear and a penetrating mind, a strong and a sound judgment,
calmness and temper for deliberation, with invincible firmness and perseverance
in resolutions maturely formed, drawing information from all, acting from
himself, with incorruptible integrity and unvarying patriotism: his own
superiority and the public confidence alike marked him as the man designed by
heaven to lead in the great political as well as military events which have
distinguished the era of his life.

The finger of an overruling Providence, pointing at Washington, was neither
mistaken nor unobserved; when to realize the vast hopes to which our revolution
had given birth, a change of political system became indispensible.

How novel, how grand the spectacle, independent states stretched over an
immense territory, and known only by common difficulty, clinging to their union
as the rock of their safety, deciding by frank comparison of their relative
condition, to rear on that rock, under the guidance of reason, a common
government through whose commanding protection, liberty and order, with their
long train of blessings should be safe to themselves, and the sure inheritance
of their posterity.

This arduous task devolved on citizens selected by the people, from knowledge
of their wisdom and confifidence in their virtue. In this august assembly of
sages and of patriots, Washington of course was found -- and, as if
acknowledged to be most wife, where all were wise, with one voice he was
declared their chief. How well he merited this rare distinction, how faithful
were the labors of himself and his compatriots, the work of their hands and
our union, strength and prosperity, the fruits of that work, best attest.

But to have essentially aided in presenting to his country this consummation
of her hopes, neither satisfied the claims of his fellow-citizens on his
talents, nor those duties which the possession of those talents imposed. Heaven
had not infused into his mind such an uncommon share of its aetherial spirit to
remain unemployed, nor bestowed on him his genius unaccompanied with the
corresponding duty of devoting it to the common good. To have framed a
constitution, was showing only, without realizing the general happiness. This
great work remained to be done, and America, steadfast in her preference, with
one voice summoned her beloved Washington, unpractised as he was in the duties
of civil administration, to execute his last act in the completion of the
national felicity. Obedient to her call, he assumed the high office with that
self-distrust peculiar to his innate modesty, the constant attendant of
pre-eminent virtue. What was the burst of joy thro's our anxious land on this
exhilerating event is known to us all. The aged, the young, the brave, the
fair, rivalled each other in demonstrations of their gratitude; and this high
wrought delightful scene was heightened in its effect, by the singular contest
between the zeal of the bestowers and the avoidance of the receiver of the
honors bestowed. Commencing his administration, what heart is not charmed with
the recollection of the pure and wise principles announced by himself, as the
basis of his political life. He best understood the indissoluble union between
virtue and happiness, between duty and advantage, between the genuine maxims of
an honest and magnanimous policy, and the solid rewards of public prosperity
and individual felicity: watching with an equal and comprehensive eye over this
great assemblage of communities and interests, he laid the foundations of our
national policy in the unerring immutable principles of morality, based on
religion, exemplifying the pre-eminence of free government, by all the
attributes which win the affections of its citizens or command the respect of
the world.

"O fortunatos nimium, sua si bona norint!" Leading through the complicated
difficulties produced by previous obligations and conflicting interests,
seconded by succeeding houses of Congress, enlightened and patriotic, he
surmounted all original obstructions, and brightened the path of our national
felicity.

The Presidential term expiring, his solicitude to exchange exaltation for
humility returned, with a force increased with increase of age, and he had
prepared his farewell address to his countrymen, proclaiming his intention,
when the united interposition of all around him, enforced by the eventful
prospects of the epoch, produced a further sacrifice of inclination to duty.
The election of President followed, and Washington, by the unanimous vote of
the nation, was called to resume the chief magistracy: what a wonderful fixure
of confidence! Which attracts most our admiration, a people so correct, or a
citizen combining an assemblage of talents forbidding rivalry, and stifling
even envy itself? Such a nation aught to be happy, such a chief must be forever
revered.

War, long menaced by the Indian tribes, now broke out; and the terrible
conflict deluging Europe with blood, began to shed its baneful influence over
our happy land. To the first, outstretching his invincible arm, under the
orders of the gallant Wayne, the American Eagle soared triumphant through distant
forests. Peace followed victory, and the melioration of the condition of the
enemy followed peace. Godlike virtue which uplifts even the subdued savage.

To the second he opposed himself. New and delicate was the conjuncture, and
great was the stake. -- Soon did his penetrating mind discern and seize the
only course, continuing to us all, the felicity enjoyed. He issued his
proclamation of neutrality. This index to his whole subsequent conduct, was
sanctioned by the approbation of both houses of Congress, and by the approving
voice of the people.

To this sublime policy he inviolably adhered, unmoved by foreign intrusion,
unshaken by domestic turbulence.

"Justum et tenacem propofiti virum
"Non civium ardor prava jubentium,
"Non vultus instantis tyranni
"Mente quatit solida."
Maintaining his pacific system at the expense of no duty, America faithful to
herself and unstained in her honor, continued to enjoy the delights of peace,
while afflicted Europe mourns in every quarter, under the accumulated miseries
of an unexampled war; miseries in which our happy country must have shared, had
not our pre-eminent Washington been as firm in council as he was brave in the
field.

Pursuing steadfastly his course, he held safe the public happiness, preventing
foreign war, and quelling internal discord, till the revolving period of a
third election approached, when he executed his interrupted but
inextinguishable desire of returning to the humble walks of private life.

The promulgation of his fixed resolution, stopped the anxious wishes of an
affectionate people, from adding a third unanimous testimonial of their
unabated confidence in the man so long enthroned in their hearts. When, before,
was affection like this exhibited on earth? -- Turn over the records of ancient
Greece -- Review the annals of mighty Rome, -- examine the volumes of modern
Europe; you search in vain. America and her Washington only afford the
dignified exemplification.

The illustrious personage called by the national voice in succession to the
arduous office of guiding a free people, had new difficulties to encounter: the
amicable effort of settling our difficulties with France, begun by Washington,
and pursued by his successor in virtue as in station, proving abortive, America
took measures of self-defence. No sooner was the public mind roused by prospect
of danger, than every eye was turned to the friend of all, though secluded from
public view, and gray in public service: the virtuous veteran, following his
plough General Washington, though opulent, gave much of his time and attention
to practical agriculture.
, received the unexpected summons with mingled emotions of indignation at the
unmerited ill-treatment of his country, and of a determination once more to
risk his all in her defense.

The annunciation of these feelings, in his affecting letter to the President
accepting the command of the army, concludes his official conduct.

First in war -- first in peace -- and first in the hearts of his countrymen,
he was second to none in the humble and endearing scenes of private life;
pious, just, humane, temperate and sincere; uniform, dignified and commanding,
his example was as edifying to all around him, as were the effects of that
example lasting.

To his equals he was condescending, to his inferiors kind, and to the dear
object of his affections exemplarily tender: correct throughout, vice shuddered
in his presence, and virtue always felt his fostering hand; the purity of his
private character gave effulgence to his public virtues.

His last scene comported with the whole tenor of his life. -- Although in
extreme pain, not a sigh, not a groan escaped him; and with undisturbed
serenity he closed his well spent life. -- Such was the man America has ost --
Such was the man for whom our nation mourns.

Methinks I see his august image, and hear falling from his venerable lips
these deep sinking words:

"CEASE, Sons of America, lamenting our separation: go on, and confirm by your
wisdom the fruits of our joint councils, joint efforts, and common dangers:
Reverence religion, diffuse knowledge throughout your land, patronize the arts
and sciences; let Liberty and Order be inseparable companions, control party
spirit, the bane of free governments; observe good faith to, and cultivate
peace with all nations, shut up every avenue to foreign influence, contract
rather than extend national connection, rely on yourselves only: Be American in
thought, word, and deed -- Thus will you give immortality to that union, which
was the constant object of my terrestrial labors; thus will you preserve
undisturbed to the latest posterity, the felicity of a people to me most dear,
and thus will you supply (if my happiness is now aught to you) the only vacancy
in the round of pure bliss high Heaven bestows."

FINIS.

