A DISCOURSE, DELIVERED AT PLYMOUTH, February 22 d, 1800.

AT THE REQUEST OF THE INHABITANTS, AND IN COMPLIANCE WITH THE RECOMMENDATION
OF CONGRESS, AS A TESTIMONY OF GRIEF FOR THE DEATH OF GEORGE WASHINGTON.

COMMANDER IN CHIEF OF THE AMERICAN ARMIES.

WHO DIED Dec. 14, 1799.

BY James Kendall, A. M.

Pastor of the First Church in Plymouth.

Boston.



PRINTED BY JOHN RUSSELL, 1800.

G. W.



"The memory of the just is blessed." PLYMOUTH, FEB. 24th, 1800. SIR,
THE Selectmen of the town of Plymouth, with the warmest sentiments of
affection and respect, present you the thanks of said town, for your ingenious
and apposite discourse, delivered on the 22d instant, by the unanimous request
of the inhabitants, in legal town-meeting assembled; to commemorate the sublime
virtues and pre-eminent worth of the late illustrious GEORGE WASHINGTON; and,
in behalf of said town, request a copy thereof for the press.

Per Order, THOMAS WETHRELL.
The Rev. Mr. KENDALL.
PLYMOUTH, FEB. 25th, 1800. GENTLEMEN,
THE very affectionate and obliging manner, in which you, as the
representatives of the town, have expressed your approbation of the performance
on the 22d inst. has afforded, on this occasion, the most grateful
satisfaction. To comply with your request is to be exposed, at too early a
period, to the criticism of the world. Not to comply, is implicitly refusing to
perpetuate, among all classes of the rising generation in this place, the
memory of those sublime virtues, and that pre-eminent worth, which deserve to
be immortal. A copy of the discourse, therefore, is with diffidence of its
merit, submitted to your disposal.

With perfect respect and esteem, I am, Gentlemen, your affectionate friend,
And very humble servant, JAMES KENDALL.

The Gentlemen Selectmen of the town of Plymouth.
A DISCOURSE.
THIS day, my afflicted friends, gave birth to the greatest of our national
blessings. Its annual return has hitherto been welcomed as the jubilee of
Americans, and celebrated as the birthday of their country's glory. A nation
once hailed it, as the day of her rejoicing; but, alas! too soon, she is
summoned to observe it, as the day of mourning. "The joy of her heart has
ceased." The heralds of festivity have become the messengers of woe. The voice
of merriment has yielded to the sigh of affliction. The pensive breeze wafts
through the continent the funeral knell. The oil of Columbia's joy has turned
into mourning, and the garment of her praise to the cypress shade, and the
spirit of heaviness. Instead of the birth of the illustrious Living, we
commemorate the virtues, but lament the loss, of the illustrious Dead! Of
America it may truly be said, that to day she is gone "to the house of
mourning." Her hero sleeps in dust! The arm, that defended her is fallen! The
tongue, that counseled, is silent! The countenance, that inspired, is changed!
And the godlike spirit, that patronized a world, has returned to the place of
its rest! Well, then may we adopt, as the theme of mutual condolence on this
mournful occasion, the plaintive prayer of the Psalmist: -- "Help, Lord, for
the godly man cease!"

THIS passage, recorded in the first verse of the twelfth Psalm, naturally
brings to our recollection the character of that illustrious Personage, whose
death a Nation mourns -- whose virtues a world admires. The design of the
present occasion is to recognize the eminent worth of this "godly man;" -- to
reflect on the afflicting loss sustained by the community in his death; -- and
to direct us for consolation to a Being, "in whom alone is our help found."

To commemorate the virtues of the great and good is not adulation; nor is due
respect and reverence for "the memory of the just" idolatry. It is proper,
however, to distinguish between divine and human excellence; to make the former
the standard by which to judge the latter; and, in proportion to the
resemblance, which the image bears to the original, we may safely admire and
imitate the copy, while we give the honor and the glory to the Great Archetype
of all perfection and excellence.

IT is also manly and generous to weep at the loss of a valuable and pious
friend. In a world, like this, it is christian to mourn the death of the
righteous. Every tributary tear helps to embalm his memory. Every mournful sigh
follows the ascending spirit with the prayer of the prophet -- "My Father, my
Father, the chariot of Israel, and the horsemen thereof."

ALTHOUGH godliness primarily expresses piety to GOD; yet, as this is the sum
of all the virtues, it implies also resemblance of the moral perfections of
Deity, and general observance of all the duties of religion. It is not confined
to the closet, nor the sanctuary; but is manifest in every circumstance and
condition of life. Godliness is the companion of benevolence and charity -- the
guardian of patriotism and humanity. It supports the highest station, and
adorns the most resplendent character. To the best of citizens and the wisest
of statesmen "her ways were ways of pleasantness, and all her paths were peace"
to the most renowned of warriors.

IT is too true, that eminent piety has rarely been allied, with what the world
calls greatness. A man may have distinguished himself by the accumulation of
wealth, and merely by the splendour of his riches acquired the character of
great. He may have rendered himself great in the eyes of a flattering world by
deep researches into the laws of nature, and uncommon advances in human
science. And some have waded through the blood of their fellow creatures, shed
by their own sword, and risen to greatness on the ruins, which their lust and
ambition have wantonly spread. But there is no godliness in this.

AND are we never disappointed even in the humbler walks of life? Here we are
taught to look for meekness, temperance, and devotion. But true piety has not
always possessed the hearts of those, who have made pretensions to it. How
often has the specious "form of godliness" sanctioned the neglect of half the
duties of christianity, and atoned for the repeated violation of its divine
commands? The vilest hypocrisy has sometimes assumed the dress of piety; and
the murderer's heart been concealed beneath the cloak of religion. This,
however, proves nothing more, than the corruption of human nature, and the
universal respect, which is always paid to genuine goodness and exalted piety.

BUT the Man, whose life was the joy of America -- whose death is the grief of
the world -- was a stranger to malevolence and deceit; an enemy to pride and
unrestrained ambition; a conqueror of every passion, that tended to endanger
his integrity, or threatened to usurp in his heart the empire of virtue and
religion. From the moment, he entered the public theater of life, till the
grand drama was finished, the resolution of a perfect man was the motto of
every act? "Till I die, I will not remove my integrity from me. My
righteousness I hold fast, and will not let it go. My heart shall not reproach
me so long as I live."

HIS character is without a parallel. Circumstance and opportunity have
contributed to his superior elevation. If the patriarchs and prophets of old
rose in any degree above him, it was the immediate inspiration of the Almighty,
that gave them the pre-eminence. Separate from this, where shall we find a man,
even among these ancient saints, more exemplary in meekness, benevolence and
piety; more inflexible in integrity; more impartial in the distribution of
justice; more disinterested in patriotism; more wise and timely in counsel;
more dignified and venerable as a statesman; or more prudent, valiant, and
humane, as a general?

GREAT and good men have been raised up in every age, who have adorned human
nature, and blessed the world. But profane history has not furnished a
personage, to be compared throughout with the great example before us. No age,
nor nation, can reckon up so many, and such sublime virtues, united in an
individual. Can any country boast a character equally conspicuous, so
uncontaminated by the vices of the world? Can any point us to a man, so rarely
led astray from conscious virtue, either by the power of habit, or the violence
of passion? Where among the children of men shall we look for a greater
instrument of good? An instrument, which, in the hands of a benevolent
Providence, has contributed more to the advancement of national perfection and
glory; to maintaining and defending the rights and liberties of mankind; to the
dignity and honor of human nature, or the improvement of human happiness? In
whatever point of light we view his character, whether as a hero, or a
statesman; as a citizen, or (what gave stability and luster to all his virtues)
as a christian; we find the same godlike spirit manifested in every station,
and regulating every action.

WHAT shall we say of the unequalled General? It requires a mind, great as this
illustrious Chief's, to form an adequate conception of the toils and hardships,
the anxieties and distresses, to which a military life exposed him. In this
capacity he commenced his public career; and, by his bravery and skill in
saving the remnant of the haughty, though unfortunate, Braddock's slaughtered
army, he gave indications of that unrivalled military glory, to which he
afterward attained, by a series of hazardous enterprises and heroic exploits,
united with more than Fabian wisdom and prudence. At the early age of
twenty-one he drew his sword in defense of his Country and its rights. Not,
like the heroes of ancient times, to extend his dominions by violence, and riot
in the spoils of victory. Not, like the conqueror of modern times, to slaughter
the innocent for a victor's fame, and spread the havoc of war for a tyrant's
power. But, like the matchless WASHINGTON, to rescue his brethren from the
unjust encroachments of an enemy, and to preserve to posterity a land of
freedom and independence, of religion and peace.

IN the memorable war between Britain and her colonies, all eyes were fixed
upon WASHINGTON. It was a time for more than mortal counsel. Convinced that his
country's rights were the gift of heaven -- that freedom was hers as much as
life -- with that noble elevation of mind, which is inspired by virtuous
patriotism struggling for liberty, he boldly dared to espouse the cause of
humanity, and the cause of God. The united call of his afflicted Israel, like
the voice from the burning bush, urged the American Patriarch to be their
leader. Looking to heaven for its auspicious smiles upon his exertions, he
stood forth the brave advocate for the oppressed, broke the yoke of the
oppressor, and freed a world from slavery. When the liberties of his country
were threatened, his sword leaped from its scabbard. While they were invaded,
his uplifted hand was stayed, till America prevailed. But the moment the
tempest of war subsided, and the olive branch of peace was extended, with the
same greatness of soul he beat his sword into a ploughshare, and his spear into
a pruning book; and, determining to learn war no more, exchanged the hardships
and dangers of a camp, for the domestic sweets, and the peaceful shades, of his
beloved Vernon.

JUSTLY to delineate his character, as a statesman, would be to transcribe the
records of his administration. His acquaintance with the secret springs of
human action, and the various and complicated working of human passion,
together with an ardent and increasing love for his country, gave him the
fairest claim to her suffrages; and were a sure pledge of his proving the
wisest of politicians and the first of statesmen. He had already conciliated
the affection, and secured the confidence, of his fellow-citizens, by his
eminent and disinterested services in the revolutionary war. He had already
manifested his wisdom and prudence as a politician, while presiding over that
venerable body of sages, who framed our excellent and justly admired
constitution. Being thus designated by Providence as the man, who would unite
all hearts, he was twice hailed, "by the spontaneous and unanimous suffrage of
three millions of freemen," as President of these United States. The modest
manner, with which he accepted the highest honor his country could confer, his
extreme diffidence of personal qualifications for discharging the duties of
this important trust, and his humble dependence on "that Almighty Being, who
rules over the universe, who presides in the councils of nations, and whose
providential aids can supply every human defect," show the godliness of his
heart; and evinced, that he was actuated solely from a conviction of duty, and
lived but for the service of his country. In his answer to a farewell address
from the inhabitants of Alexandria, on his "again relinquishing the bliss of
retirement," we behold the disinterested patriot. "Those who know me best, said
he, (and you, my fellow citizens, are, from your situation, in that number)
know better than any others, my love of retirement is so great, that no earthly
consideration, short of a conviction of duty, could have prevailed upon me to
depart from my resolution 'never more to take any share in transactions of a
public nature.' For, at my age, and in my circumstances, what possible
advantage could I propose to myself, from embarking again in the tempestuous
and uncertain ocean of public life." But he had not been accustomed to turn a
deaf ear to the voice of his country. In the alarm of war, it was to him the
voice of thunder. In peace, it was a still small voice; but God was in it.

HIS unceasing fidelity in discharging the duties of his elevated station, his
integrity in maintaining the honor of his country, his vigilance in guarding
its rights, and his patriotism in promoting and securing its interests,
demonstrated that the confidence of his fellow-citizens had not been misplaced,
nor their highly raised expectations disappointed. During eight years arduous,
but successful, administration, having collected and consolidated the crude
materials of a newly confederated republic -- reconciled and calmed the
seemingly opposite and jarring interests of a widely extended continent -- and
removed, in a considerable degree, local prejudices and attachments -- he fixed
our national character, and stamped America with the image of WASHINGTON.

BUT "the increasing weight of years at length admonished him, that the shade
of retirement was as necessary to him as it would be welcome." He could not,
however, lay aside his high responsibility without giving new proof, that he
was the father of his country. This he did by bequeathing to her sons an
incorruptible inheritance. Of all human productions this invaluable Legacy
claims the highest regard of the American people. Its maxims are the result of
sage experience, and its precepts founded in truth. Would America, in a
political view, adopt it as "the man of her counsel," it would prove to her "a
cloud by day, and a pillar of fire by night." It would guard her against ^^e
pestilence of foreign influence, that walks in darkness, and preserve her
from the destruction of domestic faction, that wastes at noon day.

WHEN the highest honors of his country, and her warmest attachment, could no
longer detain him from the tranquil joys of private life, he descended from his
elevated height to set the world the too novel example of the greatest and most
influential of rulers becoming the first and best of citizens. But for him, who
had been accustomed to govern from principle, it was easy to obey from duty. He
knew how to serve in every sphere of life. Do the just, though disputed, claims
of an individual require his verdict as a juryman? He, who had been foreman of
a nation, in the cause of justice, was ready to guide the empannelled band in
defense of the rights of an injured citizen. Are the liberties of his country
again endangered from the insidious arts of an encroaching enemy? And has a
desire of peace "exhausted to the last drop the cup of reconciliation?" -- How
suddenly does the alarm drown the remonstrance of supplicating age; and the cry
of persecuted justice nerve his trembling arm, and rekindle the fire of heroism
in his patriot breast! There was nothing in the conduct of this illustrious
chief, but what fills us with admiration. Every act of his life is marked with
greatness. But his acceptance of the last commission of Commander in Chief of
the American armies is an instance of disinterested patriotism, that cannot be
equalled, if we consider his former services, his advanced age, and his love of
retirement. The united suffrage of his countrymen, joined with ardent affection
for their President, could not persuade him, that it was any longer his duty to
preside over the nation in a time of peace. "But," said the aged and venerable
citizen, "When every thing we hold dear and sacred is so seriously threatened,"
"I am ready," in obedience to my government, to appear as second in command;
and "to go again to the field of battle in defense of the liberties, the
independence, and the religion of my country." This was the last and greatest
action of his life. It is beyond the power of language to give it a comment. We
can only say, that this raised him so far above the world, that it lost its
power to hold, and he passed into the heavens.

IN the private and domestic walks of life he displayed all the virtues, that
dignify the man, or adorn the christian. Free from every species of pride and
ostentation, he possessed a native gracefulness and dignity of manners, that
commanded universal respect. Superior to that meanness of spirit, which debases
the man, while it affects the christian, he was amiable and dignified in his
humility. With an exquisite sense and just resentment of injury, he united the
meekness of one Saint and the patience of another. His uncommon fortitude and
magnanimity were always regulated by the most consummate prudence and
discretion. In his daily intercourse with his fellow-citizens the law of equity
and kindness was his guide. He was just and upright in all his dealings;
courteous and gentle in his society; candid to the frailties of others, because
conscious of frailty himself; grateful to his country for its honors, and to
his friends for their attachment and affection; kind and compassionate to the
needy and afflicted; humane and sympathetic even to the meanest servant. Here I
cannot but notice, with what parental care and attention he has provided in his
last will for the comfort, the freedom, and the happiness of the slaves,
employed in his service. With the most pointed prohibition has he guarded
against the traffic of human souls. Even the decrepid African, rendered useless
by age and infirmity, was not unworthy the regard of the best of Masters. With
a father's tenderness he heard the infant orphan's cry; and, as he saw the
tawny cheek glisten with the falling tear, he records with the pencil of
humanity, "It is well with the child" -- It has a claim to my compassion, and
shall live from mine inheritance. An instance of godliness worthy to "be had in
everlasting remembrance."

BUT his whole character, public and private, derived its splendor from
religion. Strike from his system of virtues his humble, his elevated piety, and
the luster of all the rest would have been lost in oblivion. This was the
governing principle of his heart, and regulated every action of his life. In
all his ways he acknowledged God, and the purity of his character demonstrates,
that He directed his paths. It is not in human nature to maintain so uniform,
so perfect a character, through a long life, placed, as he was, in the most
elevated stations -- surrounded by numerous and strong temptations -- without
the agency and influence of Almighty Grace. As no man had greater reason to
believe and notice the Providence of GOD in the affairs of men, so none has
been more frequent and explicit in declaring his belief, nor more humble in
acknowledging his constant and absolute dependence upon his providential aids.
When I contemplate, says this eminently pious Magistrate, the interposition of
Providence, as it was visibly manifested in guiding us through the revolution,
in preparing us for the reception of a general government, and in conciliating
the good will of the people of America toward one another after its adoption;
I feel myself oppressed and almost overwhelmed with a sense of the divine
munificence. I feel that nothing is due to my personal agency iu all these
complicated and wonderful events, except what can simply be attributed to the
exertions of an honest zeal for the good of my country.

IF I have distressing apprehensions, that I shall not be able to justify the
too exalted expectations of my countrymen, I am supported under the pressure of
such uneasy reflections by a confidence, that the most gracious Being, who has
hitherto watched over the interests and averted the perils of the United
States, will never suffer so fair an inheritance to become a prey to anarchy,
despotism, or any species of oppression. See his answer to an Address from the
Mayor, Aldermen etc. of the city of Philadelphia.
Compare this, my brethren, with the haughty speeches, made by the rulers of a
modern Republic, who acknowledge no omnipotence but their own; and, because
they know no greater, swear by themselves.

AS no man had greater need of the hope and promises of the gospel, than our
illustrious deceased, so none has appeared to be more influenced by that hope,
and animated by these promises; nor has any manifested a livelier sense of his
responsibility to the Judge of the world. Does any one ask for further evidence
of his being a christian, than his christain life? "By their fruits," says the
Savior of the world, "shall ye know them." And "no man," says this humble
follower, who is profligate in his morals, or a bad member of the civil
community, can possibly be a true christian, or a credit to his own religious
society. See Volume of Addresses.
And his circular letter to the governors of the United States he closes in
this sublime manner: -- I now make it my earnest prayer, that God would have
you, and the State over which you preside, in his holy protection; that he
would incline the hearts of the citizens to cultivate a spirit of subordination
and obedience to government; to entertain a brotherly affection and love for
one another, for their fellow-citizens of the United States at large, and
particularly for their brethren, who have served in the field; and, finally,
that he would most graciously be pleased to dispose us all to do justice, to
love mercy, and to demean ourselves with that charity, humility, and pacific
temper of the mind, which w^^e the characteristics of the divine Author of our
blessed religion; without an humble imitation of whose example in these things
we can never hope to be a happy nation.

DOES any one inquire for still further evidence? Go, visit the dying
christian. Behold this godly man, suddenly arrested by mortal disease, lying
upon the bed of death! not a murmur, nor a groan! not a sigh, nor a tear! Clad
in the "armor of God" he appears undaunted before the king of terrors! "With
his lamp trimmed and burning" he is not afraid to pass "the dark valley of the
shadow of death!" Shielded by the hope of the gospel he sees no terrors in the
grave! Nature, pressed down with leaden weight, beckons for her dissolution!
The immortal spirit, pinioned by the slender thread of life, pants for
celestial flight! The wished for moment approaches! Sickened at the sight of
its honors, he closes his eyes upon the world! The interesting summons arrives
-- "Help, Lord; for the godly man cease!" -- Disconsolate widow! thy sorrows
become thee; for lover and friend is put far from thee, and thine acquaintance
into darkness! Vernon, weep; for thy glory is departed! Zion, mourn; for the
beauty of Israel is fled! America, let thy sighs waft to heaven the
lamentations of thy Jerusalem! for a Prince and a great man is fallen.

SUCH, my mourning friends, was the glorious life, such the godly death, of the
man, whose memory will be forever blessed. His loss, though gain to himself, to
America is incalculable. Who can tell how much the sublime virtues of this
righteous Man, his constant and fervent supplications at the throne of grace
for his beloved Country, availed to avert the judgment of heaven, and to bring
down its blessings upon our land? If the prayers of the righteous were ever
needed -- if the death of the godly was ever to be lamented -- it is in a day
like the present; "for spoiling and violence are before us; and there are, that
raise up strife and contention." The very Name of WASHINGTON, even at his
advanced age, was a host to the Nation, and his life "a wall of fire" against
her enemies.

BUT let us not despair; nor mourn as those, who have no hope. The Lord
reigns, let the earth rejoice. It becomes us as a church, as a society, and
as a nation, to look to God, in humble fervent prayer, beseeching him, in pity
to a land, that mourns, in mercy to a people too apt to murmer -- too prone
to rebel -- to raise up to us other WASHINGTONS in his stead: For Jehovah is
our strength and our refuge, and in him alone is our help found. He kills and
he makes alive; he wounds, and he heals again. The Lord gave to America,
and the Lord has taken from her, and blessed be his Name. While we suitably
notice this severe chastisement, let us not forget to be grateful for his
mercies. Let us thank Him for raising up this illustrious Personage in the
infancy of our country; for making him an instrument of so great good in peace
and in war; for blessing us for nearly fifty years with his eminent and
disinterested services; for prolonging his life to a good old age; for
continuing his strength of body, and the power and vigor of his mind to the
very point of life; and, finally, after giving him strength and firmness to
close his own eyes with his own unshaken hand, for taking him to Himself. For,
like Enoch, he walked with God, and was not, for God took him.

WHILE we humble ourselves for the sins, which have thus brought down the
judgments of heaven in causing the godly to cease, and the faithful to fail
from among us, let our gratitude ascend for the numerous blessings, with which
we are still favored as a Nation. Let us learn to praise God for continuing to
us many wise and virtuous rulers; and, especially, for sparing the invaluable
life of the President of these United States -- who, like his best beloved and
greatly lamented Brother, deserves the highest esteem and most implicit
confidence of his fellow citizens for his long tried integrity and eminent
piety. When we think how frail is man; -- when we are thus solemnly admonished
of our dependence upon the Almighty for the life and services of the best of
men; -- when we behold the aged, the venerable, the illustrious ADAMS, with a
Nation upon his shoulders, walking on the edge of the grave; -- let us humbly
and fervently commend him to the care of that gracious Providence, without
whose notice not a sparrow falls; earnestly praying, that he would keep him
from accident as the apple of his eye -- that he would hide him from pestilence
under the shadow of his wings.

BEFORE we close this solemn occasion, let us unitedly resolve to imitate the
virtues of our deceased WASHINGTON. In him the aged will find their ornament;
the youth their model; the citizen his counselor, the soldier the standard of
his patriotism; the magistrate the guide of his administration; and the weeping
daughters of Columbia every virtue and grace, that can improve the heart or
adorn the sex. As members of the community let us follow the excellent advice,
contained in his parting address. Thus shall we mourn aright our revered and
beloved hero. Hear this, ye Fathers, and leave it for an inheritance for your
children after you forever! Give ear all ye inhabitants of the land! Tell ye
your children of it, and let your children, tell their children, and their
children another generation.

FINALLY, by this melancholy death let us be awakened to a sense of our own
mortality, and to a preparation for an event which none can escape. If the
highest earthly excellence could not save its possessor from the grave, surely
there is no discharge in this war. Convinced of the insufficiency of man, let
us seek the eternal God for refuge, and lean upon the everlasting arm. Knowing
that he will bring us also unto death, and to the house appointed for all
living, let us, through infinite mercy in Christ Jesus, secure an interest in his
favor, which is life, that we may enjoy his loving kindness, which is better
than life. Thus shall we be prepared to die the death of the righteous, and our
last end will be like his.

FINIS



