A DISCOURSE DELIVERED IN COLEBROOK, ON THE (...) OF AMERICAN INDEPENDENCE July
4th, 1800.

BY CHANNING LEE, A.M., PASTOR OF A CHURCH IN COLEBROOK.

If thou had known, even thou, in this thy day, the things which belong unto
thy peace! JESUS CHRIST. BENNINGTON: Printed by T. Collier, and Company. 1800.

A Discourse, etc.
GENESIS iii. 2, 3. And the woman said unto the serpent, We may eat of the
fruit of the tree of the garden; but of the fruit of the tree which is in the
midst of the garden, God has said, ye shall not eat of it, neither shall ye
touch it, lest ye die.
DEUTERONOMY xxxii. 17. They sacrificed unto devils, not to God; to gods whom
they knew not, to new gods, that came newly up, whom your fathers feared not.
THIS day, fellow-citizens, completes twenty-four years since our country
emerged from a state of dependence upon a foreign power, and assumed a rank
among the nations of the earth, as a free and independent republic. The heroic
declaration, by which it was proclaimed to the world, detailing the many cogent
reasons of necessity and national justice upon which it was founded; together
with the sacred pledge plighted for its suprort; and the solemn appeal made to
heaven for the vindication of our injured rights, has now again been publicly
exhibited to you, and received, I doubt not, with mingled emotions of wonder,
gratitude and joy.

Supported by the arm of the Lord Jehovah, our venerable fathers in council, at
a time when our country was in the lowest state of depression and impotence --
when ruin was near, and help afar off, or at best but awfully doubtful -- as
with ropes about their necks, and for themselves no other alternative, but the
gibbet, or a triumphal arch; blew the trumpet of American Jubilee, and in the
face of incensed despotism declared, that we were, and of right ought to be,
free, sovereign, and independent states.

The same spirit inspired our citizens, in the cabinet and in the field. With
the same firmness with which the declaration was made, it was supported by the
sword; and an eight years bloody war in the purchase of independence esteemed
but a cheap price.

To account in historical detail, the awful and animating vicissitudes of this
arduous conflict -- the causes which induced -- the means which supported, and
the effects which have flowed from the declaration of American Independence, is
foreign from my present purpose. These have long since furnished the most
engaging themes of the statesman, the orator, and the poet. -- In this field
all the flowers of rhetoric have a ready bloomed and fruits of genius been
ripened and plucked. Happy were it for us, had the forbidden fruit remained
untouched -- had not the seeds of that noxious foreign plant, the Tree of
Liberty and Equality, been sown and cultured in the midst of our political
Eden, and had no tempter emerged from Gallic Pandemonium to seduce the virtue
of our countrymen, by the poisonous fruit of that Bohon Upas of human
happiness, that tree of knowledge of political good and evil (of good lost and
evil gained) which corrupts the fountain of national felicity, diffuses its
poison through all the streams of social life and threatens the forfeiture and
loss of all the blessings of Independence.

Yet such, alas! seems the unvaried lot of miserable man. Such the shades which
have ever darkened and whelmed the brightest scenes of human prosperity.
Coffeehouse with every allotment of Providence -- (...) and complaints in
the very surfeit of divine bounty and aspiring to be Gods knowing good and
evil, fill up the pages of the history of Man. Restless ambition, indulgence
unrestrained, insatiable desire, and repining jealousy, have marked the
footsteps of human folly, and led our untoward species blindfold to
destruction. "God made man upright, but they have sought out many invention."
In the garden of God, they invented a sepulcher. In the fruitful field of
America, the death of Religion and Government is projected, and the grave of
independence already dug. In the midst of every Eden stands the tree of
knowledge, and rears its towering branches, heavy laden with its deadly fruit;
and even the walls of Paradise itself were insufficient to exclude the artful
wiles of the hellish tempter. From the seed of the first wicked invention, a
ten thousand fold cr^p has ensued, and spread itself co-extensive with the
population of man. The soil of human depravity has been most industriously
tilled. The field of human misery is nearly ripe. Yea, lift up your eyes and
behold it already black for the harvest, and calling aloud for the sickle.

But why, some perhaps may say, why this singular and in suspicious text? why
these severe and uncharitable remarks? what motives can actuate the speaker, in
his very exordium, to mingle gall with the sweets of conviviality, and by
drawing such a dark cloud over our political horizon, attempt to damp the
luster of social delights and shroud the day, devoted to festivity and joy, in
the gloomy sadness of melancholy and remorse? Patience, fellow-citizens. In
this severe exercise of self-denial, be kind enough, for a little while to help
me bear the cross; and if the subject do not sufficiently explain itself, let
deserved censure upon it. -- For this you are referred to the sequel of my
discourse, with only this general observation at present -- that, if we are,
what we profess to be, a Christian peopl, we shall not disrelish
bible-instruction as ill timed or unprofitable upon any occasion; and while we
read this in our bibles, "Serve the Lord with fear, and rejoice with
trembling," we must believe solemnity to be essential to true joy, and godly
sorrow compatible with the pleasures of festivity. -- If we are truly disposed
to rejoice in the past signal mercies of God, toward us, as a people; we shall
be equally prompt, to consider the operation of his hands, and mark the aspect
of divine providence in relation to the present situation, and present
prospects of our country. If animated with the love of virtue, we admire and
celebrate the worthy deeds and noble achievements of our venerable fathers, now
sleeping in the dust; will it not be natural and pertinent to inquire, how far
the character and conduct of their sons, are formed and directed by the force
of parental example? And who, or what are those new gods, that have newly come
up, whom our fathers feared not? And in a word, if in the spirit of patriotism,
our sensibilities are feelingly excited, by a review of the past dangers and
perils of our country -- if we exult in the original attainment of our national
independence, and celebrate the means which conducted us to it; surely we shall
not feel indifferent to the present dangers, by which it is threatened, nor
inattentive to the only means by which this national blessing, the purchase of
our father's blood, may be preserved and transmitted to their children's
children.

For these reasons, and impressed with these views, while from the very
occasion of the day your minds are readily employed in retrospect of the past,
I beg leave to call your serious attention to the present state of things. I
feel this my duty, both as a fellow-citizens, inviolably attached to the
interests of our common country; and as a spiritual watchman, solemuly bound to
faithfulness in my sacred trust. Disclaiming the talents of the statesman, the
orator, or the historian, mine only be the humble part of a gospel minister, to
hold up to your view, the dangers which threaten our country, from present
existing evils, and point to the means of deliverance and safety. In doing
this, the censure of political preaching, will ever be as unheeded, as in the
present instance, it is unexpected.

In recurring to the sacred oracles, I have selected, as sources of
instruction, pertinent to the present anniversary, the two distinct passages
recited. They are considered, in effect, as parallel texts, though the one has
respect to man in his primitive, and the other to man in his fallen state. For
this reason they are chosen, and designed to be improved in concert, to impress
with their united strength, this great and important truth respecting mankind
in every character and state. That,

A restless, factious spirit constantly impelling to innovation and change, is
both unreasonable in its nature, and fatally pernicious in its effects. Or in
other wods,

That, when mankind, either as individuals or nations, abandon those
principles, and depart from that line of conduct, which God has prescribed,
and by his word or providence, clearly pointed out, as the path of duty and
happiness -- they do it at their utmost peril -- evil inevitably ensues, and
certain destruction is the end.

These doctrines, it is believed, equally flow from each of the forementioned
passages of Scripture respectively, considering them in their relations,
connections and consequences.

The better to receive their united weight of instruction, let us now bestow a
few thoughts in a particular and separate examination of each.

The text of Genesis, refers to the original constitution under which man was
placed, and points directly to the fruitful source (...) all the evils and
miseries which have ever embittered and poisoned the cup of humanity. Our first
parents then composed the whole family of man. They were individuals -- they
were a family -- they were a nation, and they were a world. As such they were
considered and treated by their benevolent Creator, in his covenant transaction
with them. As such by nature, and divine constitution they stood -- as such
they acted -- as such they sinned and fell, and as such they suffered and died.
God their Creator, was their Governor and King. He had made the most ample
provision for the supply of all their wants, and the gratification of every
reasonable desire. They were under a most free and happy government. They were
blessed with an excellent constitution, by which all their rights and
privileges were secured; and subjected to no other restrictions, but those of
the most equal, wholesome and salutary laws. And their government was
calculated to have transmitted these inestimable blessings, inviolate to all
the unborn millions of their posterity, through the whole progression of the
human race: For as a nation and a world they stood, and in their conduct, all
their posterity were implicated and concerned.

And why citizens, should this be thought strange? Our posterity are as really
implicated, concerned, and interested in our present national conduct, and will
as certainly enjoy, or suffer the effects of it.

Our first parents were mankind, and their national happiness, like that of all
other nations, was suspended upon their obedience to the divine law -- their
continued conformity to the rules of righteousness and justice -- abstaining
from the taste or touch of the forbidden fruit, and cheerfully according in
that wise and beautiful order, which the God of nature had established in the
system of his intelligent creatures. These were all made known to them. Their
path of national duty was clearly pointed out, and they were commanded to walk
in it, and be happy.

How unaccountable is it then, how passing strange, that, under these happy
circumstances, they should apostatize, and sacrifice their national honor,
independence and happiness! That the bright lus^^e of the worlds fair morning,
should so soon be overshadowed and darkened by the clouds of atheism,
insurrection and anarchy! Can any subsequent event of the like nature be
brought as a parallel? Truly, I know of none, unless it be the present,
prevailing unreasonable dissatisfaction and implacable opposition of Americans
toward the administration of constituted authority, and the operation of the
government of their choice: -- one of all human governments the most mild,
benign and equal, upon which the sun ever shone; and the repeated insurrections
which have actually arisen against it in the very bosom of our country. Surely
a more unreasonable and wicked opposition against civil government never
blackened the pages of history.

Let us further inquire, what were the immediate cause, or causes, which
actually led to this first grand apostasy of mankind, and effected this awful
revolution in the nation of Eden. This is an inquiry of moment, and productive
of the most pointed, practical, and important instruction. It will afford the
most sure ground of argument, in reasoning by analogy, and applying the
substantial evidence of past events, and their consequences, in illustration of
the nature of present facts and present prospects -- bottomed upon these sure
data, that, like causes under like circumstances, ever produce like effects.
What then were the cause, or causes, the subject of inquiry? The answer is as
obvious, as the question is interesting. It state us in the face at the first
glance. The moment we look at it, we see that the effectual, immediately
influential, and proximate cause, which led to the very first act of national
degradation and misery, and revolutionized the garden of God, was -- INFIDELITY
-- Ye shall not surely die. This was the new god which then newly came up,
which impelled and supported the hand of mother Eve, while she plucked the
fruit of that forbidden tree, "whose mortal taste, brought death into the
world, and all our woe." In this she literally sacrificed unto devils, and not
to God -- to gods whom she knew not.

To this awful catastrophe, other circumstances conspired, in predisposing,
preparing, ripening, and effecting the plan of the tempter. It seems that a
restless spirit of innovation, coffeehouse with present situation and an
aspiring ambition to be more wise and happy was then, either for the first
excited, or had previously taken root in the minds of the young nation. But all
this, for aught that appears, might have been dispelled by the strong light of
reason and conscience, and entirely subdued by the force of innate virtue,
never have led to the fatal issue; had it not been for the officious aid of
foreign influence. A wicked, artful alien, a banished emigrant from the regions
of bliss, foiled in a late attempt to subvert the government of Heaven, now
wings his way to this new world, still bent on mischief, and finds means to
introduce himself into the garden of innocence and peace. The young nation,
unsuspicious of danger, and not dreaming of an enemy, were unprovided for a
sudden attack, and indeed lay open to his wiles. The better to insure the
success of his wicked enterprise, the villain chose not to appear in his true
character, but assumed the form of a serpent, and taking advantage of the
weaker part of the community, the woman, who, by analogy, may be called the
populace, -- in this concealed and insidious manner, with all the fawning arts
of deceitful intrigue, commences his attack. With much show of disinterested
friendship and generosity mixed with an air of wonder and surprise, he asks,
"Yea has God said, ye shall not eat of every tree of the garden?" Is it
possible that you should be thus unreasonably restricted? thus deprived of the
essential rights of men and citizens? Eve answers in an honest statement of
facts, as expressed in the text -- "We may eat of the fruit of the trees of the
garden; but of the fruit of the tree which is in the midst of the garden, God
has said, ye shall not eat of it, neither shall ye touch it, lest ye die." Her
mind was not yet prepared for a compliance with the purpose of the tempter,
until fired by the ideas of Liberty and Equality -- He then throws off the
mask, and. comes out open and bold in the principles of infidelity, and his
blasphemous assertions of the divine tyranny, "And the serpent said unto the
woman, ye shall not surely die: For God does know that in the day ye eat
thereof, then your eyes shall be opened (or illuminated) and ye shall be as
gods knowing good and evil."

Here is the origin, and the very quintessence of Jacobinism. Never was a truer
copy of an original drawn, than that which is marked out by the tongues, the
pens, and the swords of the modern illuminators of mankind -- the champions of
Liberty and Equality, Health and Fraternity. Their whole system is a perfect
paraphrase upon this text: They have even refined upon the cunning of Satan,
and outdone him in his own arts. He contented himself with denying GOD'S truth,
and calling in question his goodness -- while his followers have the superior
effrontery of coming to the same thing in a shorter way -- by denying his
existence

With respect to our first parents, as the Most High, was both their GOD, and
their King or civil Ruler, it is evident, the object of Satan in tempting them
to disobedience and rebellion, was nothing more nor less, than the absolute
destruction of all religion, and of all civil government* And this too is the
real object, the fervent wish, and grand design of that restless,
indefatigable, disorganizing faction that have for years infested our country,
and now begin their songs of triumph, in the fascinating prospect of successful
views. But let them remember, (and blush, for their own, since they connot for
their country's shame) that they have not the honor of originality, but are
only copiers, plagiaries and servile imitator. This new god of their's which
has newly come up, made his appearance in our world almost six thousand years
ago; and though he had never before appeared in the same form, yet it is the
same being, who in the shape of a serpent, then drove Adam out of Paradise. --
Let them, therefore reflect, whether, it is not to him, rather than to GOD that
they are sacrificing. The very system and creed of Jacobinism, was preached and
enforced upon mankind, by the grand adversary of GOD and man, in the infancy of
the world.

For the conviction of every one, we will recur a moment to the sermon of this
hellish preacher, and by expressing it a little more at large, and in modern
language, endeavor more thoroughly to investigate its latent principles. Then
let candor say, whether the paraphrase be not just.

Text Translation "And the serpent said unto the woman, Ye shall not surely
die." The Bible is a forgery. The pretended prohibitions, warnings and
threatenings of Heaven, are the mere whimsies of imagination -- idle bug-bears
imposed upon the superstious credulity of mankind, the better to awe them into
subjection to their masters. The natural right of man is to enjoy liberty
uncontrolled -- to eat of every tree in the garden without exception, and
indulge his appetites and passions, with unlimited freedom. And as to the
ghostly distinction of virtue and vice, saints and sinners, rewards and
punishments, it is equally arbitrary -- wholly unfounded in reason or nature.
It is all a farce. Too long already have you been gulled of your rightful
liberty, by the pompous rant of Heaven and Hell. Death is an eternal sleep,
where hope and fear are buried together, and neither sorrow, nor joy exist
beyond it. The Sun of Liberty now shines. Awake from your long delusion and be
free. "For GOD does know that in the day ye eat thereof, then your eyes shall
be opened and ye shall be as gods knowing good and evil." You are held in
ignorance of your rights by men in power, whose interest it is to keep you in
ignorance, the better to support their own pre-eminent and domination, and
insure your subjection and servitude. For they know that in the very day these
shackles are taken off, the blinding films of prejudice, fear, and superstition
removed, and the arts of priestcraft and aristocracy cease to operate, your
eyes will be opened to the knowledge of your just rights, the rights of Liberty
and Equality -- You will know that you are gods as well as they, as great, as
wise and as good -- that all men are equal -- equally deserving to rule -- that
all subordination is tyranny, and all authority, however vested, exercised by
one man over another is unsufferable oppression; and that therefore their
usurped dominion, must immediately tumble. -- Would you then deserve well of
your country, Eden must be revolutionized -- no longer be a monarchy, but a
republic, one and indivissble. -- Assert your rights. -- Expunge the tyranny of
subordination. Rise superior to the restraints of law. Eat freely of the tree
of knowledge in the midst of the garden. Say what you will, Do what you will.
Write. print and publish what you will, true or false, provided your end be the
destruction of all constituted authority. Shake off these imposing shackles of
religion and government, by which the human mind is enslaved, genius crampt,
the freedom of inquiry fettered, the liberty of the press restrained, and the
source of human enjoyment and perfectibility, muddied and choked up. Do this
and receive the fraternal embrace.

The other passage of sacred writ comes next under consideration. In it we find
the same sentiment expressed equally clear and pointed; and the theory of the
tempter actually carried into practice. "They sacrificed unto devils, not to
God; to gods whom they knew not, to new gods that came newly up, whom your
fathers feared not." This is a part of that memorable song, which the great
leader of God's ancient people, wrote and left on record for the instruction
and warning of his people: particularly to guard them against all future
innovations upon their religion and government. It is to be viewed as the dying
advice, and farewell address of that Israelitish Washington, of similar import
and instruction with that of our American Moses.

In the passage we find the guilt of political apostasy, and the danger of an
unreasonable spirit of inovation upon the ancient and approved usages, and
institutions, religion and government of their fathers, painted in the most
glaring colors; especially when taken in connection with the preceding and
following context.

Original comment Verse 15. But Jeshurun waxed fat and kicked: thou art waxen
fat, thou art grown thick, thou art covered with fatness: then he forsook God
which made him and lightly esteemed the rock of his salvation. Here is
described the insolent pride and arrogance of prosperity -- luxury and
dissipation -- immorality and profaneness, ingratitude and contempt of God. 16.
They provoked him to jealousy with strange gods, with abominations provoked
they him to anger. Profanation of divine institutions -- subversion of the true
religion -- utter corruption of morality. 17. They sacrificed unto devils not
to God, to gods whom they knew not, to new gods, that came newly up, whom your
fathers feared not. Jacobinism complete. 18. Of the rock that begat thee thou
art unmindful and have forgotten God that formed thee. Pride and Ingratitude.
19. And when the Lord saw it he abhorred them, because of the provoking of his
sons and daughters. The divine example held up for our imitation. 20. And he
said, I will hide my face from them, I will see what their end shall be --
Accordingly it is fully proved by experiment; we all see what their end is --
Confusion and anarchy, revolution and uproar, rapine and murder. -- for they
are a froward generation, children in whom is no faith. Disciples of Voltair;
obstinate, incoraigible infidels. 21. They have moved me to jealousy with that
which is not God; they have provoked me to an ger with their vanities; and I
will move them to jealousy with those which are not a people: I will provoke
them to anger with a foolish nation. America, rejoicing in their successes --
imbibing their principles -- following their footstepts -- resigning her
national Independence, and hastening to the same fate. -- This fate is pointed
out in what follows -- 23 and 25. I will heap mischiefs upon them, I will spend
mine arrows upon them. The sword without, and terror within shall destroy both
the young man and the virgin, the suckling also with the man of gray hairs.
Foreign and civil wars -- the rage of faction -- private and public
assassinations. The system of terrorism -- the indiscriminate slaughter of the
guillotine, and all the horrors of the reign of Robespierre.

Such, citizens, is the cloud which now broods over our political horizon.
These are the horrible prospects of democratic revolution. Here we behold in
clear light, those new gods that have newly come up, whom our fathers feared
not, and the sacrifices they require of their votaries. Here is the Tree of
Gallic Liberty, and the fruit which it bears -- that tree of knowledge of
political good and evil, planted in the midst of our garden, around which so
many of our infatuated countrymen are rallying, eager to comply with the advice
of the tempter -- hungering for the taste of its deadly fruit.

Let us now combine the instruction of both texts, under the following twofold
arrangement.

1. As they primarily respect, the one our first parents in the garden, and the
other, the Israelites in the land of promise; so in applying them to our own
country, we may consider America as the Canaan of the nations, and the Eden of
the world.

2. in the midst of our national garden stands the tree of knowledge of
political good and evil. Under this head I shall endeavor more particularly to
expose the nature and properties of this tree, by pointing out, without tasting
or touching a variety of its fruits, and the national consequences of eating
them.

As each of these divisions contains sufficient subject for a volume, no more
can be attempted in the limits of the present discourse, than the compilation
of a kind of index to the system, hinting here and there at some of the more
prominent parts* referring the rest to the information and good sense of my
audience; and committing the improvement wholly to your patronage and care.

The knowledge, fellow-citizens, you all possess of the history and geography
of our country -- of its fertility and extent -- its first settlement, rise and
progress -- its rapid population and improvement in all the beneficial arts of
civilized life -- its advantages, wealth and resources natural and acquired --
its dangers and deliverances -- its privileges, immunities and blessings civil
and religious, and in a word, its copious fund of all the means of human
enjoyment, and of every thing tending to make a nation great, powerful and
independent, respected abroad, and happy at home; joined with a predilection
for our native soil, the country which gave us birth, the religion of our
fathers, and the government of our choice, under whose benign influence and
protection, we have so long feasted on all the delights of social life, and the
infinitely variegated blessings of freedom, as men, as citizens, and as
Christians; this knowledge, I say, which enlightens your minds, and this
patriotism which glows in your breasts, must supersede the necessity of any
arguments or proofs upon the first head, simply for the purpose of information;
a more sensible and thorough conviction only is wanting. Of the rich and
distinguishing blessings which the great and beneficent Parent has poured with
such profusion into the lap of our country, none of us can be ignorant; and yet
perhaps but few sufficiently prize them. My only object and wish, therefore,
with respect to the blessings we hold under the Author of nature purchased by
the blood and treasure of our country, is to inspire you with the strength of
esteem and attachment for them, which the dangerous exigency of present
circumstances require -- sufficient to unite and impel our exertions to snatch
them from the yawning vortex of atheism and anarchy.

We live in a land that may jnstly be styled the Eden of the world; and of all
the trees of the garden we may freely and safely eat -- one only excpted, the
tree of licentiousness and sedition, which alas is growing in the midst of the
garden.

We live in a land flowing with milk and honey. And what articles of ejoyment
is contraband? Nothing but wormwood and gall. We are forbiden only to mingle
bitter with our sweets. Our means of every national and political blessing are
abundantly liberal, and nothing forbidden, but the mad privilege of self
destruction, for which however, many are contending, with a zeal equalled only
by their malice and intrigue.

In the blessings of religion and government and all their happy fruits, our
country appears to symbolize with the nation of Eden, and with the chosen
defendants of Abraham, the fovoured inhabitants of the promised land. But like
the former we are fast yielding to the artful suggestions of the tempter,
aspiring to be gods knowing good and evil, and reaching forth after the
forbidden fruit. Like Jeshurun too, we have waxen fat and kicked; lightly
esteemed the rock of our salvation, and are sacrificing to new gods, that have
come newly up, whom our fathers feared not.

Would time permit, it would be easy, and might be instructive and profitable,
to sketch out a parallel, between ancient and American Israel. This general
reflection, however, must not escape us, that, like them distinguished by the
mercies of Heaven, and like them too apastatizing from the GOD of our fathers,
we have reason to fear the like awful severity of divine judgments. For,

2. In the midst of our national garden, stands the tree of knowledge of
political good and evil, This we are now more particularly to examine by the
fruits it bears, and the effects of those fruits.

This tree, to the disgrace of our country, is in the midst of our political
garden. It grows and flourishes only in the soil of human depravity. Its trunk
is Infidelity. As it extends upward, it soon divides into two large main
branches, and these are Atheism and Anarchy. These branches, however, the
worshippers of the tree distinguish by different, and more specious names --
the former they call the Age of Reason, and the latter, the Rights of Man;
while with a very imposing air, they fondly call the body of the tree Liberty
and Equality.

From these main branches aforementioned shoot out innumerable other smaller
limbs and twigs. A few of which are such as the following --

Political regeneration -- popular insurrections -- private assassinations --
Public massacres -- Revolutions -- Revolutionary tribunals -- Jacobin clubs --
National Conventions -- Directories -- Consuls -- Health and fraternity --
Bulletins and Guillotines -- Requisitions -- Douceurs -- Forced loans --
Foreign robbery -- Egyptian crusades -- Self adjuration -- Public debauchery --
Private and national perfidy -- Terrorism -- Patriotism (Parisian civism
Republican Sabbath (a drunken decade) -- Republican feasts ( Sans Cullotides)
-- Republican baptism (water-murder) Goddess of Reason (a naked strumpet --
Republican Psalms (Marsellois* Carmagnole, Ca Ira) Law of nations (the art of
plunder) -- National faith (diplomatic skill) -- National honor (Revenge)
National friendship (L'argent) -- Morality (contempt of shame) -- P ublic
virtue (civic oaths) -- private virtue (a child's rattle -- Death, an eternal
sleep -- Religion ( priestcraft) -- Government ( tyranny) -- Destruction to the
enemies of Liberty and Equality -- Universal domination.

It will be ojected, perhaps, that this rold' equipage is the description of a
foreign tree. True. But let us not flatter ourselves too far with the goodness
of our own soil. The nature and properties of this tree are not altered or
improved by soil or climate. If this evil actually exist in our country,
similar causes will produce similar effects. If it be the same species of tree
that is now growing in our political garden, we may fairly conclude, that its
branches and fruit will be, for substance, the same in both hemispheres.

Before we particularize these fruits, I cannot but (...) a striking similarity
between their effects (...) votaries, and the effects of the fruit of the
original tree of knowledge upon the inhabitants of Eden. When our first parents
had yielded to the arts of the tempter, impelled by conscious guilt, "they hid
themselves among the trees of the garden." Just so the disciples of Jacobinism,
as soon as they have eaten of the forbidden fruit, immediately skulk, and
mingle themselves with the mass of good citizens, endeavor to hide themselves,
and carry on all their nefarious operations in the darkness and secrecy of
intrigue.

Nearly allied to this is another circumstance. "Adam and Eve knew that they
were naked and sewed fig leaves together, and made themselves aprons." And what
are the aprons of Jacobins by which they strive to conceal the nakedness and
deformity of their real views and intentions? The figleaf professions of pure
republicanism -- flimsy, but specious pretexts of zeal for the public good --
high sounding attachment to the principles of the constitution -- a patriotic
concern for the liberties of their country, and ranting declamation against
unconstitutional measures.

One circumstance further, in which the copy symbolizes with the original, and
the character is complete. An inflexible obstinacy in wrong. Like the ruins of
the original apostasy, all human means appear ineffectual to reclaim them. They
are wilfully blind to all the true beauties of government -- dead in every
principle and practice of political error and mischief. The means of persuasion
addressed to them are thrown away. The most powerful arguments are vain; and
the knowledge of facts before their eyes makes not the least impression. I much
doubt, whether among all that class of citizens, a single instance of political
conversion can be produced.

A few of the principal fruits of the Jacobinic tree, I shall now briefly
mention; for endless would be the task to recount them all.

1. One of the practical principles which appears as a fruit upon this tree, in
tendency destructive of the social compact, is, that the restraints of
government, however constitutional, are infringements upon the natural rights
of man. Hence, no distinction between liberty and licentiousness -- between the
rights of the governing and the governed: hence, the ground of subordination is
exploded, and liberty and government set at irreconcilable variance: and hence
too, originates that mistaken maxim or motto, Liberty and Equality, taken in
the most unlimited sense; from which, as the first principle and foundation
stone of the whole system, flow all its absurd and disorganizing principles and
practices, in the most abundant profusion. The

2 d Fruit, growing upon the same cluster, is an ungenerous, unreasonable
distrust of constituted authority, a total want of confidence in civil rulers.
The functionaries of civil government, must have no power to do good, so
certain it is, they will abuse it and do mischief. A man chosen to civil
office, however fair and unimpeachable his character for moral and political
integrity, before his election, yet commences the downright villain, and the
faithless tyrant as soon as ever he begins to act in his public character: And
though he legislates for himself, as well as his constituents, and lays no
burden upon them, but what he equally lays upon himself, his measures are all
aristocratic and oppressive. And hence the Idea adopted as a practical, if not
an avowed principle, that the constituted authorities are not the organs of the
public will; and that the acts of government are not, in the first instance, of
any binding force, but only as the people at large are pleased to approve of
them and submit to them.

Upon this very ground, pretending themselves to be the people, sprang up the
Democratic Societies for a check upon government -- or in other words, as a
third house of legislation, paramount to both houses of Congress -- assuming
the right of canvassing and censuring all their proceedings, and negativing a
bill that has passed both houses, and received the executive sanction and
signature.

3 d Fruit. That religion and government have no connection. Government is not
to be influenced or guided by the principles of religion; nor is religion, nor
religious institutions entitled to the fostering care of government. Hence, to
be divested of all religious sentiment is an excellent qualification in a civil
ruler. No matter what his creed -- if he be an infidel or Atheist, so much the
better, provided he be thoroughly imbued with the principles of Jacobinism, and
supremely devoted to the cause of France. And hence too, the cry of priestcraft
is already set up. Ministers of the gospel, cannot teach their people how to
conduct themselves as peaceable good subjects of a free and happy government,
and warn them to shun the rocks which threaten the destruction of their
country, but lo! they are the hirelings of men in place -- preaching politics
instead of religion, and grasping, for sooth, after authority and power. The

4 th Fruit of this tree, is a blind, stupid, sottish admiration of the
government of France, in all its vertiginous motions, windings revolutions, and
abominations. A spirit of championism to justify, or to the utmost to palliate
all their follies and excesses, and their acts of national injustice and
villainy; particularly toward our own country.

5 th Fruit. The absurd acknowledgement of an infinite debt of gratitude to
France -- under the mask of whichch they would fain involve us in all the
horrors of the Europen war; by precipitating our country to take arms in the
cause of France; and by yielding to all the solicitations and intrigues of the
tempter, to surrender our national peace, freedom, wealth and independence,
after the example of Holland, as the smallest token of obligation.

6 th Fruit. An inveterate hatered against constituted authorities, and all the
principal and most worthy officers in administration of the federal government.
In the prosecution of this, all the arts of insinuation, secret intrigue,
personal invective, and the shameless abuse of open lying defamation, through
the medium of tongues, pens books and newspapers are the worthiest means
employed.

7 th Fruit. A constant opposition, and noisy seditious clamor against all the
measures of government without distinction; -- imputing them to the worst of
motives, and as designed to effect the worst of ends -- to British influence --
to oppressive views, and ultimate aims to subvert the liberties of our country.
Their opposition seems more particularly levelled against those measures of
government which are specially calculated to secure our peace abroad, and
tranquillity at home -- to guard against foreign aggression, and internal
sedition and rebellion. Witness the mad uproars of democratic fury against the
British treaty -- the clamors against the alien and sedition laws; and the
means of providing for the national defense by equipping a naval force, and
raising a land army.

But strange and unaccountable as it is, this Jacobinic faction is now
prevailing in our country, and even assuming the air of triumph. Both in
conversation and newspapers, marks of exultation are discoverable; and the
certainty of a Jacobinic administration, as the fruit of the next election, is
avowed by every mouth, and scattered through every state. -- What the
consequence of such an event will be, does not require the spirit of prophecy
to foretell, but the extent of the evil baffles the powers of human numbers to
calculate. In the train may be counted the destruction of the government, under
which we are now free, prosperous and happy -- the desolation and pillage of
our couutry, and our very soil soaked with the blood of its inhabitants.

I cannot do better justice to the subject, nor to my own feelings, than by
reciting a pretty lengthy extract from that excellent public address lately
made by a very respectable character, high in the councils of America; whose
means of information none can doubt, and whose tried integrity, and long and
faithful public services, justly entitle him to the esteem and confidence of
his country: I mean the honorable Speaker of the House of Representatives.

It is now eleven years since the present government has commenced its
operations. During this time, I will not say that all its measures have been
perfect, for it has been conducted by human agents. I will however declare it
has not erred from intention -- it has committed no acts from in justice and
oppression -- it has never wantonly imposed any public burden. On the contrary
in the imposition of those it deemed indispensible, it has sought every
alleviation, in its power. It received the charge of our public affairs at a
time when by the imbecility of our former system, the reputation which our
nation had acquired by its glorious and successful struggle for freedom and
independence was almost annihilated; when confidence, public and private was
almost destroyed, when states had become the rivals of each other; and
legislative hostility was not only declared, but vigorously prosecuted by them;
when our federative importance was derided and insulted, and we were fast
becoming, not indeed in name, but in fact, the colonies of the maritime nations
of Europe; and when loaded, as the people, were, with taxes, and universally
complaining of their weight and burden, instead of a diminution of the debt,
the interest accumulated, and unpaid, was nearly the amount of one half the
principal.

Receiving the charge of our national interests, under these circumstances --
having a new and untried system to put into motion -- having provision to make
for a large debt, the price of our freedom and independence; for which the
former government had been found inadequate -- and having by its own wisdom,
without the aid of precedent by which to regulate its course, to devise the
means of executing a constitution, which was intended to form a more perfect
union, establish instice, ensure domestic tranquillity, provide for the common
desence, promote the general welfare, and secure the blessings of liberty to
ourselves and posterity; surely the men on whom this mighty task was devolved,
had a right to expect from a generous people, a candid construction of their
honest intentions. A just review of the effects which have been produced by the
progress of their labors, will determine, how far they are entitled to
indulgence or approbation.

The govornment has had to contend with difficulties which were neither
foreseen nor expected; for who could have believed that in less than ten years,
we should have to defray the expense of suppressing two insurrections, raised
by the artful misrepresentations of wicked men? Yet this, to the disgrace of
our country has been the case. We have been obliged to sacrifice treasure to
purchase peace with the powers of Barbary, and to redeem our citizens there
from slavery. We have been at great charge in sustaining a long and expensive
Indian war, and in the protection of our frontiers -- we have suffered
immensely by the plunder of our commerce; we have fortified our ports and
harbors; we have replenished our magazines, and we have created a very
considerable navy. Credit, public and private is restored. Our navigation is
infinitely extended; our tonnage now exceeding that of Great Britain, at the
commencement of the present reign. Yet our debt at the beginning of the present
year, was four millions less, than at that of 1791, when we first began the
payment of the interest. But what is infinitely more dear to humanity, under
circumstances of extreme irritation, such has been the temper, the moderation,
and magnanimity of the government that peace has been preserved, and we have
kept ourselves separated from the scenes of horror which are desolating Europe.
It is too soothing to the honest pride of an American, that all men, our own
degenerate citizens, and jacobin renegadoes from other countries among us,
excepted, speak in terms of respect and honor of the conduct of our government.
Is not this, my fellow-citizens, when it can with truth be added, that it all
has been effected without one act of tyranny or oppression, a glorious reverse
of our situation in 1789? Yet have not all these things secured to the
government the affections of the people, or itself against the malignant
enterprises of its enemies. I speak not now of New England; that is, I trust,
essentially sound. But at this moment it is a doubt, whether, throughout the
nation, the friends or the enemies of the government are the most numerous. How
has this been effected? To give a full answer to this question, would require a
history in detail of the opposition with all its windings and turnings, from
the meeting of the federal Convention, to the present day. Suffice it to say,
that the party, unsteady in all things else, in their attention to two objects,
have been undeviatingly pertinacious -- in their malignant slander of the
character of those, whom they believe possessed the public confidence, and in
their misrepresentation of the measures of government. As an instance of the
first, we cannot but remember, the great the good, the glorious Washington, the
pride of our country, the ornament of human nature. Him they represented as
ambitious, although he never sought, but always shunned public office -- as the
tool of Great Britain, although he had severed America from her empire -- as a man
of no religion, although no one was more respectfully observant of religious
duties. In short for his most eminent virtues, they charged against him the
opposite vices. At the same time they have directed the most gross and
slanderous abuse against all his friends, and those whom they deemed the most
influential supporters of his administration.

With regard to the measures of government, if its enemies may be credited, it
has performed no one meritorious act, but its whole conduct has been
mischievous. Endless would be the task, to expose and correct all the vile
slanders which have been wantonly lavished upon it; nor is the attemp necessary
-- instances enough will occur to the recollection of every man who feels for
the honor of his country, or perceives his own interest to be connected with
the preservation of the constitution. It will be sufficient to say that the
government has been charged with conduct, faithless as it respected our foreign
connexions -- insidious and traitorous as it related to the domestic
administration. By these means, alarms and suspicions have been created, a
government, I will not say perfect, but honest and patriotic, has been
slandered, and the effects (for why should not the truth be declared?) have
becomeextensive and alarming. Your danger which is great, though not desperate,
I have thought it my duty, among the last acts of my public life, to proclaim
to you. GOD grant, that I may be mistaken in the magnitude of this danger; but
I do most solemnly declare that my conviction is perfect, that it cannot be
averted, but by being more extensively, than at present known, in this part of
the United States.

Such, fellow-citizens, are the nature, properties and fruits of the tree of
Jacobinism. Such the fatal consequences of sheltering under its branches, and
of listerling to the siren voice of the tempter in plucking, and tasting its
deadly fruit! These are the new gods, that have come newly up, which our
fathers feared not, and to which they were perfect strangers. They, though the
tempest of the revolutionary war, under a national government, which, in
itself, was little more than an advisory council of safety, united by their
common interest, and their common danger, stood firm and immovable. The voice
of Congress was heard with affection and reverence. Their recommendations had
all the force of law. While wisdom and dignity attended their steps, public
confidence gave energy to all their measures. -- And why, in the name of
wonder, why, under a government which unites energy with freedom, built upon a
Constitution, designed among other important ends "to form a more perfect
union, and insure domestic tranquillity." when threatened with the most
tremendous mischiefs of the opposite evils, why does not the common danger
again unite us in the common cause, and inspire us with the same resolutions,
as with one heart, and one soul, to maintain our excellent government, preserve
our national happiness, and pour confusion upon its foes? For believe me
Citizens, our dangers are not visionary and trifling, but real and formidable.
Never was a period in the whole course of the revolutionary war, in which our
danger was more imminent and awful; and in which the happiness and the very
existence of our country was in a more alarming and critical situation. It is
high time therefore, for us to awake from our lethargy, and attend to the means
of our safety -- lest, while we are dreaming of our nation's glory, celebrating
her independence, and affecting to despise the intriguing vigilance of our
internal enemies, sudden destruction fall upon us, and that without remedy. It
becomes us not to sink down into the torpor of inaction and supineness, and
despair of the Commonwealth, because evils are at the door, and dangers stare
us in the face. Such was not the conduct of our fathers, whose virtues we
admire and celebrate -- this was not the way in which they fought the battles
of freedom, and secured and transmitted to their children, the glorious legacy
of independence. No. Their zeal increased as dangers and difficulties
increased; and their fortitude rose paramount to every discouragement.

Our government, citizen, is peculiarly founded on public virtue. It lives, it
exists in the public sentiment, and public integrity. -- The world is now
looking on, and the dubious experiment is now trying, whether there be virtue
enough in human nature to support a free Republican government. The (...) of
our government will forever decide the question. And evident it is, if we do
not secure the foundation; if we tamely suffer that to be sapped and
undermined, the fair superstructure, must and will tumble, and all the hopes of
our country, and of mankind, be buried in its ruins! -- The consequences too,
as to ourselves, are equally obvious -- if we cannot live under a free
government, we must, and shall have a despotic government.

Let it ever be remembered, citizens, as a principle of the first magnitude and
importance; let it be engraved on your hearts, as with a pen of iron, and with
the point of a diamond, that, ALL OUR DANGER ORIGINATES FROM OURSELVES. Not all
the foreign powers on earth combined against us, can effect our ruin, without
our own aid. If America fall, and add another example to the long melancholy
list of departed Republics, she will owe her destruction to her own hands.

The present day, therefore, is a day for action and alarm, and not for
security and sloth. It is a day which tries men's souls. It is a cause in which
there are not, there cannot be any neuters. "He that is not with us, is against
us, and he that gathers not with us, scatters abroad." Mark the
temporizing, lukewarm patriot for a decided foe. His professions of patriotism,
are as hollow and as blasting as the east wind. To temporize with the enemies
of government by any conciliatory midway concessions is dastardly -- it is to
kick about in sport our father's ashes. To discover a luke. warm stoical apathy
when the happiness of our country, and every thing dear and valuable on this
side Heaven is at stake, is worse than treason. -- If we would show ourselves
worthy of our ancesters -- if we would escape the execrations and curses of
posterity, we must attend to the means of our political salvation, and be up
and doing without delay. We must cleave to the GOD of our fathers, and not
sacrifice to those new gods, that have come newly up, whom our fathers feared
not. We must venerate the institutions and usages of our ancestors, both
religious and civil. We must faithfully instruct our children in the principles
of true religion, and true liberty. We must observe GOD'S Sabbaths, and
reverence his sanctuary, We must preserve the fountains of public honors and
offices, pure and unsullied, and with conscientious patriotism exercise the
high privilege of freemen, in the choice of our civil rulers. We must rally
around the standard of our government, pledging in its support, after the
example of our revolutionary fathers, "our lives, our fortunes, and our sacred
honor." And to every insinuation of the tempter, let us make this determined
reply "we may eat of the fruit of the trees of the garden; but of the fruit of
the tree which is in the midst of the garden, GOD has said, ye shall not eat
of it, ueither shall ye touch it, lest ye die."


