EXECUTION OF La Croix, Berrouse, and Baker, FOR PIRACY.


THE LAST WORDS AND Dying Confession OF THE THREE PIRATES, WHO WERE EXECUTED
THIS DAY, (May 9th, 1800.)

FROM FOLWELL'S PRESS, No. 63, North Front-street, Philadelphia. (Copy-right
secured according to law.)

LAST DYING WORDS, CONFESSION, etc.
Joseph Baker, alias Boulanger, on the day before his exit, dictated to a
French gentleman, of this city, a letter to his Brother, with injunctions to
send it forward immediately after his execution; which we have faithfully
translated from the original.

COPY.
Philadelphia, May 8th, 1800. DEAR BROTHER,
I hasten to make known to you my situation, for the last time, and about
eighteen hours before my death.

Having committed an action against the commandments of God, and the laws of
civil society, I send you this, in order to keep you at a distance from the
like misfortune, and that you should acquaint my father, brothers and sisters
of my death, without telling them the cause of it: I trust that they will pray
for me on earth, as I hope to pray for them in heaven. I have complied, in
every thing, with the rules of our religion, and bid you a last adieu, --
hoping that my poor family, and all my friends, may enjoy eternal life: so no
more from your unfortunate brother, who is only thinking on God.

JOSEPH BOULANGER.

To Mons. Pierre Boulanger, in Captain Destmonville's Company of Volunteers,
Canada.

The same day, Joseph Berrouse dictated the following letter to his Uncle, in
Paris:

COPY:
Philadelphia, 8th May, 1800. MY DEAR UNCLE,
I write you these lines, at this time, which is likely (by an accident which
has befallen me) to be the last day of my life.

Wishing to support that unfortunate Republic, and seeking to return to my own
country, I was induced to commit an action, contrary to the laws of God, and of
civilized nations -- which has shortened my days.

I pray you, my dear uncle, not to forget to make known my unfortunate lot, to
my relations and guardians, that they may take possession of my property. I
hope they will not forget me in their prayers -- that they will cause mass to
be said, and give something to the poor, for me. -- Make my respects to all my
dear relations, and salute my dear cousins, for me. I am sorry that I have made
no will, but hope that you will agree together.

I am your unfortunate and dear Nephew, Joseph Berrouse, Cadet.

To Mons. Depuis le Jeune, Saddler and Coach-maker, Fauxbour, St. Germain,
Paris.

These three unfortunate young men were attended, from the time they received
their sentence, to the day of their execution, by clergymen of different
persuasions, and they employed themselves almost unremittedly in acts of
devotion; and appeared truly penitent, and anxious to obtain favor from an
offended God, through the merits of Jesus Christ.

Peter La Croix, shortly before his execution, gave the following account of
his life.

"I was born in Flanders; my parents gave me a good education; and my mother,
particularly, never failed to give the best admonitions; but, unfortunately, I
did not comply with them; on the contrary, I followed my own wicked
inclinations. I was only a boy when I went to sea, and I engaged at last in the
Low Dutch, or Holland service; but, not liking this, I went over to England. I
soon returned from thence to Holland; and; in order not to be brought to
punishment as a deserter, I changed my name, and called myself Peter Peterson.
My restless spirit soon drove me away from Holland again; and I wandered from
one place to another.

"During the whole time, after I had left my parents, I led a very ungodly
life. I had not, nor did I care, for any good book; and, particularly, I never
read in that book, which is now my only consolation, -- the Bible.

"God and Eternity were only my sport. I was a true blasphemer; and I now
recollect, with horror, that I actually lifted up my fist against the Almighty;
and, in the tumult of my passion challenged his vengeance.

"I could say a great deal about the dreadful murder on board of the Eliza, but
I think it unnecessary: This one circumstance I cannot, however, conceal, that
I never actually killed one myself of those who were murdered: But this does
not excuse me, because I could have saved their lives: Yet, though it was in my
power, as I did not prevent the murder, but, on the contrary, sided with those
who perpetrated it, I have certainly deserved death, and shortly shall justly
suffer what my actions merit."

To the above, we have to add, that the name of La Croix was no more his real
name than that of Peterson; and he certainly had his reasons why he changed his
name the second time -- reasons which were obviously not founded on his good
behavior.

He disclosed his real name to one of the ministers, who visited him: but
begged that it might be kept a secret, as he did not wish to expose his
relations to that disgrace which the publicity of his unhappy end undoubtedly
would.

According to his account, he is of a respectable family; and his mother,
brethren, and sisters were yet alive, as far as he knew.

The author of this short account did not see the prisoner until sentence had
been passed on him; and, therefore, can only relate what situation he found him
in, during that short space of time.

The unhappy man was, in those days, as much as appeared, quiet, and perfectly
resigned. His chief occupation was the study of the Scriptures; and, in these,
the Old. Testament as well as the New, he was surprisingly versed. He made many
sensible and striking remarks upon some texts, which might otherwise be
accounted difficult; and it appeared, plainly, that he understood what he read.
It was a great advantage to him, that, in his early days, he had been well
acquainted with the Bible; for, although he afterward reviled the same, and
even scoffed at it, yet, at the hour of death, it was his only refuge; and
this, without a doubt, because the blessed recollection of what it had been to
him in his youth, encouraged him thereto. He confessed that he never had cared
for the Scriptures since his infancy, until he was confined in the cell of the
Philadelphia Prison. In this distress, he knew of no other remedy to allay his
apprehensions. He read, and the more he read, the more he wished to read; and
he must really have been very industrious, in this his employment, or else it
would have been impossible, that, in so short a time, he should have become so
well acquainted with this book, as he really was.

When visited, he complained of nothing more than of the hardness of his heart.
This he looked upon as the severest judgment of God, which the Lord had
inflicted upon him for his enormous iniquities. He acknowledged how great the
difference was between the faith of the head and of the heart: He complained
that the latter remained so strange to him. He prayed frequently; yet,
according to his own declaration, although the words proceeded from his mouth,
his heart and sentiments had no share therein. He believed in Jesus as his
Savior; but this belief made no impression upon his heart. He showed great
concern, lest the Lord should reject him, and that he would hardly accept of a
sinner like him. His approaching end, did not, according to his acknowledgment,
occasion in him any fear. He confessed that he had perfectly deserved this
punishment; but, that the judgment of God, and of eternity, were dreadful to
him: That the recollection of his sins, and the damnation which he had
deserved, were the gnawing worm of his heart.

In this sorry and dreadful situation of mind, he was found constantly, until
about three days before his execution: when beamed a small glimpse of grace
upon his darkened soul. A very applicable German Hymn was read to him, which
drew the first tears from his eyes, and his heart was considerably releaved by
it. From that moment, he began to be more easy. He now perused the Scriptures
with more sensation: Reading Luke 11, 1, 12, he exclaimed: "Now this must be
true, what Jesus has said, for be never spoke an untruth; and so the Almighty
God will, for all, hear my prayers." And here-his-eyes were bathed in tears.

The abovementioned Hymn gave great consolation to him; he read it himself,
and he caused it to be read to him repeatedly.

On the (...) morning of his life, when he was visited, and asked how it was
now with him? his answer was, "Oh, it is better, -- much better with me. I had
a very good night; I have prayed the whole night. The Lord Jesus ordered me to
watch and pray! No sleep came into my Eyes, and I feel now much easier."

Particularly important it was to him, that which he had read that morning in
Harvey's Meditations on the Night, where he introduces a Latin Motto on a
Sun-dial. The translation of which is, "On this moment depends an eternity."
Each moment; said he, is now, for certain, to me, an eternity; and, for that
reason, I like to do nothing better than praying:

During this conversation, a woman came in, who said that she was his mother.
He looked at her without the least emotion; and only said, "no, -- no, -- that
is not my mother. I know that my mother could not be in Philadelphia." It is
said that the woman, herself, afterward, acknowledged her error.

As one of those, who visited him took his leave, (bursting into tears) he
said, "Ah! I hope and I believe we shall see one another again in bliss with
the Lord. Farewell -- farewell, and thanks for your kindness."

He had given to the same person, the evening before, a Letter, with a request
to forward the same to his brother, and to desire him to inform his mother of
his fate; at least, of his death. Here follows the translation of the letter,
which was written in the Low Dutch language.

Philadelphia, 28th Germinal, 8th year of the French Republic. DEAR BROTHER,
THIS is the last letter which you will receive from me; and I hope that the
great and Almighty God, will let you come to a better end than that which I am
come to: Because I forsook the Almighty God, my latter end is truly
unfortunate. I hope you will take this to heart, and, with your whole soul,
cleave to God, who can deliver us from evil. Dear brother, I write this in
chains and fetters, about twenty hours before my death, in hopes that you will
take the same to heart, and trust in him, whom I had forsaken, -- but on whom I
now place my only hopes, and confide in his unmerited mercy. I hope that you
will remember me with brotherly love. I herewith conclude, recommending you, as
likewise my poor soul, into the hands of the God of my fathers, and wish you an
eternal good night. And, as I hope to obtain the grace of God, I recommend you
into the hands of my Savior, Jesus Christ; and I now go to eternal rest --
Amen. -- Greet all friends and acquaintances in the name of the Lord my God,
and your God -- Amen.

Your servant and brother, to eternity, PETER LA CROIX.


Reader! The crimes of these young men were the greatest that can be committed
in civil society -- and highly aggravated by many attrocious circumstances.
Although they have not furnished the world with a particular account of their
past lives, it is almost certain, that, though young men, they had pursued a
dissolute and abandoned course, -- regardless of God, before whom they are now
to be judged -- and who, in his all-wise Providence, stopped them in their
vicious career.

Murder is a crime of so deep a dye, that it seldom or never escapes a temporal
punishment; -- though God, in his infinite mercy, may grant repentance, and,
thereby, the unhappy perpetrator may not be finally shut out from eternal
happiness.

How much reason had these persons to rejoice, that they were brought to a
city, where the consolation of the gospel were held out to them, by pious
divines; -- that they were not snatched into eternity, from their wicked
courses, in a moment, without time or opportunity to reflect on, and repent, of
their misspent life, and the disregard they had paid to the commandments of God,
or the laws of man.

It is sincerely hoped, that their untimely fate may be a warning to all young
men, to forsake the paths of vice, and to remember their Creator in the days of
their youth -- to gain a living by honest industry, rather than by violence
upon the persons or property of others, in whatever stations they are alloted
to, -- whether by Land or Sea.

They were taken from the cells about 11 o'clock, dressed, in white, in one
cart, accompanied by two clergymen, to Market-street wharf, where they were put
on beard a boat, and conveyed to the place of execution, on the Island,
opposite Dock-street, and guarded by the marshall, sheriff and other
peace-officers. They continued in prayer until near twelve o'clock; when the
executioner performed his last office to them, and they were launched into
eternity, in the view of an immense concourse of spectators, who crowded the
wharfs and the shipping. They made no other speech, than begging the world to
forgive them, as they forgave every person in it.

Captain Wheland was present, with whom they shook hands, as they did with each
other, previous to the last moments of their existence.


