AN EULOGY ON General George Washington, DELIVERED AT THE WEST MEETING HOUSE IN
THE TOWN OF BOSCAWEN, On the 22d of February, 1800, At a meeting of the
Inhabitants, agreeably to the Recommendation of CONGRESS.

BY Ariel Kendrick, V. D. M.

CONCORD: PRINTED BY GEO. HOUGH. 1800.

EULOGY.
MEN, BRETHREN, and FATHERS,
IT is with reluctance that I now present myself to public view, as an organ by
which the feelings of this assembly are to be expressed, under the most
afflicting dispensation; But, in a full belief of your candor, I surmount
every embarrassment.

Fellow-Citizens,

Advised by the General Government, and urged by our own feelings, we have met,
to commemorate the Life, the Acts, and the DEATH, of the Man, who has been the
most luminous star which has ever shone in the American Field, or Councils: He
has, with propriety, been styled, "the first in war, the first in peace, and
the first in the hearts of his countrymen." Many sons of America have done
well; -- but, the illustrious, the most excellent WASHINGTON, has excelled them
all. John Baptist was, in a spiritual point of view, "a burning and a shining
light." The beloved Man, whose Death we deplore, has, in a political point of
view, done the same. He has burnt and shone in our political heavens, until the
chains of slavery and the clouds of despotism have been destroyed, and Liberty
and heaven-born Freedom, with all their concomitant blessings, are here
enjoyed. There is not a son or daughter of America, who does not enjoy many
blessings, more precious than rubies, which result from the magnanimous conduct
of the beloved Man, whom relentless death has torn from our weeping eyes, and
bleeding hearts. Such have been the valor and firmness which he has displayed
in behalf of his Country, that, should not his name and character receive
monumental honors, they will yet live and flourish, being written in indelible
characters on the human heart. Parents will teach their children the great
things which God has brought to pass by the hand of WASHINGTON -- and
generations yet unborn, will rise up and call him blessed; and speak of him, as
a precious gift of God to his beloved Country.

America seems to have been marked out, by God himself, as a place where to
bestow his glorious goodness, in the communication of those blessings which are
suited to the social and civil state of man; particularly liberty and freedom.

At the time of the first discovery of the American Continent, tyranny, and the
galling shackles of slavery, had obtained their empire over almost all the
nations of the Eastern world. Our Forefathers seeing this; and having, at the
same time, an ardent thirst for the rights of man, both civil and religious,
left their native shores, and crossed the broad Atlantic, to seek, in this new
world, a place for the enjoyment of those blessings which were denied them at
home. God crowned the enterprise with success. Our fathers reached this desired
haven. And, from that time to the present, the interpositions of Heaven, in
favor of our country, have astonished many of the human race. "The ends of the
earth" heard, "drew near, and came." We may, with propriety, adopt the words of
the Psalmist, "Thou have done great things for us, whereof we are glad."

After our Ancestors had, for some time, enjoyed those blessings, for which
they hazarded their lives, hell stirred our mother country to adopt those
measures, with respect to Infant America, which breathed the most unnatural
affection, and were calculated to destroy the tender ties of habit, faith, and
blood. In this alarming and distressing crisis, America placed herself in a
position, which astonished the nations of the earth. She, who was weak in
numbers, weak in money, and still weaker in military discipline, told her
veteran, her unnatural foe, that she would be free, or die.

When hostilities were commencing, the grand question was, Who shall command
the sons of Columbia, and lead them in the awful contest? Our enemies,
undoubtedly, thought there were none of her native sons whose abilities were
adequate to so important a task. But, lo! Heaven had designated the MAN, whom
it had inspired with wisdom, integrity and fortitude, equal to the undertaking:
-- And, at the call of his country, WASHINGTON came forth; and, with all the
diffidence of a man of sense and merit, took upon him the important charge.
During eight years service, the most fatiguing and discouraging, being
subjected to many incidents which rarely happen in other countries, he
displayed an almost unexampled vigor, heroism, and firm attachment to his
country.

During the war, money grew scarce; the soldiers were poorly paid, and
consequently became mutinous: the ravages of the enemy were intolerable; and
many times it seemed as though tyranny must triumph. These disasters hung, like
a thick cloud, on almost every American mind, and seemed to forebode immediate
destruction. But, under these weighty trials and discouraging omens, our HERO
exhibited a calmness and fortitude peculiar to his almost unequalled soul. His
enemies, from time to time, felt the weight of his potent arm; while all those
who fell into his hands experienced the benignity and benevolence of his heart.
On the one hand, he exercised strict severity, when his country's good required
it; while, on the other, he discovered great compassion when it was consistent
with duty and honor.

General WASHINGTON, although highly exalted in the scale of honor, viewed
himself as the companion of Men, and not of Angels; and therefore always
discovered the greatest sympathy for his suffering soldiers, as many of them
can this day bear testimony. In but a very few men has such angelic mildness
dwelt, with such high authority and power. If we search the records of
antiquity, we shall find the names of many who could boast of conquest and
victory; but, still, in them the best part of man seems to be lacking; for,
while they could, on the one hand, boast of rivalship, they could not, on the
other, boast of clemency, and of sacrificing individual good to general
happiness. -- But the latter of these has shone, with the most conspicuous
luster, in America's dearest friend. If we view him, and trace his steps, from
Braddock's defeat, till the surrender of Cornwallis, his character does not
suffer by a comparison with any General, either of ancient or modern date, who
has trodden the field of battle. He was neither elated with prosperity, nor
disheartened by adversity; but was enabled to preserve that equanimity, which
is highly necessary and important for those, on whose shoulders the great
concerns of a nation rest.

After WASHINGTON had conducted America, through a long and distressing war,
under God, to a state of freedom and renown; after he had raised her to that
exalted rank which she now holds among the nations of the earth, having rolled
the glorious ear of freedom over the necks of tyrants and oppressors, and
placed the oppressed under the Olive Tree of Liberty, he retired from the field
of battle with the grateful thanks and best wishes of millions, and resigned up
his commission to those from whom he had received it. At this time, he met a
band of illustrious Councillors, and they rejoiced together, that the
auspicious day had arrived which terminated the bloody contest in favor of
America.

Our beloved WASHINGTON, and faithful General, having thus obtained the laurels
of victory, hasted from the field of war and din of arms, to Mount Vernon,
there to enjoy, in calm retreat, the blessings of domestic life, which were
justly due to a man who had done so much to secure them to others. But he did
not long enjoy that repose, and freedom from anxiety, which perhaps would have
been more consonant with his desires. He was soon called to take upon him the
office of Chief Magistrate of the United States. Having led the American sons
in the field of war, he is now called to lead in the Grand Council of the
Nation, a task perhaps no less difficult than any he had yet undertaken,
considering the then present situation of our nation Independence, our primary
object, was indeed gained; but we began to feel all the miseries which a
reduction of paper currency, want of money, loss of credit, contentions between
different States, and the want of a wise, uniting Constitution, could produce.
For any other man to have taken the important post of President, at this
alarming crisis, must have been entirely fruitless. He, who had served his
country during eight revolving years; he, in whom the affection and entire
confidence of all harmoniously centred, was the Man, and on him the important
office was conferred: -- And the event evinced the wisdom of the choice. He,
together with his co-patriots, devised, executed, and presented to the world, a
Constitution, in which the wisdom of man shines conspicuously, and by which the
several States are so wisely and closely united, as that we hope they will
continue one and indivisible till the laws of gravitation fail, and the
kingdoms of the earth are buried in undistinguishable ruin.

During eight years in the Chair of Government, to which he was raised by the
voice of millions of freemen, WASHINGTON displayed vast knowledge in politics,
and almost unequalled skill in governing. His authority borrowed the mild guise
of paternal affection and care; and, in this way, his character became
complete. After having guided the political ^ar of America, for eight years, he
refused to be considered among the candidates for a new election, when in
higher esteem than ever in the minds of his countrymen, and once more hasted to
the shades of retirement, with the blessing of millions upon his hoary and
honorable head, the best reward that a lover of his Country can receive. The
Valedictory Address of our departed Friend to his beloved Country, is a
precious political Legacy: and will God grant, that it may be preserved, and
wisely and faithfully regarded, until the kingdoms of this world become the
united Kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.

There were none, perhaps, who thought, that the man who had served his country
forty years, would again be called on to resume his public toils in the decline
of life, with his silvered locks: But the French having commenced hostilities
against us, the means of defense became necessary. For this purpose, an army
was raised, and he, whose name was like a Host, was invited to take the
command: And no sooner did our much beloved Father receive the invitation, than
he complied with the request, and the sons of Columbia exulted with joy. But
when we consider his advanced age, his great achievements in the American Field
and Legislature, his having gained the summit of human greatness; and when we
likewise consider, that a mind so great must have been sensible, that a very
few circumstances in combination might overthrow all his popularity, and bring
a cloud on all his former greatness; I say, when we see him accept the office
under these necessary considerations, we are constrained to say, it was not for
money, or honor, but from real love to his country, that induced him to the
undertaking. This was an action, which displayed such virtue and benevolence as
are rarely found in man: Yea, such was the parental care manifested in this,
that it seemed to crown all the other actions of his life with a glory which
equals the resplendent beams of the sun; and almost presaged, that a man so
good must soon leave the theater of mortality -- And so was the event; for on
the 14th of December, 1799, he who was the chariot of America, and the horsemen
thereof, resigned his useful life, and passed the dark vale of death; which
proves him to have been a son of Adam, and a fallen creature.

Pale Death, from whom there is none may seek relief,
To Vernon rode, and visited our Chief;
The combat soon began -- Death's arrows reached his heart;
Alas! America and WASHINGTON must part.
Here let us pause for a moment, and admire the hand which preserved the Father
of our Country in the field of battle, amid the thunder of cannon and showers
of flying balls, that he might die on his own bed, being blessed with the tears
of his worthy Consort, and many domestic friends, which in some measure
alleviated the distress of sickness, and eased the pains of death.

But, perhaps some are ready to conclude, that the speaker, in viewing our
deliverances, looks no higher than men and means. But, my friends, of such
stupidity I wish not to be guilty. There is a God on high, who rules in the
kingdoms of the earth, setting up one, and putting down another, according to
his infinite pleasure. This God, from eternity, decreed the prosperity of
America; and all the instruments, requisite to accomplish it, were written in
the book of his eternal purposes: And, among the many instruments used by God
for the accomplishment of his purpose with respect to America, the excellent
WASHINGTON seems to have been the chief. Thanks to God for such a rich and
noble blessing. And while I speak of the noble talents of our departed Friend,
so wonderfully exerted in favor of the human race, I would avail myself of it,
as an argument to enforce the importance of the most profound reverence and
respect to that Being, who knows perfectly well what instruments are necessary
and adapted to the accomplishment of any glorious object. To speak respectfully
of any finite being or object, is consistent with supreme love to God. To say,
that the Sun is the great illuminator of the world, the arbitrator of time, and
that which causes the womb of nature to bring forth, would be consistent with
devotion to God; but to say, that it shines with unborrowed luster, would be
highly blasphemous. -- So, to say, that the beloved WASHINGTON has been
extensively useful to the world, and particularly to United America, is
consistent with the most religious belief in Divine Providence; but to say,
that his life, his talents, and his virtues, were not from God, must argue the
greatest stupidity.

In view of our National loss, the following things naturally strike the mind:

1. That it will either tend to greater internal discord, and external
commotion; or, to greater internal harmony, and of course to greater external
peace. God grant, that it may be the latter -- And to this end, let each of us
live, let each of us pray.

2. This loss reminds us, that all sublunary things must fail us; and
particularly, that Death is an article in the creed of the universal progeny of
Adam, the principles of dissolution being fixed in all the works of nature. The
tall, the wise, the reverend head, must not only taste, but drink the bitter
cup. Could the universal esteem of mankind, the warmest affections of millions,
and the prayers of Saints, have saved our Friend, he would not have died; -- --
but* alas! when God's time had come, it was not possible for all these to hold
him, or protract his life, a moment. It is appointed unto man once to die, and
after this the judgment. May we all prepare for the grand assize -- for the
midnight cry.

3. We have reason to bless God, that he raised up for us such a glorious
deliverer; that he directed his talents to the happiness of his country; and
that he preserved his life, and continued his usefulness, to so great an age.

4. By this stroke of the righteous judgment of God upon us, as a nation, we
are reminded of the obligation we are under, of gratitude and thanks to
Jehovah, that he has given another to sit at the Helm of our National
Administration, in whom wisdom and virtue shine with unblemished luster. -- May
ADAMS as nearly equal WASHINGTON in the grand Council of our Nation, as Joshua
did Moses in the camp of Israel. May America ever be blessed with wise
Governors and Legislators, until HE whose right it is shall come and reign, by
the power of his grace, in the hearts of all men, "from sea even to sea, and
from the river even to the ends of the earth." In that day, union will be
spiritual and universal -- the law and constitution, Divine -- and the
Governor, THE MIGHTY GOD, THE EVERLASTING FATHER, THE PRINCE OF PEACE.

FINIS.

