A SERMON, Preached at WESTFIELD, JANUARY 1, 1800. At the DEDICATION of the
ACADEMY in that Town. By JOSEPH LATHROP, D. D. PASTOR of the FIRST CHURCH in
WEST-SPRINGFIELD.

SUFFIELD, PRINTED BY EDWARD GRAY, M,DCCC.

At a legal meeting of the Board of Trustees of Westfield Academy, Jan. 1st.
1800.
Voted, that the Board of Trustees present their thanks to the Reverend Dr.
Lathrop, for his sermon delivered this day, at the dedication of the Academy,
and request a copy for the press.

True copy from the Records, ABEL WHITNEY, Secretary.

PSALM CXLIV, 12. That our sons may be as plants grown up in their youth; that
our daughters may be as corner stones polished after the similitude of a palace
IT is natural for us to look forward with the hope of future good. This
anticipation of futurity is one evidence of our immortality. We weary ourselves
to find happiness in this world: but our labors are baffled, and our
expectations disappointed. We are never at rest, until we are settled in the
firm belief, and filled with the cheerful hope of happiness in the world to
come. In youth, while we are climbing the hill of life, we amuse ourselves with
the prospect which opens before us: but when we have passed the summit, and are
treading the downward path, the worldly prospect shortens -- and shortens, the
shadows stretch over us, and we find ourselves, at every step, sinking into the
darksome vale of infirmity and age. Our earthly prospects are now in posterity:
Our brighter prospects are in God.

THE parent rejoices to see his children rising to virtuous dignity and
usefulness. The hope that he shall live in them -- that his labors will
contribute to their happiness -- that their worthy conduct will embalm his name
and rescue it from oblivion, consoles him in the melancholy thought of his
hastening dissolution.

THE patriot has much the same feelings toward his country, as the parent
toward his family. He delights in its present prosperity -- he seems to share
in its distant glory -- he appropriates the happiness it will enjoy after his
connection with it shall cease. It is this anticipation which prompts his
exertions for the advancement of arts, learning and religion. When David, in
the psalm before us, prayed that God would deliver the people of Israel from
the invasion of foreign enemies, who were strangers to the true God, he had
regard not only to the present, but to succeeding generations.

Rid me and deliver me from the hand of strange children, whose mouth speaks
vanity, and whose right hand is a right hand of false-hood, that our sons may
rise like young flourishing trees, until they attain their full stature and
strength; and our daughters adorned with virtuous manners, may stand like
pillars of polished marble, which beautify and support a palace.'

HE deprecated the admission of foreigners, the worshippers of false gods, into
his country, lest succeeding generations should be corrupted in their
principles and manners, and thus the sentiments of piety and virtue should be
banished from the land.

HENCE then we learn the sense which David had of the importance of the rising
generation. This is the thought which I intend to illustrate and improve.

GOD has appointed the human race to be continued by succession; and each
generation is an essential link in the chain.

THE Creator has framed a universe, and peopled it with an endless variety of
beings, rising in a gradual scale from the borders of nothing upwards to a
degree of perfection beyond our present conceptions. In this scale the human
species holds an important place. However small we my appear in comparison with
angels; yet, considered as rational and immortal beings, designed for an
endless existence, and capable of continual improvement in knowledge, virtue
and happiness, we are of vast importance.

THE particular regard, which the Creator has shown for us in providing a world
for our habitation, in spreading around us bountiful supplies for our wants --
in appointing his angels to be our ministers and guardians -- in giving his Son
to redeem us from the ruins of our apostasy -- and in furnishing us with the
necessary means of scientific, moral and religious advancement, shows that we
are beings of distinguished importance in his universal plan, and that by means
of our race some grand and glorious purposes are to be answered.

IF our race is so important, we are not to look with indifference on the
generation which is rising after us. They are rational and immortal beings --
they are in a state of probation -- they are a part of that species which the
Son of God came to redeem -- and they are the persons on whom the continuance
of our race depends.

THEY are of particular importance in the families to which they belong.

WHEN our children are young, we observe with pleasure the gradual opening of
their tender minds toward reason and maturity. We promise ourselves still
greater satisfaction, when we shall one day see them acting a worthy part on
the stage of life. Our labor and expense in their support and education are
encouraged by the expectation of their present improvement and future
usefulness; and amply repaid, when this expectation is realized.

MANY of the services necessary to the support of human life call for the
vigor, activity and enterprise of youth, and must be entirely neglected, if
none were found but such as have past this sprightly period. It is the rising
generation which must be our support and comfort in that evil day, 'when the
keepers of the house shall tremble, and the strong men shall bow themselves --
when the doors shall be shut in the streets, and they that look out at the
windows shall be darkened -- when we shall rise up at the voice of the bird and
fear shall be in the way.' In the prospect of this uncomfortable season, it is
a relief to hope that we shall be strong in the vigor, and secure in the
virtue of those who are growing up under our care. In this view, children are
an heritage of the Lord, and as arrows in the hands of the mighty.'

THE rising generation are of great importance in civil society. The defense of
the state in a time of war, and the promotion of arts in a time of peace,
depend chiefly on them. As we advance toward old age, our spirit for
enterprise, our resolution to meet danger, and our ability to sustain hardship,
sensibly decline. In this languid period, our exertions are prompted by the
spirit of our children, and strengthened by our regard for their interest. Were
it not for their lively ambition, and our parental affection, we should
languish out the latter part of life in a dull pursuit of the old beaten track.
It is the ardour of the son, which gives activity to the experience of the
father. The ambition of the former, directed by the prudence and checked by the
caution of the latter, operates to useful improvements, and keeps the world in
progress.

THEY who are now young are soon to take into their own hands the great affairs
of society; and general peace, or confusion will be connected with the part
they act. By their virtue and prudence, they will diffuse happiness around and
transmit it to the next succeeding age; or by their folly and vice they will
spread general misery and entail it on those who shall come after them.

ON the rising generation will depend the continuance and increase of useful
knowledge.

THE present advanced state of the mechanical and liberal arts by which life is
embellished, and the mind enlarged is the work of many ages. The early
condition of mankind was rude and uncultivated. Their first occupations were
such as necessity dictated, and piety prescribed -- the culture of the ground
for food, and the keeping of sheep and cattle for clothing and for sacrifice.
Their labors in opening the ground for pasturage, and in mellowing the soil
for corn, must, for want of instruments, have been difficult and slow. We have
no account of the use of iron and brass until the eighth generation from Adam.
For a long time mankind had much dependence on the spontaneous productions of
the earth. Their first clothing was made of the skins of beasts. The
manufacture of wool and other materials was a subsequent invention. These
probably were first wrought, not by the contexture of threads, as they are now
among us; but by the contusion of the mass until the natural fibers were
incorporated; as is still the method among some savage tribes. About the time
that brass and iron came into use, was invented the construction of tents, and
the formation of musical instruments. It was a long time before the strength of
beasts, the impulse of wind, the weight of water-falls, and the mechanical
powers of the wheel and the pully, were applied to relieve the weakness and
lighten the labor of men. The longevity of the first generation, was favorable
to improvement. But while the art of writing was unknown, the progress of
invention must have been very moderate, and its communication much confined.
Geography would scarcely extend beyond the limits of their own travels --
mathematics would be little more than the enumeration of their flocks and
herds -- astronomy would be only such an observation of the stars as was
necessary to guide them in their journey, and direct them in their husbandry.
The first writing was by the pictures and symbols of things; which would be but
few, and these often of doubtful signification. It is a question whether
alphabetical writing can be traced higher than the time of Moses. If letters
were known earlier, probably they were of the nature of our numerical figures,
the signs of ideas, rather than of sounds. Alphabetical writing greatly
facilitated the progress of learning, which has since been much improved by the
invention of printing. The diffusion of knowledge has been greatly assisted by
the art of navigation, which has opened an easy communication among the nations
of the earth. Mankind are still making progress; and a few generations hence
may have the benefit of arts as much unknown to us, as were the magnet and
printing type, a few centuries ago; or some late invented engines in the
beginning of the present century.

OUR elevation in arts and refinement is the acquisition of ages. If this were
by any means lost, ages and ages must pass away before it would be again
recovered: And it is doubtful whether mankind could survive the loss. The
rising generation are the depositaries of these treasures of science. Into
their hands we are to commit them: And they, in their turn, must convey them,
with their own additional improvements, to the generation which shall succeed
them.

Religion is a matter of still higher importance. With this the present
prosperity and future felicity of mankind are essentially connected. The care
God has taken to impart to us the knowledge of it by the ministry of his own
son, and of holy men inspired with his own Spirit, demonstrates our infinite
concern in it. He taught it to former ages in a supernatural way. In these ages
he leaves it to be conveyed on from one generation to another by means of a
standing revelation and an instituted ministry. If religion should be generally
neglected, revelation exploded and the ministry discontinued in one age, the
next would come forward in ignorance of the truth and in depravation of
manners; and of consequence would experience all the miseries of prevailing
wickedness in this world, and stand exposed to its more dreadful effects in
another.

WE are placed under a government the most liberal and happy of any known among
the nations of the earth. But our government rests on the basis of religion,
and without out it cannot be sustained in its present form. There may, indeed,
be government without religion; but it will be a government of terror and
force; not of reason and justice. When Israel was without the true God, without
a teaching priest, and without the law, there was no peace to him, that went
out, not to him that came in; but great vexations on the inhabitants. The
experiment of government without religion has lately been made in Europe; and
its effects have been too disastrous to justify a repetition. A man must be
either blinded by enmity to truth, or very careless in his observations on the
tendency of things, not to have seen, in the course of a few years past, the
connection of religion with the happiness of society, and the operation of
infidelity to produce missery and confusion. On this subject experience and
observation have thrown such light, as human reasoning could not have
displayed. And there is ground to hope that religion has received some
additional support in this land from the attempts to undermine it in another.
As we wish to leave with our children the privileges of a free government, we
must train them up in the faith and obedience of the gospel. The present youth
are the persons by whom religion is to be preserved and communicated in the
world. If in their hands it should be lost, there is no reason to expect a new
revelation to restore it: But the ignorance and irreligion begin in them will
run on and spread round, how far, and how wide, none can tell. Such is the
corruption of human nature that its tendency is not to amendment, but to
increasing depravation. This will be the effect, when restraints are cast off,
and the means of knowledge and virtue are thrown aside. Hence God threatens,
that he will visit the iniquities of the fathers on the children to the third
and fourth generation of them that hate him. Not that he will punish the
obedient for the iniquities of their fathers; but he will punish these
iniquities in the children who retain them and continue to hate God as their
fathers have done before them. The threatening is grounded on a natural
presumption, that the children, from one generation to another, will adopt and
practice their fathers' sins.

WHEN we consider, that the virtue, liberty and happiness of many generations
will depend on the youth who are now coming forward, and that unborn millions
will be happy or miserable here and for ever, according as these shall support
or neglect religion, we must regard them as beings of mighty consequence to the
world and feel ourselves bound to treat them accordingly.

OUR preceding observations fully evince, that the education of youth is an
object which demands our most zealous attention. There is no way in which we
can so essentially promote the great interests of humanity, as by training up
this young generation to industry, science and religion. Happy will be our
nation while their sons are as plants grown up in their youth, and their
daughters as corner stones polished after the similitude of a palace. The
structure of society must not be an unshapely pile of rude stones promiscuously
thrown together, as they are taken from the quarry; but a compact and well
proportioned edifice of regular pieces, fitted each to its place, polished by
the tool of education, and closely united by the cement of benevolence and
virtue. The former, horrible while it stands, will soon tumble into ruins; the
latter, beautiful in its appearance, will be permanent in duration.

THE education of youth must be begun in the families in which they are placed.
But it cannot be completed here. As they are growing up to be members of a
larger society, some public provision ought to be made for their obtaining a
more elevated education, than can be given them within their native walls.

IN the settled state of the Jewish nation, seminaries were early erected, and
liberally endowed for the education of young men to public usefulness,
especially to offices in the church. To preside in these schools, persons
eminent for their wisdom, learning and sanctity were appointed; and into them
were freely admitted such young men as discovered a taste and aptitude for
useful knowledge. To these schools Solomon probably alludes in the beginning of
the IX Chapter of Proverbs. Wisdom has builded her house, she has hewn out
her seven pillars; she has killed her beasts; she has mingled her wine; she
has also furnished her table. She has sent forth her maidens; she cries upon
the highest places of the city. And this is her cry; Whosoever is simple, let him
turn in hither. Come, eat of my bread, and drink of the wine which I have
mingled. Forsake the foolish and live; and go in the way of understanding.

THE early Christians,' says Dr. Mosheim, took all possible care to accustom
their children to the study of the holy scriptures, and to instruct them in the
doctrines of their holy religion. For this purpose schools were every where
erected, even from the commencement of the Christian church. Besides the
schools destined for children, there were Academies erected in several large
cities, in which persons of riper years, especially such as aspired to be
public teachers, were instructed in the different branches of human learning
and sacred erudition. And we may undoubtedly attribute to the Apostles
themselves and their injunctions to their disciples the excellent
establishments, in which the youth destined for the holy ministry received an
education suitable to the solemn office they were to undertake.

THE legal institution of schools in their several grades is a privilege which
commenced with the settlement of New England, and which has had the most happy
effects. By means of this institution our children are early formed to the love
of knowledge, to sentiments of virtue, to decency of manners, to habits of
subordination, and to a preparation for public usefulness. To this it is
greatly owing that knowledge is so generally diffused, and that civil society
is in so orderly and peaceful a state.

THE ordinary schools maintained in our several towns are well adapted to the
object of their institution. But it is necessary there should be some in
society, who have an education superior to that which these schools are
competent to furnish. For this purpose our colleges are founded. But a regular
collegiate education is beyond the reach of of many happy geniuses who wish to
rise above the education of an ordinary school. Therefore certain intermediate
seminaries are instituted by authority, and endowed by public grants and
private benefactions, that with moderate expense the lovers of learning may
obtain an education which will gratify their literary taste, and lay a good
foundation for farther improvements and for more general usefulness.

OF this kind is the WESTFIELD ACADEMY, which we, this day, dedicate to the
purpose of erudition, and commend to the blessing of Providence.

IN consequence of an application from the citizens of this town, the
legislature of our Commonwealth have here instituted an Academy, endowed it
with competent privileges, and appropriated for its use a valuable tract of
land, which, with the addition made by the town, will we hope, soon prove a
fund competent to the purposes of the institution. By a farther grant of the
town and the subscriptions of particular Gentlemen in it, an elegant and
capacious edifice is erected for the accommodation of students, and now
prepared for their reception; and a gentleman of approved ability and character
is procured, and is now present to whose immediate government and instruction
the students will be committed.

THE object of the institution is to train up youth of both sexes in virtue and
science. Reading, writing, arithmetic, elegant composition, and graceful
speaking will be here taught. Such as aspire to a higher education will be
assisted in acquiring a knowledge of the learned languages, geography,
mathematics, and such other branches of erudition as are taught in our
universities. Particular attention will be given to the morals of the youth;
and instruction in the principles and duties of religion will not be neglected.
With a view to these objects the Trustees will ever be careful, that the
preceptors and teachers in this Academy be men of distinguished learning and
exemplary conversation, and that they be the professed friends of piety and
religion.

A STRICT government will be necessary in the Academy. But this will be
maintained, not by corporal or necessary punishments; but by means better
adapted to influence ingenuous minds. Offenders, on whom such means are
unsuccessful, will be deemed unworthy of a place in the Academy; and they must
retire.

THE expense of tuition will be as moderate as the support of the institution
will allow; and as soon as our funds come into operation, we hope this expense
will be reduced.

THE funds and donations already committed, and such as may hereafter be
committed to the Trustees, will be faithfully appropriated; the will of
benefactors will be religiously obeyed, and a strict economy will be observed.
We anticipate the time, when this institution will become respectable for
numbers, order, virtue and science, under the care of able instructors and the
patronage of liberal benefactors. We hope, from the proceeds of our funds and
from the munificence of the friends of science, soon to see the Academy
furnished with a necessary philosophical apparatus, a useful library, and a
valuable collection of curiosities, to stimulate the enquiries and assist the
improvements of the students. But an infant institution must have time for
growth and maturity.

THE progress, reputation and usefulness of this Academy will much depend on
the wisdom and virtue of the people, and especially of the influential
characters of the town in which it is placed.

WE commend the zeal and liberality of the town in the cause of learning and
religion. We applaud the generosity and public spirit of those gentlemen, who,
in addition to the grant of the town, have largely contributed to the erection
and completion of the edifice, which we this day dedicate to virtue and
science. But remember, gentlemen, your work is only begun. If it stop here,
your labor and expense are lost, and the laudable purpose of your exertions is
defeated. You have done much in pecuniary contributions: You have still much to
do in another line. There is a duty which you owe and which you will
continually owe to this institution. As it is placed among you, so on your
virtuous influence its respectability; yea, its existence will principally
depend. Had we the remotest idea, that the youth who become its members, would
here be contaminated in their principles and depraved in their manners, and go
abroad to spread the corruption among others, we should by no means have given
it our countenance, nor this day have assisted in its dedication. Should this
unhappily prove to be the case, no virtuous parent will send a son or daughter
to it for an education; and it will, of consequence, expire in disgrace. With a
regard to the usefulness of the institution, the interest of its members, the
good of our country and the honor of religion, we expect -- and we shall
require, that the pupils be restrained from impiety, profaneness, dissipation,
riot and gambling -- from mingling with licentious company, and resorting to
places of temptation. Let there then be nothing of this kind among you. We
expect -- and we shall require, that they here be nurtured in the principles of
religion, in sentiments of piety, in habits of virtue, in a love of order, in
decency of behavior, in sobriety of manners, in a reverence for, and
attendance upon the instituted worship of God. Among you let these things be
conspicuous. You easily see, that the obtainment of our object will materially
depend on the wise and virtuous conduct of the citizens and youths of this
town. It will be difficult -- it will be impossible for the immediate governors
of the Academy to preserve order and virtue among their pupils amids counter
examples; but amidst concurrent examples their task will be easy.

WILL not my age, my trust, my appointment for this day excuse me, and entitle
me to your attention, my young friends while I exhort you, in regard to your
own reputation and safety -- in regard to the honor of this infant institution
-- in regard to the youths who shall seek an education here, to shun and detest
those evil communications which corrupt good manners? Let it never be reported
abroad, or known here, that any of you are profane, disorderly, riotous,
gamblers, sabbath breakers, scoffers at religion, lovers of sinful pleasures,
and enticers to evil. Let it appear, and let it every where be spoken to your
honor, that you are sober, virtuous, godly, obedient to domestic order, and
observant of religious worship. Then our sons and daughters, who come to reside
among you, will from your example learn the things which are virtuous and
praise worthy, the things which are lovely and of good report. Then you will
not only feel a conscious pleasure in your own virtue, but enjoy an additional
satisfaction in having diffused its influence far around.

YOU who are masters of families are always under sacred obligations; but now
you will be under new obligations, to watch over your children and domestics,
and to maintain order, virtue and religion in your houses; for you will thus
render a most important service to the children of your brethren abroad. In
some of your families our children must reside. Let them there hear nothing,
but what deserves their attention -- see nothing but what is worthy of their
imitation. Let them see peace and harmony, government and subordination, a
reverence for God's word and an observance of his worship. Let them hear
nothing impious and profane, disrespectful of the scriptures, or contemptuous
of divine institutions. Treat our children as your own; at least so far as to
give them seasonable cautions and rebukes. We feel a solicitude for our
children, when they are removed from under our eye. A persuasion that they are
placed in orderly and religious families and under the inspection of our pious
and faithful friends, greatly relieves our anxiety.

I BEGIN to fear, I shall be thought to have stepped over my line. Your
goodness, however, will excuse the transgression. I speak not these things from
an apprehension of any peculiar danger in this town. I honor you as the
friends of order, virtue and religion. But in regard to this infant academy,
and to the youth who may seek an education in it, I felt an impulse of duty,
which I could not easily repress, to hold up to you some salutary cautions. In
expressing my own feelings, I am sure, I express those of my brethren of the
board.

TO the preceding cautions I will add another, which more immediately respects
the officers, magistrates, and influential characters in the Town. Will it not,
Gentlemen, be particularly incumbent on you to use the authority and influence
which you possess, I will not say, for the suppression, for I know not that
such things exist here; but for the prevention of the evils which have been
mentioned; profaneness, gambling, sabbath-breaking, and whatever would tend to
vitiate the manners, fully the reputation and defeat the intention of this
academy? Will it not be your duty to countenance and encourage the religious
observance of the Lord's day, and a regular and general attendance on the
worship of God's house; that the students, from the example which they behold,
may receive deep and permanent impressions of the sacred importance of these
divine institutions? -- I shall not enlarge -- You will judge of yourselves
what is right.

THIS day introduces a new year -- the year which closes the 18th century from
the era of your redemption. On this day we are assembled to dedicate to God and
commit to his blessing this infant seminary, hoping, that here our sons will be
as plants grown up in their youth, and our daughters as corner-stones polished
after the similitude of a palace -- that here formed to useful knowledge, pious
sentiments and virtuous manners, they will bring honor to God, do service to
men in their day, and transmit to another generation the pious principles and
the excellent wisdom, which they here imbibe. That God may accept this offering
at our hands, let us join piety with our charity, like the Mecedonian
Christians, who, in preparing a benefaction for the saints, first gave
themselves to the Lord. In vain we pretend to honor him with pompous
offerings, while we deny him the affection of our hearts and the obedience of
our lives. Let us, with this new year, lament our own follies, and recognize
God's mercies in the past. And with the dedication of this new seminary, let us
present ourselves living sacrifices holy and acceptable to him, and serve him
the remainder of our days in newness of life. When our bodies shall be
forgotten in the dust, and our names no longer mentioned on earth, may this
institution live and flourish, and be a blessing to the children of those who
shall then occupy our place. In the mean time our prayers shall commend it to
God, and in his attendant smiles our hearts shall rejoice. Having closed this
mortal scene, may we all rise to the world of light, where we shall see, not
through a glass darkly, but with open face, and shall know, not merely in part,
but as we are known.

FINIS.
DEDICATION SPEECH. By the honorable SAMUEL FOWLER, Esquire. President of the Board
of Trustees.
GENTLEMEN and Fellow Citizens.
WE have Assembled this day for the delightful purpose of dedicating, and
setting apart this building for the important design of education, that the
rising generation may be instructed in the various branches of human and sacred
erudition.

WE rejoice that this happy lot has fallen to us, and that we have an
opportunity to impart a small portion of our property in laying the foundation
of so useful an Institution.

The attention of the Citizens of this Commonwealth to the education of the
rising Generation affords a most pleasing prospect of the future support of
religion science and morality. These are the Grand Pillars, on which this
Country has been raised to its present opulence and splendour, and on which the
principles of our most excellent Frame of Government must be continued and
supported. Having completed this Academic Edifice, and procured an instructor
for the education of those Children and Youth of both sexes, who may be
committed to his care; having also received ample testimony of his literary and
moral character; to introduce this Gentleman into his important office is what
now remains for us to do.

I therefore, by the direction of this Honorable Board of Trustees, deliver to
you, Sir, this Key, in token of your investiture with the office of Preceptor
in this Academy.

UPON your exertion aided with ours, we conceive the future prosperity of this
Seminary very much depends.

IT is our ardent wish, that you may answer our just expectations, in forming
the minds and manners of the Children and Youth, that may be placed under your
instructions.

PERMIT us, Sir, on this occasion, to suggest to you the importance of
carefully inspecting the morals and behavior of your Pupils; and of frequently
instiling into their tender minds the great principles of the christian
religion: The rest we leave to your own good sense.

WE look forward with pleasing satisfaction to some future Period (far distant)
when you shall resign this Key and Office of preceptor, with honor to yourself
and reputation to this Seminary.

MAY this institution long flourish; may it become more and more reputable for
virtue and science; and may it continue to afford an opportunity for acquiring
every branch of learing which is useful to the individual and beneficial to the
Community.


