MR. KING'S DISCOURSE, ON THE DEATH OF GENERAL WASHINGTON.

A DISCOURSE, DELIVERED IN CHELSEA, IN THE CITY OF NORWICH, JAN. 5, 1800, AS A
TOKEN OF HUMILIATION BEFORE GOD, ON ACCOUNT OF THE DEATH OF Genesis George
Washington; WHO DIED DEC. 14, 1799.

BY WALTER KING, PASTOR OF THE PRESBYTERIAN CHURCH IN THAT PLACE.

NORWICH: PRINTED BY THOMAS HUBBARD, 1800.

Norwich, 7th January, 1800. REV. WALTER KING, SIR,
IN behalf of the inhabitants of Chelsea, convened for the purpose of paying a
suitable tribute of respect to the memory of their beloved WASHINGTON, we have
the pleasure to communicate their thanks to you Sir, for your well adapted,
pathetic and pertinent discourse, delivered on the occasion, and to request a
copy thereof for publication.

COMMITTEE OF ARRANGEMENTS.
LEVI HUNTINGTON, BENJAMIN COIT, BENJAMIN SNOW, JESSE BREED, JOSEPH PERKINS,
CHRISTO, VAIL, BENADAM DENISON, DWIGHT RIPLEY,


FUNERAL SERMON.
II SAMUEL i. 27. How are the Mighty fallen, and the weapons of war perished.
WHILE the tears of United America, are flowing for the fall of our illustrious
Chief, the beloved Washington, we are called upon, My Friends to mingle our own
in the general stream. -- O America! thou have felt the stroke of the Almighty
-- thou have suffered an eclipse -- thy stars are still permitted to shine; but
a portion of thy glory; one of thy brightest (...) shrouded in darkness. --
Now, while grief (...) thy countenance, and the instruments of music hang on
the willows -- while thou clothest thyself with the cypress, and tears trickle
down thy cheeks, remember thy GOD lives -- ^e comforted in this; for he shall
be thy Guardian and Defense. Let thy trust be in him, and thy fo^^ shall not
triumph over thee. Let thy trust be in him, and he shall be as a wall of fire
round about thee, and a glory in the midst of thee. Let thy trust be in him,
and he shall raise up other deliverers, who shall watch over thy interests, and
defend them, till the world shall be hushed into peace: and the whole family of
(...) embrace each other as brethren, and dwell (...) universal love and
harmony --

But while the providence of GOD, calls us to mingle our tears with our
afflicted c^^^try, it may be highly useful to consider in the

FIRST PLACE, That in concordance with our text, we are prompted to this duty
by the examples of GOD's children on similar occasions -- as well as by the
contemplation of our loss; whether we consider it in the light of an
experienced Commander, noble Patriot, enlightened Politician, or worthy Citizen
--

But previously to mentioning the obligations to the duty before us, it may be
necessary to notice, that while we indulge the natural feelings of grief, for
the loss of an eminent Friend and Benefactor, these feelings are to be
regulated by an holy sorrow for sin, which is the real ground of all our
calamities. While our natural passions are under the control and absorbed by a
godly sorrow for sin, we may be said to comply with the duty of mourning with
those that mourn, and weeping with those that weep -- or the religious sorrow
of this day. This kind of mourning is all which can render true honor to the
dead -- mend our own souls -- or meet the divine approbation. -- The
obligations to this duty shall now be hinted,

First -- From the examples of GOD's children on similar occasions --

When the high Priest of GOD's ancient Church, fell a victim to the stroke of
death upon mount Hor, all Israel grieved and lamented (...) him. It is said,
"When all the congregation saw that Aaron was dead, they mourned for him thirty
days." This great and good man, having repeatedly saved the lives of his
brethren from immediate death, and being constituted the medium though whom
their public prayers ascended to GOD, became greatly esteemed and beloved -- On
his removal, the heart of every Israelite melted with gratitude, at the
remembrance of his services -- and the tender ties of nature and friendship
bled in lengthy streams when they were separated --

In like manner when the Mighty Lawgiver resigned his breath, on Pisgah's top,
it is written, "All the children of Israel wept for him thirty days." -- By
this universal expression of grief, they manifested that they remembered, that
Moses was the man, who in the face of death, in every terrific form, delivered
them from the iron furnace -- their bitter slavery in Egypt -- who led them
through the mighty deep on dry land; and gave them to triumph over their
haughty foes -- who endured, and hushed their murmurings in the wilderness --
ascended the flaming mount, and delivered them the law -- Who fed them with
angel's food, and gave them water from the rock -- Whose intercessions a
multitude of times warded off the stroke of vengeance from their guilty heads
-- and whose hand had conducted them to the verge of their temporal Paradise.
-- But now, the mighty Moses is no more! How distressing the thought, to those
who knew his worth, and shared his kindnesses! They Wept -- Their deep and
lengthy sorrow, proved how much they loved him -- how much they respected him
-- how grateful they felt for what (...) had done -- and how wide was the
breach in his removal. And all this naturally led them, to their own ill desert
of such an eminent blessing, and to that godly sorrow for sin, which in its
consequences might excite them to imitate their illustrious Benefactor, and
hereby honor him forever --

To pass many instances; the lamentation instituted at the death of Saul and
Jonathan is very impressive. David, the man after GOD's own heart, composed a
sacred elegy to be sung in their solemn humiliations before GOD on this
occasion. They fasted seven days, and lamented as in our context -- "The beauty
of Israel is slain upon the high places: how are the mighty fallen! Tell it not
in Gath, publish it not in the streets of Askelon; left the daughters of the
Philistines rejoice, lest the daughters of the uncircumcised triumph. -- Ye
mountains of Gilboa, let there be no dew, neither let there be rain upon you,
nor fields of offering: for there the shield of the mighty is vilely cast away,
the shield of Saul, as though he had not been anointed with oil. From the blood
of the slain, from the fat of the mighty the bow of Jonathan turned not back,
and the sword of Saul returned not empty. Saul and Jonathan were lovely and
pleasant in their lives, and in their death they were not divided: they were
swifter than Eagles, they were stronger than lions. Ye daughters of Israel weep
over Saul, who clothed you in scarlet, with other delights, who put on
ornaments of Gold upon your apparel. How are the mighty fallen in the midst of
the battle: O Jonathan, thou wast slain in thy high places. I am distressed for
thee my brother Jonathan: very pleasant have thou been unto me: thy love to me
was wonderful, passing the love of women -- How are the mighty fallen, and the
weapons of war perished!!"

In this divine elegy, as well as in the examples already brought, we are
taught the strict propriety which there is, in a people's uniting in
manifesting their heartfelt sorrow, at the fall of their greatest temporal
Benefactors. -- Saul and Jonathan, were princes over Israel; the former was the
Lord's anointed and King in Jeshurun -- These men possessed commendable
qualities in their high stations -- But now, when all their glory is stained by
death: and all their ensigns of honor buried in the dust of humiliation --
pity, tenderness, gratitude and friendship, all spring up at once, in the
people's breasts and they mourn over them. -- They dwell with the softest
compassion on every commendable deed or accomplishment they possessed. -- Ye
daughters of Israel weep over Saul, who clothed you in scarlet and other
delights, who put ornaments of gold upon your apparel -- How are the mighty
fallen! Their valor and heroism are mentioned -- From the blood of the slain,
the bow of Jonathan returned not back: and the sword of Saul returned not
empty. Likewise their agility of body -- They were swifter than Eagles; they
were stronger than Lions. Their pleasant society as companions -- They were
lovely and pleasant in their lives. But when they speak of their deaths, the
scene is too tender for expression -- the very ground is forbid to receive its
natural refreshment, and the spot where they fell, condemned to perpetual
barrenness -- Ye mountains of Gilboa Let there be no dew, neither rain upon
you, nor fields of offerings: for there the shields of the mighty were vilely
cast away -- That is, Let the very ground mourn to all generations; for there
the strength and glory of man perished. Finally, The calamity was too affecting
to be touched by the profane bands of the wicked, or told where enemies might
rejoice and triumph. Tell it not in Gath, publish it not in the streets of
Askelon, lest the daughters of the Philistines rejoice, lest the daughters of
the uncircumcised triumph. -- These expressions of sorrow, very forcibly evince
how tenderly affected the people of GOD have been, at the decease of their
temporal sovereigns, who have in any degree merited their affections --

But one instance more shall be mentioned -- It is recorded, that when the
great and good Prince Josiah fell, "he was buried in one of the sepulchers of
his Fathers, and all Judah and Jerusalem mourned for Josiah. And Jeremiah
lamented for Josiah: and all the singing men and singing women spoke of Josiah
in their lamentations to this day -- and made them an ordinance in Israel and
behold they are written in the lamentations." This mourning was so exceedingly
deep and affecting, that ever afterward it was proverbial. It is observed by
the Prophet Zechariah, speaking of a time of affliction; "That in that day,
there shall be in Jerusalem a great mourning as the mourning of Hadadrimmon in
the valley of Magiddon" -- This was the time and place were Josiah was slain.
-- All the millions of Judah wept with a sore lamentation -- Jeremiah composed
an elegy upon his death: and all the singing men, and singing women spoke of
Josiah, and told of his goodness in their lamentations to this day -- that is,
till their nation was broken up and dispersed. And they ma^^ them a new
ordinance in Israel to remember and perpetuate his virtues. In addition to this
it may be remarked, that the people of GOD instituted a register, in which were
recorded the elegies and lamentations which were made upon the deaths of good
men. These several instances, selected from a multitude, unite in placing
before us the examples of GOD's children, and demonstrate the duty and perfect
propriety there is, in a people's unitedly expressing the grief they feel upon
the decease of their greatest temporal benefactors and princes -- That hereby
they may express their affection by pouring their tears upon their graves --
call up into lively remembrance their virtues for imitation -- attend to the
voice of GOD in their removal -- and prepare to follow them --

But my Friends, We did not need the examples of primitive saints to prompt us
to a reluctant duty: but only to give us liberty to vent the sorrows we feel
when the Death of a Washington swells our breasts. But pause a moment! Is
Washington Dead!! He certainly is -- America has felt the shock -- the report
has reached the Heavens, and murmurs through the universe -- How is the Mighty
fallen, and the weapons of war perished!!

While the dark cloud of affliction hangs over our country, by the fall of its
brightest luminary; and shrouded as we are The house of worship being dressed
in full mourn^^^
with the ensigns of mourning; can there any thing be more natural than to
contemplate a few particulars in Justice to the memory of him whom we lament,
and

First -- We cannot but remember the time when the chains of slavery were
forged and shook over us by the cruel and haughty hand of our Mother country --
at this moment every heart meditated terror. But the Lord of Hosts inspired us
as a people to rise up boldly and repel the bondage -- By one mighty effort of
manly resolution we were born anew, and Declared our INDEPENDENCE. Now
commenced the bloody* contest for every thing we held dear -- The same Almighty
Being, by whose guidance we were hitherto conducted, beheld us with compassion,
and saw what we needed; a PILOT, a LEADER in the perilious enterprise we had
undertaken -- He called for his Washington already prepared; anointed him as
his servant with regal dignity, and put into his hands, the control of all our
defensive operations. But here admiration suppresses utterance -- Your own
minds must fill out the active character of the man -- A description of the
warlike skill -- the profound wisdom -- the prudence -- the heroism -- and
integrity which he displayed, in character of Commander in Chief, would suffer
materially in hands like mine. But this I may say, the eyes of all our American
Israel were placed upon him, as their Savior, under the direction of Heaven --
and they were not disappointed -- He endured the mighty conflict for a long
series of years -- He faced death in ten thousand forms -- the Lord preserved
him -- He persevered -- He conquered -- He made us FREE -- This was the mighty
Washington -- raised by the God of Armies to be the Father and Protector of his
Country -- a Defense of rational Liberty -- and a Friend of Man. At the risk of
his own blood, he purchased all we hold dear, "with his Sword and with his Bow"
-- But where is he now! Pale death has disrobed him of all his outward beauty
-- his armor, and manly accomplishments, and laid him in the silent dust!!
Says the Scriptures "I have said ye are Gods but ye shall die like men, and
fall as one of the Princes" -- O how are the mighty fallen and the weapons of
war perished! -- Ye Daughters of America weep over Washington, who clothed you
with Freedom and other delights -- who put ornaments of gold upon your apparel
--

But again, The tender and afflicted mind roves back, to view its object in
brighter scenes -- When the man who had earned the love and esteem of every
American and the world, returned from the great theater of action; clothed with
the laurels of victory and triumph; the next thing which strikes our admiration
is, His Great Soul conquered Himself! -- In stead of improving his successes to
exalt and aggrandize his own person and name like other conquerors, he appeared
before the grand Council of the nation -- acknowledged all his successes and
glory, to be ascribed to GOD; put up his earnest prayer for his dearest country
and all to whom its interests were entrusted -- resigned his commission and
took his leave of all public life. This act so far demonstrated the
disinterestedness of his views, in the immense services he had rendered his
country, that it could hardly be thought to be the conduct of a mortal man. The
affections of the people glowed on him more than ever, and the world stood
astonished! --

But the Lord of Hosts had services for him still. While our political body was
in its infancy, and its limbs unnerved by any civil compact, and almost severed
by her late conflict; a council is called to form a band of political Union and
Government -- Into this august Convention, Washington is invited, and presides
-- A Constitution is formed -- It is accepted by the States -- A seat in the
government presiding over the whole, is to be filled. Now United America, have
an opportunity of testifying their confidence in the man they love -- They
erred not, Washington again by the voice of GOD in the universal voice of the
people is called from his retirement* and being placed, as the "Head of Gold"
over these States, launched into operation, our happy political system. But
here, be it repeated -- Your imagination must supply the deficiences I feel in
giving the portrait of that Constellation of political virtues which irradiated
his eminent station -- which warmed and gladdened every heart of his brethren,
and darted their beams to distant climes. Sufficient is it to say, No man
uninspired could do better. His deep penetration -- undeviating prudence and
invincible integrity cemented our general interest, and rebuked opposition. A
testimony of the complete satisfaction which the people felt in his
administration, appeared in a second election to the same important office.
Thus seeming to take us by the hand and set us out in the enjoyment of our dear
bought privileges, confident of our safety, he resigned the helm of government
and retired a second time to his own happy mansion. This was the mighty
Washington who was lovely and pleasant in his life, and in his death
triumphant!! In his delightful retirement, he anticipated the evening of life,
enjoying the calmness and serenity of a bright setting sun after a tempestuous
day -- But alas how short is human felicity. No sooner had he left his high
station, than these States are coveted, as a boon by a perfidious ally --
Secret intrigues, breach of faith, contempt and spoliations are practiced upon
us -- We address Heaven, and seek an adjustment of difficulties -- All efforts
of this kind fail -- To whom then must we look for redress, but to a righteous
GOD, and the experienced sword of our victorious Chief? -- Once more, impelled
by the aggressions of our foes, by the love of his country, by the desire of
his brethren, and the call of GOD; he accepts the Commission of Commander in
Chief of the American forces. This last token of his love crowned all the rest
-- Willing now to confirm all he had done before -- willing to leave his
earthly Paradise with all its sweets -- put to risk his unsullied character,
and spill his last drop of blood, if called, to serve his GOD and his dear
country!! -- This is the man whom we lament this day -- Encircled with a cloud
of human glory; peaceful and calm he meets the summons of his GOD, and sleeps
in dust. -- O Washington, let thy name be written with gold, and laid in the
adamant for ever -- Let unborn millions read, and pay their tribute to thy
virtue -- O may the children of America, to the latest ages, (...) thy name and
call thee their Friend. -- O Columbia, let thy present Sons and Daughters
individually weep over thy Friend and say -- We are distressed for thee O my
brother, thy love to us was wonderful!!!

But hark again -- Imagination seems to hear the departing spirit of the Hero
say -- "Adieu Ye kindred Souls, who have shared with me the toils of war, and
its trophies -- Adieu Ye ministers of Justice, whose counsels have adorned your
stations, and blessed your country -- Adieu My Dear Brethren, the People of
America -- Farewell!!"

Let all rejoin, We thank thee, for all thy love and toil, Adieu My Brother!!
--

Excited by motives like these, we cannot be wanting in the duty of this day to
humble ourselves before GOD -- testify our high regard for our deceased Friend,
and leave our tears on his grave --

Now he is gone, it remains that we make a suitable improvement of his exit --
and

First -- Looking round us we find a breach, a wide chasm in creation;
especially in our own land which no man can fill. In this we learn the loss, we
have sustained. Tell it not our Enemy, nor publish it in the streets of
Infidels, lest the daughters of the uncircumcised triumph. America never
sustained so great a loss in a man. In this likewise we may see the displeasure
of Heaven -- One of our "strongest rods" is broken -- our defense is so far
weakened: Hence in the same proportion we are exposed to calamities from
abroad. The very name of our late Commander was of more use than an army of no
small magnitude --

While we mourn the loss of so great a Benefactor, it becomes us to look
inwardly, and view the sins of our own hearts and land; and confess them before
GOD with deep penitence and humiliation. This will prove that we eye the hand
of GOD in this afflictive stroke -- are disposed to glorify him in it, and
cleave to him still --

Secondly -- Being so sensibly struck with the loss of our Political Parent,
let it excite us to put our trust in GOD more than ever. It would be infinitely
criminal to lose sight of the Source of all our comforts, and expectations --
It was the Lord of Hosts, who raised up our late Protector -- gave him all his
accomplishments and made him successful in all the enterprises he performed --
The same Being who raised up Moses, Joshua, David, Cyrus and others. While we
do honor to the man, and commend him for his public and private virtues, we are
still to remember he was only GOD's instrument to do his work -- The GOD of
Israel girded him, supported him, and carried him through his momentous labors
-- We are obligated to bless and praise GOD infinitely more, than his
instrument. But as GOD has raised up one Benefactor; Yea many; he can raise up
others just when he pleases -- He can fill them with any degree of talents
which his wisdom dictates, and make them even surpass their predecessors. To
this source we are to look and pray, with the greatest sincerity for the
bestowment of all temporal and spiritual blessings. Trusting in GOD, we have
nothing to fear --

Thirdly -- If we would really honor the mighty subject of our lamentations we
must go farther than outward ceremony. We must imitate him, in all things
wherein he complied with the word of GOD -- Could we now hear him addressing us
from the world of spirits, what would he say? "Obey GOD" would be his language
-- "Love and serve him with all thy heart, and soul and strength and mind" --
We are fond of thinking the gates of Heaven were set open, to receive his
departing spirit: Be it so; In this case his exhortation to his Friends here
below, would be precisely the language of angels, or the word of GOD. Were he
to speak with an audible voice and exhort in the language of Paradise he would
say, "Repent and believe in Christ: there is none other name given under Heaven
whereby ye can be saved -- Fly to the Lord Jesus, the captain of your salvation
and take hold on eternal life. If you ever mean to be my company, you must
become holy, for without holiness no man can see GOD -- Break off your
iniquities -- fly from the wrath which is coming -- make your calling and
election sure -- Serve GOD and your generation with your whole heart -- And if
you would honor me and mourn my absence, so live as to come and dwell where I
am" -- Now, if we would honor Him, in his death, who was so dear to us in life,
let us hear his address from the Heavenly mansion, where we hope his spirit
lives -- Let us practice it; and this will prove we respect him, and hold him
in everlasting remembrance -- This will be joining in the religious sorrow of
this day, and gain spiritual advantage to our souls.

Fourthly -- The event we contemplate teaches us, that Death, is our certain
lot -- If a Washingington is dead -- if the King of terrors would not be bribed
when such a victim stood before him, then we must die -- O Let the light and
trifling, the busy and the gay, think of this, and feel that they are dead men
-- The devout know it already. But since this is our certain end, can there be
a wiser course than to prepare for it? Do we wish for Heaven? Do we wish, when
we close our eyes on earth, to be gathered with angels and saints, and all the
honorable and mighty who have died in faith -- if so, to devote ourselves to
the service of GOD will carry us thither? But any other course will land us
without end, with hypocrites and unbelievers. -- Shall we lavish our praises on
the righteous -- mourn their deaths -- accompany them with our wishes to
Heaven's gate, and yet by our daily practice prove we have no serious meaning
in all this? Shall we look upon death just as certain, as our existence, yet
make no preparation to meet it! O Let it not be -- but let it be our sole
business to acquire a temper of mind suited to the Heavenly world, and to
follow the footsteps of those who through faith and patience inherit the
promises -- Then, when the moment of dissolution arrives, the transition will
be glorious, and the society we shall enter will be pure and delightsome beyond
all our present conceptions. --

Finally -- This day, My Friends, finds a sable cloud spread over our whole
country, and such gloomy vestments as never shadowed it before -- and all this
for the fall of one man, a fellow mortal! -- But how strikingly ought this to
remind us of that awful period; and what solemn ensigns of distress nature
herself put on, when the SAVIOR of men expired! -- So great the Personage, so
important his fall, the sun himself hid his face -- the Temple rent -- and
nature groaned with convulsions! -- Darkness shrouded the world and hung it in
mourning!!

This event called the attention of the universe, and was important beyond all
imagination. -- By it an atonement was made for sinners, by which through
repentance and faith, they might be delivered from eternal misery, and received
to eternal felicity in Heaven -- And now, shall we make such great
"lamentation, mourning and woe" when a mortal like ourselves dies; and yet
neglect to notice and celebrate the Death of Him, who conquered death, and
purchased eternal life for his Friends! -- Human nature, blush! -- Angels,
stand aghast!! But chief Thou whose love and goodness is thus neglected, ^^de
thy frown till thy pity reach us! --

Are we Friends to the great Washington? And are we no Friends to Christ! --
Where is the proof of friendship to the latter? Do we in general celebrate his
death? No -- Do we expect eternal life from him -- the purchase of his blood --
Yet forbear to commemorate his death -- remain unmoved at his command do this
in remembrance of me The Sacrament was to be attended at the close of public
service --
-- O my Friends, Think how the Savior views the indignity cast upon him, when
he sees the Dust of his feet preferred before him! -- O may this thought beget
conviction in every breast where the censure falls -- Now is the only time to
correct the infinite error, and to honor Christ -- His long suffering waits
upon you: but it cannot always wait -- Seize the moment lest it be too late,
and your misery be sealed -- Remember Christ suffered not to put on ornaments
of Gold upon your apparel: but the ornament of salvation upon you: And if you
are truly disposed to wear the garments he has prepared, and obey him; You will
soon exchange these gloomy emblems of sin and death, for robes of righteousness
and crowns of eternal life. -- You will now find comfort springing up in the
midst of temporal sorrows -- While you are called to mourn the loss of the most
excellent of the earth, you will have a glorious prospect of soon passing
through this scene of trial, and joining them in mansions of eternal Joy and
Triumph -- Then will you sing the song of Moses and the Lamb -- You will join
the throng of Angels, and with Prophets -- Apostles -- and all the redeemed
will say -- Unto him that loved us, and washed us from our sins in his own
blood, and has made us Kings and Priests unto GOD and his Father, To him be
glory and dominion forever --

Thus eternal ages will roll on --

But Alas! the present occasion breaks in upon us! How deep the gloom at this
time!!

WHAT solemn sounds the ear invade!
What wraps the land in sorrow's shade!
From Heaven the awful mandate flies --
The FATHER OF HIS COUNTRY DIES.
Let every heart be filled with woe,
Let every eye with tears overflow,
Each form, oppressed with deepest gloom,
Be clad in vestments of the tomb.
Behold that venerable Band!
The Rulers of our mourning land,
With grief proclaim from shore to shore --
"Our GUIDE our WASHINGTON's no more!"
Where shall our country turn its eye!
What help remains beneath the Sky!
Our FRIEND, PROTECTOR, STRENGTH, and TRUST
Lies low and mouldering in the Dust.
ALMIGHTY GOD, to THEE we fly --
Before thy Throne above the Sky,
In deep prostration humbly bow,
And pour the penetential vow.
Hear, O MOST HIGH! our earnest prayer --
Our Country take beneath thy care;
When dangers press, and foes draw near,
May future WASHINGTONS appear.

