LA PEYROUSE: A COMEDY, IN TWO ACTS. TRANSLATED FROM THE GERMAN OF KOTZEBUE, BY
CHARLES SMITH.

NEW YORK: PRINTED FOR CHARLES SMITH AND S. STEPHENS. 1800.

DRAMATIS PERSONAE.
LA PEYROUSE. ADELAIDE, his wife. HENRY, her son, a boy of between eight and
nine years. CLAIRVILLE, Adelaide's brother, captain of a vessel. MALVINA, a
young Indian woman. CHARLES, her son, a boy of between seven and eight years
IT will be acceptable to the reader to know something of the history of the
circumnavigator LA PEYROUSE, which has given rise to this dramatic piece.

Count DE LA PEYROUSE sailed from Breast harbor on the 26th of June 1785, with
the frigates Astrolable and Bousole; touched at the Island of St. Catharine, on
the coast of Brazil, and sailed round Cape Horn, and along the coasts of Chili
and California. Afterward he touched at Easter Island, Nootka-sound, Cooks
River, Kamschatka, Manilla, the Isles des Navigateurs, the Sandwich, the
friendly Islands, and Norfolk Island, and arrived in Botany Bay on the 26th of
January 1788; from whence he transmitted home by Governor Phillips at Port
Jackson, all his papers, journals, maps, plans, views, etc. and sailed from
thence on the 10th of March following. -- Since which time he has not been
heard of, but is supposed to have lost both his ships among the Ice Islands, in
his run toward the South Pole, on discovery. His journal from 1785 to 1788,
has since been published at Paris by order of the Directory, and lately
translated in London. The Corvettes La Recherche, and L'Esperance, sailed from
France in 1790, under the command of Captain Entrecasteux, and returned in
1793, without having gained their object; which was, to search for the
unfortunate Count DE LA PEYROUSE.

The Amer. Translator.

LA PEYROUSE.
ACT I.
SCENE I.
[The Scene is on an uninhabited island in the South Sea. In the back ground
the sea coast, sidewards a high rock.] LA PEYROUSE standing on the top of the
rock, looking at a distance. THE fog clears away -- still combating with the
sun -- still darkening the surface of the sea -- thus calumny covers virtue,
creates romantic appearances, and is finally swallowed up by the force of
truth. -- Ah! what a spectacle! already the peak of a mountain on the nearest
island raises itself out of the vapors -- thin clouds only are seen to hover
yet around it. -- Now the fog forms itself into balls on the deep, the
beautiful surface of the sea becomes visible -- the circle expands every moment
-- my breast becomes fuller -- the view brighter -- and the Creator forces from
me a tear of high affliction as my morning prayers! -- Do I not see at a
distance some white point? -- A small cloud -- no -- a sea bird -- a swan -- no
-- God! -- What deception! -- A sail! -- A ship! -- Poor forsaken! do not
rejoice too soon! -- An image of your dream juggles hope before your eyes. --
And yet -- it moves -- it proceeds -- not so the course of clouds -- the flight
of birds -- away from my eyes you clouds of fog! down to the sea shore! -- Here
I stand strengthless -- can tremble only -- and wish every vital in my eyes --
yes! yes! -- the mast becomes unveiled -- (with the strongest emotions of joy)
it is a ship! -- (he kneels down and folds his hands) After eight years the
first time! God! you send me a vessel! -- (rises hastily, takes a white
handkerchief from his pocket, and swings it in the air) Ah! they do not
perceive me! -- they will pass by -- not hear my anxious cries -- Oh! now my
fate perhaps depends on the eye of a single man -- God! throw but one glance
this way! May but one glance of the sailor on the top be fastened to this rock,
that he may call to the helmsman: halt! there lives an unfortunate man! -- In
vain! -- I will light a fire -- a thick smoke shall rise to the clouds -- (a
cannon shot is heard far in the sea) Ah! What can that mean? Was it an answer
to my signal? Was it a promise to save me? -- Yes! yes! triumph! the ship
alters its course -- it steers toward me! -- Away! away! down to the bay!
(With joyful emotion, he leaps down the rock and will run off.)

SCENE II.
MALVINA (meeting him.) whither, dear friend?


Peyr. A ship! A ship!


Malv. Where?


Peyr. There! There! (he hastens away)


Malv. (alone) A ship? What have I to care for that? What can a ship bring to
me? I have every thing, and I love my friend -- Where is my boy? my lively
Charles, as his father calls him. I would rather call him Tomai, for that is his
grandfather's name. Oh! if the old man would but come from his island! if he
could but see this boy, how he climbs up the highest trees, and lets the dart
fly from his little bow; I am sure he would not be angry any more. If he could
hear how much I have learned of my friend, if he could know the goodness of the
God he has given me; if he could see how we love each other, how we continue in
love, and always are contented in storm and sun shine -- I don't know what this
ship can have to do here? we don't want it. -- But my friend seemed to rejoice
so much, then I must rejoice too; neither of us has ever rejoiced alone.


SCENE III.
CHARLES (comes in leaping.) Mother, I have seen something!


Malv. Where have you been?


Charles. At the sea shore, I looked for shells.


Malv. Well, and what have you seen then?


Charles. A great mountain in the sea, but far, far off, but it comes nearer
and nearer; but it cannot be a mountain.


Malv. I know it already, it is a ship.


Charles. No, it an't a ship either, but a ship has entered the bay, just like
our ships, only much larger.


Malv. That is called a boat -- have people been in it?


Charles. Yes, many people, such as my father; they came on shore and called
out, then I ran off. There was a woman among them, who wanted to catch me, but
I ran faster than she. It was not a woman like you, mother, it was a woman like
my father.


Malv. Have you then not met your father?


Charles. No, I crept into the thicket, and the strange woman always after me.
Sometimes I turned; and then she winked, and showed me pretty things, but I
laughed and ran away.


Malv. Where did the strange woman remain?


Charles. I don't know, she certainly became tired -- little Charles is too
quick for her. Now I Will creep through the bush; there I can see all; but be not
afraid, they shall not catch me. (runs off.)


Malv. What should I be afraid of? If they are men like my friend, they are
good men.


SCENE IV.
Enter ADELAIDE. Adelaide (in entering) Ah! a savage girl! Oh! could we but
understand each other!


Malv. Be welcome dear woman.


Adel. How my child? You speak my language?


Malv. I have a friend, who taught me your language.


Adel. An European? A Frenchman?


Malv. I know your God also.


Adel. Oh! I conjure you by this God of Love! tell me: Who is your friend? how
came he here?


Malv. Do you see that rock? Many years ago there a ship went to pieces, and no
one was saved but my friend.


Adel. His name?


Malv. Alexis.


Adel. God! His surname?


Malv. What is that a surname? Alexis, my good friend, I don't know any other.


Adel. How does he look?


Malv. The finest man in the world.


Adel. The color of his eyes --


Malv. Black and brilliant, like the eyes of the sea lion, but friendly and
good.


Adel. Is he tall?


Malv. When he takes me in his arms, without stooping, I kiss his breast.


Adel. (terrified) He takes you in his arms?


Malv. Indeed, he is my friend, and I love him. Do you know the man, as you are
so inquisitive?


Adel. Whether I know him? -- perhaps -- I don't know -- I seek a man, such as
you describe.


Malv. You will not find such another.


Adel. Shall I wish or fear to have found him?


Malv. Are you afraid of the man, then don't seek him.


Adel. Ah my good child! I had a lover, a husband, thirst for glory tore him
from my arms! he was my all! my world, but he went in search of a new world; he
placed the globe between him and his wife. My sighs swelled his sails,
prattling children kneeled on the sea shore, almost orphans already.


Malv. How can you still love the wicked man?


Adel. Seven years I waited with impatience for him like a bride -- he came not!


Malv. Poor woman!


Adel. The love of gain drove many to distant seas; many returned richly laden;
but no one knew any thing of him, no one had seen him! not a piece of wreck nor
a corpse, was any where driven on shore.


Malv. Then you may hope: your friend still lives.


Adel. Love is always rich in nourishment for hope. Two vessels were fitted out
to go in search of the forlorn. I begged for a place in one of them, and should
it be in the worst part of the ship. They spoke of fatigue, of dangers -- they
little knew what love can suffer. Yes, I am ill, my strength is exhausted --
but if I find him again, the recollection of my sufferings will vanish! and if
I find him not, what matters it in what region grief terminates the sorrows of
a disconsolate wife!


Malv. Naughty woman, you make me weep.


Adel. Humanity at last succeeded, they granted my request to embark. My
youngest son threw himself into my arms, I took him with me. During thirteen
months we have been swimming from one sea to another, landed on habited and
uninhabited coasts, searched and enquired every where -- Ah! none has any
knowledge of him! You, my good child, are the first that rekindles in me the
extinguishing spark of hope.


Malv. How it grieves me to rob you of this weak consolation. He is my friend,
he cannot be yours.


Adel. Where is he?


Malv. He hastened down to the bay.


Adel. Is this island well inhabited?


Malv. O yes, Alexis and I, and love.


Adel. None else?


Malv. I swear to you, there is not an uninhabited corner on the whole island.
(looking about) I am sorry my boy is run off too; he should have called his
father. -- You seem to be fatigued good woman?


Adel. Fatigued and sick.


Malv. Sit down upon this soft seat of moss, my friend has made it for me. He
certainly will soon be here, he never leaves me long alone. Rest and comfort
yourself, I Will run to the bushes and fetch you some ripe fruit, juicy roots,
they will soon revive you.

(Exit.)
SCENE V.
ADELAIDE (alone.) The sweet moment has perhaps arrived, which my love has
snatched as a prize from the elements -- and I tremble? -- She would send the
boy to look for his father? -- Who is this boy? Who is his father? -- Ah! have
I purchased his life for such a price? -- The father of my children I would
find, but not the husband? -- Should I have risqued all for that? -- The
beloved in the arms of a savage! -- I defied death in every shape, in this only
I did not expect it! -- Alexis! -- Is it you? -- Are these footsteps yours? --
Has your hand entwined these branches into an arbor? -- And if it is not him?
-- A stranger -- one of his companions -- the only one saved -- Did not the
girl say so -- The only one? -- May he be La Peyrouse! -- The mother shall
forget what grieves the lover! -- My Henry -- my Babet -- my Charles! -- For
you I have been beating against wind and waves! For you I have quitted my
native country! Your supporter, your protector I will bring back to you, and
then your poor mother will seek in a better world the consolation which she
could not find in all the quarters of this! -- I am to rest myself here? -- On
this bench of moss? Made by my husband's hands for another wife? -- No, here I
cannot rest.


SCENE VI.
LA PEYROUSE (in violent emotion -- his repeated cries are heard behind the
scene.) Where is she! Where is she!


Adel. Ah! what voice is this! (runs toward him.)


Peyr. Adelaide!


Adel. My husband! sinks into his arms -- a pause -- silent extacy.)


Adel. Are you indeed alive yet?


Peyr. Is it possible! so much love!


Adel. Could you expect less of me?


Peyr. With your tender constitution --


Adel. Love gives strength.


Peyr. With your timidity --


Adel. Love gives courage.


Peyr. Left your old mother --


Adel. Her blessing followed me.


Peyr. Left our children --


Adel. My blessing remained with them.


Peyr. All for me?


Adel. All for you.


Peyr. What God can reward you for that?


Adel. I am rewarded since I found you!


Peyr. How much you must have suffered!


Adel. It is forgot!


Peyr. Death before your eyes --


Adel. And the hope to find you.


Peyr. Ah! a wife only could do that!


Adel. For such an husband!


Peyr. Are our children alive?


Adel. They live.


Peyr. But have I not left you with new hopes?


Adel. Which God has accomplished! A lively boy -- my Henry -- you shall see
him --


Peyr. See him?


Adel. He is with me.


Peyr. Where?


Adel. On board the ship.


Peyr. Right, I recollect, the men in the boat spoke of him, but when they
mentioned your name -- I ran off.


Adel. Impatience drove me on shore. My brother is with me too. A great fog
some days ago separated his vessel from our's, yet we look every moment for his
arrival.


Peyr. God! If this is a dream, let me never wake!


Adel. It is not a dream! I possess you again! Love chains all the quarters of
the globe together, and converts the ocean into a drop of water. There is no
desert, no uncultivated shore, from which one time or other, the thanks of love
do not raise to the heavens! silent or loud, in words or in tears -- Good God!
to Thee it is all the same!


Peyr. Ah! how this soft well-known voice leads me, as by an enchantment, back
to my domestic bliss. I hear you, I throw a glance upon those inhospitable
rocks, and ask myself in surprise: Where are we?


Adel. Is it then so extraordinary, that a loving wife should defy the
elements? -- The national assembly ordered two vessels to be fitted out, to
restore the circumnavigator La Peyrouse again to his country. Love commanded me
to go in search of the lost husband, the bemoaned father. Without me, in what
language could those people enquire for you among the savage nations? Love
created for me a language. Who could better than me discover the slightest
traces of you? A lost piece of cloth, a name written by you upon a tree, who
could have sooner discovered it than me? And if you, perhaps, were roving about
in deserts and wildernesses, whose ears would your voice have sooner reached
than mine?


Peyr. Noble wife! Do I deserve this exalted heavenly love?


Adel. Would you have done less for me?


Peyr. Will you never repent of those sacrifices?


Adel. Do we repent of what love gives and takes?


Peyr. But if I have been obliged to obey the whim of fate -- if duty and my
helpless situation forced me to appear faithless to you.


Adel. (trembling) Faithless?


Peyr. Appear, I said, for the heart only can judge.


Adel. Before you proceed, tell me: Are you the only one saved of all your
companions?


Peyr. The only one.


Adel. Ah! Then I know all!


Peyr. Impossible! I found you alone.


Adel. The only one saved -- yet not the only one that inhabits this island --
a girl --


Peyr. Have you seen her?


Adel. She calls you her friend.


Peyr. She was my benefactress.


Adel. And what are you to her?


Peyr. All!


Adel. More than you ought to be?


Peyr. Hear me and judge. On yonder rock the waves drove us, with all the
furies of the elements. The ship went to pieces. Through every crevice entered
death. The corpse soon were swimming about the miserable wreck. I combated
swimming against the fury of the waves, and thought to reach the shore, but the
stream baffled my endeavors. My strength died away -- I thought once more of
you -- of my children -- of God! and, exhausted with fatigue, my arms dropped.
When I recovered I lay stretched upon the moss, a savage girl kneeled at my
side, and at the first sign of life, she made a cry of joy.


Adel. Had she saved you?


Peyr. Three times she threw herself into the foaming waves, and three times
she was thrown back on the rocky shore. Death roared in vain; in vain the abyss
menaced to swallow her up, or to dash her to pieces on the rocky cliffs. With
the courage of a hero, and the strength of a savage, she threw herself the
fourth time into the waves, caught her prize by the hair, and snatched it from
the combating elements.


Adel. Ah! and for what reward?


Peyr. Listen farther. This small island is uninhabited. But rarely the savages
come here from yonder group of islands, to fish. Malvina was here with her
father and brothers, who threatened to kill the stranger; the tears of Malvina
only saved him. Under cocoa trees she prepared for me a place of rest, and
linked the twigs over me for a roof. I slumbered sweetly. Before midnight she
waked me trembling. Be quick and follow me! she said, and drew me away. She led
me through the thicket to the sea side. There she crept with me into a cavern,
embraced me tenderly, and rejoiced at my second preservation. Her brothers had
concluded to kill me during the night. They thought Malvina to be asleep, but
Malvina listened, and perceived their intentions. Favored by the darkness she
stole away, and saved me from the assassins.


Adel. I owe her gratitude and admiration, but can I love her?


Peyr. Still more! The next morning they sought Malvina. The woods re-echoed
their menaces and their prayers. We heard her old father above us on the cliff,
he called mournfully: Malvina! my daughter! will you leave me? -- The girl
wept, and remained.


Adel. Enough! I forgive you!


Peyr. When, after a long fruitless search, the boat went off with her father
and brothers, she listened between the bushes, and her tears dropped from leaf
to leaf, but not a sound betrayed her grief. And when the boat appeared on the
distant sea like a white point only, she pressed me weeping to her heart, and
exclaimed: Now I have neither father nor brother! You are my all! Leave me not!


Adel. And she has not begged in vain.


Peyr. From that moment I have to thank her for my life a thousand times!
Without her I would have died of hunger. She taught me to catch birds and fish
in nets; she taught me the knowledge of the eatable roots and herbs, and warned
me of the poisonous; she made for me these clothes of feathers and skins; she
ornamented my habitation with shells. -- Speak -- What could I do? -- Separated
from the inhabited world, exiled forever to this place of solitude, without
hope ever to see you or my native country again, what reward could I offer to
my benefactress? -- to her, who voluntarily exiled herself with me* alleviated
my misery, and, when she could not alleviate, voluntarily shared it with me? --
She desired my heart -- and I gave her a grateful heart.


Adel. You are justified. My love mourns, but cannot condemn you. But Alexis,
what will now become of us?


Peyr. Ask me not. The event is yet too new for me, I have no sense yet for
what may be done in future.


Adel. Is it true, what the girl said? she is become a mother?


Peyr. It is true.


Adel. Oh Alexis! which mother will you leave?


Peyr. None.


Adel. God assist us!


Peyr. I see Malvina approaching. Compose yourself. Let us conceal from her a
moment what you are to me. The first impressions of a savage are violent. Let
me prepare the poor girl.


Adel. I will be silent.


SCENE VII.
Enter MALVINA. Malvina (with fruits in her apron) Here are fruits, there take,
eat. (to Peyrouse) Ah! are you here? be welcome! See, this good woman has lost
her friend. She is come from far, far off, to seek him; but he is not here, it
grieves me.


Peyr. She is my sister.


Malv. (smiling) Your sister? you lie.


Adel. No, my child, he is my brother.


Malv. Indeed? but you did not seek your brother?


Adel. I sought the man, I loved best.


Malv. You are in the right, I have brothers too, but I remained with the man,
I loved best. Your friend is lost. Stay with us. I am rejoiced you are his
sister; I love you for that.


Adel. I thank you, my good girl.


Malv. Wherefore? Love comes, we don't know how.


Adel. You have saved my brother's life.


Malv. Ah! that is long since. I would do that every day, for I love him much.
Oh! you don't know how much we love each other. That must give you pleasure,
because you are his sister.


Adel. (with a forced smile) Indeed.


Malv. Sometimes his countenance is sorrowful, just as it is now; then he
thinks of his native land. But then I leap about him, and caress him, and
stroke his face with my hand till his countenance becomes serene again (she
does all that whilst she is speaking) but today it will not avail.


Peyr. (who forces himself to return her caresses) Have you taken care to
provide our dinner?


Malv. Do you wish to be rid of me? (flattering) Give me a kiss, that your
sister may witness how much you love me.


Adel. (with suppressed pain) Leave him, he has whims.


Malv. Whims? what for? he should rejoice at your arrival.


Adel. So he does. But I had to bring him displeasing news. During his absence
some of his old friends died.


Malv. Heh! and what of that? a new friend has been borne for him since. We
have a boy, you shall see him, just like his father. He knows how to play away
his father's whims. Is it not true, my good friend, you love the boy? almost as
much as me?


Adel. I cannot bear it any longer. (A musket shot is heard at a distance -- La
Peyrouse rouses himself.)


Malv. What was that?


Adel. A signal. The boat returns to the vessel. They are yet ignorant of what
has happened. (she puts her hand upon La Peyrouse's shoulder) Brother! I am
going.


Peyr. I go with you.


Malv. No, no: Will you then leave me alone?


Peyr. For a few hours only. The ship will sail into the bay.


Malv. Let it sail, what is that to you?


Peyr. Shall I not accompany my sister?


Malv. And then perhaps a sudden storm -- Off would be the vessel! -- No, no,
your sister may come again.


Peyr. I have not seen her these nine years.


Malv. Have you seen me then enough already?


Adel. Stay and perform your promise. Let me not suffer this pain a second
time. I Will go and fetch my Henry.

(Exit.)
SCENE VIII.
MALVINA and LA PEYROUSE.
Malv. Who is her Henry?


Peyr. Her son.


Malv. Has she a son too? And seeks the father? Poor woman!


Peyr. Do you pity her?


Malv. Indeed I do. But the father must be a bad man, why has he left the
mother?


Peyr. His duty --


Malv. It is a detestable duty, that forces a man to leave wife and child.


Peyr. At the call of our country the heart must be silent.


Malv. Will you then return to your country now?


Peyr. Perhaps.


Malv. Shall we there be happier than here?


Peyr. God grant it!


Malv. With regret I shall leave our hut.


Peyr. Will you then accompany me?


Malv. I don't understand you.


Peyr. It is far, very far.


Malv. What do I care for that?


Peyr. A dangerous voyage --


Malv. You jest. Shall I not be with you?


Peyr. All hopes will be lost then ever to see your father or brothers again.


Malv. Have I then not given up that hope long ago?


Peyr. Yes you often stood on yonder cliff, stretching out your arms toward
your home.


Malv. Indeed I have. I recollect you often told me, how you could draw a
picture upon paper, with colors just like nature. Now take from that ship what
is requisite, and paint for me such a picture, with the cliff upon it, then I
can even in your country stretch out my arms toward my dear home.


Peyr. But if the ship pass yonder island, and you descry your old father on
the shore?


Malv. (crying) Oh! -- fie! how you have frightened me.


Peyr. Would you not throw yourself into the water and swim to him?


Malv. (with emotion) Yes, I would.


Peyr. And if he should joyfully hasten toward you, and beckon friendly --


Malv. (throws herself into his arms) Here I am, my father!


Peyr. And if he should say: your brothers are dead, stay with me!


Malv. I cannot, father --


Peyr. I am old and sick --


Malv. Be silent, wicked man! It is false! he is not sick! and my brothers are
alive. They are strong and healthy men -- But! A precious thought! Let us take
my father with us.


Peyr. Will he quit his home?


Malv. (full of innocent confidence) If he should see our boy -- what do you
think?


Peyr. Will a foreign climate agree with the old man? -- and even you -- I
tremble for your life!


Malv. Be unconcerned. Love and serenity of mind promote good health.


Peyr. But should grief await you there?


Malv. Grief?


Peyr. You would daily witness that others too love me?


Malv. Well, so much the better. I wish all good men would love you.


Peyr. But if you had to share my heart?


Malv. To share? No, I will not do that. Do they then share their hearts in Europe?


Peyr There are persons who have great and much older pretensions on my love.


Malv. Great? -- Let them come. Older? -- What matters that?


Peyr. Good girl, will you forgive me, that I kept secret from you what in this
place of solitude I thought useless to reveal?


Malv. I have never forgiven you any thing, but it must be a pleasure to
forgive you. Speak.


Peyr. I have already a wife in my native country.


Malv. A wife? You jest. I am your wife.


Peyr. Earlier ties link me to the former.


Malv. Earlier? -- But are they stronger? -- Do you love her like me?


Peyr. She is as much deserving of my love as you.


Malv. And does she love you as much as I?


Pyer. I am sure of it.


Malv. (anxiously) Woe on me! -- Wicked man! -- No more my friend! -- Woe! --
Poor Malvina.


Peyr. Will you still follow me to my country*


Malv. I thought it was so easy to pardon you, but I cannot! -- No! No! Her
love is not as ardent as mine, or she would not have suffered you to leave her.


Peyr. My duty --


Malv. Go, go, you have taught me many words which I do not understand. No! No!
You do not love her as much as me, or you would not have left her -- and I
think your wife is dead.


Peyr. What makes you think so --


Malv. I am sure, quite sure that she is dead long since. Consider only, nine
years you have been separated from her -- she has not survived that, could not
survive it. Be contented and cheerful, I love you more than she ever did, and I
shall not die, for you will never leave me. (presses herself to him) Alexis! my
friend! you will never leave me.


Peyr. (presses her with emotion to his heart) No! never!


Malv. I knew that very well. Now I forgive you. You only wished to frighten
me. -- I Will go to our hut. Our boy has found a turtle, and I will prepare it
for your sister. And then I Will pack up our things, not to forget my new feather
apron (in going away) it will please the people of your country, it is so
variegated.


SCENE IX.
LA PEYROUSE (alone.) Why had I not courage enough to tell her all? -- She must
know it! -- I must strike the wound into her harmless heart! -- and then --
what will be the end? -- Love, nature, and gratitude attach me to both alike --
Virtue! where is thy leading-string to extricate me from this labyrinth?


(He climbs to the top of the rock and throws himself upon the ground.)

End of the First act.
ACT II.
SCENE I.
LA PEYROUSE (still at the top of the rock -- his head leaning on his hand --
his face turned. Malvina (enters) The turtle is prepared. The hungry will
relish it. My boy is longing for it already. -- Why am I then so quite alone?
-- Where is his sister? -- Ah! she has lost her friend, and will not have much
appetite. It is the same with me when my friend stays out hunting above his
time. -- Yes love! love! -- Where is the man who converted me to a new life? --
(goes about sighing) Who drew my heart with impetuosity, and my soul gradually
from its slumber! Who taught me to feel and to think! -- Alexis! Where are you?


Peyr. (jumping up) Here!


Malv. Up there? What are you doing there?


Peyr. (coming down) I looked for the ship.


Malv. Are they coming?


Peyr. They are just entering the bay.


Malv. It is high time.


Peyr. (with a sigh) Yes Malvina! It is high time.


Malv. Dinner is ready, the boy is hungry.


Peyr. God! give me courage!


Malv. We are waiting for your sister.


Peyr. (half to himself) Sister? -- I have no sister.


Malv. What are you muttering?


Peyr. (sorrowfully) Malvina!


Malv. You look distracted, have you been asleep?


Peyr. I have dreamed eight years agreeably away! A sweet well-known voice
wakes me today. -- Woe on me! My duty is sacred to both -- yet one I must
trample under my feet! -- Love draws me here and there equally powerful -- it
will tear my heart!


Malv. I don't understand you. You appear strange, and that grieves me.


Peyr. Good creature! I cannot deceive you.


Malv. Have IN ever been afraid of that?


Peyr. This sister --


Malv. I love her for your sake.


Peyr. You will hate her.


Malv. Why?


Peyr. And hate me too --


Malv. You are not well.


Peyr. She seeks her husband --


Malv. The poor woman!


Peyr. She has found him.


Malv. Where?


Peyr. She is my wife!


Malv. (throws herself crying into his arms) Hide me!


Peyr. Do you love her still?


Malv. Silent! silent! hide me, my good Alexis! protect me! (She presses her
head to his breast.


Peyr. Will you still follow me to Europe?


Malv. I understand you not -- I am an indocile scholar -- I have acquired but
a slender knowledge of your language -- all what you have been saying -- No, it
cannot be so! If I could but understand it right -- I am sure it is not so.


Peyr. Dear Malvina.


Malv. Yes, I understand that. Oh! it was the first word I learnt of you. Say
it once more: Dear Malvina!


Peyr. Dear Malvina!


Malv. Dear, dear friend! thank God! now we understand each other again. I am
Malvina! your wife, is it not so?


Pyer. You are my wife.


Malv. And that sister, with whose name you frightened me -- Oh! recall the
cruel jest!


Peyr. I cannot.


Malv. How? You could deceive me? My friend could be capable of deception? --
Oh! it grieves me! -- I must withdraw my confidence -- to whom shall I give it
then? -- I have but you! -- Speak, what will you do with me? (anxiously) My
God! What will become of us?


Peyr. I shall not leave you.


Malv. But she will come -- will bring with her many men from the ship -- carry
you off -- (screeming) Ah! there she is! (She throws herself upon the beach of
moss and hides her face.


SCENE II.
Enter ADELAIDE and HENRY. Adel. (to the boy) Embrace your father.


Henry. Is this savage man my father?


Peyr. My son! (takes him in his arms) Where, and in what moment do you receive
your father's first blessing?


Henry. I am afraid of you.


Adel. (pointing to Malvina) She knows all?


Peyr. All.


Adel. (going to her) Good girl, do not hate me.


Malv. (rises slowly, her eyes full of tears, looking sorrowfully at Adelaide)
What have I done to you, that you give me so much pain?


Adel. Let us not quarrel with fate.


Malv. We were so happy here before you came!


Adel. Ah! I never thought that my arrival would cause any other but tears of
joy!


Malv. Speak! Will you take him from me?


Adel. He is my husband.


Malv. (jumping up) And mine! Speak it loud, Alexis! that she may hear it!
Those trees, those rocks have heard it a thousand times! Your God was witness!


Peyr. He was.


Adel. Also our union he has sanctioned! Also our hearts were linked by love,
and nature tied the knot still faster. Henry! embrace your father's knees, beg
him not to thrust away your mother.


Henry. (caressing his father) Pray, do not offend my mother, I Will no more be
afraid of you.


Malv. Is this boy her son? Oh! I have a son too! Charles! Charles! Where are
you. (She runs off.)


Peyr. Break, my poor heart!


Adel. I feel your grief. God! What will be the end of this?


Malv. (returns with her boy) Here boy, kneel down, beg! beg!


Charles. What shall I beg of him?


Malv. Not to leave your mother.


Charles. He will not do that. (caressing him) Dear father, no you will not.


Henry. My mother has sought you so long.


Charles. My mother loves you so much.


Henry. My mother has wept so much for you.


Charles. Do but see, my mother weeps.


Peyr. (with folded hands, his limbs shaking, his eyes raised) Great God!


Henry. My brothers and sisters send you their love, and beg that you soon may
come home.


Charles. (crying) Do not leave us! Where is your home?


Malv. Far over the sea. We never shall see him again!


Charles. Why not? he will take us with him.


Peyr. A good spirit speaks out of this child. Accompany us dear Malvina!


Malv. As your wife wherever you please.


Adel. How am I?


Malv. Oh it is hard to share the friend of our heart with a stranger -- it was
easier to jump into the waves -- but -- for the sake of my friend's ease of
mind -- (she offers Adelaide her hand) let us remain together.


Peyr. It would be baseness to deceive you, in Europe you cannot be my wife.


Malv. Not? why not?


Peyr. Our laws --


Malv. Who gave them to your heart and mine, but the God of love? -- I dare not
be your wife in Europe? What then should I be? your servant? your wife's
servant?


Adel. My friend --


Malv. Do you wish to have a friend about you, whose happiness you destroyed?
You would during day behold my tears, and at night hear my sobs! -- Better you
stay with us; nature is here the lawgiver; here we may both call him our
friend; here I will cheerfully work for you, and not look jealous when you
repose yourself in his arms.


Peyr. Yes, she spoke a word of comfort. It is on this solitary place only that
we can enjoy content; without giving offense to any weak mind. Ambition's flame
has long since been extinguished in my breast. The sighs, which I often sent
from this rock to my native country, betrayed only my heart's desire, not the
love of glory. You have arrived -- love has led you here to my arms -- what
more can I wish? -- My heart is silent. Blessing to him who can contract all
that he loves into a small circle! Blessing to him who from his small piece of
land, looks contented at the world, which became to him as strange as the
firmament that moves above his head. Here I have but to stretch out my hand, to
touch a being by whom I am beloved. Then let us remain, Adelaide! Let us take
possession of the property which God has created for us in the midst of the
sea. Love will cultivate yonder naked rocks, will ornament yonder grot, and
convert yonder gloomy woods into smiling groves.


Malv. Yes, let us stay!


Adel. And my children whom I left behind, and my poor old mother!


Peyr. (sighs, and is lost in melancholy thought,)


Adel. No Alexis, do not deceive yourself. Your situation is dreadful. My heart
feels, what you suffer -- but be a man! You must choose between us.


Peyr. I cannot.


Malv. Could my friend leave me? How mean would be my thoughts if I could
believe it. I was a raw savage being, had no idea of pain, or pleasure, but
those susceptible to the senses. Have you given me reason, to make me frantic?
Have you given me a heart, to pierce it?


Adel. And me also you have led from a convent's solitude to the alter of love.
Also my heart you have inspired with new feelings -- also my mind you have
cultivated. What I am I am through you* and have been all for you. Will you
cruelly destroy your work?


Malv. Have we not passed so many years in quietness and concord? Have you ever
seen in me a discontented countenance? Has my conduct ever caused you pain?
Aurora waked me to my cares for you: the setting sun led me to your arms.
Consider that, and choose.


Adel. Remember the blissful times of our union. Have I ever tormented you with
whims? Has love not eased every duty? Have you, when fatigued by business, ever
looked in vain for the smile on my countenance, which then seemed to be your
recreation? -- Remember not your vow, remember only our love -- and choose.


Pyer. I cannot.


Adel. I have left my old feeble mother for your sake. Ah! if you had seen the
tears she shed at my departure.


Malv. Have you forgot already how we stood in the cavern, and my old father
called out above us: Malvina! -- He called so tender, so anxious, but I closed
my ears against a father's voice.


Pyer. God! I am but a man!


Adel. To find you, I have defied death a thousand times. Neither the danger
among savage nations, nor the foaming waves, nor the diseases of foreign
regions, could disarm the courage of a faithful wife.


Malv. Into the furious waves I have thrown myself to save you! I have crashed
my limbs on the cliffs! I have torn from my brother's hands the dagger, which
was already drawn for your destruction!


Peyr. No, I cannot support it any longer.


Adel. Give me now the reward for my fidelity! Fulfill what you promised me in
the face of God!


Malv. No! No! Where is your God? To me you have vowed love, where is your God?
You have called him just -- may he descend and protect me, if I am to believe
in his justice.


Henry. Mother, what ails you?


Charles. Mother, I never saw you so.


Adel. There, whine at the feet of this obdurate man.


Malv. Boy, caress your father.


Adel. Choose, man! for whom I suffered all.


Malv. Choose, you! for whom I ventured all.


Peyr. (in the greatest confusion) Leave me! -- Despair knows nothing of
choice! -- Merciful God! if you lay a heavier burden upon a man than his
strength can bear, Oh! it is a hint to throw off the yoke of humanity -- to
destroy the weak existence! -- Even a tiger could not cast away either of these
women! -- No tyrant could spurn from his feet either of these boys! --
(senseless, looking wildly to the right and left) I shall choose! -- Yes, I
choose -- (rash) I choose death! -- (He draws a dagger and is going to push it
into his breast -- the women and children are crying -- Adelaide and Malvina
throw themselves into his arms -- Charles and Henry at his feet.


Malv. (tearing the dagger from his hand and throwing it away) Wicked man! Will
you murder us all with one stroke?


Adel. (anxiously trembling) Recover yourself! -- My love shall save you -- I
renounce you voluntarily.


Malv. Go with her. I Will bring the boy to his grandfather -- I know that you
live -- and think of me.


Adel. Stay with her. Let me enjoy but the consolation, when your children come
leaping toward me on our country's shore, to call out to them: Your father
lives and sends you his blessing!


Malv. Accompany her. No sigh shall render your departure painful.


Adel. Stay with her. No tear of mine shall oppress you.


Peyr. You are inventive in new manners of inflicting death -- you make me
bleed drop by drop -- Oh! do not tear my heart any longer! Your tenderness is
more murderous than a dagger! Allow me to recover myself! -- God! preserve me
from madness! (He runs off.)


Adel. Hasten after him Henry.


Malv. Follow him Charles.


Adel. Caress him.


Malv. Leap about him. (The boys go off.)


SCENE III.
ADELAIDE and MALVINA. Malv. My poor friend!


Adel. I can no more -- I am exhausted -- he may be at his ease -- death will
soon unloosen the knot.


Malv. No, let me die! Ah! I never knew that love and death could become
friends!


Adel. All this misery is your work.


Malv. It is yours. Why came you to this solitary place, to fright the silent
joy from our nest? We were so happy before you came, and would have remained so
without you.


Adel. Why have you robbed a loving wife of her husband? Young children of
their father?


Malv. Do you love him as much as I love him? Why did you suffer him to leave
your arms? Had your heart been attached to him like mine, you never would have
let him out of sight.


Adel. Your union commenced with a crime against nature. Your father you let
depart comfortless, and he is perhaps now pining away with grief. Curse,
therefore, is with your love, ah! a curse, which even falls upon me though
innocent!


Malv. (weeping) What have I done to you, that you speak thus hard to me?


Adel. What you have done to me? Had you torn a child from my breast, I would
hate you less. Yes, I hate you! Whoever loves like me, soon learns to hate. --
A moment of joy -- deluded hope -- disease and grief have overstrained my
nerves, my sensibility -- welcome thou strange feeling! Deformed or beautiful,
it is all the same! Where love gives way, a dreadful vacuum takes place --
welcome then deadly hatred, if you can fill it up.


Malv. I do not hate you; but how can I love you? I was so happy! You robbed me
of my all!


Adel. Return to me my property. I will be generous, I will purchase the prey
from the robber. There -- see -- a diamond, brilliant stones --


Malv. Do you think me still to be a savage?


Adel. Have compassion! Tremble at my despair! One of us must give him up.


Malv. Is that not saying: One of us must die?


Adel. Then die! yes, your death only can restore my rest.


Malv. And so I could wish, that the waves had swallowed you up -- no! no! I
cannot wish that.


Adel. Chillness pervades my limbs! -- Ah! I shiver! -- What is it that presses
with such fury to my heart, and deprives me of respiration? -- Ah! am I
overcome at last by unused sorrows? Is the power of love fled from me? Was it
love only that protected me against the vapors of the sea, and the scorching
sun under the line? -- Yes, my spirits are gone -- my nerves relaxed -- every
limb becomes heavy, and seems to belong to me no more -- (pointing to her
breast) Here only moves a turbulent anxiety!


Malv. (with compassion) Can I assist you?


Adel. Leave me, your sight augments my pain. Go, let me die without cursing
you. (shivering.) Again? -- I have a fever -- it is fled -- the last strength
of my body, with the last hope of my heart -- I can no more! -- (she throws
herself upon the bench of moss.) Here you may prepare my grave -- far from my
children -- ah! -- my tongue is panting -- my palate is dry -- a burning fever
thirst --


SCENE IV.
Enter HENRY. Henry. Mother, look at this beautiful fruit. I found it in yonder
bush. (He shows her a fruit resembling an apple.)


Adel. Are you coming my Henry to refresh me? Give it! give it! (she grasps at
the fruit.)


Malv. (snatching it hastily away.) In the name of God! this fruit is poisonous.


Adel. Poisonous?


Malv. Whoever tastes it, is in a few minutes dead.


Adel. And you tell me that? (her frenzy changes into inexpressible softness.)
and you tell me that? -- (she stretches out her arms, tries to get up, and
sinks back.) Come to my heart.


Malv. (throwing herself into her arms.) You do not hate me any more?


Adel. I hate myself -- my life was in your power -- you need not commit a
murder -- you had only to be silent -- O girl! girl! you are more just than I!


Malv. What ails you, good woman? I understand you not.


Adel. I am an European, subject to detestable, artful passions -- therefore
you understand me not -- have no idea of what you might have done -- Oh,
pardon! be reconciled! Favor me with your pity.


Malv. Thank God! you are good again. Yes, I will love you, and nurse you,
because you belong to my good friend.


Adel. Keep your friend, I renounce him. One only of us can make him happy, one
only can through him become happy. Has the fever given new spring to my
faculties? or has your noble mind irresistibly inspired me? Three sacrifices
are bleeding. Fate desires but one. -- I will depart -- voluntarily -- your
blessing -- his tears -- your happiness -- what can I wish more?


Malv. How? Would you then return without him to your country?


Adel. To the bosom of our common country -- there to enjoy the reward of a
pure conscience. -- My frame is undermined -- I stood on the brink of death --
faithful love has led me -- I follow blindly -- an hour sooner or later, God
will not call me to account for it! He that promotes dying, the happiness of
human beings, never leaves this world too soon.


Malv. You speak so strange, it frightens me.


Adel. One of us must give him up -- that is, one of us must die -- have you
not said so?


Malv. Good woman -- your wild looks -- your strange words -- what anguish
seizes me? Why this trembling of your lips? Why this convulsion of your
muscles? -- Ah! you are sick.


Adel. Very sick -- leave me my good child -- tell your friend that I have
blessed him -- I bless you too.


Henry. Dear mother --


Adel. (hastily raising herself with a shriek) Ah! what was that? Yes, I bless
you also my Henry! (presses him with emotion to her heart) Beg this good girl
henceforth to be your mother.


Henry. I want no other mother.


Adel. Promise it to me, Malvina; this boy is your friend's son, take care of
him as of your own.


Malv. My God! what are you making of me! never have I felt such anguish, such
affliction -- have I then indeed been guilty of a crime, that I am thus
tortured in my heart. -- There my friend ran off in despair, here a poor woman
grieves herself to death -- is all this the work of my love? perhaps of a
blameable love? -- It is true that a curse rests upon our union, the curse of
my old father! -- I tremble -- a cold sweat covers my forehead. Are these the
feelings of a sinner? -- Forgive me, God! I had no conception of sin. -- Who
will console me? who will tell poor me what I have to do? -- I will pray -- God
sends assistance when we are in need; so taught me my friend. I will go and
pray. (Goes off melancholy.)


Adel. Go Henry, seek your father.


Henry. Mother, I will stay with you.


Adel. Go, leave me alone. (Henry obeys.)


Adel. Henry, are you going?


Henry. You commanded me.


Adel. (struggling with herself.) Yes, I command you. Away! hasten! (Henry
going.)


Adel. (with maternal anxiety.) Henry! Henry!


Henry. (returning.) You call me?


Adel. (takes him weeping into her arms.) Love your father -- remember your
mother -- away! away. (She shoves him from her.)


Henry. (going off) I Will bring my father to you.


SCENE V.
ADELAIDE alone. Better one voluntary sacrifice, than grief's slow death of
all. If I saw him surrounded by enemies, I would throw myself between their
swords to save him. Despair is the most formidable enemy! It gnaws the body,
and deadens the soul -- (a pause.) -- This good girl was happy without me; and
so was La Peyrouse. He thought of me but with sorrow, as if we had been
separated by death. My arrival was to him the appearance of a spirit; though
the form of a once beloved person, yet still a spirit. -- (a pause.) This girl
is young and handsome -- my blooming time is past -- I am no more beautified by
my tears -- gratitude will attach him to me -- every tie is oppressive to love
which is not effected by its own power. -- I shall not make him any reproaches;
but he will expect them, and avoid me. My too feeling mother will torment him
with complaints; and me, the innocent cause, he will hate. -- He hate me? No,
no! but can we love the person whose presence oppresses us? Courage, Adelaide!
as far as your eyesight reaches, the horizon is obscure. Drop the curtain --
but do it soon -- do it now -- in this moment whilst this attraction strains
your nerves -- whilst this fire expands your veins -- who can assure me, that
in a few hours the love of life will not reason away every future grief? I then
would have to empty the cup drop by dop -- better pour it down at one draught.
-- Well then! (she rises hastily, and picks up the fruit which she had thrown
away.) How soon is such a fruit eat up. It will quench my feverish thirst --
forget, what more it will effect (looking at the fruit.) How beautiful, how
alluring -- poor human beings! in how many delightful forms death lurks for
you. -- Thanks to you, chance, for this last favor! No dagger makes me shrink;
no nauseous poison excites disgust. -- Who could be afraid of this apple?

SCENE VI.
LA PEYROUSE (appears, in the moment of Adelaide's putting the apple to her
mouth.)


Peyr. (anxious.) Our Henry told me you are ill. -- (he spies the fruit.) What
have you there? For God's sake! throw this fruit from you, it is poisonous.


Adel. I know it.


Peyr. You know it? and yet --


Adel. I wish you to be at rest.


Peyr. (takes her hand.) My wife, you are sick. A disordered fancy only could
make you familiar with so horrible an intention. Give it to me! (he gently
forces the fruit out of her hand, and throws it away.)


Adel. I cannot struggle with you. It is easy for you to take this apple from
me; but can you also root the bud of death out of my heart?


Peyr. If you love me no more, remember at least your children -- your poor old
mother.


Adel. To you I intended to give the last token of my love. Have I not already
devoted myself to death, when I went on board, to share all dangers of the
circumnavigator? I was ready to die for the distant hope, to find you. I have
found you, have pressed you to my heart, have brought to you the pledge of our
love. I begged much of God -- God has granted me much -- and now I should
shrink from death, which would be a benefit to you! I ran the risk of death for
a mere hope, and should not die for your ease of mind?


Peyr. Your inclination to noble enthusiasm leads you astray; your burning
imagination throws a wrong light on the surrounding objects. You think this
terrible sacrifice necessary, because you have the courage to make it. He that
feels within him strength for heroic action creates dangers himself. Must you
throw yourself into the abyss as long as there is a bush remaining by which you
can support yourself?


Adel. Where grows that bush? Where?


Peyr. Patience, hope, fortitude! -- Woe on the man whose fancy converts these
oak trees into brush-wood! -- A few hours scarcely have elapsed; we are yet
driven about by the first storm of our passions; how can a drunken man pass a
rapid stream on a small piece of board? Let him become sober, the soul like the
body, finds at last its equipoise again. And if patience, courage, and hope
leave us, then still remains a hold -- Religion! Confidence in God!


Adel. (raising her eyes) Confidence in God!


Peyr. I do not request a miracle. I do not desire of God to send an angel; but
one man, cool and unconcerned, who can think for three patients. -- Oh! I know
what in our passion's storm, one reflecting man can do.


SCENE VII.
Enter CHARLES and HENRY. Charles. Father, another strange man --


Henry. Mother, uncle has arrived.


Adel. My brother.


Peyr. God! you have sent an angel! -- Where? Where is he?


SCENE VIII.
Enter CLAIRVILLE and MALVINA. Peyr. (throwing himself into his arms) My
brother!


Clair. Hail you, from the empire of the dead!! Have we at last found the
enthusiast? (he shakes hands with him) Well sister, you are on good terms with
heaven, for it has done a wonder for you.


Adel. Ah!


Clair. Still an ah? Is this a proper signal for people who sail into port? You
all look dejected. You are unfit to set for a painter, who wants to draw a
picture of a joyous meeting. -- You want to explain? -- But hark! I know all!
(to Peyrouse) Here I bring you a girl, who out of love for you had a great mind
to be guilty of a stupid trick. I overheard her prayers. She addressed the
Deity in my mother tongue. My surprise prompted me to listen -- she prayed for
courage to die.


Peyr. (terrified) Malvina!


Malv. Pardon me, my friend, I prayed -- and suddenly a ray touched my heart --
die Malvina! then all become relieved! -- Methought it was the voice of God.


Clair. Women! Women! Why do you always take the voice of your passions for
that of God, and are ever ready to cut down the stem, when only a caterpillar
creeps upon a leaf. In short, this brown locked damsel has discovered to me the
whole island, and, with your leave, I am charmed to find it as it is, for it
fits my plan.


Adel. It charms you?


Peyr. What plan?


Clair. Pardon the vain expression. If the swallow could speak, it would assert
too, that it builds its nest according to a deep meditated plan. Necessity
teaches the heaver to build huts, and man to meditate. Bitter necessity has
created my plan. -- Yet, before I proceed, brother, answer me one question:
Have these women equal pretensions on you?


Peyr. Equal.


Clair. You love them both?


Peyr. Both.


Clair. Will you cast my sister from you?


Peyr. No.


Clair. Will you leave Malvina?


Peyr. No.


Clair. Well then, sister, let me tell you what happened to me during the few
days of our separation. An English captain, who was conveying petty thieves to
Botany Bay and left the great ones in Europe, has communicated to us strange
things. We no more have a country. Anarchy has swallowed it up. The rich are
become beggars, and we -- we have been rich too.


Peyr. And therefore are also become beggars.


Clair. Health, strength, industry, and a piece of land, warmed by the sun, and
wetted by the rain -- I think we are still rich.


Peyr. Do I understand you? -- Where are my children?


Adel. And our mother?


Clair. Your children are alive, and our mother -- (stops) is very well.


Adel. You make a stop! Your countenance grows gloomy! You frighten me! --
Where, where is our mother?


Clair. -- She is here.


Adel. and Peyr. Here?


Clair. (raising his eyes with emotion) Yes, she is here! -- A mother's love
does not go into the grave.


Adel. (weeping) Ah! she is dead!


Clair. She has departed, like us, to another part of the world. She has left
us nothing but her compass, virtue. Sister, let us take possession of the
valuable inheritance. Confidence in God rewards the honest, even in a dungeon.
Look around you! Is this island a dungeon? -- A blossom invites you here, a
fine fruit there. Here grows the breadtree for our hunger, there spouts a
spring for our thirst. Here is a verdant grove for pure love.


Adel. (with grief) My good mother!


Clair. In coming up I made some fugitive remarks; the ground is good; the
fruits prosper; wood in abundance; a little industry, and nature will
distribute her treasures.


Peyr. I do not understand you quite.


Clair. How? you understand me not? Are you still longing for your degenerated
country? Will you swim there with the stream of blood, or fruitless work
against it? You have seen so much of the world, and know not yet the value of
repose? -- I know it. They may promise me golden mountains, and I will rather
flee to the naked summit of Caucasus, than take part in a revolution; which,
though it may be just, spreads death and discord, that posterity may earn a
liberty, which is covered with the corpse of their parents. Yes, I am an
Egotist. I live, and will enjoy my life; without rest there is no enjoyment. --
My flag is already hoisted; tomorrow I Will set sail for England, whither my
wife with your and my children have fled. I Will take them all on board; will
freight my ship with all what here is necessary: masons, carpenters, utensils
and farming tools -- surely, I shall find honest people enough, who will
accompany me to the small country of quietude. There are poor exiles without
number, who wander about without a roof to shelter them. Till my return, I will
leave you all I can spare for your accommodation. If the winds and weather
permit, I shall soon return; we then lay the foundation of a colony, as the
Greeks did after their flight from Egypt; and who knows, whether our names are
not as renowned after a few thousand years, as those of Inachus and Cecrops.


Malv. (caressing him.) Good man! I do not understand all you say; but this I
understand, that we shall stay here together, is it not so?


Peyr. Brother you possess an excellent gift, to unite cool reasoning with warm
imagination. I agree to your plan with extaoy, and if Adelaide --


Adel. Ah brother!


Clair. Well sister? do you wish to become a widow, and lead in Europe your
orphans from door to door oppressed by poverty? Shall Peyrouse accompany you,
to meet death in his native land, or to expose himself to want and misery in a
foreign country? -- Here dwells security; here reigns abundance; here love and
quietude await us.


Adel. Quietude? where may I find it?


Peyr. Ah! She wishes and seeks her death!


Clair. Illness, nothing else. The raw sea diet has spoiled her blood. Give her
for a few weeks soups of herbs, and all will be well -- or -- I hope not, that
an unnoble jealousy against the benefactress of your husband -- it is singular
indeed, that we would willingly share the kingdom of heaven with every good
being, yet will not share a heart.


Malv. (turning timorous to Adelaide.) I have prayed for you and me -- let us
be sisters.


Adel. Sisters? (meditating a moment.) Sisters? -- My good girl, you awake in
me a thought rich in consolation! Yes, let us be sisters, if this man will be
our brother. We cannot share him; neither of us can possess him.
(enthusiastic.) We, she sisters, inhabit a hut of our own: he, the brother,
another. We educate our boys; he assists you and me. -- During day we form one
joyful family -- the evening separates us -- the mothers stay with the children
-- the father in his hut -- do you agree?


Malv. Willingly, if I can but see him.


Peyr. With pleasure, if I can quiet you.


Clair. Hail brother! Not every one, who like you, sailed to discover a
northwestern passage, found like you, the land of repose. Well then children!
the treaty is concluded. Shake hands, and seal it by an embrace.


Adel. (approaches La Peyrouse with open arms.) The embrace of a sister!


Clair. Just as you please, I do not quarrel about words.


Malv. My friend! My brother!


Peyr. (holding them both in his arms.) My sisters!


Charles. (clinging on Malvina.) My mother is joyful.


Henry. (clinging on Adelaide.) My mother smiles again.


Clair. The paradise of innocence.


The End.

