THE FORCE OF CALUMNY: A PLAY, IN FIVE ACTS.

TRANSLATED FROM THE GERMAN OF KOTZEBUE.

NEW YORK: PRINTED FOR C. SMITH AND S. STEPHENS BY JOHN FURMAN. 1800

DRAMATIS PERSONAE.
SYNDICUS MORLAND. Syndicus, is the title of an officer in the Law Department
in some parts of Germany.

Translator.
EMILIA, his Wife. JENNY, his Sister. EDWARD SMITH, an Englishman, his Clerk.
COUNT SCHARFENECK, Prime (...) to the Prince. YOUNG SCHARFENECK, his Nephew, a
Gentleman of the Privy-Chamber. PRUNK, Valet of the Privy-Chamber. ALLBRAND,
Private Secretary to the Prime Minister. CAPTAIN ELLFIELD, an Old Officer. MRS.
ELLFIELD, his Wife. BENJAMIN KROLL, a Jailer. EVE, his Wife. PILZ, an Officer
of the Police. THOMAS, an old Servant to Morland. GUARDS.
THE FORCE OF CALUMNY.
ACT I.
SCENE I.
A Room in MORLAND's House. The Br^st-Table set out. EMILIA enters at a
side-door, and speaks as she enters to somebody behind the Scenes. EMILIA. GO
to bed, Catharine, I (...) you! (Coming forwards) The poor old woman must be
very cold! -- It Is well that these nocturnal walks will soon be at an end! -- I
have indeed promised poor Ellfield to see him again tonight, and I dare not go
alone. Yet why not? -- What need I fear in so short a distance? -- What
accident can happen to me? -- Well, well, in a few days all will be revealed*
Mrs. Ellfield recovers fast, and by Morland's birthday I hope will be in
perfect health. -- What pleasure shall I feel in presenting these unfortunate
people to him upon that joyful occasion, and saying, Dear husband I have
preserved the lives of a worthy pair by the savings of my frugality; I have
rescued the husband from want, the wife from sickness, -- accept this offering
as a birthday tribute! -- And must the story be disclosed? -- ah, I feel that
the enjoyment of a good action is annihilated the moment that action becomes
known: if another praise thee, -- there is an end of thy reward; but is thy own
heart thy sole confidant, -- new transport always arises from the recollection!
-- Morland, therefore, shall know all. Ah, could he foresee that a still more
important discovery awaits him! -- Thanks to Heaven! I can no longer doubt of
the joyful event! -- but this happy communication shall also be deferred till
his birth day.


SCENE II.
-- Enter JENNY. Jenny. Good Morrow, sister! -- of what happy communication
were you talking to yourself?


Emilia. Guess.


Jenny. That you have a fine br^ of young goslings hatched this morning?


Emilia. Sarcastic girl!


Jenny. Or have you spun up all your flax?


Emilia. Any one who heard you, would suppose, that my attention was solely
occupied by geese and spinning*


Jenny. Your happiness is so ^^eat, that you cannot have (...) more important
objects of so^de.


Emilia. Do you suppose --


Jenny Can I never hear the story often enough? -- Evening after evening do I
sit with you, my brother begins to read, my sister to work; but scarcely has
the one read a half dozen sentences, or the other set in half a dozen stitches,
before a dead stop is made; and the blank in the narrative filled up with a
long parenthesis of caresses, and " my dears," and " my loves," till I am tired
of the repetition.


Emilia. Do you not recollect, that G^ethe says, to behold two real lovers, is
a scene to charm even the gods.


Jenny. And, do not you recollect, that Musaeus says, It may be a scene to
delight the gods, but to mortals it is ennuyan^ in the extreme.


Emilia. I confess it a scene, in which one would rather be a performer than a
spectator.


Jenny. The one sighs, "Ah, sister I am so happy!" -- "Brother I have heard
that about a thousand times." The other lisps, "Jenny, my happiness is
unbounded!" -- Sister, I know all your fine rhapsodies by heart.


Emilia. Why do you not seek like happiness?


Jenny. There, again! -- dear sister, you know as well as I, that a maiden must
not seek, she must only find; -- and, good heavens! how rarely can we find what
we are not permitted to seek!


Emilia. Whoever would gather a flower, must at least stretch out a hand.


Jenny. The roses of lo^ ^ow only in summer, -- the thorns of wedlock last the
whole year round.


Emilia. Does that reflection arise from observations made in this house?


Jenny. Heaven ^o^d! -- No, a perpetual spring reigns here, as in Mahomet's
pa^^dise.


Emilia. And in every place (...) love is combined with a taste for domestic
life.


Jenny. But amid this prating, we have wandered from our text. I wanted to know
the subject of your communication?


Emilia Have you never, in the midst of all our happiness, heard us name one
single subject of regret?


Jenny. Of regret.


Emilia. And unite in an ardent wish, that heaven would consecrate our union by
a still longer pledge?


Jenny. Most poetically expressed! -- But am I indeed to understand that you
are likely to become a mother?


Emilia. Undoubtedly! -- Yet, be silent, dear Jenny!


Jenny. And my brother is still ignorant of this joyful news?


Emilia. I feared to deceive you all by illusive hopes.


Jenny. (Knocking at the door of Morland's, study) -- Brother, come hither
directly! important tidings await you! leave your writing! that may be deferred
till another time.


Emilia. Be silent, I entreat! -- I wish the communication to be reserved for
his birthday.


Jenny. Can joy be too soon imparted? (she opens Morland's door) Henry, will
you not come?


Emilia. Dear Jenny!


SCENE III.
-- Enter MORLAND. Morland. Well, here I am! -- Good Morrow, dearest Emilia! --
and now, Jenny, what is the matter?


Jenny. The matter! -- only that I am afraid poor Pompey is likely soon to be
wholly superseded in your favor.


Morland. Truly, an important ^^bject, on which to call me from my writing. But
whence this ^ear?


Jenny. Because we seldom lavish our affection upon brute animals, but from the
want of more interesting objects. -- Have you not often made this remark
yourself?


Morland. What? -- how! -- Jenny! -- E^! -- Come, come, this is too serious a
subject for trifling! (he looks alternately at his wife and sister) Emilia,
(...) believe it?


Emilia. Yes, dearest Morland.


Morland. (after clasping her in his arms for a while in silent ecstasy) God! I
thank thee that thou have listened to my most ardent wish!


Emilia. I meant this to have remained a secret till your birthday; but that
prattler --


Morland. Oh, Jenny, how will this news rejoice our father!


Jenny. Tomorrow is post-day; I will write to him.


Morland. Then will the good old man drop a tear into the lake of Geneva.


Jenny. Or hasten to the grave of our mother, where he will feel this transport
most deeply.


Morland. It is a long time since I wrote to him -- beg him to excuse me! --
you know that my business --


Jenny. I make excuses for you! -- by no means! -- that you have, for a long
time, sat in your study whole days together, and lately even slept there, that
you might be up earlier in the morning to renew your labors, I well know; --
But what you are about --


Morland. You cannot tell.


Jenny. Even so! -- Often, when we have questioned you upon this subject, you
have answered with the air of an ancient Roman; My dear girls, the welfare of
the whole state rests upon my shoulders! -- Well, then, hasten to complete the
important task in which you are engaged, that you may be restored to our
society.


Morland. To accomplish that restoration, I must still work. Never was it more
necessary to take example from the watchful crane, whose figure crowns the arms
over our city gates. On one side, too much (...) required, on the other too
much refused! -- The prince is di^ul, the people presuming, and neither party
can enjoy a moment's repose.


Jenny But with us, God be thanked, all is quiet! -- Aetna sends forth torrents
of fire -- the earth trembles -- and we calmly read the dread tidings in the
newspapers.


Morland. When the earth shakes in Sicily, a new island is sometimes thrown up
in the sea of Iceland. Heaven be praised! we are quiet at present, and my
nightly watchings will, I hope, contribute toward increasing our security. It
is no light task, to search the archives of a town for a succession of six
centuries, to separate rights from customs, and claims from laws, and then to
compress the result into such a form that the Prince may know enough, without
the people knowing too much.


Emilia. Will not your talk be soon finished? We have enjoyed so little of your
company for a month past --


Morland. This very day I shall transcribe the last sheet.


Jenny. Away then! write hard, and do not let us see you any more till you can
throw aside that countenance of thought.


Morland. This happy news has so distracted my attention, that I know not,
whether I shall be able any longer to form a letter.


Jenny. Or at every word you write, some apostrophe to the future heir of your
family will be intruding itself, and whenever the letter P occurs, " he says
Papa," will be ready to follow.


Morland. Give as free scope to your wit as you please, my good sister; but
unless I am much mistaken, the aunt feels no small degree of happiness.


Jenny. She does not deny the charge.


Morland. Well, go to breakfast, my dears -- I will be with you presently.
(Exit into his Study)


SCENE IV.
EMILIA and JENNY. Emilia. What an excellent man!


Jenny. Not one of the worst of hum^^ ^ngs, indeed! a true honest Swiss! -- his
ance^^ors fought at Morgarten.


Emilia. How happy is it for me that I obeyed the dictates of my reason,
instead of yielding to the ambitious views of my aunt, with her numerous line
of ancestors?


Jenny. It Is happy, indeed, since all has fallen out so well! yet I must own,
dear sister, that I was strongly averse to this match; as it did not, in my
opinion, wear an auspicious aspect.


Emilia. Had you fully known the principles that decided my resolution --


Jenny. I had earnestly wished the union! -- I had shown that I was not
insensible to the value of a woman whose innocence was so lightly estimated by
a base aunt, yet who had virtue enough to prefer becoming the wife of a worthy
citizen, to being the mistress of a prince.


Emilia. Silence! -- not so loud!


Jenny. But then, indeed, my expectations would have been raised to such a
pitch, that I should not, as now, have seen you, for two years soaring so far
above them.


Emilia. This testimony, dearest sister, is my pride, and my joy; and, believe
me, I would, this day, do from enthusiastic affection, what was then only the
result of reason.


Jenny. Singular enough for a woman to fall in love with her own husband.


Emilia. Not singular surely; -- and is it not far better than to idolize the
lover at the expense of the husband? I would seriously advise you, Jenny, to
follow my example, not to wait for the witchery of love, but to be content with
reason and friendship.


Jenny. Again casting a reflection upon my respectable spinster state? any one
would suppose me as much surrounded with suitors, as formerly the rich princess
of Burgundy.


Emilia. There is the gentleman of the Privy-Chamber --


Jenny. A Sp^ zephyr, that plays with every flower -- a blighting insect that
destroys every leaf he comes near. His tongue levels with the dust every
respectable name, as the scythe mows down every blade of grass. I lately,
however, very coolly and drily, told him such plain truths, that his hopes must
now be entirely at an end.


Emilia. I know not whether you may have observed the new enemy that seems
advancing to the siege from another quarter.


Jenny. As how?


Emilia. That our clerk --


Jenny. The Englishman? you dream!


Emilia. Women are seldom mistaken in such conjectures.


Jenny. A true English caprice! and moreover --


Emilia. I know what you would say -- a clerk --


Jenny. Not so. A clerk wears a coat, to the button-hole of which chance may,
some time or other, fasten an order. -- But --


Emilia. He has a good understanding, well cultivated --


Jenny. But, nothing wherewith to make the pot boil.


Emilia. I am not so certain of that -- I suspect him to be richer than he
appears.


Jenny. Why so?


Emilia. Do not laugh, and I will tell you a truly feminine observation I have
made. He wears very fine linen.


Jenny. To which I can add another equally curious. Not long since a man came
to this town, who gives himself out as an English master of languages. Smith
calls him his friend and fellow countryman. But I, one day saw them together
upon the stairs, when Smith had his hat on, and the other, with his in his hand
was bowing to him very respectfully. This struck me, and I stopped to observe
them; but they immediately perceived me, appeared embarrassed, and the tone of
equality was instantly resumed, though evidently with some degree of restraint;
soon after which they shook hands and parted.


Emilia. What if this clerk should be a Prince in disguise?


Jenny An Arcadian shepherd come to assist me in tending my flocks?


Emilia. He is certainly no ordinary man.


Jenny. So my brother says.


SCENE V.
Enter THOMAS. Thomas. Secretary Allbrand to wait upon you, Madam.


Jenny. The odious wretch! I will not see him. (She runs out through a side
door.)


Emilia. Alas! must I be obliged to receive him? Show him up Thomas. (Exit
Thomas) Oh God! how often in this w^rld are we compelled to stoop to
dissimulation!


SCENE VI.
-- Enter ALLBRAND. Allbrand. Pardon, Madam, my troubling you thus early.


Emilia. You are my husband's friend. A friend cannot come unseasonably.


Allbrand. Would to heaven that this were spoken as from yourself.


Emilia. Morland is not yet at leisure; will you condescend to loose a few
minutes with a female?


Allbrand. You are sportive, Madam. You know but too well what a gain I
consider this loss.


Emilia. Possibly your business may be urgent? I will call my husband.


Allbrand. Urgent! Ah Madam, I have no business so urgent as to tell you, that
in your presence every thing else is forgotten.


Emilia. The air of the court has infected you.


Allbrand. It has only emboldened me to declare my feelings.


Emilia. (Embarrassed, and endeavoring to turn the conversation) I understand
that a new play is to come out at the theater this evening.


Allbrand. At which I would indulge a hope that you may be present.


Emilia. It Is possible.


Allbrand. Then I may look forward to spending some hours of transport.


Emilia. Of that you scarcely can fail, since the piece is Schroeder's.


Allbrand. The theater is the only place where I may be allowed to contemplate
those charms, without offending your rigid notions. There leaning against a
pillar, alone in the midst of a surrounding crowd, my eyes remain immovably
fixed upon your box; -- you see me not, while I see only you; -- sometimes,
indeed, your fan or muff are alone to be seen; -- but even to behold them is
soothing to me.


Emilia. Secretary Allbrand, you forget your engagement. -- Solely on the
condition, that in future I should hear no more such language, did I consent to
conceal from my husband, whom you call your friend, a passion, which to view in
the most favorable light, is the height of imprudence.


Allbrand. Could a mind like yours harbor the idea of sowing the seeds of
discord between two friends, who so long since, even as youths at the
university, swore eternal fidelity to each other?


Emilia. Have you observed your oath?


Abllrana. Can it be perjury toward friendship to admire what my friend has
found so lovely? to adore the being who makes him happy?


Emilia. Think as you please, in silence; b^ never forget that the wife of
Morland can only admit your friendship and esteem; but will steadily reject all
pretensions to your admiration or love.


Allbrand. Happy Morland! yet at least permit me to complain of the injustice
of fate; that I who have never loved but once in my life, whose constancy might
be entitled to some recompense, am compelled in silence to cherish a hopeless
passion; while he, who, for years, only roved from flower to flower, is repaid
by an ardor and steadiness of attachment which such levity ill deserves; --
that I, to whom innocence was ever sacred, am now scorned, rejected, while he,
who at Strasburgh --


Emilia. No more! -- I will not hear you!


Allbrand. Far be from me the malignant wish to derogate from the merits of my
worthy friend! particularly to injure him in the esteem of one in whom his
whole happiness is centered! If at the time I reproved him severely for
deceiving an innocent girl with false promises --


Emilia. It Is false! -- Morland never deceived any one!


Allbrand. I do not mention this lapse, as a thing wholly unpardonable. He was
young -- a perfect Adonis among the women, -- was it surprising that such
admiration should make him vain? and we all know to what lengths vanity will
(...) a man; perhaps the want of opportunity alone, protected me from doing the
like. But, what excites my indignation is, that partial fate should give him a
reward due only to the purity of a first passion.


Emilia. Secretary Allbrand, even if this story, in the disclosure of which you
seem to find so much gratification, were true, why relate it to me? how does it
concern me? what purpose do you hope to make it answer to yourself? For two
years, I have been united to Morland; he has studied incessantly to promote my
happiness; I have no wish unsatisfied; and what passed prior to our union, is
indifferent to me; If my husband was once wild, I esteem myself the more
fortunate that such courses are now entirely abandoned by him. Above all
things, I detest the malignity that would trace back the life of a man even to
his cradle, to enumerate how many times in his childhood his mother was
constrained to use the rod. In short, Sir, I will hear no more! To preserve
domestic harmony, and spare my husband some hours of painful chagrin, I have
hitherto been silent; but be assured, the next time that a similar expression
shall escape your lips, all shall be revealed, whatever may be the consequence.


Allbrand. If you suppose that an unhappy passion is to be repressed by
menaces, you know little of the human heart.


Emilia. To deal with you sincerly, Mr. Secretary, I consider you as ready to
grant any passion free ingress into your heart; but I believe none will ever
gain a permanent establishment there.


Allbrand. I know not in what way to answer such a compliment.


Emilia. Do with my compliment, as I have always done with yours -- given them
to the wind.


Allbrand. (with suppressed irritation) Madam --


SCENE VII.
-- Enter MORLAND. Morland. (as he enters) I heard right then! -- I thought I
recognized your voice; (he gives him his hand) whether upon business, or as a
friend, most welcome!


Allbrand. I come in both relations.


Emilia. I will not interrupt you, gentlemen. (Exit)


Morland. Sit down, my friend! -- Have you breakfasted?


Allbrand. Two hours ago.


Morland. I w^ited till I had finished my business -- I thought that breakfast
would then have a better relish. -- Has the minister asked --


Allbrand. I came hither upon that account. He expects to see you today.


Morland. He shall not be disappointed.


Allbrand. The abstract --


Morland. Is ready; and I have exceeded in it beyond my hopes. I have
endeavored to be as clear, as a work of such important public utility demands.


Allbrand. The minister expects implicit submission.


Morland. Say rather temperate truths; and then his expectations will not be
deceived.


Allbrand. Indeed, in taking such ground, you will oppose many courtly ideas.
But so much the better; -- only be upon your guard; and should he, in
consequence, receive you with a haughty coldness, do not show any resentment.


Morland. I never swerve from the strict line of my duty.


Allbrand. He is no friend to the rights of citizens.


Morland. They are clearly defined.


Allbrand. Yet I fear, that a decision --


Morland. Who can withstand that power?


Allbrand. But I know the mind of a courtier; -- only oppose manly steadiness
to his ipse dixit.


Morland. I say no more than may be said with propriety by a subject, and what
I am bound to say as advocate for the citizens.


Allbrand. (with a secret malicious joy) So much the better! -- But indeed the
minister has very contracted ideas of what a man ought to say.


Morland. The citizens have not reposed their confidence in me, that I should
fashion my ideas after those of the minister.


Allbrand. There I recognize the true Swiss manliness.


Morland. Honesty is at home every where.


Allbrand. (rubbing his hands) I am delighted with the idea of this audience.


Morland. I cannot say that I feel any delight; but I go to it, with perfect
composure. The minister would have a hard task indeed to ruffle my temper
today; for I am so tuned to happiness! -- Dear Allbrand, participate my
transports; -- I am likely to become a father.


Allbrand. (starting) Indeed!


Morland. What, for two years, I have ardently wished, but had almost ceased to
hope, is at length granted me. God be thanked for so great a blessing!


Allbrand. (in a constrained manner) You give me a most unexpected pleasure! --
Believe me, I take the warmest interest --


Morland. Without many words -- friendship is not wordy.


Allbrand. It is but right, that Emilia should pay you in one way what she
deprives you of in another.


Morland. What she deprives me of! -- I do not understand you.


Allbrand. I mean that you are an object of hatred to the courtiers. You know
the old Latin saying, " regis ad exemplum totus componitur orbis."


Morland. Because she gave her hand to a citizen.


Allbrand. Not so. -- That was the subject of their sneers and ^arcasms for
three days; and then was wholly forgotten.


Morland. What then?


Allbrand. My God! -- you know very well --


Morland. What do I know?


Allbrand. The Prince is young and vain; -- he will never pardon you for having
superseded him.


Morland. The Prince?


Allbrand. Why that question? -- as if I told you something new.


Morland. New indeed!


Allbrand. You cannot be ignorant, that the prince was formerly a suitor of
Emilia's.


Morland. The prince a suitor of Emilia's? -- What am I to understand by this
insinuation?


Allbrand. What is commonly understood, when we talk of a Prince's being a
suitor.


Morland. Allbrand, I consider this as an affront.


Allbrand. Good God! how can you consider it as an affront, to hear from the
mouth of a friend, what has long served as an amusement for all the gossips in
town.


Morland. That the Prince had made proposals to Emilia?


Allbrand. Very brilliant proposals, and very urgently offered.


Morland. And Emilia? --


Allbrand. Did what honor and virtue required of her.


Morland. She never mentioned a word of this to me!


Allbrand. I am astonished at that.


M^^land. It was known to all the gossips in town, yet was to be concealed from
me!


Allbrand. Doubtless to avoid giving you uneasiness.


Morland. I am made more uneasy by hearing it thus.


Allbrand. I am not surprised at that, and, viewed in this light, Emilia has
certainly been wrong in the secrecy she has observed. She ought to have told
you the story herself, lest it might perchance reach your ears from some other
quarter, when it would be served up, adorned with all the pretty circumstances,
with which rumor delights to garnish such dishes.


Morland. And are such stories indeed whispered about? -- Such stories of my
wife?


Abllrand. Heavens! can you be astonished at that? You know the world, -- know
how much it is the aim of every scoundrel to run down all merit.


Morland. But the particulars of this history?


Allbrand. Why, what would you --


Morland. I require them as an act of friendship.


Allbrand. Then I must obey. It is said that your wife -- but, pray, excuse me!


Morland. No, no -- say on! they will make no kind of impression upon me.


Allbrand. It is said, that your wife and the Prince were once upon very good
terms -- extremely good terms.


Morland. What mean you? --


Allbrand. It is no wonder if the Prince's fine person and amiable qualities
should, at the first moment, dazzel the immagination of a young girl; but the
rest, I have no doubt, are malicious additions.


Morland. Most certainly! -- yet that people should dare to say such things of
Morland's wife. --


Allbrand. The affair is very little talked of, now.


Morland. But still sometimes hinted at?


Allbrand. Must I remind a man who knows the world so well, that a good action
is often forgotten in twenty-four hours, while a tale of calumny is scarcely
ever wholly laid asleep, even when its victim rests in the grave.


Morland. In truth, my friend, you have found the means of embittering the
happiest hour of my life.


Allbrand. For shame! Why do you suffer such a foolish business to torment you?
follow my example and laugh at the tale. It was but yesterday that I absolutely
laughed in the face of an old lady, who positively asserted that the
intercourse between the Prince and Mrs. Morland still continued.


Morland. Still continued!


Allbrand. Had been maintained with intermission for four years. As if a
Prince's love could last out an Olympiad! Ha! ha! ha!


Morland. Mere malice!


Allbrand. Neither more or less.


Morland. Pitiful envy!


Allbrand. And no reasonable man, therefore, would gratify the babblers by
suffering the affair to give him the least uneasiness.


Morland. Yet I must own myself hurt at Emilia's never mentioning the subject.


Allbrand. It astonishes me. But the more virtuous the woman, the less does she
like talking of such conquests.


Morland. She had doubtless sufficient reasons for her silence.


Allbrand. Emilia could not act but upon sufficient reasons. -- But, it grows
late -- (He rises) Farewell, my friend -- we shall meet again at the minister's.


Morland. (Rising) That four years ago the Prince had intentions? -- You know
this for certain?


Allbrand. I cannot say, that I was ever present at an interview; -- I only
give you common report.


Morland. At an interview!


Allbrand. And if she did stray a few steps out of the right path; why concern
yourself with an affair that happened two years before the commencement of your
acquaintance with her. In a very few weeks the error was seen and relinquished
-- and -- ah Morland! -- were the women to keep to strict a reckoning with us,
what husband would dare to look a wife in the face?


(Exit.) SCENE VIII.
MORLAND alone. Strange! -- what hateful ideas are floating in my brain? -- But
it cannot be true! -- and were it so; is Emilia to be condemned because she is
lovely and amiable? -- She is certainly guiltless! -- She must be, by heaven!
-- Yet, she should have imparted the circumstance to me! -- her concealment of
it was not right! --

SCENE IX
-- Enter SMITH. Smith. (Giving Morland a paper) Sir, here is the copy.


Morland. What copy? -- Oh, I recollect! -- You have finished it most
expeditiously. -- But, I forgot to tell you, that, somewhere in the paper, an
erroneous quotation from Montesquieu, has crept in, which should be corrected.


Smith. I perceived, and have corrected it.


Morland. Indeed!


Smith. Perhaps I have been guilty of impertinence?


Morland. On the contrary, you have conferred an obligation. -- You are then
acquainted with Montesquieu's works?


Smith. He is one of my favorite authors.


Morland. It seems very extraordinary, that a man so accomplished as yourself,
possessing not only a perfect knowledge of your own language, but also of the
French and German, and to whom many other branches of learning are familiar,
should be condemned to so low a situation as that of a clerk.


Smith. (Shrugging his shoulders) Fate --


Morland Excuse me if I cannot help saying, that I have frequently suspected
your birth to be above your present circumstances.


Smith. Then why concern yourself with my origin?


Morland. If you are following your own caprice, it is matter of indifference
to me? -- but should misfortune be the cause of your degradation, were I made
the confidant of your troubles, I might be enabled to procure you some
amendment in your situation.


Smith. Have none but the unfortunate, need of confidants? I am not unhappy,
yet I might be much happier.


Morland. Can I assist you?


Smith. Will you?


Morland. With the truest pleasure.


Smith. Your hand upon it? (Morland gives him his hand) Have I obtained your
good opinion?


Morland. Entirely; -- nor will you ever loose it again, if you always remain
what you have been for the last two months.


Smith. I am always the same.


Morland. I consider you as a man of abilities and integrity.


Smith. Your wishes are gratified.


Morland. Then speak without reserve.


Smith. I will. -- I love your sister.


Morland. (Starting back) Indeed! this was not what I expected to hear.


Smith. And what you are not pleased at hearing?


Morland. Why do you suppose so? -- if --


Smith. Let it remain between ourselves alone.


Morland. Rely upon that -- but there are circumstances --


Smith. I am rich.


Morland. That is in your favor.


Smith. Not much. I am a Lord also; but, that is of still less account.


Morland. How? -- explain this romance?


Smith. Does what I say appear like romance?


Morland. What is your name?


Smith. Sidney.


Morland. And you have assumed this extraordinary disguise?


Smith. For your sisters' sake.


Morland. But --


Smith. To speak in plain terms; -- for as you could not possibly unravel this
aegnima, yourself, I must, for once, allow myself to say more than I usually
do. In my early years I was a courtier, but the court is not my element;
fortunately for me I became acquainted with John Howard, who taught me to be a
man. Peace to his ashes! Many an infirmary, many a prison have we examined
together; and by this intercourse my mind was gradually strengthened and
enlightened. When he quitted England for the laudable purpose of extending his
benevolence to the whole race of mankind, I attached myself to his company.
With him I have explored the interior of Africa, and visited Abyssinia, though
not, like Bruce, drank to the health of a Prince whose dominions lay somewhere
about the source of the Nile. My concern was rather with the sources of good
and ill in the heart of man -- the sources whence might flow happiness in life,
and composure in death.


Morland. And you have succeeded?


Smith. Thus much I have ascertained -- That under the palm tree of Negroland,
as under the oak of Germany, domestic peace, and domestic comforts, are, if not
the only, at least the prime sources, of mortal happiness.


Morland. (Smiling) And were you obliged to explore the interior of Africa to
ascertain that?


Smith. What lies direclly before our eyes, is often sought at the greatest
distance. Every spreading tree that we behold, invites us to enjoy peace and
serenity beneath its shade; but we pass it by, and only hope to taste repose
beyond the grave.


Morland. And the experience you have collected in your travels, you wish to
reduce into practice?


Smith. You are right. This has long been my wish, and at length I hope the
object is attainable. For four years past, I have been in search of a good wife.


Morland. So long, and not yet found one? your researches must have been
conducted very negligently; many good wives are to be found.


Smith. It Is possible, -- but I have seen so much of the world, that I have
become suspicious -- this is the worst effect of experience. My feelings are
like those of a connesseur in painting, who, amid a magnificent groupe of
figures, should pass over the most prominent with contempt, and gaze with
delight and astonishment at one, which to the eyes of common observers,
appeared lost in the superior grandeur of the rest. Believe me, Mr. Morland, it
is a true, but melancholy observation, that our sensibilities to the joys of
life, evaporate as the transient dew-drops upon the rose.


Morland. Then, a prudent man should endeavor the more ardently to cherish
them, while a last fleeting drop still remains.


Smith. Such is my determination. My pilgrimage is at an end; I am arrived at
my goal. -- Jenny has won my whole soul, she is the single drop I wish to
cherish. Her form is lovely -- her mind far superior -- her understanding is
cultivated, while her heart remains true to nature; -- She is charitable and
benevolent, without knowing it -- witty, without intending it. She never
concerns herself with the affairs of others, nor scans the fashion of her
neighbor's new gown or cap, to turn them into ridicule. She endeavors to
exculpate all who are guilty only of weaknesses, and never condemns in severe
terms even the most palpable criminality. Above all things, she possesses that
richest of all treasures, an equanimity of temper which is the same yesterday,
today, tomorrow, and forever. Oh! what an infinite source of happiness is
idcluded in that one quality!


Morland. (Smiling) How came you so intimately acquainted with this phoenix?


Smith. First at the theater.


Morland. I did not know that you had ever accompanied her into our box.


Smith. I was not in your box -- I was in the pit.


Morland. An opera-glass acqua^ntance then?


Smith. Nor can there be a better medium for forming an acquaintance; provided
the mind will use it, -- nor merely the eye. I will venture to assest, that a
tolerably accurate opinion may always be formed of a woman, only by attentively
observing her behavior at the theater.


Morland. Truly visionary.


Smith. I mean, supposing the piece to be such as affords sufficient ground for
observation. For instance, if a woman be looking around at the company, when
Philip is engaged in conversation with Posa, I can immediately measure the
extent of her understanding. If at the lamentations of the mother in Iffland's
Foresters, or at the story of Just's spaniel, -- a woman's eyes remain dry; it
gives me an immediate insight into her heart.


Morland. And Jenny was accidentally so fortunate --


Smith. Accidentally! -- Jenny, was still Jenny. She never came to see and be
seen, but always sat in the corner of her box absorbed in attention to the
piece. Her smiles and tears were not ostentatiously displayed, but lost in her
muff; she never clapped, but appeared uneasy when any fine passage was
interrupted by the clapping of others. This made me observant -- I continued my
observations for some months -- I found that these were not the mere impulses
of the moment, but the settled feelings of her heart; and I resolved to become
acquainted with her. -- Where, and in what manner to procure an introduction to
this fair incognita, then became the question? -- Should I seek to dazzle the
imagination of my future wife with the prospect of rank and fortune? -- No!
never! never! -- If the humble Edward Smith could not win her affections; I
resolved that her hand should never be given to the rich Lord Sidney. I heard
that you were in want of a clerk; I offered my services, -- my plan succeeded
-- they were accepted. Under this disguise I have for two months secretly
watched every thought, every action, of the beloved object -- I have observed
her, under circumstances when even the slightest veil that conceals the
feelings of the soul, is thrown aside; and my reason is now satisfied; -- it
has permitted my heart to speak.


Morland. Does my sister know this?


Smith. Heaven forbid! -- You are her brother, a man of sense and discernment,
and stand in the place of her father -- have you any thing to say against it?


Morland. My lord, how can I --


Smith. Pshaw! -- Has a single word escaped me that might be supposed to come
from the mouth of a lord? -- To go farther, I will also own, that I have no
less accurately observed you -- I am convinced you are an honest man; -- I as
little throw away my friendship lightly, as my love. Will you be my friend?


Morland. With my whole heart!


Smith. Enough! -- Give me your hand! -- no more at present, and let what has
passed, remain a profound secret.


Morland. But I cannot possibly retain you any longer as my clerk.


Smith. I request it as a favor.


Morland. The women will observe my embarrassment.


Smith. Why should you be embarrassed?


Morland. Jenny is a nice observer.


Smith. Most certainly.


Morland. And a man-hater.


Smith. I rejoice to hear it. A reconciled enemy is always the warmest friend.


Morland. When will you declare yourself?


Smith. I know not. -- When courage and opportunity suit.


Morland. A man who has traversed Abyssinia cannot want courage.


Smith. A fool alone has courage in love -- the Abyssinians have as little
courage in this respect as ourselves. Have you farther employment for me?


Morland. I must go now to the Minister.


Smith. In the afternoon I will bring you documents to prove my rank and
fortune.


Morland. I can trust you.


Smith. That would be folly. I may be an adventurer, and deceive you through
impudence -- never trust any one. (Exit.)


SCENE X.
-- MORLAND alone. He makes a long pause, looking after SMITH. Never trust any
one! -- not even a wife! -- Alas! is this all that can be learnt by traveling
the world over -- that no man is to be trusted! -- better be sometimes
deceived, than live in constant suspicion! -- I cannot do that -- my heart
revolts against it! -- Emilia, it is well that the Briton has somewhat
dissipated my thoughts! -- yet they will recur to one fatal subject -- Oh
Allbrand! Allbrand! thou have placed a worm in my bosom which gnaws my very
vitals! -- Shall I, without reserve, impart all my torments to Emilia? -- that
perhaps were best! -- A husband or wife cannot guard too cautiously against
suffering aught to smother within their bosoms, that may at least burst forth
into an unquenchable flame. Yet, today, I never can assume sufficient
fortitude to mention the subject -- at least not now -- in the evening,
perhaps, when all business is over, and the twilight of domestic peace may
succeed a day of storms --

SCENE XI.
-- Enter EMILIA. Emilia. (throwing her arm affectionately round him) Are you
at last alone, dearest Morland?


Morland. (withdrawing himself from her in confusion) Yes -- I am alone -- and
-- I wish to be alone! -- (Exit into his study.)


Emilia. (overpowered with astonishment) What can this mean! -- (she sta^^^
fixed in thought) My God! what can this mean!!!


(the Curtain falls.) END OF THE FIRST ACT.
ACT II.
SCENE I.
-- The Minister's Audience Chamber. Young SCHARFENECK Sitting and Playing
caressly with his Snuff Box, Ring, and Watch-Chain. PRUNK standing by him.
Captain ELLFIELD leaning against a pillar at a little distance. SCHARFENECK
(yawning.) FOR God's sake, talk, Prunk.


Prunk. What can I say?


Scharfeneck. Any thing.


Prunk. His Excellency has an assembly and card-party, this evening.


Scharfeneck. I know that already.


Prunk. His Excellency does not dine at home today.


Scharfeneck. I know that too.


Prunk. I don't know what to say, then -- you know every thing beforehand. --
Today is Monday,


Scharfeneck. Ha! ha! ha! -- Prunk, can you guess why I laugh? -- It Is because
you really at last have told me news; for the devil fetch me, if ever I know
either the day of the week, or the day of the month.


Prunk. Except you should chance to write a draft.


Scharfeneck. Bravo! -- well said, Prunk! -- you come on -- the idea was not
bad, -- Come, again --


Prunk. I am quite exhausted.


Scharfeneck. What? -- served so long in the antichamber, and not yet learned
to talk a great deal about nothing?


Prunk. My duty is to say nothing about a great deal.


Scharfeneck. You play very prettily with an antithesis. But, seriously, have
you much to keep yourself?


Prunk. At least, frequenting the court, has taught me to appear as if I had.


Scharfeneck. You certainly have talents.


Prunk. That is my misfortune; else I had not remained so long, only valet of
the Privy-Chamber.


Shcarfeneck. How so?


Prunk. Great people love to consider themselves as creators^ Now a clever
fellow is something ready formed to their hands, and no creation of theirs; a
stupid fellow, on the contrary, is a mere block; and if a Prince form him into
a Privy-Counsellor the manufacture is all his own.


Scharfeneck. You think the stupidest fellows, rise the most rapidly?


Prunk. They do not rise, they are pushed up.


Scharfeneck. And by whom? by the women. Believe, me Prunk, Court favor is
commonly the effect of female caprice.


Prunk. That cannot be, when your honor has never risen beyond gentleman of the
Privy-Chamber.


Scharfeneck. My own fault. Could I have cringed to the ugly painted creatures
about the court I might have been Chamberlain long ago. But my devotion to the
fair sex, has never been a matter of interest -- if I see a lovely Madona
countenance, I never concern myself with enquiring whether she be a fag-end of
quality or not.


Prunk. (With a significant wink) Miss Jenny Morland for that.


Scharfeneck. You mistake -- I am quite off with her.


Prunk. Off! again?


Scharfeneck. The girl can find no place in the creation good enough for her
little pert turned-up nose. She would fain have seduced me into committing the
greatest folly of which a man can be guilty, matrimony -- or, possibly her
prudery was only intended as a varnish to conceal the blemishes of her former
intrigues.


Prunk. Intrigues! she has always been considered as extremely modest and
reserved.


Scharfeneck. Modest! But remember we are not alone. -- (Makes a sign toward
Ellfield, and then speaks in a half whisper to Prunk) Prunk, who is that statue
up in the corner?


Prunk. One captain Ellfield.


Scharfeneck. What does he want?


Prunk. A pension, no doubt -- that is the cry of all these people.


Scharfeneck. Send him away.


Prunk. I have told him, twenty times, already, that his excellency would not
be spoken with to day, but he will not stir.


Prunk. A truly comic figure, faith! he drags one foot like a ^rane, when it
stands stretching out its neck upon some lofty pinnacle.


Prunk. He is lame from a shot in the leg.


Scharfeneck. He seems good for nothing but to be shot at. -- Look at his hand
crammed so stiffly into his waistcoat.


Prnuk. He has only a false arm.


Scharfeneck- False?


Prunk. His own arm was carried away by a cannon ball.


Scharfeneck. You excite my curiosity. I Will amuse myself with him for a while.
(to Ellfield) Will you be seated, Sir?


Ellfield. I thank you.


Scharfeneck. Pray do not stand at that distance!


Ellfield. I thank you, sincerely.


Scharfeneck. For what?


Ellfield. For a few civil words. If such were not to be acknowledged, the art
of making acknowledgements might soon be forgotten here.


Scharfeneck. (aside) Upon my word, this fellow is not an absolute fool! (to
Ellfield) I am afraid my uncle will not be seen to day.


Ellfield. Then I must be content to do once more, as I have done every day for
the last month.


Scharfeneck. That was? --


Ellfield. Yo come again the next day.


Scharfeneck. Captain, you must not consider it as a particular affront to you,
if amid the crowd of supplicants who daily throng around my uncle, he have not
always the power of distinguishing between the man of real merit and the mere
pretender.


Ellfield. Ministers are appointed for the purpose of learning those
distinctions.


Scharfeneck. What have you done for your native country?


Ellfield. My duty.


Scharfeneck. Then he will perform his.


Ellfield. I trust so.


Scharfeneck. You have suffered much in the service.


Ellfield. I am an absolute cripple.


Scharfeneck. And your dismission is the only recompense you have received?


Ellfield. By which I am left without bread.


Scharfeneck. It it expensive to live where the prince resides.


Ellfield. I am surprised at that.


Scharfeneck. Why surprised?


Ellfield. Because the population is so thin.


Scharfeneck. What do you mean? -- this city contains fifty thousand
inhabitants.


Ellfield. So I have been informed.


Scharfeneck. And with truth.


Ellfield. I can scarcely believe it. I brought at least twenty recommendations
from the army, to people who were said to be resident here; but, not one of
them can I find; and if my visits to this house are to be continued in vain for
some weeks longer --


Scharfeneck. You would swear through thick and thin, that my uncle did not
live here?


Ellfield. You are perfectly right.


Scharfeneck. Ha! ha! ha! -- It is very obvious that the court is not your
element.


Ellfield. Thank God, it is not!


Scharfeneck. Three things are indispensably necessary to all who would make
their way there; -- sound legs, a flexible back, and a smooth tongue.


Ellfield. With not one of which I am blessed.


Scharfeneck. Then you are on the high road to starvation.


Ellfield. Both my poor sick wife, and myself, have been very near the end of
our journey.


Scharfeneck. Married, too?


Ellfield. Yes*


Scharfeneck. Poor man! -- And how did you help yourself?


Ellfield. I have no power of helping myself, as you see.


Scharfeneck. And foreign aid must not be expected within the atmosphere you
now breathe.


Ellfield. Philanthropy is to be found, even in the purlieus of a court.


Scharfeneck. By the help of Diogenes' lantern.


Ellfield. No, there are benevolent beings who can even seek out misery, and
unsolicited, afford it consolation, and assistance; -- yet nobly keep their
names in concealment.


Scharfeneck. Indeed! -- I thought, I was tolerably well acquainted with the
character of every one near the court; yet I confess myself at a loss to divine
who this may be?


Ellfield. She will not be known.


Sharfeneck. A she too! -- Oh hasten, dear Captain, to satisfy my curiosity!


Ellfield. I have told you all that I know myself; perhaps I have been to blame
in saying so much -- the bare mention of the circumstance may be a
transgression against that benevolent creature's wish of secrecy. But, so few
happy moments fall to my lot, that I can scarcely command myself, when I think
of those she has afforded me.


Scharfeneck. Humph! -- a lady! -- Was she young? -- handsome? --


Ellfield. An angel! -- Yet I am almost ashamed of applying to to her, a term
so often misused by poets and romance-writers.


Scharfeneck. And this unknown angel? --


Ellfield. By accident learned our distresses, and has ever since, even at
midnight, brought consolation to my garret.


Scharfeneck. At midnight! --


Ellfield. Virtues and crimes, alike, shun daylight; -- the former from
modesty, the latter from fear.


Scharfeneck. I wish you joy, Captain -- a cripple, I perceive, may make
conquests.


Ellfield. For shame, Sir.


Scharfeneck. Female virtue in the streets at midnight! -- Ha! ha! ha! -- I
know what to think of that.


Ellfield. Fool! -- why did I give vent to my feelings in such a place?


Scharfeneck. In the great world, one soon looses all belief in exalted virtue.


Ellfield. Then, for the first time, I feel my poverty a blessing!


SCENE II.
The MINISTER enters from his closet. SCHARFENECK springs up from his seat, and
bows very respectfully. Minister. Good morrow, Nephew! (he looks at Ellfield,
who bows -- he then turns angrily to Prunk) I ordered that nobody should be
admitted to day.


Prunk. The strange gentleman would not take a refusal. -- (Prunk retires into
the antichamber.)


Ellfield. (approaching the Minister) For a month past I have daily sought
access to your Excellency.


Minister. Who are you?


Ellfield. Ellfield, of the regiment of Braunstein.


Minister. Ellfield! of the regiment of Braunstein! right! right! I recollect
your name.


Ellfield. And your excellency will probably also recollect, that I have twice
lost my baggage, and am reduced to a cripple in the service.


Minister. What do you want?


Ellfield. Bread.


Minister. Your opinions are not very consistent with our necessitous situation.


Ellfield. My opinions can ha^ be known to your Excellency.


Minister. Yet --


Ellfield. Yet, granted they were, I should then feel the greater confidence in
my petition's being granted.


Minister. What do you mean?


Ellfield. That I suppose principles of strict integrity to be the most
powerful recommendation by which any petition can be enforced.


Minister. Your colonel was dissatisfied with you.


Ellfield. My colonel! I hope --


Minister. You have disseminated principles --


Ellfield. I desirbe to be judged by my actions: my crippled limbs bear ample
testimony, that I have fulfilled my duty. -- Yet, I would not shrink from an
investigation of my principles. May I ask your excellency of what I am accused?


Minister. Of making improper remarks upon the war.


Ellfield. Could my colonel be guilty of conduct so dishonorable as to make a
private conversation the subject of an official report?


Minister. Recollect, that one indiscreet word will often do more mischief,
than a thousand brave arms can repair.


Ellfield. My remarks were such as might be made with the strictest propriety,
among a circle of friends over a bottle.


Minister. What reliance was to be placed upon that friendship?


Ellfield. Experience informs me -- alas! too late.


Minister. You would have acted more prudently in times like the present, when
all the bonds that unite society are relaxed, not to trust too implicitly to
those of friendship. I wish you a good morning, Sir.


Ellfield. Your excellency has at least laid down a doctrine, whence, bitter as
it is, I might draw an inference that would furnish me some consolation, amid
the agonies of disappointed hope; for when all other bonds are relaxed, why is
that to be regarded which would force us to live? and, of what value is life to
one bowed to the earth by corporeal and mental suffering? Yes, with my one
remaining arm I should certainly discharge a pistol through that head which has
been the undersigned cause of my misfortune; did not an unfortunate being, who
in my happier days united her fate with mine, look to me alone for solace and
support. -- But I dare not leave a helpless wife, a prey to hunger and despair!
-- However reluctant I may be therefore to solicit farther; I must still
entreat your excellency to grant me some trifling pension, that may preserve us
from the extremity of want. Do not suppose this hat, shot through in so many
places, is worn from ostentation -- believe me, I have no other. My sword, and
a heart glowing with love for my native country, is all the wealth fate has
left me.


Minister. I will take some opportunity of laying your case before the Prince.


Ellfield. When may I hope? --


Minister, At present, we are so overpowered with state affairs; and besides,
the Prince has not, of late, been in a particularly good humor: -- call again,
in a few weeks.


Ellfield. In a few weeks! -- Good God! -- Your Excellency must surely be
aware, that every hour is an age to the miserable.


Minister. Perhaps it may be sooner -- I will send for you. -- (Ellfield bows
and retires with slow and sorrowful steps) These people grow every day more
numerous and importunate.


Scharfeneck. He is not so wrenched as he appears.


Minsiter. Do you know him?


Scharfeneck. Not much. I only know that the poor afflicted cripple, even now
occasions many a sleepless night, to many a kind-hearted lady.


Minister. Indeed! -- Aye, it will certainly be right to keep a watchful eye
over the man. He is a philosopher; and they are always a dangerous set of
people -- even without arms or legs.


SCENE III.
-- Enter ALLBRAND. Allbrand. Your Excellency's orders are obeyed; the letters
are ready for signature.


Minister. And may I expect soon to receive the elucidations necessary for
imposing the new duties?


Allbrand. Morland promised them today.


Minister. The old book-worm has had a glorious rummage among dusty parchments.


Allbrand. He enters very warmly into the citizens' cause.


Scharfeneck. A fanatic, who is always talking about his beloved Grecians.


M^nister. Let him take heed to himself.


Allbrand. I have advised him to that effect. We are old friends; but the
welfare of the state must supersede all private friendships.


Scharfeneck. He endeavors to instill his Swiss principles into the people.


Allbrand. It is always dangerous to trust such kind of men in any post.


Minister. Woe to him, if his influence over the citizens be misused!


Scharfeneck. He degrades the dignity of his office -- talks with the meanest
mechanic, as if he were his brother.


Minister. Cannot his wife inspire him with better notions? -- She is of a
genteel family.


Scharfeneck, He ridicules all such ideas -- he is always yawning in the
audience-chamber -- and goes into the first circles with a cropped head.


Allbrand. I have known him for eighteen years -- even from his childhood, he
was rash and headstrong.


Minister. Enough. The Prince shall know all; he must be narrowly watched.


Allbrand. I tremble for my friend! -- yet, were he my brother, I feel
sufficient resolution to become a second Timoleon, for the sake of my country.


Prunk. (enters) Syndicus Morland, Sir.


Minister. Show him in.


SCENE IV
-- Enter MORLAND. Minister. What brings the good Syndicus hither? --


Morland. I hope your Excellency will find these representations on the part of
the citizens to be just.


Minister. Representations! -- I only required such information from various
old documents, as might assist in establishing the new duties.


Morland. It is from those old documents, that the matter contained in these
representations, is derived; -- I have compressed it to the utmost of my power.
-- (Gives him a large parcel of papers.)


Minister. Do you suppose, that the Prince will read all these sheets?


Morland. Most certainly; -- for I know him to be the upright Father of his
people.


Minister. But uprightness cannot ensure a man against fatigue.


Morland. If the happiness of a nation can be purchased at the expense only of
one fatigue to its ruler; it is cheaply obtained.


Minister. What do you mean?


Morland. That I am confident, a Prince, like ours, will not think any business
fatiguing, which may ultimately promote the happiness of his subjects.


Minister. And the result of these representations? --


Morland. Is an humble hope on the part of the citizens, that the imposition of
the intended duties will be relinquished.


Minister. The pretext for which hope is? --


Morland. Necessity. -- Your Excellency well knows, how small is the
productive, how great is the consuming trade about a court. Our inland
manufactures are little encouraged; they are almost entirely superseded by the
English. -- A thousand rapid streams flow out of this city, -- one little
rivulet alone flows into it. What is saved by industry, and diligence in trade,
is swallowed up by duties on every thing we eat and drink, on our stock, our
property --


Minister. My God! why this enumeration? -- I regret the citizens' distresses
as much as you; but the necessities of the State --


Morland. I know, must be considered; -- nor are the citizens insensible to the
convulsion that shakes all Europe; but they know also that we inhabit a happy
corner of the earth, which nature, united with the wisdom of its rulers, have
preserved from these convulsions; and they hope --


Minister. These are things, Mr. Syndicus, of which, those only who preside in
the Cabinet, can be proper judges.


Morland. I have done my duty.


Minister. Less of duty I desire; and more consideration for the State.


Morland. He who seeks the people's happiness, manifests the greatest love for
the State.


Minister. Insolent! -- But I warn you Mr. Syndicus, that we live in times,
when the banishment of turbulent spirits, is, perhaps, one of the most sacred
duties of those who guide the helm of affairs. (Exit.)


SCENE V.
-- Manent SCHARFENECK, MORLAND, and ALLBRAND. MORLAND shrugs his shoulders in
silence, as the MINISTER goes out. Scharfeneck. Ha! ha! ha! -- You, literati,
are always running your heads against a post; -- you laugh at the courtiers, and
call them insignificant beings; but I would venture any wager, that a gentleman
of the Privy-Chamber, in your situation would have conducted himself in a very
different manner.


Morland. I don't doubt it.


Scharfeneck. This is always the case among people unaccustomed to courtly
manners. Observe the Pagods that ornament the chimney-piece in the
Antichamber; -- the Court is the benignant region, whence proceeds all genial
warmth; but whoever would share its smiles, must nod their heads, like those
Pagods, and be careful not to stand in any body's way.


Morland. You forget that the citizens prepare the wood which enables them and
their resemblances to nod.


Scharfeneck. Bravo! -- Ha! ha! ha! (Takes a pinch of snuff) Apropos, -- how
does the lady your wife!


Morland. Perfectly well.


Scharfeneck. Indeed! -- Perfectly well!


Morland. What do you mean by that sneer?


Scharfeneck. You know the world. -- What indeed could be more natural than
that a Swiss girl should wish, for some refreshing Alpine breezes. -- But
people about the Court have no idea of such natural wishes. -- In short, town
prattle is like a bottle of Champagne; and the purest motives are only a cork,
which it throws up suddenly into the air.


Morland. What such people say or think, is to me, matter of perfect
indifference.


Scharfeneck. Don't plume yourself too highly upon your stoicism -- the hardest
stone may, in time, be worn away, only by the drippings of the rain. Trust the
warning of a friend -- be a little less zealous in the citizens' cause, and
somewhat more attentive to your domestic concerns -- else it may fare with you
as with Cato and Marcus Aurelius. (Exit affectedly.)


SCENE VI.
-- Manent ALLBRAND and MORLAND. Morland. Allbrand, what does he mean? -- am I
become a common talk to the whole town? -- Am I so fallen, that every fool is
to jingle his cap and bells in my ears?


Allbrand. The coxcomb serves every body in the same way.


Morland. Let him divert himself at my expense, as much as he pleases; but by
Heaven, he shall not sport with the characters of my wife and sister! -- I will
break the rascal's head if he dare --


Allbrand. Dear Morland, how many heads will you break, if --


Morland. How! -- What! -- Name the carrion progeny who are so ready to caw and
scratch where they suppose they have discovered a fallen deer! -- I will make
an example of them! -- These right honorable gossips, though related to the
Abyssinian monarch himself, shall --


Allbrand. Morland, Morland, you forget yourself.


Morland No! -- when my wife's virtue is called in question --


Allbrand. You do not recollect where we are.


Morland. I would tear the very priest from the altar, who should dare to cast
aspersions on Emilia!


Allbrand. The Minister's displeasure has put you out of temper.


SCENE VII.
-- Enter the MINISTER from his closet. Minister. I thought, I heard
altercation.


Allbrand. Heaven forbid!


Minister. (to Morland) Have you any farther business with me, Mr. Syndi^^s?


Morland. None, please your Excellency.


Minister. You would do well to govern your hasty temper, in my house.


Morland. I acknowledge my fault, and entreat your pardon -- there are moments
when po^^rful feeling will overcome good manners.


Minister. Probably, important business may await you at home.


Morland. To intrude on the great, never was my failing.


Minister. Some people have strange ideas of behavior.


Morland. Indeed the air of the audience-chamber, is not salutary to the
inhabitant of the Alps! -- he sickens in it, both in body and mind.


Minister. The air of a prison is a sovereign remedy for such diseases.


Morland. Such was the opinion of the Austrian governor, four centuries ago. I
am your Excellency's most humble servant.


(Exit.) SCENE VIII.
-- The MINISTER and ALLBRAND. Minister. The Austrian governors! -- what does
he mean? -- who were those governors?


Allbrand. An insolent allusion to the history of the Swiss confederacy.


Minister. The pedant assumes it as a certainty, that every body must be as
conversant with the history of his rugged countrymen, as himself. But, what was
passing here?


Allbrand. Your excellency is irritated; and I would by no means increase your
anger. Morland is, or at least was, my friend.


Minister. I cannot suffer my questions to be evaded. Whom does this matter
concern so much as myself?


Allbrand. Your Excellency is undoubtedly my benefactor, my patron --


Minister. And as such I command you to speak.


Allbrand. The whole affair originated in an unmeaning joke made by your
excellency's nephew, which occasioned Morland immediately to cast reflections
upon all nobility, calling them carrion progeny.


Minister. The tongue is the citizen's favorite weapon.


Allbrand. And, when I admonished him gently, to consider where we were; he
scoffed at the reproof, and assured me, he would not spare even the priest at
the altar.


Minister. The man is ripe for destruction -- a little puff of wind, and he
falls.


Allbrand. Alas! my poor friend! (affects to wipe tears from his eyes.)


Minister. You weep?


Allbrand. So wept Brutus, when obliged to condemn his sons.


Minister. Friendship must yield to duty. Allbrand, I have great confidence in
you; your admirable " Patriotic reflections" are safe in my port-folio; the
prince shall see, and will doubtless reward them. In the mean time, an
opportunity is presented to you, of acquiring new merit with the State;
continue to maintain an appearance of friendship with Morland -- observe him
narrowly, and every evening, impart your observations to me -- it is of
importance that I should know this man thoroughly.


(Exit.) SCENE IX.
-- ALLBRAND alone. Be it ^o -- you shall find, that you have not mistaken your
man Morland hasten^ fast into the snare which he has himself afforded the means
of spreading for his destruction. I could easily, at this very moment, drive
him into quitting his post, even into leaving the town, but then Emilia would
be the companion of his flight; and I should be no gainer; my only prospect of
attaining the object to which I aspire, is, by the removal of himself alone.
That once accomplished -- even if I cannot overcome Emilia's prudery, I shall
at least be revenged upon it; and revenge would be enjoyment, though but of a
secondary nature. But first, I must by some means procure the sketch of the "
Patriotic Reflections" -- that must not be left in his hands, as a witne^s
against me -- then will I awaken the distrust of the citizens, and all is ever
with the Syndicus.

SCENE X.
-- Enter PILZ. Pilz. (peeping in) Hist! hist! -- Mr. Secretary?


Allbrand. Well, what news?


Pilz. Are we alone?


Allbrand. Quite alone.


Pilz. I have made a great discovery.


Allbrand. Tell it quickly, then.


Pilz. Last night, as I was upon duty, patrolling about the streets, I saw a
well dressed woman, followed by a maid, with a bundle under her arm, steal
softly across the castle square. -- She looked anxiously round her, several
times, while I thought within myself, who can this be? -- when she came to the
well, she stopped and hemmed three or four times; and in a few moments the
house door, at No. 312, was opened, and she entered. I remained wandering about
the square for more than an hour, -- to be sure the time seemed a little
tedious, but at last the door opened again, and the lady came out; -- she was
attended to the door by a man, of whom she took leave very kindly, promissing
to visit him again the next night. -- With that she tripped hastily away; and I
stole softly after her, till she reached her own house. -- And now, whom do you
think she might be?


Allbrand. Some kind-hearted lady, I suppose.


Pilz. Mrs. Morland, as I live.


Allbrand. You are mad!


Pilz. Mad! Not a bit of it! I Will consent to live upon bread and water, for a
month, if it was any body else. She attempted to unlock the garden-door, and as
it was dark put aside her veil, to find the keyhole more readily. I took the
opportunity of throwing the light of my dark-lantern directly in her face, and
saw her too plainly to be mistaken.


Allbrand. And do you know whom she had been visiting?


Pilz. I fetched the constable immediately, and he says, that the house belongs
to an old woman, and up in the garret lives one captain Ellfield, who I suppose
was the person that let her in and attended her out.


Allbrand. Impossible!


Pilz. Nay, very certain; for he is the only man in the house.


Allbrand. Do you know him?


Pilz. No, but I know that he is very poor.


Allbrand. Are you certain of the truth of this story?


Pilz. Give me a box on the ear every day, for the rest of my life if I did not
last night see Mrs. Morland go to visit captain Ellfield.


Allbrand. But what the devil could she want with him?


Pilz. That Is more than I know.


Allbrand. (In a murmur to himself) Humph! I can scarcely suspect any thing
amiss here! but no matter! it has that appearance at least; and I can make it
of important use in forwarding my plans. It may be employed as an engine for
betraying the husband into the commission of some rash action, and of
intimidating the wife into compliance with my wishes. Yes, it is a most
fortunate accident! -- (To Pilz) The Captain, you say, is poor?


Pilz. So the constable asserts.


Albrand. Very poor?


Pilz. In want even of bread*


Allbrand. So much the better!


Pilz. Have you never seen him? -- He has attended daily at his Excellency's,
for some weeks past, to solicit a pension.


Albrand. Ha! -- the same! -- excellent! -- conduct me to him.


Pilz. Now? -- at this instant?


Albrand. At this very instant.


Pilz. We have not far to go. -- No. 312, in the Castle Square. (Exeunt.)


SCENE XI.
-- ELLFIELD's Lodgings. Mrs. ELLFIELD, alone, in a white morning habit, which
she surveys several times. It Is too fine, too expensive for my present
situation! -- Admirable woman! -- Now, I am once more out of bed, and clothed
again; I could fancy myself in perfect health! -- Had I a little more color,
no one would imagine that I had so lately, for ten days together, been on the
very brink of the grave. My hands, my strength, are restored; I can walk and
stand without the assistance of a stick, or supporting myself against the wall!
-- thanks! -- eternal thanks! to my benefactress, and my dear Charles's love,
for this restoration! -- But my husband does not retutn! (She goes to the
window) I dressed myself only for him -- I know he will rejoice to see me thus!
-- but -- (She draws out a broken pocket looking-glass) There was a time, when
I was accustomed to a splendid toilette, with a glass in which I could see
myself from head to foot! -- fie! fie! -- I ought not to bestow one thought
upon such follies! -- My Charles is still spared, and all other losses are
scarcely worth a sigh! -- He is a cripple, alas! -- but his heart beats with
equal warmth for me, as in his prosperous days; and my hands shall labor for
his support! -- When he was borne wounded from the field of battle, and I knelt
in despair beside his almost lifeless body; had I another wish, or could I
breathe another prayer, save for his recovery? -- My prayers were heard! -- he
did recover! -- and I am happy!

SCENE XII.
-- Enter CAPTAIN ELLFIELD. Mrs. Ellfield. Are you at last returned, my Charles!


Ellfield. My dearest Caroline! (he observes her with looks of satisfaction.)


Mrs. Ellfield. Are you pleased to see me thus?


Ellfield. (Embracing her) Let this be my answer! You surely understand it?


Mrs. Ellfield. My heart is its interpreter.


Ellfield. But have you not ventured up too soon!


Mrs. Ellfield. No, I feel perfectly recovered.


Ellfield. You look pale still.


Mrs. Ellfield. I mean to take a short walk, to day -- I think, the air will
revive me.


Ellfield. Do not run any hazards; a relapse might cost you your life.


Mrs. Ellfield. Oh, you need not fear a relapse.


Ellfield. Remember that I cannot live without you.


Mrs. Ellfield. Have you again been disappointed?


Ellfield. I have at length seen the Minister.


Mrs. Ellfield. Indeed! Well?


Ellfield. Alas!


Mrs. Ellfield. Speak, I entreat.


Ellfield. May heaven bless you, my Caroline!


Mrs. Ellfield. I am blessed!


Ellfield. Alas! how?


Mrs. Ellfield. In your love!


Ellfield. (Taking her hand, much affected) Dearest wife! you understand making
even a cripple worthy of envy.


SCENE XIII.
-- Enter ALLBRAND. Allbrand. (As he enters) I hope I do not mi^^ake the house.


Ellfield. Whom seek you, Sir?


Allbrand. Captain Ellfield.


Ellfield. I am that person.


Allbrand. (Seeing Mrs. Ellfield, starts) And this lady? --


Ellfield. Is my wife.


Allbrand. You are married then?


Ellfield. You seem surprised at that? May I ask with whom I have the honor of
speaking?


Allbrand. As a man can scarcely be allowed at a first visit to assume the name
of FRIEND, I beg leave to conceal mine.


Ellfield. This is most extraordinary! -- While those on whom I ^^^e some claim
for friendship forsake me, I am indebted to ^^rangers for consolation and
support.


Allbrand. I know your story -- I consider your fate as hard -- and my
situation may enable me to improve it. I enjoy a considerable share of the
minister's favor.


Ellfield. You will find your patronage not bestowed upon ungrateful hearts.


Allbrand. I will engage to procure you a competent pension -- if --


Ellfield. That if, seems to imply some condition. Is it one that I am in a
station to fulfill?


Allbrand. Silence and confidence are all that I require.


Ellfield. Both which, are in the power even of a beggar.


Allbrand, You often receive visits from Mrs. Morland.


Ellfield. Mrs. Morland!


Mrs. Ellfield. Mrs. Morland?


Allbrand. I surely do not mistake?


Mrs. Ellfield. Is Mrs. Morland, the lady to whom we are so much indebted?


Allbrand. How! Do you not know her?


Ellfield. Till this moment, we only knew her heart.


Allbrand. Yes, she has often, at midnight --


Mrs. Ellfield. Often, indeed! and, like an angel, has rescued me from death.


Allbrand. Yet never told her name?


Ellfield. Never!


Allbrand. It was like herself! -- Her soul is truly noble!


Mrs. Ellfield. It is indeed!


Ellfield. Most truly so!


Allbrand. And she has promised this night --


Mrs. Ellfield. To see us again.


Ellfield. And enjoy the fruit of her benevolence.


Allbrand. Would you render this lady an essential service!


Ellfield. I would sacrifice my life for her!


Allbrand. This encourages me to inform you, in confidence that I am so blessed
as to enjoy her love.


Mrs. Ellfield. She is then unmarried?


Allbrand. No, she is married, but, alas, unhappily!


Mrs. Ellfield. Yet, if she be unhappy, to such a woman, her duty must be
sacred.


Allbrand. That is the very point. Upon this subject she entertains very strong
prejudices.


Ellfield. Prejudices, Sir!


Allbrand. Which time would banish, could she be persuaded --


Ellfield. Of what?


Allbrand. Permit me to meet her at these nightly visits? -- Your lodging is
perfectly private -- perfectly retired. -- If I might see her, here, alone? --
Or perhaps you would lend your assistance in combating some childish notions --


Ellfield. (Trembling with indignation) Oh, Poverty! Poverty! to what
humiliation do thou reduce a man!


Mrs. Ellfield. (Sinking down on a chair) This is too much.


Allbrand. I hope you do not misunderstand me? I pledge my honor that every
thing relative to the pension, shall be finished tomorrow! and do not suppose
my gratitude shall be confined to that alone -- (He draws out a purse) Be this
an earnest --


Ellfield. (Enraged) Sir, I know you not, -- I am ignorant of your rank and
name; but whatever they may be, unless you quit my room peaceably, this
instant, you shall find, that a cripple, when his honor is insulted, has
strength sufficient to kick a scoundrel down stairs.


Allbrand. This -- to me?


Ellfield. Yes, -- though you were next heir to the throne! -- Begone, or I
shall make use of the rights my own house gives me.


Allbrand. Very well, captain Ellfield -- But remember that the pension is
forfeited by your own indiscretion; you are yourself alone responsible for
whatever consequences may ensue.


(Exit) Ellfield. Scound^el! did he hope to make me his pimp! -- me!


Mrs. Ellfield. Who can the villain be?


Ellfield. Some Courtier, no doubt, who judges of us by himself.


Mrs. Ellfield. We must conceal this circumstance from our benefactress.


Ellfield. Most certainly. Innocence, like here is, would be shocked at hearing
that it was suspected capable of corruption. But I will not suffer her to go
home, again, alone.


Mrs. Ellfield. Charles, we have only potatoes for dinner; yet how much happier
are our lots than his!


Ellfield. (Clasping her in his bosom) Our hearts are pure, though our fare is
homely.


Mrs. Ellfield. He would shame poverty.


Ellfield. For the sake of mankind, heaven guard such villains from poverty! --
(Curtain falls)


END OF THE SECOND ACT.
ACT III.
SCENE I.
-- The MINISTER's Audience Chamber. -- PRUNK, sitting and reading -- Enter
ALLBRAND hastily. ALLBRAND. IS the Minister at home?


Prunk. Yes.


Allbrand, I must speak with him directly, upon urgent business.


Prunk. He will not see you.


Allbrand. Why not?


Prunk. He is at cards.


Allbrand. So much the better! -- Has he ill-luck?


Prunk. I believe so.


Allbrand. So much the better again!


Prunk. So much the worse, I think.


Allbrand. Go and whisper in his ear --


Prunk. He will bid me go to the devil!


Allbrand. My business is of the utmost importance.


Prunk. At Court, many things are very important in the morning, that become
very insignificant in the evening over the card table.


Allbrand. I must positively --


Prunk. You will damn your own cause.


Allbrand. With all my heart!


Prunk. Well, if you choose to run the hazard! -- (Exit)


Allbrand. (alone) If he have lost, he will be so much the wore petulant and
ill-tempered -- his ears here, his heart at the card-table, eager to retrieve
his losses. Then he will not stay long, but say at once, -- "you know what had
best be done, follow your own judgment," -- and thus will my point be
completely carried. Summon up all thy confidence, Allbrand! -- chance smiles
upon thee -- thy good genius beckons thee forward! -- How fortunate that I
should meet young Scharfeneck at such a moment, and learn from him so many
cirrumstances, to make my story appear the more probable! -- But, Prunk returns
--


SCENE II.
-- Re-Enter PRUNK and soon after, Enter the MINISTER. Prunk. He is coming.


Allbrand. In what sort of humor?


Prunk. So cross and snappish, that I have no desire to be one cf his auditors.
(Exit into the antichamber)


Allbrand. Go, and welcome! -- your company is not wanted.


Minister. (Entering) Well, what is the matter?


Allbrand. A melancholy discovery!


Minister. Hasten to tell it, then.


Allbrand. Morland is a traitor!


Minister. You have fresh proofs against him?


Allbrand. The most undoubted! -- He holds a secret intercourse --


Minister. With whom?


Allbrand. One Captain Ellfield.


Minister. I know the fellow.


Allbrand. They meet at dead of night --


Minister. Where?


Allbrand. At the Captain's lodgings.


Minister. Are you certain of this?


Allbrand. I know from eyewitnesses that Morland steals by night to the house
of this man; though by day he denies any knowledge of him.


Minister. Enough to create suspicion! -- But what is to be done?


Allbrand. If we could catch him in the very fact --


Minister. True! -- he might be sent at once to prison.


Allbrand. His papers might also be seized.


Minister. And he himself brought to a speedy trial.


Allbrand. If your Excellency would invest me with full powers for such a
procedure --


Minister. By all means! -- but supposing his papers should prove nothing
against him? -- the Prince, you know, requires the utmost forbearance and
circumspection in these matters.


Allbrand. The fact is beyond a doubt.


Minister. Well, then --


Allbrand. May I desire a written order? --


Minister. (impatiently) Now, directly?


Allbrand. Or if your Excellency would give directions to the police-officer
who waits without --


Minister. Let him come in.


Allbrand. (opens the door and calls) Pilz!


SCENE III.
-- Enter PILZ. Minister. (to Pilz) I have charged my secretary with an
important commission; -- follow his directions implicitly. (Pilz bows
obedience. The Minister addresses Allbrand) -- Have you any thing else to
mention?


Albrand. Nothing! -- Does your Excellency recollect any further orders?


Minister. Only a strict injunction to proceed cautiously -- I shall expect
your report early tomorrow morning. -- (Exit)


Allbrand. (rubbing his hands) All succeeds admirably! -- (to Pilz) Come to my
apartment; there you shall receive your instructions. No; first seek the
Gentleman of the Privy Chamber; and say that I request to see him for a few
moments -- tell him of his Excellency's and Highness's commands! -- away! --
instantly! -- (Exit Pilz.) That was an admirable thought! -- Scharfeneck shall
seize and seal up the papers. The sketch of the " Patriotic Reflections" I must
have! -- much depends upon that! -- much! -- very much! -- (Exit.)


SCENE IV.
-- MORLA^D's ^^use. JENNY is discovered at work; SMITH standing and leaning
over the back of ^ chair at a little distance, with his eyes fixed upon her. --
They remain silent, some minutes. Jenny. My brother is very late! -- he keeps
the dinner waiting a long time.


Smith. It must be my fault, if the time appear so very tedious.


Jenny. How so?


Smith. I do not understand how to talk.


Jenny. On the contrary, I have often, at table, admired your talents for
conversation.


Smith. I ought rather to be silent there and talk here.


Jenny. The reverse is the most natural; since in the company of a woman only,
the subjects for conversation are so much more confined.


Smith. But what they loose in variety, they gain in interest.


Jenny. You have, I perceive, been so far initiated into the mysteries of the
fashionable world, that you are an adept at making compliments.


Smith. I never make compliments, -- I always speak truth.


Jenny. (confused, after a pause) Is it long since you left England?


Smith. Many months.


Jenny. And have you never, like a Swiss, experienced the mal-du-pays?


Smith. Sometimes.


Jenny. Why, then, do you not return? -- A man of your talents might find
employment any where.


Smith. Do you wish to get rid of me?


Jenny. Heaven forbid!


Smith. I cannot return, alone, to my native country.


Jenny. Then why not marry?


Smith. It Is my ardent wish!


Jenny. Not that it is a step I would recommend.


Smith. Why not?


Jenny. Because, if you suppose all married people to be as my brother and
sister, you mistake.


Smith. I shall not easily be brought to think so.


Jenny. Most matches are unhappy.


Smith. Of that I very much doubt.


Jenny. I can plead frequent observations of the fact, in support of my
assertion. Two young people fall desperately in love with each other, and think
they never can exist asunder; -- a headstrong father, or a cross guardian
interposes, and thwarts their wishes: -- the young people sigh and pine -- and
pine and sigh -- till at length the old people's hearts are melted. Then the
lovers fancy they stand upon the highest pinnacle of fortune's temple, and
clasped in each other's arms, look down with indifference on every object, in
the busy world around them; they rush forward into wedlock, as the night-walker
to the lowest edge of the sloping roof, when suddenly some one calls, they
start, they wake, and down they fall.


Smith. A very ingenious simile; but the position on which it is founded, is
not fact.


Jenny. And there lie the poor souls, stretched in the mire of ennui,
exchanging looks of discontent with each other. If, indeed, they be at bottom,
people of sense and worth; powerful habit, after a while, will come to their
assistance; till at length, they will learn to endure each other's foibles with
patience; -- and each will jog on contentedly along the paved foot-path, to
which his steps must be confined; thankful if no thorns spring up to obstruct
and wound him as he proceeds.


Smith. But if esteem be the mother of love? --


Jenny. She is, at best, no more than a stepmother.


Smith. Those who can reason upon love, have indeed never loved.


Jenny. And are to be envied.


Smith. To be pitied.


Jenny. An unknown happiness can have no charms.


Smith. A false axiom. Do you suppose that miners, condemned to grovel at an
immense depth under ground, never long to behold the sun?


Jenny. You have high ideas of love.


Smith. And still higher of wedlock. (he pushes the chair on which he leans,
somewhat nearer to Jenny, but without altering his position) Love ties two
beings together; -- wedlock makes them only one. Love drinks down large
draughts from the cup of joy; -- wedlock sips up the sweets, a drop at a time;
nor finishes them till arrived at the very brink of the grave. Love is a
caterpillar, devouring dainties; -- wedlock, the same caterpillar, transformed
into a butterfly, when it feeds only upon the purer nourishment of the
fragrance exhaled by flowers. Years roll on; but a good wife never becomes old;
-- winter succeeds to summer; but wedded happiness never chills. The kiss of a
chaste wife, is the stamp with which nature seals her choicest blessings; --
storms roar above; lightning flashes around; but where domestic love dwells,
every trouble, every sorrow, is but half felt -- every joy, every pleasure, is
doubled.


Jenny. You grow animated.


Smith. (sitting down and drawing the chair nearer to her) Woe to that man who
would remain cold and insensible, while descanting on female beauty and virtue!
-- who would drink out of the same cup with him? -- Woe to the man who pays no
more respect to a good wife, than to his night gown; but because she
administers daily, nay hourly, to his comfort, receives her attentions without
one grateful feeling; and only learns to prize domestic happiness, when lost
forever! -- Let thy crowns, O Chance! be scattered about like flakes of snow; I
would not catch at one; -- I only ask thee to bestow upon me, the simple
garland of love! (he draws his chair still nearer) -- Should I at length find
what I have, so many years sought -- find my hopes, my wishes, realized -- then
farewell, ye petty tyrants of the mind, ambition, thirst of fame, ardour to
obtain the palm of wit! -- my heart shall have no room for any guest but love.
The sweet calm of domestic peace, firm union of souls, a taste for the joys of
nature, love for the unempoisoned air of the country, for rural pastimes, for
the pleasures of retirement, where we may live remote from envy and calumny --
from --


Jenny. (working very eagerly, and continually breaking her thread) Our finest
dreams are seldom realized.


Smith. (drawing his chair by degrees, quite close to her) That I love, is no
dream; -- but that I flatter myself with my love being returned, in equal
portion, may perhaps be the mere effect of a presumptuous vision. For the first
time in my life, I feel my happiness dependent upon the favor of others; and,
for the first time in my life, I tremble. Words are but poor interpreters of
our thoughts; let this tremor vouch the truth of my feelings?


Jenny. Smith, whence these emotions?


Smith. (taking her hand, eagerly) When a man feels to his inmost soul -- feels
so that he can scarcely speak; -- when his ^^ice faulter -- through the tears
-- that would force a passage -- to his eyes -- Oh, can his sincerity be
doubted! --


Jenny. Smith! for heaven's sake!


Smith. This moment decides the happiness or misery of my future life! -- an
honest man solicits your hand -- an ardent lover solicits your heart.


Jenny. The agitation that I witness, speaks in a language that cannot be
mistaken -- but --


Smith. My birth indeed is humble.


Jenny. That was not what I was going to observe.


Smith. My possessions are small, but sufficient to satisfy moderate wishes.


Jenny. I do not intend to sell my heart.


Smith. Be it then the reward of honorable love!


Jenny. Allow me time for consideration, dear Smith!


Smith. I thank you sincerely! (Kisses her hand with transport.) What can be
more grateful to an honest heart, than the asssurance that it shall be proved?


SCENE V.
Enter EMILIA, leading MORLAND by the hand. Emilia, Here he is at last, but in
a terribly serious humor.


Jenny. What is the matter, brother?


Morland. Nothing! overpowered with business.


Emilia. You have usually been, at least, cheerful at dinner.


Morland. Because I was not oppressed with care -- But do not mind me -- this
will pass away in time.


Emilia. We have expected you with great anxiety; you were always accustomed to
send, when you could not dine at home.


Morland. Forgive me -- I forgot -- the minister --


Jenny. The minister? what of him?


Morland, (Laying his hand upon his forehead) Excuse me -- I am not well -- my
head aches -- I feel, as if I were intoxicated -- let me retire.


Jenny, What can you have been about, this whole day?


Morland. Walking -- no, no, only --


Jenny. First it was business, now it is walking -- Oh brother! brother!


Morland. Forgive me! -- I really know not what I say.


Jenny. (Aside to Smith) A dark shade in the picture of wedded happiness.


Smith. What were light without shade?


Emilia. Will you go in, dearest Morland? dinner waits.


Morland. Yes! -- I am ready!


SCENE VI.
-- Enter ALLBRAND. Allbrand. Pardon me, that I come thus unexpectedly! -- a
very unexpected piece of business brings me hither, my friend.


Jenny. Pshaw! again business?


Morland. Go, my love -- Go Jenny, sit down to dinner -- we will be with you
presently.


Emilia. My dear Henry, I have provided your favorite dish.


Morland. (With constrained affection) Thanks, dearest Emilia! go, depend on
seeing us in a few minutes.


Emilia. (Aside, as she goes o^t slowly, and sorrowfully) All is not right!
What can have altered him thus!


Jenny. (Following her with Smith.) Smith! Smith! if this example cannot deter!
--


Smith. No overhasty judgment, I entreat! (Exeunt)


Manent ALLBRAND and MORLAND. Morland. Allbrand, you seem disordered.


Allbrand. Oh, deeply,


Morland. New torments for me?


Allbrand. Alas!


Morland. Speak out!


Allbrand. At this moment I feel, for the first time in my life, that
friendship may impose upon us most painful dutie^.


Morland. Truth is the first.


Allbrand. And most sacred of all duties -- I fulfill it with tears in my eyes,
with a bleeding heart! -- Morland, are you a man? a heavy blow aw^^ts you --
the more: severe as coming from a beloved hand.


Morland. From my wifes?


Allbrand. She is unworthy that name.


Morland. Prove her so!


Allbrand. She holds nightly meetings with the Prince.


Morland. It Is false!


Allbrand. Who has felt more implicit confidence in her virtue than myself? Who
has defended her more eagerly against all defamers, than myself? My heart
revolted at the idea of finding her guilty of infidelity toward her husband --
but


Morland. I tell you it is false!


Allbrand. So I asserted, as long as possibility of doubt remained; but when
incontrovertible facts --


Morland. (Stamping eagerly on the ground) By heaven it is false! Come to her
now, immediately --


Allbrand. Her tears, her denial of guilt, will be no proofs of her innocence.
Would you deprive yourself of the power of ascertaining the truth?


Morland. And what proofs have you against her?


Allbrand. Emilia has, for some time past quitted your house every night.


Morland. (Seizing him by the arm) Allbrand!


Allbrand. (Proceeding calmly) Stolen secretly across the Castle-square --


Morland. (Seizing hold of him with both hands, and fixing his eyes upon him) I
ask for proofs!


Allbrand. Into a very notorious house.


Morland. With his voice almost suffocated But, proofs* proofs!


Allbrand. And there met the Prince.


Morland. (Seizing him by the breast) Villian! thou lie!


Allbrand. Any thing may be excused to a friend in your situation.


Morland. Once more, I say, your proofs?


Allbrand. Will you believe your own eyes?


Morland. And only my eyes!


Allbrand. I will remain with you until midnight: we will go together to the
place; and you shall yourself be witness of her shame!


Morland. I take you at your word.


Allbrand. But unarmed.


Morland What time is it now?


Allbrand. Just nine o'clock.


Morland. Oh, God! so early! -- so early!


Allbrand. Employ the interval in endeavoring to recollect yourself; a moment
neglected never returns. Emilia's disavowal of the fact could not remove
suspicion from your soul; and without the conviction I offer, you must lead a
life of torment with a wife, whom you wish, yet dare not presume to consider,
as innocent.


Morland. I am recovered.


Allbrand. It were better not to see her again before midnight; should her
suspicion be excited, she will not go.


Morland. I swear she will not go!


Albrand. I wish she may not.


Morland. The slanderer shall answer this calumny with his life!


Allbrand. If Emilia be innocent*


Morland. She is innocent.


Allbrand. At least was so once.


Morland. Come with me, look her in the face, and be ashamed!


Allbrand. Lavater cannot decide in such a case.


Morland. Name the person who has dared to calumniate her.


Allbrand. She is coming. For heaven's sake do not betray yourself.


SCENE VIII. --
Enter EMILIA. Emilia. De^r Morland, you have been absent from home all day,
let the evening be devoted to us! -- We could not dine without you, we had no
relish for a single morsel! Is not your business yet concluded? -- Mr.
Secretary, will you partake of our humble fare?


Allbrand. I beg to be excused.


Emllia. If you will not increase our little family circle, I hope at least,
you will not, by detaining my husband, contract it.


Allbrand. I do it reluctantly.


Emilia. Of what nature, can be that business which robs my dear Morland of his
unaccustomed serenity? -- my God, Henry, how you fix your eyes upon me! --
dearest husband what can thus oppress you!


Morland. Do you wish to know?


Allbrand. It Is merely an unpleasant circumstance that has occurred in his
office -- nothing more.


Emilia. If it be nothing in which I can advise or assist him, yet tender
participation in trouble is seldom unwelcome.


Morland. Do you interest yourself in my sorrows?


Emilia. My God! -- what a question!


Morland. You look at me, so affectionately!


Emilia. And you look so wildly, at me.


Morland. Oh, you have not deserved it! -- I know you have not!


Emilia. Indeed, I have not*


Morland. By heaven, I am sure of it! (He clasps her to his breast.)


Allbrand. You forge^ our business.


Emilia. Your behavior is so extraordinary!


Morland. My heart is unchanged!


Emilia. I hope so.


Morland. As yours!


Emilia. Then I will be content.


Allbrand. You will do better to separate. Repose cannot be enjoyed, till our
business be completed. I would advise locking ourselves together into your
study for tonight, and then by tomorrow's dawn, all may be finished.


Emilia. The whole night, did you say?


Morland. Are you not pleased at it?


Emilia. I fear, lest yo^^ health should be injured! -- you have slept so
little for several ^^eks!


Morland. And you wish, that I should sleep?


Emilia. Oh, most sincerely!


Morland. Indeed!


Emilia. Can you doubt it?


Allbrand. My friend, midnight approaches.


Morland. Midnight! -- ha! -- farewell Emilia!


Emilia. Shall we not see each other again, this evening?


Morland. I hope not.


Emilia. You hope not?


Morland. Forgive me! -- I am absent! -- Come, Allbrand -- good night Emilia!


Emilia. Not one kiss at parting?


Morland. (Morland clasps her in his arms, violently agitated) I hope it is not
the last!


Emilia. God forbid!


Morland. (Tearing himself from her) No, it is not possible! (He rushes into
his study.)


Allbrand. (To Emilia, as he follows Morland) You will be so obliging, Madam,
as to give orders that nobody interrupt us.


(Exit.) SCENE IX.
-- EMILIA, alone. Something very extraordinary must have occurred; yet he will
not impart it to me! -- some heavy calamity overpowers him; and he will not let
me share it! -- What can I have done to offend him? -- Why am I, on a sudden,
thought unworthy of his confidence?

SCENE X.
-- Enter JENNY. Jenny. Are you alone, dear sister? -- where is my brother?


Emilia. In his study. -- Allbrand and he have business together which will
occupy them for the whole night.


Jenny. You have been weeping?


Emilia. Alas, yes!


Jenny. What has happened?


Emilia. Oh, I do not know!


Jenny. Has my brother been unkind to you?


Emilia. Not unkind! -- Yet he is so unlike himself, that I scarcely know him.


Jenny. What can be the matter?


Emilia. Allbrand says, that it is merely some vexation of business.


Jenny. If so, you may be perfectly easy, and may rest assured that all will
soon be right again.


Emilia. I hope so! -- I do not doubt it! -- yet, it is impossible to describe
the anxiety I feel! -- I would forbear to weep, but it is not in my power!


Jenny. (Half aside) This is one of the happiest unions I ever witnessed! --
yet, these sorrows! -- these tears! --


Emilia. Think you, I would exchange these sorrows, these tears, for your
boasted freedom? -- No, Jenny! -- Shall I have experienced unbounded happiness
for two years, and now shrink at the least reverse? -- Ah, it is but a
momentary reverse, and these tears will soon be wiped away by the hand of love!


SCENE XI.
-- Enter SMITH. Smith. Dear ladies, am I to dine by myself today?


Jenny. Yes! -- for once!


Emilia. Alas! -- I have no appetite for dinner.


Jenny. Nor I, neither.


Smith. And Mr. Morland?


Jenny. Is occupied with business.


Smith. You seem both very uneasy -- has any thing unpleasant happened?


Emilia. Nothing!


Jenny. Nothing at all!


Smith. I will not be intrusive. (Exit.)


Jenny. Shall I stay and keep you company?


Emilia. I had rather be alone.


Jenny. I have no inclination myself for company. -- It is true that I have
much to say to you; but the present is not a propitious moment for the
communication. Goodnight sister.


Emilia. Goodnight, dear Jenny.


Jenny. Will my harpsichord disturb you?


Emilia. Oh, by no means.


Jenny. Mozart shall drive away the vapors. (Exit.)


SCENE XII.
-- EMILIA alone. Music will charm your mind to peace -- I will endeavor to
soothe mine by benevolence; -- at poor Ellfield's I may perhaps forget, what
occasions me so much anxiety. And shall I go again without Morland's knowledge?
-- better at once tell him all! -- but then, the pleasure of presenting my
patients to him, on his birth day, would be lost! -- besides, at the present
moment, it might appear obtrusive. -- Hist! I thought I heard my name mentioned
in the study! -- Yet, what concern can my name have with business? -- Shall I?
-- No! shame on the idea! -- far be from me the meanness of listening. But now,
I dare not attempt speaking to my husband, since it will immediately appear as
if I had listened. And why should I be so desirous of communicating the affair
at this moment? -- I shall not be missed, -- and if I am, he knows me! -- yet
the discovery shall not be delayed beyond tomorrow! -- all secrecy is
pernicious; and I blame myself for having given way to it. I must take a short
time to recover myself; and then I will go. -- Heaven grant, that when I see
Morland, tomorrow, he may be more composed!

(Exit.) END OF THE THIRD ACT.
ACT. IV.
SCENE I.
-- The Street at Midnight. Enter PILZ and a CORPORAL with GUARDS. PILZ. MAKE
no noise, Corporal! conceal yourself with your people; and when I give the
alarm, be ready to come forth. -- (The Corporal and Guards conceal themselves
-- Pilz draws aside the shade from his dark lantern, and looks at his watch)
Wants only a quarter of twelve -- we shall not have long to wait! -- For my part,
I don't understand this business: -- the wife plays false, and the husband is
to answer for it -- I cannot see much justice in that! -- Well, well, it is no
concern of mine; and good order must be preserved! -- Hist! I hear somebody
coming! (he conceals himself near the door of a house)


SCENE II.
-- Enter SCHARFENECK, disguised in a large cloak. It must be hereabouts! -- My
direction is -- near the dooor of the Court Apothecary's. (he pants) How I
totter under the weight of this thick heavy cloak! -- or is it the adventure
that makes me quake? -- I cannot say, I like it much; suspect Allbrand to be
overreaching my uncle -- and me into the bargain. I have no objection at all
to a frolic; but an act of deliberate villainy, goes against my conscience! --
For that, however, my employers must be responsible. (he steps aside) I am to
conceal myself here; but should it be necessary to continue this game at hide
and seek, longer than ten minutes, my patience will be exhausted; and I shall
take the liberty of returning home, and going quietly to bed.

SCENE III.
-- Enter ALLBRAND and MORLAND. Allbrand. This is the place.


Morland. And that the house?


Allbrand. Yes, where you see a light in the upper room.


Morland. Oh, God! how my heart beats!


Allbrand. It Is an awful moment to an affectionate husband.


Morland. The most awful that ever I experienced! -- (The clock strikes twelve)


Allbrand. The clock strikes.


Morland. Each stroke is to me like the knell of death.


Allbrand. Promise me once more to command thyself?


Morland. I cannot promise any thing.


Allbrand. Do not forget, that the Prince is at hand.


Morland. You pour oil upon the flame.


Allbrand. How easily, in the midst of the confusion, might he accomplish any
thing that suggested itself to his tyrannical mind.


Morland. Oh! that he would command his guards to dispa^^^^ me, at the moment!
-- that were mercy indeed!


Allbrand. Do not speak so loud!


Morland. Of what are you afraid? -- Do you suppose that Emilia will hear us?
-- No! no! -- Emilia will not come!


Allbrand. Heaven grant, she may not.


Morland. Then, tomorrow* I throw myself at her feet, and confess all! -- No!
this very night! -- I will hasten to her bedside, awaken her gently, and, with
my tears and kisses, call forth a blush into those cheeks which were never
flushed by conscious guilt.


Allbrand. Hark! I hear the sound of approaching footsteps.


Morland. (trembling with agitation) The steps of a female?


Allbrand. I should think so. -- But, for God's sake be more calm! -- how your
teeth chatter!


Morland. Oh! my blood freezes. (he steps aside, trembling)


SCENE IV.
-- EMILIA crosses the stage softly, and hems when she comes to the door of a
small house. Captain ELLFIELD opens the door. Ellfield. We have been expecting
you for some time, Madam.


Emilia. How is my good friend above?


Ellfield. I thank you, perfectly well. (they go into the house, and shut the
door)


Allbrand. Did you see?


Morland. Almighty God! -- It was she herself.


Allbrand. Are you now convinced?


Morland. Scarcely, even now!


Allbrand. Whither will you go?


Morland. Can that be made a question? (he throws himself violently against the
door of the house, into which he had seen Emilia enter.)


Allbrand. Yes, break in there!


Pilz. (coming forward) Stop! -- I arrest you in the Prince's name!


Morland. (thunderstruck) How!


Pilz. Guards come hither! (the Guards surround Morland -- Allbrand gradually
draws away from him)


Morland. Do you know, who I am!


Pilz. The very person we seek.


Morland. This is too much!


Pilz. Follow me.


Morland. Whither?


Pilz. Whither I am ordered to conduct you.


Morland. I must go into this house.


Pilz. Don't compel me to use force!


Morland. Oh, God of mercy! annihilate me at this moment! (he looks up toward
the window where he sees the light) Infernal woman, hear me! -- hear me,
Emilia! -- be thou accursed for ever! -- may some heavy judgment overtake thee,
even in the arms of thy paramour! -- may ye both be accursed, both thou and thy
seducer! -- O-h-h -- (the guards drag him out; his last words and groans are
heard, after he disappears)


Allbrand. (coming forwards again) Good heavens! how he raves! -- Oh, that Pilz
had but sense enough to stop his mouth! -- his clamours are sufficient to alarm
the whole street!


Scharfeneck. (coming from his concealment) Allbrand!


Allbrand. I thank you for your punctuality.


Scharfeneck. I almost repent my engagement!


Allbrand. For what reason?


Scharfeneck. Who was the woman that stole in here?


Allbrand. Probably one of their associates.


Scharfeneck. Why are not the whole crew apprehended?


Allbrand. All are not equally ripe for imprisonment.


Scharfeneck. What occasioned Morland to curse his wife so bitterly?


Allbrand. 'Twas temporary phrenzy*


Scharfeneck. I wish I were in my bed! -- What more is to be done?


Allbrand. We must follow the guards at a distance: -- when Morland is
delivered into safe custody, Pilz shall accompany you to his house.


Scharfeneck. And then?


Allbrand. You know what -- the papers --


Scharfeneck. Why not seize them yourself?


Allbrand. Because I cannot be in different places at the same moment: and my
presence is more necessary elsewhere. Come along, now -- I will give you
farther instructions by the way.


(Exeunt.) SCENE V.
-- A room in the State Prison. KROLL sitting at a table, with his spectacles
on, reading in a large folio volume. EVE spinning, and nodding her head
frequently, overpowered with sleep. Kroll. "Chapter the seventh," -- "How
Sultan Bajazet was confined by Tamerlane in an iron cage." -- It happened in
the year one thousand four hundred and two, that a bloody battle" -- Why, Eve!
you are asleep.


Eve. No, no -- read on -- I hear you.


Kroll. What was I reading about?


Eve. Something or other of the lame and blind.


Kroll. Right! -- Bajazet was blind of one eye, and Tamerlane limped. But you
are nodding again.


Eve. My eyelids will fall down.


Kroll. I cannot think, where the prisoner can be! -- It Is now past midnight.


Eve. I cannot think who he can be?


Kroll. Neighbor Pilz was very secret; I could not get a word out of him.


Eve. Well, we shall know in time.


Kroll. Truly, we shall, by virtue of our office. (a knocking is heard; Kroll
lays down his book, and takes off his spectacles) Do you hear? they must be
come! (he goes out with the light)


Eve. He has left me alone in the dark. For three whole years, have I now lived
in this prison; yet never with my own good will was left so many minutes
together, without a light. It has entirely scared away my drowsiness -- Hark!
-- how every step they take, sounds through the long passages! -- The great
hinges of the gate, creak dismally! -- the chains rattle -- the gate bangs --
terrible music for the poor man they are bringing amongst us! -- He certainly
must be some great gentleman: -- for neighbor Pilz ordered the large room,
with the tapestry hangings, to be prepared for him.


SCENE VI.
Re-enter KROLL with PILZ and MORLAND. Kroll. Heaven defend me, Mr. Syndicus!
is it you?


Eve. Merciful powers, Mr. Syndicus! who could have thought of this?


Pilz. Come, come, neighbors; not so many words, (Morland stands motionless,
with his arms folded, and appears totally insensible to what passes)


Kroll. Humph! Humph! I should as soon have expected the skies to fall.


Eve. I am so terrified, that I cannot move a limb.


Pilz. Ah? It Is a motely world.


Eve. This is not motely neighbor; it is as black as a coal. Such a man as the
Syndicus, the friend of all the poor in the town.


Kroll. Who endeavored to procure every body their rights*


Eve. And always took notice of every child he met.


Pilz. But it is his Highness' command.


Kroll. Well to be sure if it is his Highness --


Eve. Who knows what lies wicked people may have told of the worthy gentleman.


Pilz. Neighbor Eve, take care of your tongue.


Eve. Why to be sure, God knows the Prince is only a man.


Pilz. But a man favored by God.


Kroll. That Is for certain.


Pilz. Therefore neighbor Kroll, in virtue of your office* here is a prisoner,
for whom you are answerable.


Kroll. Locks and bars shall answer for him.


Pilz. And nobody must be admitted to see him.


Kroll. Very well.


Pilz. Goodnight, neighbor.


Kroll. Goodnight, Mr. Pilz. (He conducts Pilz out.)


Eve. I should like to know, how the good night is to come, when he has shut an
honest man up in prison? -- For my part I hav'n't had any concern in it, -- but
what does that signify? -- I know for certain, that I shall not close my eyes all
night. Poor dear gentleman! how terribly he looks! -- Take heart, noble
Syndicus, bad weather will overtake those that are going to church as well as
them that are running to the alehouse, but where the heart and conscience are
warm, the clothes are soon dried. -- Alack-a-day! he neither sees nor hears me!
-- Truly, I am only the simple wife of a poor citizen, and I don't know how to
comfort such a learned gentleman. (Re-enter Kroll) Look there, Benjamin, -- our
prisoner seems to have neither life nor motion, -- he stares at the door, as if
he saw something. -- Certainly no good will happen to us, if we don't look a
little after him.


Kroll. Come, Mr. Syndicus, there is no occasion to take this so much at heart!
-- many a great gentleman has been kept up here for a long time, and yet come
off with honor at last.


Eve. We don't behave unkind to any body -- they have commonly enough to bear,
before they come to us; and we are glad to comfort them, if we can.


Kroll. This state prison is not an iron cage.


Eve. Ah, Benjamin! it is just like talking to the wind! --


Kroll. (Takes Morland respectfully by the arm) Good Mr. Syndicus!


Morland. (starting wildly) Who are you? -- Where am I? -- What would you have?


Kroll. Dear heaven! don't your honor know me?


Morland. (examining him from head to foot with an unmeaning stare) I know
nobody! -- I know nobody! --


Eve. What! -- has your honor forgotten --


Morland. Forgotten! (striking his hands on his forehead) No! no! -- I have not
forgotten --


Kroll. Would not a glass of wine be of service to you? -- you shall have the
best we can get.


Morland. Oh, a whole bottle! -- a whole bottle! -- Yes, yes, wine, good man!
-- wine! -- wine! -- happy he who can drown his feelings in wine! --


Eve. Leave him alone Benjamin; -- he is not in his right mind.


Kroll. Will Not you please to go to rest? -- Eve has prepared you a very good bed.


Morland. Ha! ha! ha! -- Rest! -- Ha! ha! ha! --


Eve. To be sure, your honor will not rest so well as at home.


Morland. At home?


Eve. Ah, God! -- how will poor Madam grieve!


Morland. (going up to her hastily) Woman! do you mean to mock me?


Eve. Oh, terrible! -- to be sure, he is out of his senses!


Morland. Would to God!


(A knocking is heard again at the gate) Kroll. More knocking! -- who can this
be! (going)


Eve. Take me with you, husband! -- I am afraid of being left alone with him!
(Exeunt Kroll and Eve)


(Morland stands motionless for some moments, then clasps his hands in agony;
-- he feels upon his finger a ring made of Emilia's hair; he looks at it
wildly, then snatches it off, and throws it away indignantly, seizes himself by
the breast, and exclaims) Morland. Oh, that I could thus easily tear her from
my heart!


SCENE VII.
-- Re-Enter KROLL and EVE, with ALLBRAND. Kroll. (as he enters) If your
Excellency have such an order --


Allbrand. I take the responsibility solely upon myself! -- leave us alone.
(Exeunt Kroll and Eve. Allbrand approaches Morland, who does not observe him:
after a pause, he exclaims) Is this the reward of love and patriotism?


Morland. What voice was that! -- Allbrand! -- you here? -- you too in prison?


Allbrand. In the cause of friendship, I even condescended to have recourse to
falsehood; -- I used the minister's name, and the doors were opened to me.


Morland. Not a prisoner, then? -- But, why should you be confined? -- she is
not your wife!


Allbrand. Oh, my injured friend!


Morland. What seek you here?


Allbrand. To console you.


Morland. Is my house burnt down? -- my whole property destroyed? -- A beggar
might be capable of receiving consolation -- but not a fond and injured husband!


Allbrand. I would give you advice, as a friend.


Morland. Give advice to a helpless wretch plunged into a whirlpool! -- perhaps
throw him a straw at which to catch!


Allbrand. I might afford you some assistance.


Morland. Can the ruined honor of a wife be propped up like a mouldering
building? -- Can faith and truth be re^^med* like an extinguished light?


Allbrand. No! -- but the man who has cherished a serpent in his bosom, may
throw it away; and then pursue his career with renovated powers.


Morland. Even though it had struck its fangs into his heart, and the venom
were poisoning the very sources of life!


Allbrand. Shall the infidelity of a perjured wife have power to deprive a
Morland of every comfort, every satisfaction? -- has not nature endowed you, my
friend, with eminent talents for advancing the welfare of your fellow citizens?
-- Does not the noble mind often recover lost repose in seeking to promote that
happiness in others, of which it is itself deprived? -- May not dissipation,
activity --


Morland. In a prison? -- in chains? -- Ha! ha! ha!


Allbrand. Does the sun shine only upon this little spot? -- Shall this soil
alone experience the beneficial effects of your ardour and industry? -- Will
not your native country receive back with transport, into her bosom, a man she
herself nourished and cherished?


Morland. Oh, why did I ever quit so blessed a spo^!


Allbrand. Away then, my friend; and at your pure Alpine springs drink oblivion
to all your wrongs. Forget a wife who is unworthy of your love! -- forget a
country which rep^ys your attachment with the basest ingratitude, but forget
not a friend who loses all recollection of himself, when he urges you to this
separation!


Morland. Shall innocence seek its safety in flight* -- in concealment?


Allbrand. Was not Socrates, though guiltless, condemned? -- and did he not
suffer because he refused to shake off his chains.


Morland. Oh, my friend! you cherish the wildest visions! -- What means are
left me for escape?


Allbrand. Be that my care.


Morland. Are you sensible, what you hazard?


Allbrand. Yes, I know what hazards I run, and for whom they are incurred.


Morland. Allbrand! Allbrand! thou have twined yet one more bond to fasten me
to life! -- thou have almost reconciled me again to the human race! -- yet I
cannot have recourse to flight, and leave my honor a prey to all the gossips
and scandalous chronicles in the town. " Morland is absconded" it will be said
-- " On what charge was he apprehended? and why did he fly? why should he wish
to escape from justice?" -- Do you suppose a single mouth would be stopped by
hearing, that I was guilty of no other crime than having a lovely wife?


Allbrand. Alas! no! -- for the colors that are to varnish over this
injustice, are already prepared.


Morland. Indeed! --


Allbrand. You are accused of being a Jacobin.


Morland. Ha! and the proofs? --


Allbrand. Not even your wife, as it is reported, could furnish any thing like
proofs.


Morland. Could not -- but would have furnised them willingly! (Allbrand shrugs
his shoulders) Conceal nothing, Allbrand -- one stab more or less is of little
consequence.


Allbrand. When I had somewhat recovered from my first astonishment at your
apprehension --


Morland. Where were you at that moment?


Allbrand. Close by you; and when I saw you borne away, I was about to follow
you down the street; but it soon occurred to me, that I might possibly render
you more important service, by seeking intelligence at the fountainhead. I was
like one thunderstruck: -- of the true motives for this proceeding, I could not
entertain a doubt; but I had no conception of the pretext that would be urged
to sanction it.


Morland. Well! -- but my wife! -- my wife!


Allbrand. I hastened back to the square, where I found the Prince's
Valet-de-Chambre wrapped in a large cloak, and in waiting for his master's
return --


Morland. Oh God! -- Oh God! -- the honor of my wife placed at the mercy of a
Valet-de-Chambre!


Allbrand. We had long known each other --


Morland. And he confided to you? --


Allbrand. The whole progress of the affair. Emilia withstood his solicitations
for a long time --


Morland. (with an indignant sneer) Virtuous woman!


Allbrand. She wept, knelt --


Morland. Extremely affecting!


Allbrand. But the Prince is young, handsome, engaging --


Morland. Perfectly natural*


Allbrand. And, perhaps, the idea of rank was too dazzling for the female
imagination to resist; since the Prince promised a patent of nobility for you.


Morland. He did me great honor.


Allbrand. And promotion at Court.


Morland. Indeed! -- that certainly was irresistible.


Allbrand. But by your own impetuosity, you have stumbled upon the very
threshold.


Morland. Oh, I am a headstrong fool!


Allbrand. You have done the Prince's work for him. It was impossible, that he
could seriously intend to permit your remaining so near; he has long watched
his opportunity, had his spies about in all parts --


Morland. And at last caught me trespassing upon his Princely territories! --
damn him! -- damn him! --


Allbrand. Nor are his apprehensions yet removed; though a prisoner, he
considers you as still a formidable obstacle to his views; and the Valet doubts
whether you will be permitted to remain here. A removal to some more secure
fortress, upon the frontiers, is talked of.


Morland. Ha! ha! ha! -- Ha! ha! ha!


Allbrand. Morland! Morland! my heart bleeds for you! -- Should his threat be
executed, you were lost indeed! -- Remote from every friend to console you,
unknown, unpitied, branded by the mandate of the Prince himself, as a criminal
-- without even the possibility of communication by letter, with those who
might pour a balm into your wounded mind --


Morland. The same God is every where!


Allbrand. No miracle will interpose to thwart the triumph of wickedness. Fly
then, while it is yet in your power -- my influence, my connections, may be of
some service in screening you from pursuit -- they can avail nothing, in case
of your removal to a distant prison.


Morland. I will appeal to the laws! -- a hearing cannot be refused me!


Allbrand. To the laws! -- Are you the first person who has been buried alive?
-- whose cries have in vain sought to force their way to the ear of justice? --
And what purpose would be answered, supposing you could obtain a hearing? -- Is
it not notorious to all the world, that you are innocent, but who will venture
to pronounce you so, when the Prince's honor is involved in the establishment
of your guilt? -- You are a foreigner; you have no relations, no connections,
here, to concern themselves in your fate.


Morland. Forsaken wretch that I am! -- Oh, Emilia! -- Emilia! -- Yes,
Allbrand, I can readily conceive that the mind, even of a virtuous woman may be
seduced by the allurements of ambition, by the blandishments of a voluptuary,
till her honor becomes their sacrifice -- yet still, she has a heart! -- Shame
may, for a while, be silenced and put to flight; but, at length, it will
return, strew the bed of roses with thorns, and change the smile of passion
into convulsive distortions. Then will busy recollection reproach her, that for
two years her love had been my all -- that my heart, my life, had been devoted
to the promotion of her happiness -- that I had sacrificed every thing to my
love -- had known no joy without her -- no sorrow when she was by my side! --
Oh-h-h!


Allbrand. Morland, you rend my heart.


Morland. And can this wife wish my destruction! --


Allbrand. Whatever she may do now, terror must soon compel her to wish it! --
the dread lest all her misdeeds should become known, and your just vengeance
overtake her.


Morland. Oh, she was so affectionate! -- could she see these cold drops that
stand upon my forehead! --


Allbrand. She would hide the blush of shame in the bosom of her seducer.


Morland. Ha! For the love of heaven, Allbrand, shake me! rouse me! -- that I
may be awakened from this terrible dream!


Allbrand. Would to God, it were but a dream! -- Did you see his Highness give
her his hand at the house-door?


Morland. Was it indeed the Prince?


Allbrand. Nay, you must yourself have seen him.


Morland. I saw the figure of a man.


Allbrand. Of the Prince?


Morland. Damn him? -- damn him!


Allbrand. And did you not hear? --


Morland. I heard nothing!


Allbrand. Not the flatteries with which he received her -- nor the burst of
laughter behind the door, when you were arrested?


Morland. Laughter! -- But it could be only the Prince who laughed! -- I swear,
by heaven, it could not be Emilia!


Allbrand. I might be mistaken.


Morland. No, Allbrand, a beloved wife may be so lost as to become a criminal;
she may disgrace the name, and wring the heart of her injured husband: but
could I suppose her capable of laughing, when she beheld innocence and virtue
trampled under foot -- when she saw that injured, deceived husband, thus made
the victim. -- O God! -- O God! -- See Allbrand! (he draws his hand out from
his bosom, and shows it all bloody) fool! -- fool! -- I have torn my own flesh
through indignation.


Allbrand. Horrible, but just wrath!


Morland. Could she see these bloody fingers --


Allbrand. Rouse thyself, Morland! -- Sue out a bill of divorce against the
Siren!


Morland. No, death alone shall separate us! -- Yes, yes, she is dead! -- See
there she lies! -- I wring my hands over her corpse! -- Oh, God! assist me to
believe in this illusion! -- Emilia dead, I can love her again; -- How that
thought consoles me! -- I can weep again! -- (bursts into tears)


Allbrand. One day will be sufficient to prepare all things for your escape.


Morland. Allbrand, bespeak me a suit of mourning.


Allbrand. Hasten to the arms of your aged father!


Morland. A mourning suit, Allbrand!


Allbrand. Let your sister be the companion of your flight.


Morland. A mourning suit for my deceased Emilia!


Allbrand. Morland, this is unmanly! -- Will you waste yourself to a shadow
with fruitless sorrow, while the sorceress makes you her sport in the arms of
her paramour?


Morland. Her sport! -- No, Allbrand! -- Emilia, though fallen, cannot make me
her sport.


Allbrand. Well, well, no matter! -- In twenty-four hours, you will be upon the
road to Basil -- then, and not till then, when the traitress finds that she is
not to enjoy her triumph in security, will she be fully unmasked. Write her a
letter, Morland -- a letter full of coldness and contempt -- a mandate of
external separation.


Morland. Do you suppose that the Prince's guards will convey a letter from me
to Emilia?


Allbrand. I will carry it to her -- will give it to her in the presence of the
Prince himself -- strike her with a look --


Morland. Will you, indeed? --


Allbrand. I give you my word of honor.


Morland. Well, then!


Allbrand. (calls) Without there! (enter Kroll with Eve) Bring pen and ink.


Kroll. I did not know that it was permitted --


Allbrand. I will be responsible.


Kroll. The next room is prepared for the Syndicus; and here you will find all
conveniences --


Morland. I will be with you again directly. (Kroll lights him to his room and
returns)


Allbrand. (aside) I have managed it at last, but with infinite trouble.


Eve. Poor gentleman! -- for certain, he must be innocent.


Allbrand. It Is possible.


Eve. May one be allowed to ask what crime he has committed?


Allbrand. That cannot be known for certain, it is a State secret; various
reports are circulated.


Eve. Heaven will bring his innocence to light.


Allbrand. That might be possible, if heaven and he were upon better terms.


Eve. I don't understand what your honor means.


Allbrand. Strange things are reported of him -- I cannot say positively, that
they are true; but certain it is, that I never saw him at church.


Eve. But still, I am sure he would not --


Allbrand. It Is impossible to say! -- bad company is contagious! -- wicked
books, and evil examples, have great influence.


Eve. Heaven forbid!


Allbrand. Thus far I know from his own mouth, that he does not believe in a
devil.


Kroll. Not believe in a devil! -- Eve, what do you think now?


Allbrand. And the Prince is extremely pious.


Kroll. To be sure he is. Well, well, his Highness has done quite right.


Allbrand. You see, my friends, that your compassion is misplaced.


Eve. Compassion, indeed! -- I say compassion to a man who does not believe in
a devil!


Kroll. It Is hard enough, that we are obliged to be under the same roof with
him.


Allbrand. Should he attempt to converse with you, I would advise you to be
short in your answers.


Kroll. You need not make yourself uneasy about that.


Allbrand. No one, beside myself, must be allowed to speak with him.


Kroll. Nobody but Satan. God forgive me the word.


Allbrand. Least of all, his wife. And, do you hear? -- I again caution you
against throwing yourselves too much in his way -- a smooth tongue might
conjole you.


Eve. He could not shake my faith. But the children, Benjamin -- he might do
them a mischief. -- We had best take care and keep the children out of his way.


Kroll. I will put a padlock upon his door.


Eve. No, no, I cannot pity him any longer. I thought he might have committed
some offense againt his Highness such as embezzling money entrusted to him, or
some such matter; for such things will happen, even to the most pious. But not
to believe in a devil!!! --


SCENE VIII.
-- MORLAND returns with a letter in his hand, which he gives to ALLBRAND.
Morland. Take it!


Allbrand. (makes a sign to Kroll and Eve, who retire, when he unfolds the
letter, and reads it to himself) It Is too wild! -- too empassioned! -- colder
contempt had been better! -- this anger will gratify her. However, (putting the
letter in his pocket, and speaking aside) what the writer has omitted, the
messenger will supply.


Morland. (seizing his arm eagerly) Allbrand, should we at last be mistaken? --
should she be innocent? -- she might not survive the receipt of such a letter.


Allbrand. Innocent!


Morland. Yes, yes, I am a fool! -- I am indeed a fool! -- Did we not both see?
-- Ah, no! -- I saw only her.


Allbrand. I saw, and heard, the Prince.


Morland. Are you very sure that you were not mistaken? -- Our senses will
sometimes deceive us -- instances have occurred.


Allbrand. I was a cool spectator --


Morland. But in the darkness of night, you might be misled --


Allbrand. The moon shone bright.


Morland. Oh, too true! -- too true! -- and to attempt to explain away the
whole affair by supposing it accident? --


Allbrand. Appears to me perfectly ridiculous.


Morland. So it is! -- so it is! -- Take the letter then! -- yet hold! -- No!
no! -- Allbrand, I think Emilia cannot possibly be innocent!


Allbrand. Certainly not.


Morland. Might not the Prince by chance? -- No, that could scarcely be! -- and
what then could Emilia want? -- to whom could she go? -- Oh, she is guilty! --
she is guilty* -- every bond between us is broken -- Take the letter, Allbrand;
take it to her, paint to her my sufferings! -- carry her my everlasting curse!
-- Yet! no! no! no! -- for God's sake -- she is pregnant! -- Allbrand, she is
pregnant! -- give me back the letter!


Allbrand. You astonish me, Morland! -- But since you are incapable of acting
for yourself, I must think, and act for you -- I must, and will save you.
Recollect, that for four years past a dishonorable tie has chained Emilia to
the Prince! -- do you suppose that she would have forsaken the father of her
child?


Morland. You suggest horrors.


Allbrand. Will you submit to be reputed the father of a child not your own?


Morland. Oh God! -- you drain the last drop of blood from my heart!


Allbrand. Will you condescend to be made the laughing-^^ock of the whole
country?


Morland. Ha! -- revenge! -- revenge!


Allbrand. Rather show contempt. It is the part of injured ^orth to despise, --
revenge must be left to conscience.


Morland. Do you expect to find a conscience where virtue and love have been so
long dissembled?


Allbrand. It cannot be enveloped in so thick a shell, but that (...) worm of
remorse will gnaw through to it at last.


Morland. And when that moment shall arrive -- when the (...) of voluptuousness
shall be exchanged for the bed of death, (...) ^e criminal shall seek in vain
for rest, upon the softest (...) down -- when the windows of her chamber must
be (...) ^at no ray of light may strike her languid eyes -- (...) ^e shall be
insensible, even to the choicest wines (...) ^'s cellar -- when ^o ^^oling
medicine shall have (...) the fever burning in her v^ins -- when hired (...)
^ng by her bedside, insensible to her faint groans, to the scene of
wretchedness before them! -- then shall my form, just visible by the dusky
glimmering of the midnight lamp, undraw her curtain -- grin horribly at her
with a ghastly smile, nod, menace, and vanish! -- away! -- away, with the
letter!


Allbrand. Recover yourself, my friend; I go. The Prince shall hear harsh
truths from me! -- truth is the severest chastisement that can be given to a
Prince. (he is going, when Kroll enters, takes a light and accompanies him out*)


SCENE IX.
-- MORLAND alone. He pauses, looking after ALLBRAND. He is gone! -- and what
now am I? -- Thus are all bonds that held me to the world, torn asunder, the
bond of life alone excepted, and that can only be dissolved by a tedious series
of excruciating torments! -- yet, why await this lingering process? -- down,
down, with thee instantly to the grave, Morland, since thou have no more to
hope from man, save a handful of earth to cover thy bones!

SCENE X.
-- Re-enter KROLL with EVE. Kroll. Will the gentleman be so good as to take
himself to his chamber -- this here is mine.


Eve. We have been kept up almost the whole night, entirely upon the
gentleman's account.


Morland. Pardon me, good people!


Kroll. Nay, the Lord pardon thee!


Eve. (with a pious sigh) And lead every one who is going astray, into the
right road!


Morland. (half aside) When only straying out of the right road, it is possible
to be rescued; but when fallen into the abyss, nothing remains but to look
down, and drop a tear upon the poor wretch who lies dashed to pieces below. But
you don't understand me! -- Good night! (Exit into his room)


Kroll. (locking and barring the door of Morland's chamber) Yes, yes, we
understand you very well!


Eve. Did you hear how he talked about the Abyss?


Kroll. Of hell, I suppose.


Eve. Ah dear heaven!


Kroll. Come wife, come to bed.


Eve. He who does not believe in a devil, most likely does not believe in the
good angels! -- how can he ever sleep quietly in his bed! (Exeunt)


SCENE XI.
-- A room in MORLAND's house. THOMAS sitting asleep in a chair -- a table
standing by him, on which is a candle almost burnt out, and a watch. He starts
from his sleep, rubs his eyes, and then rises. Three o'clock! -- I don't know
what to make of this! -- he never used to be out so late! -- I am afraid some
misfortune has happened! -- I would fain have gone with him, he looked so
troubled in mind, but he ordered me to remain here. I am never quite easy at
being alone; when two people are left together they can have a little chat, and
that passes time away. Our good lady must not be told of this -- for she would fret
herself to death; but I think I might wake Miss Jenny; and perhaps she knows
more about the matter than I do. -- I wonder, whether she would take it amiss?
-- I watched many a night upon her account, when she had the smallpox; and
surely she cannot think much of coming for once to comfort poor old Thomas? --
Yes, I Will -- I Will even venture it -- and if she should be angry, I must tell
her that " necessity has no law." (he taps at the door) Madam! -- Miss Jenny!
-- She is young and sleeps sound! -- (he taps again) Miss Jenny!

Jenny. (within) Who knocks?


Thomas. Only old Thomas.


Jenny. What do you want?


Thomas. I want to know what is become of my master? -- Pray, don't be angry
Madam, it is now three o'clock, and I could not any longer restrain my
uneasiness! (a violent knocking is heard at the door) Zounds! -- there he
comes! -- well, thank God! -- thank God! -- I might as well have let the young
lady sleep on quietly. (Exit)


SCENE XII.
-- JENNY enters from her room in a morning dress hastily slipped on. What can
this mean? -- why was I waked? -- is there a fire in the neighborhood? -- The
old man first frightened me from my sleep, and then ran away! -- What a noise
there is upon the staircase! -- Who can be coming hither at this time of night?

SCENE XIII.
-- Enter SCHARFENECK, PILZ, and THOMAS. Scharfeneck. (to Thomas) Away fool! --
you will soon learn what we want! (seeing Jenny) Fair lady, reluctantly as I
undertook a commission which might disturb your rest, yet the sight of you
banishes repentance.


Jenny. I do not understand you, Sir.


Scharfeneck. By command of his Highness, I come to seize your brother's papers.


Jenny. You cannot be serious.


Scharfeneck. (pointing to Pilz) The solemn severity of my companion's
countenance, must preclude all idea of joking.


Jenny. My God! what can this mean?


Scharfeneck. A trifle! -- only a little conspiracy! -- a snug piece of treason
against the State; no feminine concern, for there is not any love in the case.
But I forget that my company was always disagreeable to you; -- permit me
therefore, to proceed with all expedition, in the fulfillment of his Highness's
commands.


Jenny. Still, I do not understand you, Sir; and it were better that I awaken
my brother.


Scharfeneck. I should think he can hardly be asleep, since it is he who has
awakened us; and a prison does not furnish very propitious quarters for the
enjoyment of repose.


Jenny. What do you mean? -- my brother --


Scharfeneck. Has spent the last hour in the State prison.


Thomas. (clasping his hands together) My God!


Jenny. Heavens! -- on what charge?


Scharf^neck. That he wanted to introduce into the State, what is only
admissible in love, -- liberty -- and equality.


Jenny. Infamous slander!


Scharfeneck. Then you have the less to apprehend from the examination of his
papers. Come, Pilz, to your business.


Jenny. Sir, I cannot suffer --


Scharfeneck. I am heartily sorry, Madam, that I must now for the first time in
my life, disregard the interdict of a fair lady.


Thomas. (half aside to Jenny, scarcely able to restrain his indignation)
Madam, shall I call the coachman and groom?


Jenny. Be quiet, Thomas. (to Scharfeneck) Sir, I require a written order.


Scharfeneck. You know, Madam, that I have the honor of being in the Prince's
service; this officer of the police, and the guards below in the hall, must
sufficiently prove that I obey the highest commands. How much rather had I come
hither without this formidable train, only upon an adventure of gallantry? --
But your severity --


Jenny. Matchless impudence!


Thomas. (muttering to himself) Impudence indeed!


Scharfeneck. (to Jenny) You were speaking of your servant, I suppose?


Thomas. He never was impudent.


Scharfeneck. Fellow! --


Thomas. Sir, I would have you to know that I am a Swiss, a free man.


Scharfeneck. Ha! ha! ha! -- And so you also are playing that part.


Jenny Be silent, Thomas; -- Go and call my sister-in-law.


Thomas. (going reluctantly, and muttering to himself) When people break into
the house at dead of night, I know in my country -- (Exit)


Scharfeneck. I have waited too long. -- As far as I remember, this is Mr.
Morland's study -- Pilz, follow me.


Jenny. For your own justification, Sir --


Scharfeneck. May I request the key of your brother's desk?


Jenny. He always carrys that about with him.


Scharfeneck. Then we must manage without a key.


Jenny. Sir, I warn you that the Prince, shall know by daybreak --


Scharfeneck. Unfortunate that I am, to be compelled to give the warnings of a
fair lady to the wind. (he goes into Morland's study, followed by Pilz,
carrying a lan^^rn)


SCENE XIV.
-- JENNY, alone. Afterward, THOMAS. Jenny. I tremble! -- I know not what to
do! -- How will my poor sister-in-law be shocked and terrified! -- What fatal
consequences may not be apprehended!


Thomas. (entering in haste and terror) New troubles! -- new sorrows! --


Jenny. Good Heavens! -- what? --


Thomas. Our good lady is gone too!


Jenny. Impossible!


Thomas. Has never been in bed. Mary stole into her room, just opened her
curtains, and called softly, "Madam," -- No answer! -- She tapped with her hand
upon the bed -- all cold! -- At last, she fetched the lamp and looked --
nothing to be seen! -- nothing to be heard!


Jenny. Oh, God! what can be the meaning of this!


Thomas. She is most likely with my master.


Jenny. How can she have learned --


Thomas. Who knows? -- She had perhaps a kind of a misgiving. -- Such things
often happen among people that love each other so very dearly.


Jenny. Then I am left quite alone!


Thomas. Don't be frightened, Madam, -- old Thomas is here, and the good God is
here; and if you would but let me call the Coachman and the Groom, we'd soon
clear the house.


Jenny. Go, Thomas, and call Mr. Smith.


Thomas. Zounds! if I had not forgotten Mr. Smith! --


(Exit) Jenny. Proper, or improper, I must send for him; -- in times of
distress, we concern ourselves little about propriety.


SCENE XV.
-- Enter SCHARFENECK and PILZ with the papers. Scharfeneck. My errand is
accomplished: -- once more I entreat your pardon, Madam, and heartily wish you
pleasant morning slumbers.


Jenny. Yet another moment, Sir! -- My brother's clerk will be here instantly,
and I must request of you to tell him what papers --


Scharfeneck. All, Madam! -- every scrap! -- I am not fond of selections.


Jenny. He is a man of business, and will know what should be granted, what
refused.


Scharfeneck. As to what concerns the papers, Madam, there is nothing either to
grant, or to refuse; I must take them all. What else the clerk may grant or
refuse here, I am too modest to enquire.


Jenny. At least, I think you might respect misfortune.


Scharfeneck. I respect the rights of beauty, and should be perfectly
inconsolable were a longer interruption of your rest to endanger the making of
those lovely cheeks pale. -- Come, Pilz, I fear we are intruders here. (Exit
with a low sarcastic bow, followed by Pilz)


Jenny. (bursting into tears) Why do I weep? -- Why at such a moment, bestow
one thought upon an insult that concerns myself alone? -- This is not a time to
waste in fruitless lamentations! -- My poor brother! -- my poor Emilia! -- Oh
that I were not a woman! -- but my sex shall not withhold me! -- I will go
directly to the Prince.


SCENE XVI.
-- Enter SMITH. Smith. Thomas tells me strange things.


Jenny. Give me your advice, your assistance, dear Smith.


Smith. Mr. Morland, a prisoner -- his papers seized -- your sister-in-law not
to be found!


Jenny. It Is all but too true.


Smith. This is a cursed country.


Jenny. What shall we do?


Smith. Go to England, and live in freedom.


Jenny. But, at present --


Smith. We must patiently wait the approach of day.


Jenny. And then? --


Smith. I do not doubt of being able to procure your brother's release.


Jenny. But how?


Smith. (After considering for a few minutes) Yes, I must speak. -- My dearest
Madam, many a book may be found in the world* which, though shabby to the eye
from being uncut and unbound, will by its innate worth attract attention from
the man of understanding, though it may be scorned by the coxcomb on account of
its homely garb. Such a book is Honesty in the heart of a citizen, and
Innocence in a plain coat; both are the ^est of the valets in the antichamber.


Jenny. Is that, any source of consolation to me?


Smith. By no means -- I rather made the observation, to prove that your
brother is lost, because, though his virtue is of sterling worth, the buckles
in his shoes are not of equal value. -- With Courtiers, the case is the very
reverse.


Jenny. Heavens! -- Is this a moment for such remarks?


Smith. The precise moment for them. You think me, perhaps, cold, unfeeling to
your distress -- but you mistake -- I am only composed through habit -- because
I have witnessed the like an hundred times. Man possesses the noble faculty of
being able to habituate himself to any thing, save excess of happiness.


Jenny. And whither do these observations tend?


Smith. To confessing that I feel myself reduced to the unpleasant necessity of
using baser coin, where nobility of soul will not pass as currency. I will go
to the Minister, announce myself as Lord Sidney --


Jenny. Smith, are you awake?


Smith. I will present him with a letter of recommendation from our Minister;
nor do I doubt that the Lord will obtain a hearing, when the humble clerk would
be spurned.


Jenny. Smith, do you speak seriously?


Smith. Most seriously, dearest Madam. Influenc^^ by love, the eccentric being
you behold, laid aside his rank, till he could fully assure himself, whether a
Lord was of more account in your estimation, than an honest man.


Jenny. I am astonished!


Smith. Why astonished? -- Love and caprice have frequently wrought changes
even more extraordinary.


Jenny. My Lord --


Smith. Oh, no! -- My Lord will go to rescue your brother: but Edward Smith
will return hither to solicit your hand. I have a fine estate in Warwickshire,
a true Swiss country, which wants nothing to render it a complete Paradise, but
those delightful inhabitants Love and Liberty. What think you, Madam? -- I now
rejoice, that I am rich; since I have enough for us all -- enough to support us
all happily together.


Jenny. I am incapable at present of making any reply to offers so generous.


Smith. You will never meet with one whose intentions are more honorable.


Jenny. Shall necessity grant what love asks?


Smith. Nobly urged! -- I will therefore be silent, nor solicit you farther.
Repentance is every where an evil guest; and if it enter the abode of Love, is
too apt to destroy the host. -- But the day begins to dawn -- I will hasten to
the Minister.


Jenny. And I, to my poor brother's prison.


Smith. Allow me to take your hand, Madam! (He presses her hand most tenderly
to his lips) -- I am not accustomed to use many words; but God, who knows my
heart, knows that I love you! (Exit.)


Jenny. I am quite overpowered! -- I could weep like a child! Fie! fie! Jenny,
-- lay aside the woman, and think only of thy brother! -- Gold will procure
thee access to him, sooner than tears. (Exit.)


SCENE XVII.
-- Captain ELLFIELD's Lodging. The Captain, Mrs. ELLFIELD. and EMILIA
discovered. Emilia. I rejoice indeed, Madam, to find you thus. Appetite and
sleep, are the most infallible symptoms of returning health; and, thanks be to
God, for some days past, you seem to have amended very rapidly; -- but you must
still be careful.


Ellfield. I urge the same to her every day.


Mrs. Ellfield. The weather was so fine --


Emilia. But the air was cool.


Mrs. Ellfield. Indeed, the walk has been of great service to me. The fresh
air, the benign rays of the sun, gave me new life. -- I seemed to inhale
strength with every breeze.


Emilia. But you should have gone early to bed.


Ellfield. I would fain have persuaded her to that.


Mrs. Ellfield. I slept, for some hours, upon the Sopha; and I could not refuse
myself the pleasure of receiving my benefactress.


Emilia. If I have deserved this name, I am richly repaid. I leave you for the
first time, with satisfaction; -- it grows late. (she puts on her cloak) I
cannot now determine, when we shall meet again.


Ellfield. Will you not allow two grateful hearts to pay their respects to you
in your own house?


Emilia. Then, I must tell you who I am, and where I live.


Ellfield. Is it not cruel, to conceal it from us any longer?


Emilia. Dear Captain, allow me to follow my own humor. In a week, I will
receive you, when I shall introduce another person to your acquaintance.


Ellfield. But how, if the veil of this amiable modesty have no^ proved
sufficiently thick, to conceal you from the penetrating eyes of gratitude? --
How, if your name be already known to us?


Mrs. Ellfield. Our faith has been inviolably observed.


Emilia. You surely cannot have watched me home?


Ellfield. No, upon my honor.


Emilia. Then you cannot know my name.


Ellfield. The name of Morland can never be erased from our hearts.


Emilia. (with astonishment) Ha! -- indeed you do know me! -- Oh, say how has
this happened? -- by what means have you guessed my secret?


Ellfield. If you will trust to my word of honor, that the information was
unsought by us; I would rather bury in oblivion a hateful circumstance --


Emilia. You but increase my curiosity; I am certain that my secret is not
known to any one in my house.


Ellfield. Are you equally certain that you have never been watched?


Emilia. How! --


SCENE XVIII.
-- Enter ALLBRAND. Ellfield. Ha! -- you here again!


Emilia. Secretary Allbrand! -- I am astonished! -- What can bring you hither?


Ellfield. Yes, Sir! -- I desire to know your errand?


Allbrand. I can scarcely recover breath. Pardon this unseasonable visit! --
(to Emilia) I must entreat, Madam, for a few minutes, private conversation with
you.


Emilia. With me?


Allbrand. (to Ellfield) Sir, I conjure you, if you possess the feelings of
humanity, to allow me a few minutes alone with this lady.


Ellfield. Not, unless it be her desire.


Emilia. What can you have to say in private with me?


Allbrand. Oh, for heaven's sake, do not delay a moment! -- time is precious.


Emilia. If I alone am concerned, I have no secrets from these good people.


Allbrand. My business concerns your husband.


Emilia. (with a look of suspicion) Indeed! -- Well a lie can avail you little
-- a few moments, my friends -- but do not go far.


Ellfield. We shall remain in the next room. (Exit with Mrs. Ellfield)


SCENE XIX.
-- ALLBRAND and EMILIA. Emilia. Now, what is your business?


Allbrand. Alas! that I must be the messenger of ill news!


Emilia. Ill news! -- but go on! -- we know each other already! -- What is your
news?


Allbrand. My friend, your husband --


Emilia. Do you seek to lead my senses astray through terror?


Allbrand. What mortifying distrust!


Emilia. Speak out at once! -- What has happened to your friend, as you are
pleased to call him?


Allbrand. You seem extremely composed, Madam.


Emilia. My nerves are not weak* Mr. Secretary; -- I do not faint away, at a
spider's crawling about my neck.


Allbrand. Do I deserve to be treated with such scorn?


Emilia. Ask that question of yourself.


Allbrand. I only entreat you to forget at this moment, the errors of love, and
to listen solely to the voice of friendship!


Emilia. I am all attention.


Allbrand. Your husband is at this moment in close confinement in the State
Prison.


Emilia. (disdainfully) Indeed!


Allbrand. He is accused of exciting sedition.


Emilia. Really!


Allbrand. His papers are seized.


Emilia. And of what use do you suppose this story can be to you?


Allbrand. You do not then believe it?


Emilia. I certainly do not.


Allbrand. Would to God that this were the worst part of my information.


Emilia. The worst part! -- What more have you to relate? Let me hear all.


Allbrand. Whether Morland be guiltless or not of the State crimes imputed to
him, I shall not now enquire -- but --


Emilia. No enquiry is necessary.


Allbrand. But that he is criminal toward his wife will not admit of a doubt.


Emilia. Toward me! -- well, to what extent?


Allbrand. Must he believe you accessory to his arrest, only because you
prudently concealed from him some former transactions --


Emilia. (Starting) Former transactions!


Allbrand. Could not he who knows you so well, give you credit for the purity
of your motives?


Emilia. Morland knows then --


Allbrand. That you once received certain offers from the Prince --


Emilia. Well?


Allbrand. And he asserts, that he has positive evidence of this connection.


Emilia. (With dignity) Sir, there never was any connection between me and the
Prince.


Allbrand. Who is more convinced of that than myself? -- But Morland --


Emilia. Has some evil demon possessed him?


Allbrand. Unworthy of your tender and faithful affection, he even threatens a
separation.


Emilia. A separation! -- from me!


Allbrand. He forgets, that the indignation of a virtuous woman, who feels
herself injured, burns most fiercely amid the ashes of extinguished love.


Emilia. Secretary Allbrand, I desire you to forbear breathing forth your
poisonous exhalations, and to speak more plainly -- for by Heaven, I do not
understand you.


Allbrand. He has discovered your nightly visits to this house.


Emila. Dishonor light upon the head of him who betrayed them.


Allbrand. And he believes his honor injured --


Emilia. He knows me! --


Allbrand. He ought to know you! -- his suspicions therefore, are the more
unpardonable: his determination never to see you again the more horrible.


Emilia. Hence from my sight, liar!


Allbrand. Would to heaven I were a liar!


Emilia. Allbrand, if there be any thing in the world that you esteem sacred,
swear by it! --


Allbrand. I swear by your virtue.


Emilia. Villain! dare not thus to profane my virtue! -- Fool that I am! -- Why
do I stand here patiently listening to that baleful tongue, when in a few
moments I might be in Morland's arms, and then would this whole scene of
villainy be exposed.


(going) Allbrand. Whither would you go, unhappy woman? Morland languishes in
prison -- he cannot see you -- and if he could he will not.


Emilia. Allbrand, what can be your aim in all this? -- Do you seek to lead my
senses astray by these horrible falsehoods?


Allbrand. What end could I propose in uttering falsehoods which must be
detected the moment you entered your own house?


Emilia. Must I then indeed believe Morland to be a prisoner?


Allbrand. Yet be composed, and do not therefore consider yourself as deserted
-- A friend still remains to you, one who can forget unmerited humiliations --


Emilia. And must I also believe that Morland intends to separate himself from
me? Oh God! Oh God!


Allbrand. Insulted Virtue, summon thy elder brother, Pride, to thy supporr!


Emilia. Man, what have thou done!


Allbrand. What have I done?


Emilia. Thou alone were capable of spinning such an infernal web! -- Demon,
what have thou done?


Allbrand. These injurious suspicions, Madam --


Emilia. But do not exult too soon! The Prince shall give back a citizen to the
state -- love shall restore a husband to my arms.


Allbrand. What dependence is to be placed on that love, this letter will
inform you.


Emilia. God of heaven! -- my husband's hand! (s^ ^atches open the letter --
reads it -- drops it from her hand -- ^^^ggers -- sinks on her knees -- utters
a loud shriek, and faints.)


Allbrand. Have I subdued thy spirit at last! -- Oh, sweet, sweet revenge --
(exit hastily, casting a malignant look upon Emilia as he goes out.)


SCENE XX.
-- CAPTAIN and MRS. ELLFIELD rush in. Ellfield. What is the matter!


Mrs. Ellfield. Merciful heaven! what do I see?


Ellfield. Our benefactress! (they raise Emil^a up and place her in a chair)
what can have become of the villain? (he supports Emilia)


Mrs. Ellfield. (seeing the letter upon the ground, takes it up and reads it)
May I believe my eyes? Can this be possible? -- read! --


Ellfield. (after reading the letter) Is this the result of her benevolent
visits to us?


Mrs Ellfield. That she should incur such a horrible suspicion!


Ellfield. That she should be supposed here --


Mrs. Ellfield, In a house of such a description --


Ellfield. Oh God! my honor! --


Mrs. Ellfield. Think, dear Charles, on all her kindness; to her alone are we
indebted that you have still a wife -- hasten, hasten then, to Morland's prison
-- a single word may develope this scandalous imposition! -- No, I will go
myself -- where is my cloak --


Ellfield. Dearest Caroline, you would not --


Mrs. Ellfield. Shall we repay her angelic benevolence by remaining cold
spectators of misery endured for our sakes?


Ellfield. But should admittance be refused? --


Mrs. Ellfield. I will hasten to the minister -- his palace shall resound with
my cries and lamentations, till they reach his ears; My countenance of anguish
will awaken the compassion even of courtiers, my convulsive agonies
irresistibly seize their attention. I am certain I shall gain admittance.


Ellfield. But you are ill and weak.


Mrs. Ellfield. Oh no -- never did I feel myself stronger.


Ellfield. Let me go, I entreat.


Mrs. Ellfield. No, remain here to console her -- of that I am incapable.


Ellfield. Dear Caroline, you will be too much agitated --


Mrs. Ellfield. To see her agonies, when she first recovers, would agitate me
still more; -- and to bring back a misguided husband into the arms of a
faithful wife, would be the most powerful cordial I could experience. (she puts
on her cloak) -- console our unfortunate friend, my Charles, I shall soon
return. Heaven prosper my efforts! (Exit hastily)


Ellfield. (still supporting Emilia) Where will this end! -- Oh fate! fate! --
in what various ways have thou strewed my path of life with thorns! (Emilia
sighs deeply and opens her eyes) Her senses seem returning -- Madam! -- (Emilia
fixes her eyes upon him, then thrusts him gently from her, and looks round the
room with a vacant stare. By degrees her recollection seems to return, when she
str^kes both hands upon her f^rehead, and bursts into tears. Ellfield again
addresses her) Recover yourself, Madam, -- all will soon be well! -- (Emilia
ma^es signs to him to be silent, she clasps her hands together, sinks ^p^^ her
knees, and raises her eyes toward Heaven in silent prayer -- Ellfiel^ kneels
by her) Oh, God, to thee I address my supplications -- save. -- in mercy save,
-- our benefactress!


(The Curtain falls.) END OF THE FOURTH ACT.
ACT V.
SCENE I.
-- The room in which the Minister receives company. Several Card-Tables set
out, with Cards strewn upon them, and Candles standing nearly burnt out. The
Time is early in the Morning. PRUNE is busied in collecting the Cards and
Card-M^^^y. PRUNK. TO the honor of the Spaniards, two inventions are to be
as^^^bed to them, the Inquisition and the Cards; -- both powerful bulwarks,
against heresy and languor, and in many respects bearing a strong resemblance
to each other. The Inquisition prevents philosophical investigation, -- so do
Cards. -- Cards occasion p^le cheeks and hollow eyes, -- so does the
Inquisition. -- The Inquisition stifles all the natural affections, -- so do
Cards. -- The (...) for Cards brings many a sacrifice to the gallows, -- the
Inquisition carries an equal number to the blazing pile. But the ^nce of Cards
is still more extensive than that of the Inquisition -- for the latter, only
seizes upon Jews and Heretics, (...) Cards do not spare any sect or age, not
even the most (...) female devotees. -- Peace to the ashes of him who invented
(...)! -- may his bones be cut into dice, and his portrait (...) every king of
diamonds!


SCENE II.
-- Enter SCHARFENECK and PILZ. Prunk. Your honor's most obedient. -- Why so
late? -- o^ whither so early?


Scharfeneck. Is my uncle risen?


Prunk. He is ill with a headache.


Scharfeneck. Has he any company?


Prunk. Yes, the Mastiff.


Scharfeneck. I must speak with him.


Prunk. I do not know whether --


Scharfeneck. Pilz, leave the papers here.


Pilz. Mr. Secretary Allbrand ordered me --


Scharfeneck. Allbrand ordered you! -- What? --


Pilz. To carry them to his room.


Scharfeneck. There Is no occasion for that.


Pilz. He charged, me upon my conscience --


Scharfeneck. Your conscience! -- a pretty kind of charge, truly.


Pilz. But, it seemed to be of great importance to the Secretary.


Scharfeneck. Enough Pilz, -- I have my reasons; -- and that is more than I can
always say.


Pilz. If you will take upon yourself, to be answerable --


(he lays the papers upon the table, bows, and withdraws) SCENE III.
-- SCHARFENECK and PRUNK. Scharfeneck. Prunk, I have struck a grand stroke.


Prunk. Met with girl? --


Scharfeneck. No, no, -- rendered a service to the State.


Prunk. To the State? -- that means, in this country, to the Prince; --
therefore I repeat my question?


Scharfeneck. Thou art a wise one. No, Prunk, the service is not quite so
important; I have only caught a Jacobin.


Prunk. By name?


Scharfeneck. Syndicus Morland.


Prunk. Morland a Jacobin? -- No, no, that will not do! --


Scharfeneck. Why do you doubt it?


Prunk. He looks every body in the face.


Scharfeneck. What can be more suspicious? He shows a want of diffidence, very
unbecoming in a subject.


Prunk. And he always says what he thinks.


Scharfeneck. A sign that he thinks too much.


Prunk. A new species of crime.


Scharfeneck. Far from it! -- It has always been thought prudent to keep fools,
and wisemen, coiners, and thinkers, in confinement.


Prunk. But, if you have no other proofs --


Scharfeneck. These papers contain the proofs. Now, my uncle will no longer
have reason to complain, that I do not apply to any thing. I have forsaken both
a Card-Table and a rendezvous -- sacrificed a whole night --


Prunk. To plunge a worthy man into distress.


Scharfeneck. An impertinent remark, Prunk.


Prunk. Truth always sounds to Courtiers, like an ill-tuned violin.


SCENE IV.
-- Enter SMITH. Smith. I have followed you closely, Sir.


Scharfeneck. (to Prunk) Is the Porter ill?


Smith. No, he snarled very properly at me, -- but I know these people very
well.


Scharfeneck. Probably, you had a great deal of conversation with each other?


Smith. I understand you. -- His rank would have been no objection to me, --
but his profession --


Scharfeneck. Indeed! -- had he then fortunately been a shoemaker?


Smith. You are right -- for then he had probably been an industrious and
useful man. But a Porter, and a Gentleman of the Privy-Chamber, are commonly
good for nothing.


Scharfeneck. Fellow, are you mad?


Smith. I have rather proved the contrary.


Scharfeneck. Prunk, lend me your brawny hands to chastise his impertinence.


Smith. Do not give yourselves that trouble -- I shall not stir from this
place, till I have spoken with the minister; -- then -- you will find me any
where.


Scharfeneck. (somewhat embarrassed) Prunk! --


Prunk. No noise must be made here.


Scharfeneck. (to Smith) This to me in my uncle's house! --


Smith. Young man, I pity you from my soul! -- It is a great misfortune to you,
that your uncle is minister.


Scharfeneck. Your language --


Smith. Was once not unfamiliar to you.


Scharfeneck. Indeed -- it appears to me -- as if --


Smith. Can we have a little private conversation?


Scharfeneck. Prunk. (he gives Prunk a nod, who retires)


SCENE V.
-- SMITH and SCHARFENECK. Scharfeneck. Now eccentric Sir?


Smith. To justify that appellation, I will begin with relating a story. In the
course of my rambles, I once came to a small town, the romantic situation of
which charmed me, and I remained for several weeks fixed to the spot. It was
surrounded by a chain of hills, at whose foot meandered a beautiful stream; and
these were my daily haunt. One evening I had stayed out very late, and was
wandering solitarily homewards, by twilight, along the waterside, when
suddenly I saw and heard, among the trees, a female form, wringing her hands
violently, and uttering deep sighs and groans, as she staggered backwards and
forwards, to the brink of the river. Curiosity induced me to conceal myself
that I might observe her farther; and, in a few moments, I saw her plunge into
the stream. I am a good swimmer; I sprung in after her, and was fortunate
enough so save her life: yet she did not thank me for -- What think you, young
gentleman, of the privy chamber? -- what reason do you suppose she gave for
this attempt at self-destruction?


Scharfeneck. (extremely confused) How can I guess?


Smith. You tremble.


Scharfeneck. Well, well, go on.


Smith. "I am, said she, the daughter of an humble citizen, and possessed no
other wealth, but my honor and innocence. Of these, a young man, a student
here, sought to beguile me: but failing in his attempt, he had recourse to a
most cruel revenge. He traduced my character in all companies; till at length,
wherever I went, the neighbors pointed at me with their fingers; my former
friends looked askance at me; and worse than all, my lover, an honest mechanic
-- oh, terrible to think on! deserted me. I could not support myself against
such undeserved ignominy, I was driven to despair, and I resolved to put an end
to my life." You do not seem well, sir?


Scharfeneck. (with downcast eyes, and twirling his fingers) Sir?


Smith. At first I supposed the slandere^ to be wholly worthless; but I was
mistaken; he was only thoughtless. I went to him with the f^rmness of an honest
man, painted to him in forcible colors, the poor girl's misery, and the
disastrous consequences of his chattering vanity: he was shocked at the story;
I saw tears of remorse rush into his eyes; the blush of shame suffuse his
cheeks.


Scharfeneck. (stretching out his arms) Edward Smith!


Smith. He had sufficient magnanimity instantly to recant his former errors,
and to proclaim aloud the maiden's innocence, and his own criminality.
Repentance, and assiduous kindness, washed out the stains that calumny had
made, and on my bosom he thanked heaven, that I had saved him, before it was
too lat^ to repair his fault.


Scharfeneck. (throwing himself upon his neck) Edward Smith!


Smith. You now recollect my name.


Scharfeneck. With shame, that I could forget your person. Edward, we then
exchanged promises of perpetual friendship.


Smith, Which you are not ashamed to own?


Scharfeneck. Do not suppose me sunk quite so low!


Smith. I am only Morland's clerk.


Scharfeneck. I am only a man.


Smith. (shaking his hand warmly) Right! and like that unfortunate girl you
have plunged into a rushing stream, whence I may perhaps equally succeed in
rescuing you. Young man, that dreadful example ought to have served you as a
warning; under its influence you made me a solemn promise to subdue your fatal
propensity to calumny: but ask your heart how faithfully that promise has been
kept. Though all who have become sacrifices to your tongue, may not have made
like attempts upon their lives, yet who can tell how many a bitter tear has
been shed in secret, of which you only were the cause: how much domestic
happiness may have been destroyed by one word alone, perhaps carelessly uttered
by you. The ears of mankind are always open for the reception of slander, but
are often inflexibly closed against all attempts at its refutation: a hint is
easily given, but its effects cannot easily be calculated: a thoughtless word
trips lightly over the tongue; but it cannot be recalled by the Almighty
himself.


Scharfeneck. You have a right to reproach me thus: yet at present I do not
deserve --


Smith. What had Morland done to thee?


Scharfeneck. He was considered as dangerous.


Smith. Calumny!


Scharfeneck. He espoused the citizens' cause with great warmth.


Smith. It was his duty.


Scharfeneck. He is a thorn in the eyes of some persons.


Smith. There is the thing, Allbrand --


Scharfeneck. Even so!


Smith. And can you suffer yourself to be made the tool of such a man?


Scharfeneck. I consider myself as performing my duty to my uncle.


Smith. Young man, your head and heart received from nature a proper bias.
Ro^se yourself then from this unworthy intoxication: Let an Allbrand cringe as
he pleases: but do not suffer yourself to be infected with the poison. You
might be splendid by virtue: and you only glitter by rank: You might enlighten
from merit, and you only dazzle with wit. Your heart would gain you friends,
but they are repulsed by your head: you might attract love, and you only coquet
with fear. To slander a worthy man, who is peaceably following his own
pursuits, is no less base, than to murder one who sleeps: and to re-establish
the character of the undeserved victim of calumny, is a task scarcely less
difficult, than to smooth over scars of the smallpox.


Scharfeneck. Here is my hand: never will I give you cause of complaint in
future.


Smith. As an earnest of your sincerity, save Morland.


Scharfeneck. I give you my honor, that whatever is in my power shall be done.


Smith. Where are his papers?


Scharfeneck. Upon this table.


Smith. Will you deliver them into your uncle's hands?


Scharfeneck. No!


Smith. What will you say to him?


Scharfeneck. That they are lost -- burnt --


SCENE VI.
-- Enter the MINISTER from his Chamber. Minister. (calls) Prunk!


Prunk. (entering from the antichamber) Your Excellency.


Smith. (aside to Scharfeneck) Now is your time.


Minister. What a noise has there been here this morning: it is a shameful
breach of decorum.


Prunk. This stranger --


Minister. What does he want?


Smith. I beg your Excellency's pardon for coming so late.


Minister. (looking at his watch and smiling) So late?


Smith. Too late for one in whose house justice never slumbers: too late when
the question is to vindicate an innocent man whom calumny has unjustly thrown
into prison.


Minister. Who are you?


Smith. One who will esteem himself most happy, most worthy of envy, should he
succeed in rescuing innocence from undeserved odium -- and in saving your
Excellency's fame from incurring the stain of injustice.


Minister. (contemptuously) You!


Smith. So looked the snared lion upon the mouse, till she had gnawed the net
in pieces.


Minister. In whose behalf do you speak?


Smith. In behalf of the worthiest man in the town -- Syndicus Morland.


Minister. Ha! where is he?


Smith. In a place of all others the least proper for him -- in prison.


Minister. And where was the bird caught?


Scharfeneck. (confused) Secretary Allbrand will inform you.


Smith. Relate all that you know, but let truth alone guide the narrative:
before her, my friend will never blush nor I grow mute.


Minister. The truth, young sir!


Scharfeneck. Mr. Morland stole at midnight --


Smith. It Is false, he never stole.


Minister. No interruption, sir!


Scharfeneck. The Syndicus was going at midnight, to visit the Captain
Ellfield, who lives in the Castle Square --


Smith. Impossible, he does not know any body of that name.


Minister. Yes, the Captain is well known both to the Syndicus and ourselves.
But, proceed.


Scharfeneck. When, just as he entered the house he was arrested.


Smith. At whose command?


Minister. At mine.


Scharfeneck. Secretary Allbrand immediately dispatched me to seize his papers.


Minister. And where are they?


Scharfeneck. By an unlucky accident -- (he stops extremely embarrassed)


Minister. Well?


Smith. Here they lie! -- the property of a citizen, under the protection of
the first officer of the State.


Minister. They must be examined.


Smith. By what authority?


Minister. (starting indignantly) Sir!


Smith. Justice would not shrink from the question, and ^e who stands in the
Prince's place, ought not to be offended at it.


Minister. Once more, who are you?


Smith. An Englishman, and at present clerk to Mr. Morland.


Minister. Esteem for your nation, could alone induce me to pardon such
boldness.


Smith. Speak pardon to the criminal! -- undisguised truth may not suit t^ mass
of mankind; but from the nobl^ ^ded Minister of Justice, it will be received
with transport.


Minister. The man in whose behalf you speak with such true English license,
lies under strong suspicion of holding dangerous principles.


Smith. By whom is he accused?


SCENE VII.
-- Enter ALLBRAND. Minister. It Is well that you are come -- your prudence
keeps you watchful -- now complete your work, unmask a suspicious character,
and justify measures which appear despotic in the eyes of this Englishman.


Smith. This man, his accuser! -- My Lord Count, before one word shall pass
those impure lips, I entreat you to hear me! -- Secretary Allbrand was a daily
guest at Morland's, and was considered as his bosom friend. He has shared those
moments when wine increases the circulation of the blood, and when an ardent
feeling will often burst out in unguarded wo^ds. He was always courteous,
always pliant, had always a compla^ent nod of the head ready for every opinion
which was thrown out, -- a smile at command for every sally of wit. Possessing
in an eminent degree the faculty of drawing forth whatever he wished to know,
he has availed himself of the unreserved moments of social mirth, to ruin the
man he pretended to love, -- he has watched every turn of conversation at
table, and dipping his pen in gall, noted down any innocent piece of humor
uttered by his honest host, to make use of it as opportunity should offer for
trampling him under foot, and ingratiating himself with the court. Count
Scharfeneck surely will not listen to such an accuser. -- When a man of honor
is called to account, a man of honor alone should be heard against him.


Minister. (To Allbrand) You stir not hence, till you have pro^ all your
accusations.


Allbrand. Am I to guess at the question before you?


Smith. Oh, the innocent hesitation!


Minister. Morland is arrested.


Allbrand. Of that I can inform your Excellency.


Minister. Declare before this gentleman, why he is arrested.


Allbrand. For arrogant assumptions, indiscreet conversation, and suspicious
intercourse.


Smith. And where are your proofs?


Allbrand. With respect to his arrogance, I need only remind your Excellency of
the manner in which he has defended the rights of the citizens, as he is
pleased to term them.


Smith. A man who would perform his duty, must speak with firmness.


Allbrand. Of his indiscreet conversation, your Excellency's nephew, the
Gentleman of the Privy Chamber, has often been witness.


Smith. (Scharfeneck.) Is this true?


Scharfeneck.. (With firmness) No.


Minister. How, nephew, -- have you not yourself --


Scharfeneck. Yes uncle, I confess it with shame; -- but God be my witness, I
was then a slanderer; nor reflected upon the consequences! -- Thoughtlessness
and bad example misled me; but the happiness of a worthy man is concerned, and
I am recalled to myself. Morland's house is a school of morals, his table the
rendezvous of innocent cheerfulness -- his jokes never wound -- his serious
conversation is full of instruction, and no captious expression ever escapes
his lips. Love for the town he inhabits, affection for the Prince, and respect
for my uncle, reign in his bosom. As such I know him: and whoever represents
him otherwise, were it my uncle himself, I would say that be misrepresents him
and deserves correction.


Smith. Worthily spoken, young man! Can any thing more be wanting to establish
Mr. Morland's innocence, than this unsuspicious testimony? -- Oh, Count! let
your ears be closed against the voice of calumn* The slanderer is the most
^^ngerous of all the traitors to the state, for he unites all crimes in one. He
is a thief who steals into men's houses, and robs them of more precious
treasures than gold and silver -- he is a murderer who attacks the inoffensive
and unarmed, and deprives them of even more than life. Restore to the State a
citizen, to whom his duty was ever sacred, and who has too dearly atoned for
his only weakness -- placing confidence in this man.


Allbrand. The true declamation of an associate in his crimes.


Smith. Base soul! -- is that thy last resource?


Allbrand. Justice remains cool! -- it is fortunate for me, that my patriotic
zeal is fully known to his Excellency.


Minister. Why this altercation? -- Morland's papers will elucidate the whole
affair.


Allbrand. They are in my apartment, and shall be laid before your Excellency
this very day.


Minister. They are here; they may be examined instantly.


Allbrand. (starting, and appearing to be extremely confounded) How! -- What!
-- I ordered --


Smith. Once more, my Lord Count, let me entreat your forbearance toward these
papers! -- I am unacquainted with their contents: I never was in Morland's
confidence: yet I would venture to pledge my life that they contain nothing
improper. But Mr. Morland is a philosopher and a poet: and in the course of
philosophical investigation, or in the composition of poetry, things are often
hastily written, which were never intended for any other eye than the writer's.
A random line may condemn a man, only for want of being considered in connection
with the context -- the writing-desk is a friend to whom we confide every
effusion of the heart, or imagination -- has any one a right to put this friend
to the rack? or if he possessed it, would he avail himself of the right?


Minister. These observations may be just: but they only increase my curiosity.


Smith. Curiosity is a feeling that a Judge must suppress.


Allbrand. There is such a variety of other business awaiting your Excellency
this morning, that I had better previously examine the papers in my own
apartment.


Minister. They shall remain here.


Allbrand. Indeed, that gentleman is perfectly in the right -- Many things may
have escaped the pen of a philosopher and poet, never intended to see
daylight. I would select only such papers as can in any way interest the
state: and thus save your Excellency much trouble, and many precious moments.


Minister. This, when you believe --


Smith. I beg your Excellency's pardon, but I must now recall my former request,
and entreat no less earnestly, that the papers may be opened. The Secretary is
embarrassed -- he seeks to prevent it -- this cannot be without good reasons --
Good reasons, my Lord Count -- good you know is a relative term.


Allbrand. Sir, you are abusive -- I know you not -- I have never offended you:
but I will not forget who I am. I refer myself to his Excellency for
satisfaction -- for my own part, I find that I had better retire: since not
even the presence of the first minister can secure me against affronts. (he
snatches up the papers hastily and is going.)


Smith. (stepping before the door) Hold! -- You stir not hence!


Minister. Mr. Clerk, your impertinence exceeds even my patience -- Prunk call
the guards. (exit Prunk.)


Smith. (taking out his pocketbook) My Lord Count, it is with reluctance, that
I am obliged to avail myself of a letter of recommendation, which I have
reserved only for a case of extreme exigence. (he gives the Minister a letter.)


Minister. (contemptuously) You a letter of recommendation to me!


Smith. I beg you to break it open.


Minister. (opens the letter, looks at the signature, starts and exclaims)
WILLIAM PIT! (He reads the letter to himself, astonishment and confusion
appear alternately in his countenance when he has finished, he turns with great
courtesy to Smith) -- I -- if I do not immediately -- if I do not understand --
Prunk, a chair! -- My Lord, so earnest a recommendation was wholly superfluous
for a man who has distinguished himself so nobly -- Prunk, why don't you bring
a chair!


Smith. Your Excellency will excuse me, if I defer to a future opportunity, of
acquainting you with the motives which occasioned my appearing thus incognito.


Minister. No one has any right to question your Lordship upon that subject.


Smith. National humor may perhaps be offered as the principal cause.


Minister. (presenting his Nephew with great solemnity) -- My Lord, the
Gentleman of the Privy-Chamber, Von Scharfeneck -- Nephew, my Lord Sidney.


Smith. (giving his hand to Scharfeneck with a smile) We are already known to
each other.


Prunk. (entering) Please your Excellency, the guards are ready in the
antichamber.


Minister. Silence! -- My Lord, I hope you will give his Highness the pleasure
--


(Allbrand, during this scene, has been watching an opportunity to escape: but
Smith, who has still kept his eye fixed upon him, seeing him attempt to slide
to the door, seizes him somewhat roughly by the arm) Smith. This gentleman
appears so extremely anxious to escape with these papers, that I must once more
request they may be opened in my presence.


Minister. They shall be examined instantly. Yet let me assure your Lordship,
that you have mistaken my secretary, of whose fidelity and activity I have the
most convincing proofs.


Smith. Then I pity the honorable man, that nature has bestowed on him a
countenance which seems destined to the gallows.


Minister. Come Allbrand, unseal the papers! Why this hesitation?


Allbrand. I obey. His Lordship must himself acknowledge the truth of what is
alleged: provided nothing be suppressed which may tend to inculpate the
accused.


Smith. His Excellency has forbidden any preface.


The Minister, Smith, and Allbrand, range themselves r^und the table, the
papers are unsealed, and the Minister examines them. Minister. Accounts settled
-- Acquittances -- Letters -- (he opens the letters) From his father in
Switzerland -- Phylosophical reflections upon the immortality of the soul --
Letters and verses to my wife -- Secret benefactions -- "In case of my death,
my wife is requested to continue this list exactly as they are here noted down.
-- Ode to spring. -- Sketch of a poem for the children of Count von
Scharfeneck, for their father's birthday.


Prunk. Their young excellency's lately begged that of him very earnestly. Your
Excellency's birthday happens in the course of next week.


Minister. Indeed! -- Ah, I have made an ill return for this! (he proceeds in
his examination) Drawings. -- A Song, with music -- Actions which appear to be
well-grounded -- Deductions --


Smith. (hasttly to Allbrand) What are you hiding there?


Allbrand. (looking extremely confused) Nothing.


Smith. Produce it.


Minister. Instantly! (Allbrand lays the paper on the table with a trembling
hand, the Minister takes it up and reads) "PATRIOTIC REFLECTIONS thrown
together, at the REQUEST of my friend ALLBRAND." -- How! -- I hope this is not!
-- (he runs over the paper hastily) It is so indeed -- the very work --
verbatim et literatim -- Mr. Secretary, this is the treatise which first
recommended you to my favor.


Allbrand. I beg your Excellency's pardon --


Minister. Oh, shame! shame! -- You have pressed all the juice of the ripened
fruit, and now would trample the rind into the dust -- Misguided wretch that I
have been! -- But Morland's innocence is sufficiently established; hasten,
Nephew, to release him from his shameful bondage. Order that my carriage be
made ready; it shall follow you and bring you the Syndicus hither from the
prison. I owe a public atonement to the worthy man; and it shall be made in the
presence of you all.


Scharfeneck. I hasten to execute the most glorious commission with which I was
ever entrusted. (exit.)


Allbrand. I see the whole extent of my misfortune -- Morland's enlargement
includes with it my condemnation. Heaven grant that your Excellency may not
have proceeded rashly! -- I acknowledge that I was indebted to the Syndicus for
this treatise: but with my principles I could not suffer a private obligation
to interfere with my prior duty to my country. I rejoice that nothing
suspicious has bpen found in those papers; yet the falsehood of the charges
brought against the accused, is by no means proved. Your Excellency will
recollect, that a very important circumstance yet remains uninvestigated -- the
secret intercourse that has long subsisted between Mr. Morland and Captain
Ellfield -- his stolen visits at midnight --


Smith. Is not the serpent's venom yet exhausted? A female voice without, in a
tone of great anxiety. I must speak with him!


A servant without. His Excellency cannot spare time.


The female voice approaching the door. I will go in.


The servant. Go back! -- Go back!


Minister. (to Prunk) See what is the matter.


Prunk. (opening the door) Some strange lady --


SCENE VIII.
-- MRS. ELLFIELD rushes in wildly. Her countenance is pale and ghastly -- she
staggers and looks eagerly round on all present. Mrs. Ellfield. Which is the
Minister?


Minister. I am he, Madam -- Whom do I behold?


Mrs. Ellfield. The wife of Captain Ellfield.


Minister. Come hither, I imagine, to support your husband's petition for a
pension.


Mrs. Ellfield. No, my Lord, want would never have induced me to enter the
Chamber of a Prime Minister: I was born in the great world, and well know what
kind of reception a beggar meets with about a Court. (she supports herself
against the back of a chair.)


Smith. (reaching her a seat) You seem ill, madam -- sit down.


Mrs. Ellfield. I thank you, sir. Yet you remind me of my illness at an
unseasonable moment. ( she sees Allbrand) Ha! Villain! You here!


Minister. What ^^a^ you by that, Madam?


Smith. Oh, welcome, auxiliary!


Allbrand. I have not the honor of knowing the lady, who accosts me so
familiarly.


Minister. Explain yourself, Madam!


Mrs. Ellfield. I will, my Lord: yet not to waste the little strength possessed
by one scarcely restored to life, upon a villain, but to save the guiltless, to
vindicate the aspersed character of an angel. -- How my husband fought for his
native country: how he was crippled in her service: and what recompense his
valor has received, you already know -- The long and painful confinement he
underwent, in recovering from his wounds, exhausted at once our slender means,
and my health: and scarcely was he able to rise from the bed of sickness, when
I was seized with a dreadful fever. The delirium attendant upon my disorder,
deprived me for two months of all sense of our sorrows: and I had sunk unknown,
unnoticed, into the grave, had not an accident conducted a lady, a total
stranger to us, into our garret. To her benevolence alone, am I indebted for my
recovery: she attended me with the affection of a sister: her purse, her heart,
were ours: yet she kept her name in concealment: nor knew we till yesterday,
when a villainous accident revealed it to us. -- (casting a pointed look at
Allbrand) that Mrs. Morland was our benefactress.


Smith. Excellent woman!


Mrs. Ellfield. She came to us only by night: and at the approach of morning,
returned again! nor was any one, even in her own house, acquainted with her
benevolence.


Smith. No one, Madam?


Mrs. Ellfield. Alas, no! -- not even her husband; and by this means villainy
has succeeded, in transforming a benignant angel, into a demon of darkness.
This man -- oh, to what humiliation does not poverty subject human nature! --
came to us, and with insidious promises and persuasions, endeavored to purchase
our assistance to his base designs upon her virtue -- We spurned his proposals
with indignation; but he is no half villain: and last night, as she was
administering her usual consolation to our sufferings, he again entered our
lodging, and solicited a private interview with our guest, on pretense of some
important business that concerned her husband. This, after some hesitation, she
granted. I know not the whole of what passed between them: but a probable
conjecture may be formed from this letter which had dropped from the hands of
the unfortunate woman, as she fell senseless upon the floor.


Smith. (takes the letter and reads) From the State Prison. -- Dissembling
woman! enjoy thy triumph! -- thou art free! thou may now, without restraint,
revel in the Prince's arms! -- laugh at me, if you please; I know, myself, that
my rage is impotent. I know that I cannot interrupt thy voluptuous hours. I am
here in chains, and powerless to revenge my wrongs! -- yes, in chains through
thee! -- such is the reward of my faithful love! -- Yet, hope not that I can be
blinded by the flimsy pretense, on which I am imprisoned -- I know well the
true reason of my being here -- with my own eyes I beheld you steal into the
house of wantonness, thanks to the friend who enabled me to detect your
falsehood! -- I am fully sensible, that on earth I cannot hope for redress, that
you will secure my perpetual detention in this confinement, while you dishonor
my name with impunity -- yet tremble at the vengeance that awaits you, when the
righteous God shall have freed me by death from these ignominous chains, and
have summoned you from the arms of voluptuousness into the cold bosom of the
grave!

MORLAND.


(Smith having read the letter, seizes Allbrand eagerly) Ha! fiend! -- this is
thy work! -- confess it! -- Oh, what daggers do thou not plunge into the
hearts of the unfortunate!


Allbrand. Sir, you forget yourself! -- of what concern can Morland's domestic
quarrels be to me? -- it is well known, that his wife was formerly in a certain
predicament with the Prince -- this he has perhaps now first discovered --
perhaps he supposes that the connection still continues -- for my part, I
neither do, nor will, know any thing of the matter.


Mrs. Ellfield. He himself sought to obtain her favors -- and would have
influenced our poverty to promote his suit. A pension for my husband was the
promised reward of our infamy: -- but failing in his attempt, his mean soul was
resolved on vengeance.


Minister. I am astonished past expression, at all that I see and hear! -- Tell
me, sincerely, Madam -- has Morland ever had any intercourse with your husband?


Mrs. Ellfield. He never even saw him.


Minister. How is this? My secretary informed me, that suspicious meetings were
held at your house, in which Morland was principally concerned.


Allbrand. I may have been deceived by my informer.


Mrs. Ellfield. Suspicious meetings at our house! -- Oh, my Lord! my husband's
limbs indeed are crippled, but his heart is sound.


Minister. I have been imposed upon most shamefully! -- What a man have I taken
into my confidence!


Smith. My part is over, yours is now to come, my Lord Count.


Minister. Prunk, are the guards still in the antichamber?


Prunk. They are, my Lord.


Minister. Consign the villain into their custody.


Allbrand. I have so firm a reliance upon your Excellency's justice, that I do
not fear being condemned without sufficient proof of guilt. Nothing has
hitherto appeared against me but empty words -- I have only been talked down:
yet I doubt not of my innocence triumphing at last over such malice.


(Exit, with Prunk) Smith. Hypocrite to the end!


Mrs. Ellfield. May I request permission of your Excellency to hasten
instantly, and inform Mr. Morland, whose freedom you have pronounced as a
citizen, of what alone can render his enlargement acceptable -- the innocence
of his beloved wife?


Smith. You are right, Madam; and allow me to be your companion; my arm shall
support you.


Mrs. Ellfield. Joy will be my sufficient support.


SCENE IX.
-- As they are going, the door is opened, and EMILIA rushes in, followed by
CAPTAIN ELLFIELD. Emilia. (throwing herself at the Minister's feet) Justice, oh
Count! justice for my guiltless husband! Compassion for his disconsolate wife!


Minister. Rise, Madam! (reaches her a chair) Recover yourself!


Emilia. First pronounce Morland's acquital! Oh! this misery is insupportable!
Awakened from a swoon, I learnt that a noble-minded woman was gone to procure
my husband's enlargement: but she did not return: my impatience could not be
restrained: anguish lent me wings, and I flew hither! -- Oh! I can no more!


Minister. Be composed, Madam. Mr. Morland's acquital is already pronounced --
we expect him here, every moment -- I am convinced both of his and your
innocence.


Emilia. My husband at liberty! -- my honor vindicated? Great God! (She takes
the Minister's hand, and presses it silently to her heart)


Prunk. (entering) Your Excellency's carriage is returned.


Minister. With my welcome guest! Hasten to conduct him in. ( to Emilia) It is
Mr. Morland, Madam.


SCENE X.
-- Enter SCHARFENECK, MORLAND and JENNY. Emilia. Morland! (she rushes into his
arms, he turns away, she sinks almost fainting into the arms of Smit^ and Jenny)


Morland. (looking at her with constrained coldness and contempt) Why am I
brought hither?


Mrs. Ellfield. Unfortunate, misguided man! Oh, cast from thee the poison of
unjust suspicion -- thy Emilia is innocent -- listen to me!


Morland. Who are you, Madam? I know you not! by what means can you be
concerned in our fate?


Mrs. Ellfield. I owe my life to Mrs. Morland.


Morland, Still I do not understand you, speak more plainly.


Mrs. Ellfield. I lay upon my deathbed, she visited me, administered to my
wants, sacrificed whole nights to me --


Morland. Whole nights! -- Oh! repeat that again!


Mrs. Ellfield. Yes, whole nights -- Believe me, your suspicions have fallen
upon a benevolent angel.


Morland. But it was to meet the Prince?


Mrs. Ellfield. He never entered our garret.


Morland. Yet I saw a man receive Emilia at your door.


Mrs. Ellfield. It was my husband.


Morland. But my imprisonment --


Minister. Was the work of villainy.


Morland. I know it was of Emilia's villainy.


Minister. No, of my Secretary's -- of Allbrand's.


Morland. Of Allbrand's! of my bosom friend's -- impossible!


Mrs. Ellfield. Most true! he loved your wife.


Morland. Oh, horrible! but how know you that?


Mrs. Ellfield. Would that I were not compelled to repeat it once more! he
would have purchased our assistance to his base designs!


Morland. And this Emilia concealed from me?


Smith. Through an unfortunate forbearance.


Jenny. Have I not repeatedly assured you of that?


Morland. And was this his motive for persuading me to escape?


Smith. Most assuredly! he wished at any rate to get the husband out of the way.


Morland. For this did he persuade me to write her such a letter?


Mrs. Ellfield. A letter that deprived her of her senses.


Minister. We have all been deceived by a villain, who now expiates his crimes
in a dungeon.


Morland. Great God! What have I done? (he throws himself at Emilia's feet)
Pardon injured innocence!


Emilia. (bending over him) Yes, I am indeed, innocent!


Morland. (rising and clasping her in his arms) My wife! my wife! (Emilia hides
her face in his bosom -- a long pause)


Jenny. (giving her hand to Smith) Edward, I am yours.


(The Curtain falls.) THE END.

