ARUNDEL A NOVEL.

ARUNDEL, A NOVEL. BY HARRIET LEE AUTHOR OF CONSTANTIA DE VALMONT.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED BY JAMES CAREY. JUNE 1, 1800.

ARUNDEL.
There is a kind of character in thy life,
Which to the observer does thy history
Fully unfold!
SHAKESPEARE.
IN the gay and dissolute reign of Charles the second, when wit was almost as
general as licentiousness, and a happy vivacity and good person the surest
recommendations, Henry Arundel was distinguished from a crowd of fashionable
libertines, by a superiority of elegance, taste and extravagance: in a word,
for all those seducing allurements which lend a charm to vice in every age, and
for which that was particularly remarkable.

Arundel, though not wholly deserving of the lavish admiration he every where
extorted, had advantages few men could boast. His figure was graceful; and,
what is often thought still better, it was fashionable: his eyes, naturally
fine, had the art of saying the prettiest things in the world to every pretty
woman: his manners were ingratiating: he sung well, danced well, and dressed
well. Could any thing further be added to his character? Yet, with all these
advantages -- strange does it seem to say -- Arundel was at heart a
discontented man. Highly as the world thought of him, there was an individual
in it whose opinion rose much beyond theirs: it was himself: and he secretly
repined, that so much merit, talents, and grace, had never yet raised him to a
rank above that he was born to.

Mr. Arundel was indeed of good family; though, to his unceasing regret, he had
early in life debased himself by marrying a lady whose connections did not add
luster to it. She was the daughter of an officer of more loyalty than rank, who
had served his country in the cause of Charles the first, and had followed the
fortunes of his son.

Cromwell was then protector: dancing and dressing were not in fashion; and mr.
Arundel consequently resided with his lady on his patrimonial estate in
Cornwall. Some years passed before they had any children, when he was surprised
with an heir, and rather more surprised on finding himself soon afterward a
widower.

Never truly alive either to conjugal or parental affection, he expressed
little regret on the loss of an amiable wise, nor any great emotion at sight of
her offspring. Decent care, however, was taken of the child; and as all England
became insensibly engrossed by politics, his father thought oftener of them
than of the little Henry.

The Restoration of Charles the second gave that luster to London to which it
had long been a stranger. Henry Arundel had only to show himself there to be
admired: his person won the ladies -- his address the monarch; and from a
neglected country gentleman, he found himself in a few years the idol of a gay
and elegant court. Rapidly as the change was effected, it yet could not fail to
bring with it some knowledge of the world. He began to think himself born to
fill the most elevated rank there; and regretted too late the having entailed a
tax both on his estate and his pleasures, and perhaps prepared a rival at a
time of life when he was likely to find himself but little disposed to endure
one.

Mr. Arundel, it may easily be judged, was not a man of principle: he therefore
formed rather a resolution than a plan; and, without exactly analyzing his own
motives. sent his son, at two years of age, into France, under the care of a
person who had once been his mistress, and whose declining health induced her
to try a more settled climate than her own. The woman had her instructions. The
birth of young Henry was carefully concealed; and her death, which happened
three years after, left the child in the hands of strangers, at a small English
school in Normandy, where an annual stipend freed his father from all further
anxiety: from the relations of his deceased wife he had nothing to fear: most
of them were dead: the rest were wanderers over the Continent; distressed by
the ingratitude of a monarch whom they had abandoned every thing to serve.

Time now rolled rapidly away in vanity and pleasure; but time, though it had
not yet robbed mr. Arundel of his graces, had produced an insensible alteration
in them: that of novelty was vanishing fast. He began only to please, where he
was accustomed to captivate; and had even some vague surmises, that he might
soon cease to do either, when fortune resolved, by one stroke, to atone for all
her past inattention.

The young heiress of the illustrious house of Lindsey was at that period first
presented at court. She was beautiful, rich, and had just seen enough of the
world to value all the graces it bestows. Arundel caught her eye, while his was
directed elsewhere: the superior elegance of his person fixed her attention;
and when he was introduced, a softer sentiment sunk into her heart. He was
still enough the fashion to make his name a theme of conversation, as she
dropped it amongst her acquaintance; nor was it long before he discovered that
she had done so often. The denouement it is not difficult to guess: he
presently found that he might win the lady, and therefore instantly resolved
that he would; but the blind goddess, who so often embitters her own gifts, was
now preparing one for him, which, of all others, he least suspected he should
ever deem a misfortune, since it appeared in the shape of a patent of nobility.
To the nobility in his own person, indeed, he bore not the slightest objection;
but the clause by which it was limited to his heirs, unluckily brought to his
recollection a poor little boy in France, who was just beginning to wonder to
whom he belonged, whenever he found time to do so from the more important
employments of studying bad Latin, and playing school pranks with his
companions; yet this poor little boy had most certainly been brought honorably
into the world, some years before. Arundel well knew the house of Lindsey to be
too proud to stoop to an (...) where such an obstacle intervened: he therefore
very prudently determined they never should know it. The marriage articles were
signed without any such impediment being announced; and miss Lindsey became a
wife and a mother, in the full conviction that both families were indebted to
her for an heir.

And what became of little Henry? -- Why, little Henry was now shot up beyond
his years; not strictly handsome, yet winning; not formed, yet ingratiating:
light traces of sensibility and judgment wandered over the glare of youth, like
clouds upon sunshine, and gave his character a graceful shade. The
impossibility of detaining him where he was, and the fear of detection when he
arrived at maturity, had obliged his father to change his mode of education;
and he had consigned him to a tutor, who, though apprized of the secret, was
bound by many ties to conceal it.

Mr. Mortimer -- for such was the name which the abovementioned gentleman
chose on this occasion to assume -- had once been the companion of mr. Arundel,
before he was dignified with the title of lord Lindsey; and had passed in his
society some of those hours, the recollection of which should seem to unite man
to man, if the experience of every day did not prove the distinction between
joviality and friendship. To say truth, mr. Mortimer's character, while yet
immatured by adversity, did not seem to demand or deserve superior regard; and
was one of those which, for want of a decisive trait, the world has agreed to
distinguish by the epithet of easy. Prodigal without being rich, and dissolute
without being vicious, he found himself at fifty a wanderer from his family,
friendless, and impoverished; and was contented to accept an annuity from lord
Lindsey, under such restrictions as every day convinced him were both cruel and
mean.

"Let the boy want nothing that a moderate income can supply!" -- Such were the
words of his lordship's letter to Mortimer: "Let him travel -- if, as you say,
he fancies it, and can do it without additional expense: but, above all, seize
the first opportunity of an attachment to marry him, and settle his
establishment in some province which he may never think of quitting.

"You know my situation -- Lady Lindsey is in a dying state: -- The physicians
even threaten me with a voyage to Lisbon. My son requires all the indulgences
suitable to the importance of his rank; and, indeed, my employments at court do
not allow me to retrench. From these circumstances, you will conclude how
little I am able to supply any extraordinary expense. As to my own state of
health, it is much as usual. The gout and rheumatism, indeed, make pretty
frequent attacks upon me; and I have some returns of the giddiness in my head.
These excepted, I find myself as young, and as well disposed to enjoy the
pleasures of life, as at five-and-twenty."

Such was the language of five-and-fifty! -- Such was -- May I not say, such is
it every day?

But though loud Lindsey perceived not the alteration in himself, the world was
not so complaisant: His friends found out that he was weak; his enemies, that
he was unprincipled: the old thought him too young; and the young discovered
daily that he was too old. In two points only were they all agreed; that he was
an imperious husband and a foolishly fond father.

"What is it that takes your attention so much?" said Mortimer to his pupil, as
they jogged on toward Brussels in a dusty chaise de post, amply filled with
two gentlemen and a raw-boned Swiss, who served both as valet: "Is it the
magcificent suite that has just passed us, or the powdered coxcombs in it?"

"It is an English carriage," replied Henry, still following it with his eyes,
through the cloud of dust in which its rapid movement had involved their more
humble vehicle.

"So much the worse," returned the other. "Would not a man swear, from its
structure, that it was the temple of luxury? One might really suppose that the
joints of our modern men of fashion -- " a violent jolt that brought his head
in rather too close a contact with that of the Swiss interrupted his speech,
which was as suddenly drowned by the postillions, who, clacking their whips,
gave notice of the post house.

The carriage ^^at had passed them stood at the door as they drew up. It was an
English postchariot, elegantly built, followed by two grooms, so perfectly a l'
Anglaise as to attract universal attention: one of whom led a capital horse,
which, by its appearance, seemed designed for his master.

"Lewis, open the door, and bring up Comete," said a young man, touching the
spring of the blind, and discovering both himself and his companion at full to
the curious eyes of our travelers -- "I Will ride the next post!"

"Not on that horse!" interrupted an elderly gentleman in black at his elbow,
in a tone which, as it seemed preliminary to much longer expostulation, made
his companion spring with some abruptness from the carriage.

A form light, graceful, elegant; a countenance lighted up with all the bloom
and fire of nineteen, at once fixed the eyes of Henry and his tutor. It was not
mere beauty, it was vigor -- it was intelligence -- it was character, that
seemed to live in the motion, and speak in the features, of the young stranger.

"I am afraid, gentlemen," said he, advancing, "that we are robbing you of
horses!" casting his eyes upon those his avant-courier had indeed secured; and,
by the same motion, directing the attention of Mortimer to a melancholy truth,
which the postmaster, after condescending to mention once to the Swiss, had
left them to digest at leisure. Clamor, fretting, and altercation succeeded on
all parts, except on those of Henry and the young stranger, who seemed on terms
of perfect familiarity, before their graver tutors had exchanged ten words.

"The matter is very easily arranged," said the young man: "Do you, sir,"
turning to Mortimer, "take my place in the carriage: my servant's horse (which
was a beautiful creature) shall be at this gentleman's service. I will ride my
own; and our fellows have only to wait an hour or two, and follow in your
carriage as soon as a fresh reinforcement arrives.

To this proposal a sort of doubtful pause succeeded, which was broken by the
gentleman in black, who, in a peevish tone, exclaimed, "I have told you, sir,
you ought never to ride that horse again!"

"Nay, pr'ythee, Walbrook," returned the other, gaily, "no more musty debates!
-- Had he really broken my neck in his last frolic, as you seemed to apprehend,
the world would not perhaps have been much the loser. My steed, gentlemen,"
added he, addressing himself on the the other side, "is so much of my own
taste, as to have an instinctive aversion to every thing old or ugly; and
having yesterday the misfortune to be surprised by a shrivelled Dutch hag
sitting under a hedge, he took the liberty of dismounting his master. -- But,
allons, mes amiss! -- I like him not the worse for it. -- Give me a horse that
will follow a pretty woman half the world over, and I Will compound for a few
vagaries at sight of an ugly one." Without waiting a reply, he sprung into the
saddle, cast a look of invitation, which was instantly complied with, on
Arundel, and, touching his hat to the seniors, both gentlemen were out of sight
in a moment. Walbrook groaned inwardly; Mortimer shrugged; the postillions
again clacked their whips, and the carriage rattled once more over the pave.

"Is the old gentleman behind us your father, or your tutor?" said the younger
stranger, checking his horse that his valet might tie up his hair, which, from
the velocity of their motion, had got loose and slowed over his shoulders.

" Both, perhaps!" cried Truth, in the bosom of Arundel, though his tongue
instinctively pronounced, "Neither. He is my friend!"

"A most reverend one!" said the other, archly.

"A kind one," returned Arundel, "and a wise one! -- He gives me the best
advice possible."

"So will I -- gratis, too! and there, perhaps, I have the advantage of him!"

"You must seek it first, I believe," retorted Henry, smiling.

"Not far -- I have it in folio -- on my chase! I love an old friend as well as
you do, when I can carry him in my imperial; and to make the matter easier, my
friend is my father."

"And who may this father be?" thought Arundel -- yet he had not the courage to
ask. The note of interrogation so common with travelers, was not yet familiar
to him: yet had he lived with Frenchmen, and, par hazard, had been asked almost
every possible question with that polite impertinence a Frenchman so thoroughly
understands.

But while glowing youth and exhilarated spirits thus cemented the liking of
the two juvenile travelers, their sober tutors were far from participating
their sentiments. Life, like the magnet, has two points; the one does not more
forcibly attract, than the other can repel; and our party quarre were stationed
at these opposite extremities.

Yet were not either mr. Walbrook or mr. Mortimer without curiosity: from the
former, however, a name had escaped which plunged his companion in a profound
reverie; nor was it till a flask of Burgundy gave fresh circulation to his
spirits that he appeared to recover himself.

"Mr. Lindsey, your glass!" said Walbrook, who was also beginning to relinquish
his supercilious taciturnity.

Mortimer started again at the name; again looked at the young man who bore it;
and again a vague and painful sentiment of remorse, enforced by the conviction
that his surmises were right, shot across his heart. -- The countenance of the
stranger, his arms, his liveries, his age, all united to prove that he could be
no other than the brother of Arundel -- his younger brother, yet permitted to
invade his rights -- to annihilate, as it should seem, his very existence.
Again Mortimer sighed, and again relapsed into useless reverie. For there is a
weakness in certain minds, which renders them alternately the prey of pleasure
and remorse, without power to perpetuate the one, or profit by the other; as
the wildest trees will put forth blossoms, though they require culture and
attention to produce fruits.

"A bumper, gentlemen!" said Walbrook. "I mean to give you a toast -- My worthy
friend and patron, lord Lindsey!"

"My father!" said the young stranger, as he negligently lifted the glass to
his lips. The secret monitor in the bosom of Mortimer smote him again -- "
Father!" repeated he, as he cast his eyes upon Henry: "yet, is the discovery
new to me? -- No! but the epithet is: and what is an epithet?" -- Thus
arrogantly argued reason, while modest feeling shrunk abashed. -- Feeling, that
indefinable union of the material and immaterial nature; that spontaneous sense
of right which would so often guide when reason would mislead us; and which,
though rejected and rebuked, still calls a blush into the cheek if the idea
sophistically familiarized to our own bosoms, is inadvertently obtruded by the
lips of another.

But these are metaphysics! -- Metaphysics in Flanders! We shall talk logic
next among the Iroquois in North America. Let us change the scene then and
place our travelers, now sworn and bosom friends, three whole weeks back, in
France -- France! lovely country! let me stop to weep over thee! -- to ask,
where are the nobles whose valor once graced, the peasantry whose mirth
enlivened thee! -- the monarch, over whose early and unmerited grave the
generous and enlightened of every nation shed tears of pity! -- And you, savage
band of ruffians, who to the hideous idol ye miscalled Liberty daily offered up
a sacrifice of human blood, and tears more painful than blood, deem not that
your names shall be mentioned -- your memories be transmitted to posterity --
but, as the scum of that mighty mass, which, "billowed high with human
agitation," must at last purify itself!

As yet, however, France was a country. It had arts; it had manufactures; it
had even a police -- a bad one, indeed; but a police that at least allowed its
inhabitants to carry their heads upon their shoulders in perference to a pike
-- that occasionally plundered them of their money, but made it no crime that
they had some to be plundered of -- that often stripped the beautiful plant of
genius of its leaves, but never buried it beneath that coarse and rugged soil
which blasts its very root.

"Will nobody teach these fellows that they are miserable?" said Lindsey,
smiling, as they passed through the beautiful grounds of the duc de T --, where
the peasants, collected under the trees, were capering to the indefatigable
violin of an old man, who performed the double character of fiddler and
dancing master, by incessantly bawling out every change in the cotillon, with
an exertion of lungs that seemed to console him for the quiescent state of his
heels, "Will nobody, I say, persuade these people they are miserable?"

"It is more than probable," said Arundel, "that they will soon need but little
persuasion to think so. They want every thing toward happiness, but
good humor and good spirits."

"And those some generous misanthrope or other -- some speculative reasoner,
who seeks in his head for what he ought to ask of his heart, will one day
deprive them of. Dear Arundel, I am inclined to think we are often strangely
deceived as to modes of felicity, and, while calculating too nicely that we are
to make for ourselves, we often overlook that Heaven has made for us."

"You would infer, then, that the enjoyment of an innocent pleasure is more
conducive to happiness than the satisfying a want? In this, at least, our
lively neighbors excel us. The intenseness with which an Englishman applies
himself to the latter idea, damps his animal spirits, and often brings on the
strange necessity of reasoning himself into gaiety."

"While the Frenchmen, an contraire, will be taught to reason himself out of
it!"

"But Liberty -- "cried Arundel, with enthusiasm --

"Is a goddess, I grant. But pr'ythee, dear Henry, lift thine eyes to one of
the prettiest mortal rustics that ever yet greeted them."

A blooming girl of about sixteen, who suddenly appeared upon a winding path
that crossed the road, was indeed an interesting object. Yet interesting is not
the word; for in truth, according to the modern acceptance of it, she was
nothing less. But if among my readers there happens to be a young man about the
age of mr. Lindsey, let him find a better. The little paysanne was not tall; so
much on the embonpoint, as to approach the clumsey; and tanned to a downright
brunette: yet would a painter, perhaps, have chosen her for his subject. The
roses on her cheek, deepened to unusual richness, gave to that very tan, which
would have disfigured a colder complexion, the vivid glow poured over the
landscape of a Claude. Large curls of auburn hair broke upon a brow of
exquisite beauty, while the full-orbed eye beneath them sparkled in a bright
fluid that seemed created by youth, by hope, and health. A short jacket in the
fashion of her country, a straw hat, and a basket over-weighted with clusters
of grapes, finished the picture. To those who recollect that a figure like this
stood the earnest gaze of two young men, it may not be amiss to add, that an
honest Lubin attended her, who though tired from the vintage, and laden with
spoil, still went the longest way about, to follow the footsteps of pretty
Annette.

"Monsieur peut bien passer," said our damsel, retreating, with a rustic
courtsey, from the grand chemin, where Lindsey, perceiving her about to cross
it, had checked his horse.

"Will money, or charity," said he, aloud, in French, "obtain us some of those
beautiful grapes?"

The ears of the pretty rustic were as quick as her eyes -- honest Lubin, too,
had the use of his: both were solicitous to do the honors of their country;
and our travelers, after the prodigious fatigue of riding three leagues, found
it necessary to rest under the shade, while the servants walked their horses to
the neighboring post. But this was a maneuver, which, though apparently
satisfactory to three of the company, was but little agreeable to the fourth:
and the eyes of the young peasant incessantly reproached his mistress for those
glances which the person, the manners -- and, above all, the flattery of
Lindsey, united to draw from her.

They soon discovered that Annettte could sing. The vanity of her lover, even
in despite of his jealousy, betrayed, her. She had just led the rustic chorus;
nor was it difficult to prevail on her to repeat the air with which she had
charmed the vintagers. Our travelers thought themselves in Arcadia.

"Ecoutez, Messieurs," said Annette, interrupting their praises with a careless
gaiety, "je m'en vais vous chanter un autre." And with a naivete that thought
not of entreaty, she sung a wild and simple air, where, as usual, l' amor was
the chief subject, and of which some tender looks she involuntarily bestowed on
Lubin, proved him to be the object.

Lindsey's good humor underwent a sudden change. "The girl is not so pretty as
she appeared:" said (...) to Arundel, as they walked through the town --
"whereabouts did she say she lived?"

The contradiction of ideas, implied in these words, extorted from his friend
an incredulous smile; in which, however, there was no mixture of pleasure or
approbation. To say truth, he felt neither. The behavior of Lindsey within the
last hour had been evidently marked with levity and self-love; levity that
respected not innocence, and self-love that knew not how to brook either
indifference or repulse. But, if he had already been surprised, he found
himself much more so, when the same evening, in talking over their future
route, mr. Lindsey, without appearing in the least to consider his companions,
spoke of remaining some days where he was, and then pursuing a circuit that
could not but detach him from theirs.

The secret insolence that unconsciously betrayed itself in thus supposing his
pleasure a sufficient argument for deranging the party, was felt equally by
each, though differently received. Mr. Walbrook made a sententious speech; by
which, it was plain, he meant nothing but to show his rhetoric and his
complaisance. Mr. Mortimer uttered a cold compliment; and Arundel replied but
by a bow. They soon after retired.

"Henry," said Mortimer to his young friend, as soon as they found themselves
alone, "what makes you so triste?"

"Only thoughtful, sir."

"Come, come, be sincere! You are not pleased with Lindsey."

"I have at least no right to be otherwise."

"Pardon me, my dear boy -- the man who has a reason, has always a right. Shall
I tell you frankly my opinion of him?"

"Certainly, sir," said Arundel. "Yet his tongue and his countenance were a
little at variance. To say truth, though himself offended with Lindsey, he
shrunk from a judgment which he felt would be severe."

"Of all the young men I have ever seen," continued Mortimer, with more
asperity than the occasion seemed to justify, "Mr. Lindsey is least calculated
to create esteem. His heart is hardened, and his mind enervated by indulgence.
From his cradle he has heard nothing but adulation, and seen nothing but
servility. He is indeed affable, because he is always obeyed; generous, because
he is rich; sprightly, because he i^ young and flattered. Take away his youth
his affluence, or his dependents, and you shall find him splenetic,
marrow-minded, and arrogant."

"Heaven and earth!" cried Arundel, "what a picture! From whence do you draw
your conclusions, sir, and whither do they tend?"

The heart of Mortimer was full. The original of the portrait stood before his
mental eye; and Lindsey was, in truth, but the mirror in which he saw his
father.

"Be satisfied," said he, after a pause, "that my pencil is dipped in the
colors of life: and should there even be deformity in the likeness, let it at
least teach you, before you sanctify either your own caprices, or those of
others, with the name of friendship, to calculate how far the qualities on
which that should be built are incidental, or natural."

Arundel sighed; and willing, perhaps, to give a new turn to the conversation,
unconsciously exclaimed, "If such is indeed the character of Lindsey, how much
is that father to be pitied, whose blind fondness thus nourishes all that is
corrupt in his offspring, and blights all that is worthy! while mine,"
continued he, struck with the emotion of mr. Mortimer, which he attributed to a
sudden impulse of paternal regard, "mine -- "though possibly blushing for his
son --

"Dear child of my affections!" cried Mortimer, embracing him, "spare me this
tender topic! Oh, Arundel, if I dared tell thee -- If it was permitted me to
reveal -- But Heaven is my witness!" added he, with energy, "that there shall
come an hour in which I will do thee justice! -- When the grave shall have
cancelled -- I mean when death -- Let us wave further conversation!"

Arundel, confounded with all that had passed, obeyed in silence. Yet, as far
as respected the character of Lindsey, his heart was still rebellious. Though
not of an age, however, to abide by the suggestions of experience, he was
perfectly alive to those of pride: nor was it till he came to shake hands with
his young friend the next day, that he repented the engagement he had made with
Mortimer to continue their journey tete-a-tete. Lindsey was once more himself;
wild, animated, enchanting.

"I have picked up a curiosity this morning," said he: "an old German
philosopher, who has been explaining to me a new system of the earth. He was on
the wing for Paris, with a portmanteau of recommendatory letters, and a wagon
load of musty manuscripts, besides minerals and fossils innumerable, with which
he expects to get a fortune. I have persuaded him to make one of my suite. I
shall pick something out of him -- and can indemnify myself at last," continued
he, laughing, "for any extraordinary expense, by showing him in London as a
specimen of the antediluvian race of mortals; for a more grotesque animal on
two legs I never saw."

The chaise de post, which made its appearance at the door, put a sudden stop
to this rattle.

"Whom have we here?" said Lindsey.

"Those whom you will not have long," returned Arundel, forcing a smile.

"Why, what carries you off?"

"What keeps you here?"

The same answer, I presume, will do for both," returned Lindsey, with apparent
dissatisfaction, however: "our own inclination." -- They shook hands, and
separated.

"Mr. Mortimer was in the right," thought Arundel, as he threw himself into the
chaise. "This young man has no idea of an independent being. He is offended
because, like the German philosopher, we are not contented to become a part of
his suite."

The days that intervened between this separation and their arrival at Lions,
were to mr. Mortimer more pleasant than any that had presented themselves for
some weeks. The character of his pupil, as it opened before him, became more
and more interesting. It had a sweetness, a simplicity, an affecting candor,
particularly calculated to win the regard of one, whose intercourse with the
world had produced him so few instances of it. The tender deference with which
the young man looked up to him, by flattering his self-love contributed to
strenghten his attachment. Arundel's affections were warmly alive; and
circumstances allowed them so few objects, that their energy, when indulged,
was unusually powerful. Duty, as well as sensibility, directed them to mr.
Mortimer; for he had never been able to persuade himself, that the only being
who appeared to take an interest in his fate, could be other than his father.
To acknowledge his foibles, as well as his virtues, it should be added, that he
sometimes indulged romantic ideas of visionary grandeur; flattering himself
that political concerns might have involved his family in casual obscurity,
from whence they were again to rise to hereditary affluence and rank. To him,
therefore, day after day passed smoothly on; while every setting sun left the
mental, as well as natural horizon, embellished with a thousand brilliant
vapors, the rising one renewed.

After voluntarily prolonging the journey some weeks, mr. Mortimer saw himself
established in a hotel at Lions; and taking from his valise a small packet of
letters, informed his companion, that he intended to reside in the
neighborhood some time.

"The beautiful banks of the Rhone," said he, "present an endless scope for
admiration and enquiry. Your education is hardly finished enough to make you
view the charms of Italy with a scientific eye; and though I do not intend,"
added he, laughing, "to let you pick up an itinerant philosopher who may
instruct you in a new theory of the earth, it may not be amiss to be better
informed of its productions, both natural and moral, We will, therefore, ramble
between this country and Swisserland, till our judgments are sufficiently
enlightened, and our imaginations elevated enough, to enjoy the stupendous
beauties that await us on the other side of the Alps. These letters it will be
necessary to deliver; and of one packet I shall make you sole bearer. It is
addressed to a lady who resides in a convent hard by, where she will soon, I
believe, take the veil. Her family are extremely unfortunate, and have
requested me to offer her advice and assistance. I am, however, ill qualified
for the office, which yet she may expect me to undertake. I would wish her,
therefore, to suppose I have chosen a different route, that I may avoid
bringing on myself claims which I cannot fulfill.

Arundel, for whom the sound of a convent and a lady had already some charms,
most readily undertook the commission; though, having been but little in the
habit of acting for himself, he felt some doubts as to the grace with which he
should execute it. In this, however, he was unjust to nature, who had hardly
been more liberal to him internally, than externally. His countenance had not,
indeed, that beautiful glow of youth and gaiety so striking in his brother's.
His person, though considerably taller, was less formed, his manners generally
reserved, and often even a little embarrassed: but these were the blemishes of
habit and situation. Arundel's countenance, to much regular beauty, united an
intelligence that spoke to the heart, and, where he was familiar, a vivacity
that captivated the eye. The graces his form had not attained, it eminently
promised; and in his voice and manner there was a shade, a coloring of mind,
that was almost peculiar to him. He had, besides, an air of sensibility to the
merit of others, and a forgetfulness of himself, that was singularly charming
to those who had either undiscovered talents, or lively affections. But, alas!
the greater part of the world possess not these, or bury them in society; and,
therefore, by the world at large he was little understood.

The lady he demanded at the convent he was readily admitted to; and he found
her young, beautiful, and interesting: for how (...) a lady seen through a
grate be otherwise? She was avowedly unfortunate -- his knight-errantry was
called upon -- was reduced possibly by cruel necessity to take the veil -- at
least, so spoke, as he fancied, a pair of very fine eyes: and to disbelieve a
pair of fine eyes was hardly within the stretch of Arundel's philosophy. -- In
short, why should we make a man a hero, where nature generally makes him a
fool? In ten minutes he was as much in love as a young man can be who has never
conversed before with a truly beautiful woman; and in ten minutes more as much
in despair as a lover generally is who finds himself on the point of losing his
mistress: for, lo! on breaking the seal of the envelope, our fair incognita
discovered that the letters were not intended for her, but for a sister novice,
whose sanctified appellation somewhat resembling her own, had given rise to the
mistake. Both parties now expressed a degree of confusion, which was increased
by conscious regret, on perceiving that an acquaintance so suddenly made, must
almost as suddenly cease. The fair Louisa at length broke silence by an
assurance, "that sister Theresa was too good-natured to see any thing in this
error but a little heedlessness on the part of both, from which no harm could
possibly arise. I will have the honor," said she, gracefully courtfying, "to
let her know that Monsieur attends at the grate to make his apologies."

"Have (...) charity first," cried Arundel, with unusual emotion, "to invent
them for me."

"Mon Dieu!" said Louisa, smiling, "what need of invention? We have only to
tell the simple truth."

"But the words -- the manner -- " again interrupted Arundel, eager to detain
her.

"Will occur of themselves. Or, if they should not," added she, casting down
her eyes, and blushing, yet with a smile of pretty consciousness. "Theresa will
inspire you -- Theresa is so beautiful!"

With what design this was said, or whether with any design at all, cannot
easily be decided; but whatever was the motive, the effect of the speech was a
look from Arundel that made the eyes of Louisa again seek the ground, and
restored that embarrassing silence from which they had been so lately relieved,

"If," said our young Englishman, hesitating, and at length forcing himself to
speak, "if mademoiselle would do me the honor of, in person, presenting me to
la Soeur Theresa, I should then, perhaps, be better able -- I mean only that I
should know better -- "

"Ah, par exemple," cried Louisa, recovering her vivacity, "la chose du monde
la plus facile! Elle est de mes bonnes amies la petite Therese! Attendez,
Monsieur! Je vais vous l'amener." And, so saying, with a girlish gaiety that
brought a brighter rose into her cheek, she tripped away; and with her went the
senses, the heart of Arundel. Her sparkling eyes, her long fine hair which hung
negligently down her back, the playful graces of her figure, and a certain
character of countenance that blended the bewitching modesty of her own
country, with the sprightliness of that in which she was educated, might,
indeed, have touched a heart much less new to beauty than that of our young
traveller.

The boasted charms of Theresa he was not permitted to judge of, as she wore
the white veil of the novice, which fell over a complexion too pale to appear
to advantage under it. The letters, received and read with evident agitation
engrossed her for some time, which was spen^ (...) Arundel in the most animated
and assiduous attentions to Louisa; and when on having finished the perusal,
Theresa threw up the veil to thank him, his eyes wandered over her features
with so apparent an absence of mind, that the shade, through negligence or
pique, was again permitted to fall, and she was contented no further to obtrude
herself on his attention, than by those compliments politeness would not allow
her to dispense with.

"A-propos!" said Mortimer, after supper, as they talked over the occurrences
of the day; "you saw the girl at the convent! -- Is she pretty?"

"Yes -- very -- "returned his young friend, with embarrassment.

"What did you talk of?"

"Oh -- a great many -- a thousand things!"

"Indeed?" returned Mortimer, laughing. "Methinks your acquaintance came on
very fast then! Pray indulge my curiosity with one of your thousand."

"I -- I have really forgotten them," again stammered Arundel.

"Since they were so very uninteresting," said Mortimer drily, "I hope, at
least, your method of treating them did more honor to your eloqence than the
specimen you (...) me. However, if your memory does not continue thus
treacherous, have the goodness to go again to the convent, within four days at
furthest; and, among your thousand topics, pray enquire if Theresa has any
letters for England. I shall have an opportunity of sending them, which she may
wish for in vain."

Arundel blushed, and bowed assent. For the first time in his life he had been
but half sincere; yet why, he hardly knew. A troublesome glow that rushed from
his heart to his cheek, an unmanly hesitation that seized upon his tongue, and
a confused apprehension of the interference of mr. Mortimer, first
involuntarily led him to conceal, what he afterward knew not how to avow.

Time now passed not with Arundel as it had done. He loved with the ardour of a
man who had never loved till then, and who supposed the sentiment to be as much
above that entertained by others, as he felt it to be to any he had himself
before experienced.

Was Louisa susceptible? Why, time must discover. She had, at least, eyes for
beauty, ears for admiration, and a happiness of invention that furnished her
perpetual excuses for being in the way of both. Theresa, undesired by either
party, yet often the oftensible object of the visit, formed, generally, the
third at the grate. To Theresa, therefore, the hopes, the fears, and all the
energy of Arundel's character, became intimately known. Of hers, he knew
little. Ill health and ill fortune depressed, timidity concealed it. Humility,
complacency, and sadness were all the traits by which he ever recognized her.

It was now, however, that our young traveller began to speculate seriously
upon life; and the first ideas that occurred were relative to his own situation
there. Had he any claims in society? Was he the object of beneficence to mr.
Mortimer, or that of natural tenderness? What were his prospects, and where was
to be his future establishment? Painful questions, which the youthful heart
never asks itself, till it has breathed that sickening sigh which is drawn from
it by the heavy atmosphere of the world!

Shrinking from an enquiry, of which he now, for the first time, dreaded the
consequences, Arundel passed whole days, whenever he could do it without
observation, in solitary rambles. He drew exquisitely; and as his liberality
and sweetness of character soon made him known to every cottage in the
neighborhood, he took pleasure in introducing, amid his sketches, the little
cherub faces that curiosity or playfulness attracted round him.

It was on a lovely summer evening, when the rays of the retiring sun still
glowed on the river, and threw it forward, a bright mirror amid the landscape,
While woods, and winds, and waves disposed
A lover to complain,
that he was slowly returning to the city, when his attention was engaged for a
moment by a carriage. It was only a moment; for hardly was that passed, ere one
of the two travelers it contained was in his arms.

"Dear Arundel!"

"Dear Lindsey!" exclaimed they at once incoherently; "are we so lucky as once
more to meet!"

"Aye; and we will be so wise as not easily to part again," cried the ever
impetuous Lindsey. "In the interim, dear friend, pr'ythee make a speech to my
old Mentor, who sits there," continued he, pointing to the vehicle, "as sullen
as Bajazet in his cage. In truth, we have quarrelled worse than Turks since I
saw you. However, having once carried my point of dragging him after you, I
leave all the subordinate articles of our amnesty to be regulated as he
pleases."

Arundel who conceived no motive for disgust or ill-humour in mr. Walbrook
toward himself, immediately complied with the request of his friend; but met
with so ungracious a reception, as little disposed him to any further exertions
of complaisance.

"And now that we are once more met," said he to his friend, as they followed
the carriage on foot into the city, pray tell me why we parted?"

"Why, thou traitor to thy country," said Lindsey, laughing, "can thou find
an English law that obliges a man to impeach himself? However, if it must be
so, in two words, we parted because I was capricious and arrogant."

"And we meet again -- "

"Nay, there, dear Arundel, I can give a better account of myself: because I
have met none like you since we parted: -- because, though my head was wrong,
my heart was right: -- in short, for fifty other reasons unnecessary to detail."

"And how long is it since you left B --?"

"Three days."

"Three days! -- Impossible. Why, it is a week's journey."

"For a philosopher, I grant you. But I was in pursuit of a friend; which all
your philosophers agree they have had nothing to do with. So, as the day was
not long enough, I took the liberty of borrowing the night."

"And of obliging mr. Walbrook to borrow it too! Upon my word, I cannot wonder
that he had no superfluous complaisance to bestow, after you had taxed it so
highly."

The conversation now grew more interesting; and in the course of twenty
minutes the two young men had discussed almost every topic that could touch the
heart of either. Their short separation had made them mutually feel the want of
a companion and an intimate. They met, therefore, with that impassioned
interest such a conviction inspires, and with the lively slow of animal spirits
every sentiment of pleasure creates in a youthful mind.

"You must show me this Louisa tomorrow," said Lindsey, in a low voice, as
they parted; "I would sain see the woman who can turn your head." There was an
emphasis in the speech that Arundel might have observed; but observation,
except on the eyes of his mistress, had not of late been his forte, and the
inference passed unnoticed.

"Louisa tells me," -- said he, starting one evening from a long reverie --

"And who, pray, is Louisa?" said Mortimer, starting in turn.

The question was sudden, was mal-a-propos; and neither willing, or, to say
truth, quite able to answer it, he stammered out with much perplexity, that she
was "the friend of Theresa."

"The friend of Theresa!" again re-echoed Mortimer with a tone of surprise and
incredulity, "and pray what friend has she? -- that is, where did she find -- I
mean, in short, how came you acquainted with any friend of Theresa's?"

The manners of Arundel, we have before said, were reserved, but his character
was impassioned to a fault; and to dive beyond the surface was to call forth
all its vigor. With the spirit of a man, therefore, and the eloquence of a
lover, he now at full length recited the story of his heart. That of his
auditor was visibly moved with the narrative. "Imprudent boy," said he, sighing
when it was concluded, "I have then vainly strove to save you from the
contagion of vice! -- You are, doubtless, ignorant," he added, with a tone of
unusual asperity, "that the father of this girl, whose name I now well
recollect, is a needy adventurer -- a profligate, disgraced in his own country,
and disgracing it in others -- a being so low -- "

"No, sir," interrupted Arundel, in a stifled tone of sensibility and pride, "I
am not ignorant of the disgraceful connection -- I have even thought of it with
grief; and, when I can persuade myself that virtue and vice are hereditary, I
shall doubtless think of it with shame. Till then, allow me to say, that,
however an early and unguarded attachment may impeach the head, those who check
it are not always aware of the dangers to which they expose the heart; nor do
they consider that by teaching us thus early to weigh prudence against nature,
they possibly substitute the cold and frivolous errors of self-love, for the
more generous ones of passion." Blushing, as he spoke, with the consciousness
of offended, and offending feeling, he hastily withdrew. Yet the temperate
silence of Mortimer was not lost upon him. "What am I to think of it?" said he,
as he attempted to rest. "He is indignant at my petulance, or he relies upon my
prudence: either way there is but one resolution to take, and, painful as that
may prove, it shall be adopted."

Youth always sleeps well upon a resolution. The resolution, it is true, often
evaporates with the slumber, and leaves nothing for the morning but the self
applause of having formed it. Happily Arundel's outlived the night; and it was
at breakfast the next day that he communicated to mr. Mortimer his intention of
pursuing their promised tour into Switzerland, and of conquering, if possible,
by temporary absence, a passion he ought not to gratify.

Was Arundel sincere? -- No matter: at least he thought he was. But the heart
of a lover has sometimes a finesse that deceives even himself; nor is it
impossible that a rigid examination of his own would have convinced our young
philosopher, that he had more lurking gratification in the idea of proving his
passion unconquerable, than any real intention of conquering it. To Switzerland
they went. But were the bold, the romantic, the interesting scenes that country
afforded, calculated to chill a sensibility to which every object was
congenial? In vain did Mortimer read lectures upon botany: the letters of
Louisa were to his pupil a more interesting study than all the Alpine
curiosities which a young and ingenious Italian had spent years in collecting.

"These insensibles," cried he, as he rambled from them amidst immense
mountains, whose white bosoms were tinged with the beams of the setting sun,
and diversified with hanging cottages "these insensibles pretend to admire the
fibers of a leaf, yet to those more tender and living ones within our breasts
are they stoics. Great and supreme Creator!" would he add, lifting his eyes
toward heaven, have thou drawn this bright canopy over our heads? Have thou
enriched the earth on which we tread with numberless and ever-varying beauties?
Have thou ordained them through the medium of the senses to steal upon the
heart, and waken there a tremulous sensibility that reason is to crush? -- Ah,
no! -- Choice, passion, character, are thy gifts? -- While Nature and her God
are before him, man feels the influence of both: plunged in the vortex of
cities, he becomes an artificial being, vulnerable no longer through any sense
but interest or vanity?"

Whilst his heart glowed with similar sentiments, did he often return to
Mortimer: but alas! the glow was only in his heart; his complexion had lost it.
Marlini, the young Italian, noticed the change; and, as he valued himself upon
some knowledge of medicine (which was the more generous of him, as he was never
valued for it by any body besides), he would have prescribed: but the
complaisance of Arundel extended only to listening; and as Mortimer well knew
that the complaint might defy a college of physicians, he was not very earnest
in enforcing their assistance.

The heart of the young man, however, was yet to struggle with a grief more
oppressive than that of love. Louisa, who during the first month of his
absence, had punctually attended to her promise of writing now sometimes
neglected, and at others coldly fulfilled it: and Mortimer, who closely watched
the effect of his pupil's feelings, at length thought he saw the luckless
moment arrive, when it was necessary to yield to a passion, that could no
longer, without danger be controlled.

"Henry," said he, you have blasted my hopes; but I will not destroy yours; the
power I possess of regulating your fate, I now confide to yourself. Return to
Lions, offer to Louisa a moderate fortune, and a heart dear to me as that
within my own bosom: let her estimate the gift as it deserves, and both may yet
be happy."

Arundel, scarcely able to believe his senses while they conveyed to him a
language so delightful, falls, as it should seem, motionless at the feet of his
benefactor: -- Not at all, however: he rises in a moment -- he flies to the
post house -- he is no longer a consumptive and enfeebled young man, who has
neither eyes nor ears for any thing that passes: on the contrary, he appears to
think that he has borrowed the senses of all around him, by the ardour and
frequency with which he reiterates his orders. In fine, they are once more at
Lions, and forgetful of Lindsey, or his suite, whom they had left there --
forgetful of Mortimer, who was satigued -- or of Marlini, who was a stranger --
he flies to the grate where he had so often beheld Louisa, and, with all the
eagerness of passion, acquaints her that proposals were on the point of being
made to her father. What was the excess of his disappointment, when, after
listening to him in silence, Louisa threw herself back in her chair and burst
into a flood of tears! The countenance of Arundel, vivid but a moment before
with hope and pleasure, changed instantly to deadly paleness.

"Louisa! dearest Louisa!" cried he, throwing himself on his knees before her,
"To what am I to impute this emotion? You alarm, you shock me! Can it be
possible that I am unfortunate enough to have lost my interest in your heart?"

"I will not deceive you, mr. Arundel," said Louisa, sobbing, and covered with
blushes; "you deserve my candor -- and -- I will frankly acknowledge -- " She
hesitated; but the imperfect sentence was conviction -- Arundel started from
his knees, shocked at the abruptness, and overwhelmed with the disappointment,
of such an event.

"I thank you, madam," said he, after a pause, and in a voice hardly
articulate; "I think I have deserved your candor; though to bear it -- " Again
he stopped -- turned from her, to her; and gazing for a moment on the
loveliness of a countenance even tears did not disfigure, reproachfully added,
"Oh Louisa!"

"Do not believe," said she, stretching out her hand to meet his, as it grasped
the grate, against which he leant -- "do not believe that an unworthy object
has supplanted you in my regard -- I am sure, when I have explained all, you
will excuse, will pity me!"

Arundel looked earnestly at her -- She had not then lost the passion, but
changed the object -- a new sentiment glanced faintly across his mind -- it
felt, for a moment, like contempt; but love arrested the intruder, and changed
its nature into jealousy. "If to have adored you with a passion too powerful
both for my happiness and health," replied he, with a heavy sigh, "could have
secured me your regard, I should not now have the grief to know I have lost it.
May he on whom it is bestowed have more successful claims! -- But you are pale!
-- This happy, this envied being possesses not the power of making happy! Or is
the felicity you would have enjoyed embittered by regreat for that you were
about to deprive me of?"

"Yes, doubtless," said Louisa, with an air of melancholy and confusion, "we
have both felt for you."

" Both! repeated Arundel, trembling with a new and vague apprehension, "How --
how am to understand you?"

"Alas! I dare not explain myself!"

"Louisa, I adjure you by every thing sacred, to tell me the name of him for
whom I am thus cruelly renounced."

Louisa blushed, wept, and was silent.

"Is it," continued he, hesitating, and shaking with uncontrollable emotion --
" Is it not -- Lindsey?" The countenance of Louisa made reply unnecessary,
while that of Arundel, true to his heart, sparkled with indignation. The
generous diffidence of his nature, however, presently prevailed. She avowedly
loved another: -- tenderly -- fondly loved him; and that other was, in the eyes
even of his rival, the most winning of human beings -- endued with beauty,
youth, wit, and accomplishments enough, unintentionally to win the coldest
heart; and Louisa! -- ah! could he wonder that she was irresistible?

By short and imperfect explanations, he learnt that mr. Lindsey had, from the
moment he was seen by her, left an impression on her memory, absence did not
efface: during that of Arundel, he had visited her once or twice through mere
complaisance: that an interest insensibly sprung up between them: that his
attendance became more frequent: that love in fine lent his language to their
eyes, and placed his interpreter in their hearts.

"It is enough!" said Arundel, starting from a train of thought this avowal
occasioned. "I cannot be your happiness, dearest Louisa -- but I will at least
endeavor to establish it." With these words he flew to her father, who had
just received a letter from Mortimer, explained to him his situation, and as
hastily went in search of Lindsey. A generous and delicate mistrust of himself,
made him precipitate measures from which he feared he might recede: for Arundel
was yet to learn all the value and nobleness of his own heart.

Lindsey received him with open arms; and his friend even thought he perceived
the transports of successful passion embellish his complexion, and lend
animation to his eyes. What then was his astonishment to see this envied lover
plunged by his narration into a deep and cold reverie!

"It is certain," said he, at length breaking silence, "that I love Louisa; she
has there simply stated a truth, which for your sake I would willingly have
suppressed: but as to marrying her, that is wholly out of the question at
present; nor am I indeed sure I shall ever find it one at all." A torrent of
new and indignant emotions again swelled the heart of Arundel; nor was it till
his friend had given him the most unequivocal proofs under his hand that
Louisa's passion had kept pace with, if not preceded the acknowledgment of his
own, that harmony was restored between them.

Obliged slowly to resign the illusive image of perfection he so long had
cherished, Arundel still thought somewhat due both to that and himself. By
arguments, therefore, and remonstrances, he wrung from his frieud a solemn
promise to see Louisa no more, till absence, by trying the cause between his
tenderness and his pride, might render his intentions less dubious.

"Louisa," said Arundel, "is indiscreet; but you assure me she is virtuous: the
pain of seeing her otherwise would be more than I could patiently endure.
Self-interest, therefore, bids me step forth the guardian of her innocence. If
you love her enough to make a sacrifice, I will prove to you that I love her
enough to rejoice in it. But beware that you do not demand any from her."

Lindsey laughed at his refinements, and, after much expostulation, agreed to
prove his sincerity by taking a temporary leave of Lions on the same day; a
compliance in which he had, indeed, no great merit; as he had already more than
half promised a party of his countrymen to join them in a rambling excursion to
Nismes.

Sad, solitary, hopeless, Arundel now bent his steps toward home. The business
of the day was accomplished. Of the day! -- Ah! rather that of his life; for
what remained of it seemed nothing but vacuity and gloom: and he looked round
in vain for some farther sacrifice on which to spend the feverish enthusiasm of
an overheated mind. Mortimer with concern perceived it glow on his cheek, and
give an alarming expression to his eyes. Lindsey, gay, insolent, and happy --
Lindsey triumphant alike in fortune and in love over his more deserving
brother, became an object of absolute detestation to the guardian of Arundel.
The secret so long concealed now trembled on his lips: his young friend even
perceived that it did, and urged, with tender vehemence, to know what further
hope in life remained for him. The eternal argument, that he should always find
time enough to do the justice he desired, again silenced Mortimer. That secret
and invisible Power, which so often hovers over mortality, and with his icy
breath annihilates its projects, unfelt, unthought of, nevertheless, even then
approached him! The important truth, the deliberating moment, were yet within
his reach; but the truth was once more suppressed, and the moment passed away
no time was ever to restore!

"I will consider more of this, my dear boy," said he, as he mounted his horse
to take an airing; "endeavor to compose yourself for an hour, during my
absence, and my return shall produce a suitable explanation."

Mr. Mortimer was brought home three hours after, cold, stiff, and bloody. A
pistol bullet passing through his temple had perforated his brain; and in this
condition he was sound, by some peasants, not a hundred yards from the high
road. His horse was grazing by his side. His purse which contained only a
trifling sum, remained; but his pocketbook, where notes of value were probably
enclosed, was not to be found.

The shock was too mighty, and Arundel's constitution, already attacked, for
the time sunk under it. Marlini, the young Italian, attended him with exemp^^^y
kindness and humanity, through a burning fever; but ere he recovered to reason,
the wishes, the intentions, and the errors of Mortimer had long since been
buried with him in the grave. Hardly escaped from thence himself, Arundel
impatiently hastened to weep over that of his benefactor, and if possible, to
discover the perpetrators of his murder. Of them, however, no traces could be
found. He was an easy mark for robbery, as it was his custom to take gentle
rides in the environs of the city at that hour when the retiring sun made the
exercise most pleasant; and, when unaccompanied by Arundel, those rides were
well known to be solitary. Exhausted by vain and painful surmises on this cruel
event, the latter at length began to examine the papers and property his
protector had left behind him. But one inexplicable mystery seemed now to
overshadow the fate of Arundel. A few personals of value, some English
bank-notes, and letters of credit upon a house at Genoa, were all that remained
to trace his past life, or to guide his future. Perplexed, bewildered, he
paused in silence over the gloomy prospect, when some slips of paper, that were
wedged within the hinge of a casket, from whence the rest appeared to have been
hastily torn, attracted his attention. Cautiously disengaging one of them he
sound three lines, which ran thus: "To acknowledge, therefore, another son, nay
even an heir, would be a step too injurious to my interest and honor to be
thought of: I am determined never to do it; and Arundel must be content -- "

"Oh heaven and earth!" exclaimed the injured and unfortunate son of lord
Lindsey, as he perused these cruel words, from a hand which he could not doubt
to be his father's; " Must be content! Content without a tie! without a hope
without one trace of those to whom he owes his existence, but in the unnatural
sentence which cuts him off from them for ever!"

It was some moments before he could recover composure enough to examine the
remaining paper. Nay, he was almost tempted, by an emotion of indignant
sensibility, to commit to the flames, unread, what, in the perusal, was perhaps
destined to inflict a second and more insupportable pang. The hand was
evidently a female one; and the purport of the writing awakened a feeling more
lively, if possible, than that excited before.

"Yet why should I blush to acknowledge what I do not blush to feel? In mr.
Arundel are united every grace that wins affection, and every virtue that
justifies it. Born, I sincerely hope, for a more brilliant lot than that" --
The tormenting paper here finished: but so did not his perusal of it. Three
times was it read; minutely was it scrutinized. Even that by which he had been
a few moments before so cruelly chagrined, seemed to vanish from his memory:
while a soft conscious slush of vanity and gratitude stole imperceptibly over a
cheek lately pallid with sickness and sorrow. The world again resumed its
charms; it contained at least one being interested in his fate; one who "did
not blush to feel" -- who would not blush "to acknowledge his virtues."

Nor was it till memory had dwelt with delight on many individuals of a gay and
beautiful circle, with which his residence at Lions had accustomed him to
mingle, that he recollected the mystery in which that being would probably
remain ever enveloped.

To the transient gleam of pleasure which for a moment had brightened his
horizon, now succeeded long and cheerless months. Fruitless journeys to every
place where mr. Mortimer had ever appeared to cherish intimacy, or demand
credit, though by variety of scenes, and succession of hopes, they
re-established his health, yet contributed to diminish his little fortune,
without fixing his views. Of Louisa he had taken a tender farewell previous to
his leaving Lions; and to Lindsey he knew not how to address himself, during an
excursion, the plan of which was not settled even by those who undertook it.

Bus^d in tracing the channels through which mr. Mortimer had transacted his
pecuniary concerns, he had just learnt, by a journey to Paris, the name of the
English banker with whom his credit originated, when he was one day agreeably
surprised by a letter from Marlini. It was dated only ten days from that on
which he had himself left Lions, had followed him in his wanderings, and
reached him at last by mere accident. The good-natured Italian who took a
sincere interest in the happiness of Arundel had engaged to write him any
occurrence by which that might be affected. "I fulfill my promise," said he, "by
informing you that your friend Lindsey left Lions last week. He was here only a
few days, and was suddenly called to England, by the intelligence that his
father would most probably be dead ere he could reach it -- an event for which,
by the bye, he somewhat reproaches his own extravagance and inattention. Will
it grieve you to learn, that the fair Louisa is his companion, and that their
union has at length completed a felicity which I am sure you sincerely wish
them both?

"The generous patronage he has so warmly assured me of in England, I am
preparing to accept: therefore, when you hear of me again, it will probably be
at the Hotel de Lindsey. Come, dear mr. Arundel, and share in the pleasures of
this munificent and kind friend, who I am sure, by his conduct to myself,
desires nothing so much as to serve you, and who particularly enjoined me to
say, that he is only prevented addressing you by the haste with which he is
obliged to depart."

Arundel closed the letter with a sigh. He had long ceased to esteem Louisa:
even the impression she had made upon his senses was considerably diminished by
the efforts of reason and absence; yet he heard not with indifference that she
was the wife of another; nor did the temptation of living in the Actel de
Lindsey, and under 'the munificent patronage of its lord," accord quite so well
with his feelings, as with those of the complaisant Italian. Yet, to England,
circumstances obliged him to go; and in England, though his native soil, he was
a wanderer and an outcast. The character of Lindsey, "in that rare semblance
that he loved it first;" their social and congenial habits -- their early and
unstudied confidence in a word, a thousand tender recollections rose to mind,
and impelled a heart, naturally susceptible, to cherish the only tie it ever
yet had formed.

"I will try him, at least," said Arundel, as he laid his hand upon the knocker
of a magnificent house in St. James's. We understand each other, and a moment
will decide for us both." A moment did decide: he was welcomed by Lindsey, not
indeed without embarrassment; but it was the embarrassment of a man who doubts
his own reception, not that which he is to bestow; welcomed with lavish
kindness, with generous cordiality, with every testimony of friendship that
sensibility could offer, and graceful manners could embellish. Arundel would
have avoided seeing lady Lindsey, and for that reason excused himself from
residing under the same roof with her. But this was not to be thought of. The
young lord, too happy both in love and fortune not to be a little vain, saw, in
the society of Arundel, nothing but a new, and, as he deemed it, admissible
gratification to his self-love; and resolutely, therefore, insisted on not
parting with him.

"Women, my dear friend," said he, "are among the baubles of life; we may each
wish to appropriate, but we will never wrangle about them. Come, come you are a
philosopher, and Louisa is at last only a beautiful coquette. Nothing will so
surely disunite you as knowing more of each other." So saying, he dragged his
unsuccessful rival to her dressing room. From the toilette Arundel attended her
to dinner, where he was led in triumph through a circle of parasites and sops.

"You see that creature with his fine languishing black eyes!" said Louisa to a
young nobleman who sat on her right hand.

"And his rusty black coat! replied his lordship, casting a glance of
nonchalance upon Arundel.

"Nay, that is downright slander," said Louisa laughing. "Not rusty yet; though
it may, perhaps, see veteran service. He is an old adorer of mine -- so pray be
civil to him!"

"With all my heart; provided you are not so: but you had better make sure of
my complaisance -- a fortunate lover is never quarrelsome, you know!" Louisa
laughed again. If my reader happens to have white teeth, and one of the
prettiest mouths in the world, she will find out the jest: if not, it will
probably defy her penetration, and may as well remain unsought.

Lindsey had judged truly: in less than a week, Arundel was completely cured of
his partiality for Louisa -- a Louisa far different from her he had first seen
at the convent. When he beheld her, cold of heart, and light of conduct, living
only to dissipation and flattery; scarcely mingling with any of her own sex,
and admitting to her familiar society the most dissolute part of his, often did
he call to mind the caution Mortimer had once given him, of weighing, before he
formed his attachments, whether the qualities by which they were excited, are
incidental or natural. Nor, though more slowly developed, did the character of
Lindsey rise in his estimation. Warm in his professions, and elegant in his
manners, he still attracted affection; but it was not possible to overlook the
profligacy of a life, every hour of which was marked by being abused; and his
friend perceived, with a sigh, how insensibly, when not effaced by principle,
the faint outline of youthful indiscretion becomes filled up in our progress
through life with the bold coloring of vice.

Amid the motley group who attended the levee of lord Lindsey, Arundel was
particularly attracted by an officer, whose countenance, though still in its
bloom, bore the traces of disappointment. He was lately returned from a long
station in the West Indies; inclining to thin, but of a noble and graceful
carriage; the climate had somewhat impaired his complexion, and the secret
chagrin that seemed to rob his eyes of their sire, lent them a seriousness
calculated to excite interest. Those of Arundel had at first studiously sought
their acquaintance; yet, strange to tell, had sought it in vain. Like an
apparition, captain Villiers hovered amid the brilliant circle, attentive,
calm, and impenetrably cold to all but lord Lindsey. As Arundel doubted not,
however, that he courted promotion, and guessed by the crape round his arm that
he had sustained some family loss, he adopted the cause, though not permitted
judge of it, with an ardour that was natural to his character. But he was not
long in discovering, that Lindsey's love of patronage extended only to
promises; and that, far from soliciting successfully for others, he might
perhaps do it vainly for himself. Yet, eager to emancipate his situation from
that dependence to which it was every day approaching, he made the attempt, and
was cruelly confirmed in his conjectures. Still never did refusal wear so fair
a form: "My fortune and my house, dear Arundel, are yours," said his friend;
"when the one is impoverished, or the other disagreeable to you, we will think
of new plans."

Arundel was thus plunged again, despite of himself, into gay and dissolute
society: he was young and charming; was it wonderful that he should be charmed;
Ah! is there any illusion so complete as that our own talents and graces
scatter around us? Every day more captivating in person, more polished in
manners, more enervated in heart, he imperceptibly drew nearer that precipice
of error, from which, no kind hand, either of nature or friendship, was
extended to save him. -- Yet still had he both sensibility and pride -- still
did he spend many a solitary hour in forming plans, by which the next might be
more active -- in sighing over the memory of Mortimer, and in fruitless
perusals of the cruel, the inexplicable papers he had left behind him. Lost in
reverie, often did his thoughtful eye pierce through crowds for that unnatural
father, who had thus announced his intention of never acknowledging him; often
did his beating heart dispel the illusion, which beauty diffused over his
senses, and anxiously enquire, where -- where was the gentle being to whom his
graces and his virtues were so disinterestedly dear. For the paper which
contained this avowal, from the moment that Louisa had lost her place in his
affections, he cherished a romantic ^^nderness: the other, he had, on his
arrival in England, communicated to Lindsey; who so far got the better of his
usual inattention and heedlessness, as to accompany him in person to the
banker's, whence mr. Mortimer had obtained credit at Paris. From him, however
nothing could be learnt, but that five hundred pounds had been annually lodged
there in that gentleman's name, the larger part of which had in the last year
been drawn out, without since being replaced. Of this latter sum, a very small
portion now remained to Arundel; and his indignant heart, roused at the idea of
pecuniary obligation, began to affect his temper: that most cruel of all
maladies, self-reproach, seized upon it. To Lindsey he scorned any other
obligation than that of assisting him to struggle for himself -- an obligation
which of all others Lindsey was least likely to confer: nor existed there a
being besides, from whom he could hope it. With a grieved and rankling heart,
that veiled itself in smiles, was he going to the apartment of the latter, when
he met captain Villiers coming from it: both seemed to have departed from their
natural character; for Arundel, whose thoughts were pre-occupied, and who was
besides somewhat disgusted by the coldness with which his efforts at civility
had been received, scarcely noticed Villiers, who, on his part, brushed by with
a haughty rapidity that nearly amounted to rudeness.

"Did you meet that scoundrel on the stairs?" said Lindsey abruptly as he
entered the room.

"If you mean Villiers, he passed me this moment."

"'It Was well he did not affront you," said Lindsey; "he was sufficiently
disposed to have done it."

Arundel paused for a moment, uncertain whether to think he had done so or no,
and then resentfully added -- "It was well, as you say, that he did not; for I
was never less disposed to bear it"

"I would have you beware of him, however," said Lindsey; "for as I cannot
fight him," glancing fretfully at his arm, which a strain obliged him to wear
in a sling, "it is ten to one but he makes you do it."

" Me!" repeated Arundel, with a tone of astonishment.

"Yes, you: since, if I may judge by his language, he ^^^es you the honor of
ranking you amongst my parasites and dependants -- I shall find a future
opportunity of talking with the gentleman."

"The present will do for me," said Arundel warmly, and involuntarily advancing
toward the door -- "But what was the matter in dispute?"

"Faith I hardly know -- Ask him.

"I am more than half tempted: -- and if I do, I may probably convince him that
I can take up the cause of a friend, without being either his dependant or
parasite."

"Dear Arundel," said Lindsey, warmly seizing his hand, "how generous, how kind
is this idea! -- I cannot however admit it: it is true, we have both been
insulted; but the cause is particularly mine."

"If both have been insulted," said Arundel, " either is entitled to demand an
explanation."

Lindsey paused on the idea; and his friend, who thought he perceived his
assent to it in his silence, felt his spirit and his pride both concerned in
not receding. The conversation that followed corroborating this opinion, he
presently dispatched a note to captain Villiers, requesting a few moments'
conversation at any place he should name. This done, he left the apartment of
lord Lindsey, flattered with his applause, and gratified by his kindness.

But, though the temper of Arundel was thus inflamed, all felt not as it should
have done in his heart. Personal courage was in him a constitutional gift, and
it was that perhaps which lest him more at leisure to ask why he had thus drawn
on himself the probability of a duel; but as on this head his own memory did
not supply him with any very satisfactory answer, he determined to refer to
that of captain Villiers.

When two young men meet to know why they are to fight, it will be fortunate if
sufficient provocation does not arise to render the enquiry needless: neither
of those in questien had any animosity, though no longer any personal
prepossession, to each other; but truth must be acknowledged. The high-spirited
Villiers did indeed look upon Arundel as one of the venal many whose word and
sword were equally at the command of lord Lindsey. Plunged in family chagrins,
and embittered by disappointment, he had attended but little to nice
discriminations of character, and came prepared to consider the interview only
as a paltry pretense for appropriating the quarrel: it was consequently short.
Arundel, proud, youthful, and brave, felt all his passions raised by the cold
indignity with which he saw himself treated: the marked contempt with which
Villiers mentioned the name of lord Lindsey interested his friendship: and when
to that of Louisa, as it accidentally arose, he returned a look and expression
of most ineffable disdain; Arundel, whose heart still retained some embers of
the sire which once had made that name so sacred, was no longer master of
himself. It was the cause of gallantry, of honor, of friendship; and, fearful
perhaps lest reflection should discover to him that it was not the cause of
reason, he the more readily embraced mr. Villiers's proposal of meeting him,
behind Montague-House, at five the next morning.

The hours that intervened were spent in a fruitless search after lord Lindsey,
who had early left the party with which he dined, and was not to be heard of.
Disappointed in the pursuit, and immersed in a train of no very pleasant
reflections, Arundel stood surrounded by a gay and brilliant circle apparently
listening to a concert, of which he heard nothing, when his eye casually rested
upon one of the band, whose face instantly brought to mind the recollection of
Marlini -- but Marlini still in England -- Marlini the botanist turned fiddler,
and that in an inferior rank -- it was a thing impossible! -- Advancing closer,
and leaning against the wainscot, he amused himself, till the conclusion of the
sonata, with examining the features of his friend, till satisfied of their
identity, he approached the orchestra and addressed him by name.

"Ah, mr. Arundel!" said Marlini -- "how glad am I to see you, and how glad to
find that you have not forgotten me!" Arundel most cordially returned the
salutation, and expressed his surprise both at the place and the employment in
which he found his friend engaged. "I have frequently," said he, "enquired of
lord Lindsey where I might find you: he assured me that you were disgusted with
England, and had, he believed, returned to Italy: that you had almost renounced
botany; and I now recollect he even told me somewhat of your having shown an
extraordinary genius for music."

"So he was kind enough to tell me," replied Marlini, smiling with some scorn;
"and you see to what extraordinary preferment my genius has led me. As to
England, I have certainly no disgust to it, though I have some cause to wish it
did not send its fools abroad to bring foreign fools home. -- Another time, mr.
Arundel, I will tell you more."

Arundel, who really felt interested in the tale, and across whose mind it
glanced that another time to him might never come, pressed him to continue the
conversation.

"Nay, I have not much to tell neither," said Marlini, laying down his fiddle.
"You know the repeated invitations which induced me to come to London; where I
found il cavaliere Lindsey converted into la sua excellenza, and surrounded by
a crowd of fools all gaping like myself for patronage. To do him justice,
however, he received me very civilly, and recommended me to the care of his
Swiss valet, through whose interest I got a lodging in the Seven Dials -- not
without a general invitation to dine at the hotel de Lindsey whenever it was
agreeable to me. Alas! I did not then know that the latter clause was in fact a
perfect exclusion. I made my way, however, to his lordship's table, though not
without bribing his porter with twice the money for which I might have dined at
the ordinary, and had the honor of taking my place at the bottom of it,
between an old German and a young English divine. The company was numerous, and
some of them talked as if they were men of science: I was therefore not without
hopes, that his lordship would take an opportunity of recommending myself and
my studies to their notice. But in this I was disappointed: they sat long,
drank hard, and at length unwillingly broke up, to adjourn to the drawing room,
where lady Lindsey had prepared a concert. I flattered myself, that in general
conversation I might at least be able to forward my own plans, and was greatly
pleased by the civilities of an old gentleman, whose consequence was denoted by
a star, and who talked to me in very good Italian. He had already invited me to
his palace; and I had discovered him to be the duke of B --. I was beginning to
congratulate myself on my good fortune -- But, alas! how cruelly was I
disappointed, when, in the midst of an interesting conversation upon botany, he
reminded me with great eagerness, that the concert was going to begin, and
recommended me to take up my violin. I assured him I was no performer, and even
totally unskilled in music: he heard me at first with incredulity, till,
perceiving that, far from being the phenomenon he doubtless had imagined, I
actually took no part in what was going forward, he abruptly shifted his place,
and became ever after so near-sighted that it was impossible for me to attract
his notice. -- Why should I tire you, mr. Arundel, with repetitions of the same
thing? Day after day did I attend the levee of lord Lindsey, and vainly did I
solicit the patronage he had promised. Perhaps he meant not to impoverish or
betray me; but, woe to the man in whom vanity and self-love do the offices of
the blackest treachery! -- impoverished I certainly became. The story of the
duke, which in our first familiarity I had related, appeared to him then an
exceeding good jest; but what was my surprise, when, after being worn out in
that (...), it suddenly took another, and he very seriously proposed to me to
turn musician! Vainly did I represent the years I had spent in my favorite
study, the expensive collection of plants I had brought over with me, in the
hope of being presented to some of those societies in London whose applause
secures celebrity and wealth. My remonstrances were not listened to, I was
poor, and could not enforce them. It was settled, in his circle, that a fiddler
I was; and a fiddler I at length became -- lucky in getting half a-guinea a
night by scraping in a manner which the taste natural to my country renders
offensive to my own ears, and contented to be any thing rather than the table
companion and the attendant upon a lord!"

Arundel, to whom parts of this narrative had communicated stings of which he
who related it was wholly unconscious, was preparing to reply, when Marlini,
being called upon to take his part in a full piece, had only time to give his
address; and the other, not unwillingly, resigned his place to some ladies who
pressed near him.

One, two, three o'clock came, and lord Lindsey returned not. Arundel, who had
spent the night in walking his chamber, at length saw day appear; and with a
mixture of irresolution, self-disdain, and despair, rushed, with the friend who
was to accompany him, to the place of appointment. Villiers, with his second,
was there almost at the same moment. The calmness and intrepidity of his
countenance; the shame, too, of seeming to shrink from the occasion sealed up
those lips on which native candor and sensibility had half-prepared an
apology. They drew; both were admirable swordsmen; but Arundel, who eminently
excelled in every manly exercise, soon gained a manifest advantage; and, being
pressed on too boldly by his antagonist, most unwillingly sheathed his sword in
his breast. -- Villiers dropped his -- staggered -- and fell.

Had the universe, and all it contained, been vanishing from before his eyes,
hardly could Arundel have felt a greater shock. (...), passion, prejudice --
all that sustained, all the (...) had misled him, fled instantaneously; and
Villiers, whose languid looks were directed to those who supported him, saw,
not without sensibility, the change of that cheek which the approach of
personal danger had not for a moment blanched.

"You have used a brave as well as skilful sword, mr. Arundel," said he, "in a
bad cause; and have, I fear, completed many family calamities. I pardon you,
however. -- The challenge was mine, gentlemen," added (...), turning to the
seconds, "(...) have only to entreat -- "The word (...) which had faltered on
his lips faded imperceptibly and he fainted.

Neither the sense of danger, nor the remonstrances of their mutual friends,
could for a moment incline Arundel to resign the care of him whose murderer he
now began to deem himself; and he resolutely followed them into the carriage
which was to convey mr. Villiers to an hotel not far distant. The danger was
there declared by the surgeons to be less imminent than it appeared. The sword
had fortunately missed the vitals; and though by penetrating deeply it had
caused a vast effusion of blood, the wound bore no present appearance of being
mortal. Arundel became more composed at intelligence so unexpected, and was at
length prevailed upon to retire.

The events of the morning were now to be recounted to Lindsey; and to Lindsey,
spite of his faults, the agitated spirits of his friend still turned with
habitual confidence. But he was yet to learn, that the man who relies on the
gratitude of the dissolute must have claims more imposing than desert.

Lindsey, who was just returned from a gaming-table, feverish with-accumulated
losses, and stupefied for want of rest, listened with coldness to the narration
and smiling at the end of it, sarcastically thanked him for his knight
errantry. "Louisa, too," added he, "will, I doubt not, be duly grateful for her
share of the obligation; and a gratitude so well-founded I certainly can have
no right to interfere in." -- Arundel, to whom this speech was wholly
incomprehensible, replied not.

"Or perhaps," added Lindsey, "she has been so already! -- But pr'ythee, dear
Arundel, let me counsel you as a friend not to make a practice of drawing your
sword in that cause!" There was a half jealous and half disdainful sneer in his
manner, at once calculated to alarm and to irritate.

"I shall most assuredly never draw it again in your lordship's cause," said
Arundel indignantly; "but for lady Lindsey -- "

"Lady Lindsey! mr. Arundel. You certainly do not suppose that she is really my
wife?"

A thunderbolt at the feet of Arundel would have astonished him less than this
speech. It was then for two beings equally licentious and ungrateful that he
had hazarded all dear to nature or to principle! Louisa -- Lindsey --
despicable names! Yet For them the gracious Duncan had he murdered!
Put rancours in the vessel of his peace --
Only for them.


"The generous blood of Villiers is on my sword!" exclaimed he, rushing from a
roof which he knew not to be his paternal one: "I will not wrong him so far as
to blend it with the unworthy tide that flows through the heart of lord
Lindsey!"

His feet spontaneously moved to the hotel to which captain Villiers had been
carried; but the recollection that repose and perfect quiet had been deemed
essential to his safety forbade him to enter it. Lost in a tide of
heart-wringing recollections, he wandered, he knew not whither, through half
the streets of the metropolis, till the busy crowds with which they were filled
retired at the approach of evening. Stragglers among the dissolute or the idle
still faced the nipping autumnal wind, which began to rise; and a small crowd
of these, collected round a ballad-singer, impeded, in a narrow street, the
passage of Arundel. The momentary embarrassment awakened his senses, and a
sound that struck from thence upon his memory induced him to start forward. It
was to be a day of painful retrospection. The female who sung had the
appearance of a Savoyard: a little common organ hung at her side -- her
complexion was tanned -- her figure was emaciated -- her eyes were hollow --
straggling locks of auburn hair added rather a misery than a charm to her
appearance; -- yet the foreign accent, the beautiful brow -- above all, the
well remembered air she sung, at once carried conviction to the heart of
Arundel -- It was -- it could be no other than Annette! Annette betrayed! --
Annette, the victim of Lindsey! exposed in the first instance to disgrace, and
in the last to poverty! frail, yet not licentious! miserable, yet not
vindictive! drew from the charity of strangers that humble pittance which
industry and innocence had rendered once so honorable! -- Let us draw a veil
over the picture, and follow Arundel.

In solitude, silence, and adversity, he now indeed had learnt to think -- to
estimate the difference between real and imaginary blessings -- and to perceive
how neglect, indiscretion, and self-love, scatter, even from the bosom of
luxury, the fruitful seeds of vice and devastation.

After various painful self-denials, he thought he might at length venture to
request admission to Villiers, of whose wound he received the most favorable
reports; nor was it among the least of his late mortifications to learn, that
on the noon of that day, Villiers had by his own orders, been conveyed into a
chair, and, after paying every expense, quitted the hotel without leaving
behind him the smallest indication of the place of his retreat.

Arundel was now overwhelmned with chagrin and disappointment. On the idea of
offering an honorable and ample concession, his heart had rested with romantic
enthusiasm. Perhaps he had secretly flattered himself he might find a friend in
that generous antagonist with whom his feelings had at first sight claimed
acquaintance.

Frustrated in his past views, and hopeless of the future, his spirits would
have been wholly depressed but for a singular event.

A note from the banker with whom mr. Mortimer had transacted business,
informed him, that two hundred pounds had been recently lodged in the house,
payable either to that gentleman's order or mr. Arundel's,

Soft hope again stole over the heart of the latter. He was not then forgotten!
-- Some being was still interested in his fate! Some protecting spirit, like
that of Mortimer, still hovered over him! -- Ah! could it be a female one?

Relieved from pecuniary embarrassments, it was his first employment to
discover the habitation of captain Villiers. The poor rarely have a secret that
is well kept; and in a very few days it was traced to be the second floor of a
house in a small street near Piccadilly. Bounded as Arundel's means were, yet,
to share them with the man he had injured, and whose circumstances, it was
plain, could ill support extraordinary expense, became now the first object of
his life. To have shared them, indeed, with those he had himself injured, might
have been only justice; but to say truth, the improvident Arundel was hardly
less disposed to show his liberality to Marlini and Annette.

Captain Villiers was now in a state to quit his chamber; and Arundel, who well
knew how to calculate the wishes of pride, easily concluded that he had no
other mode of insuring their meeting but a surprise. Forbearing, therefore, his
usual anonymous enquiry, he one evening repaired to the house; where, being
told by a servant that mr. Villiers was in his apartment, he abruptly walked up
stairs, and, without further ceremony than a gentle rap, opened the door.
Candles in the room there were none; but the twilight, aided by the bright
blaze of a sire, enabled him clearly to discern Villiers, who reposed on a
sopha on one side of it, while on the other sat a tall and fair young lady in
mourning, who appeared to have been reading to him.

Generous minds are not long in understanding each other. Villiers was
prepared, by some frank and noble traits that he had discovered in the
character of his visitor, to give him credit for qualities the other was now
well disposed to show. To remove prepossession, was to ensure regard: Arundel
was born to be beloved; and captain Villiers, though less fascinating, had a
candor and martial enthusiasm of mind which circumstances only had concealed.
The conversation soon became unfettered and interesting.

"On the father of the present lord Lindsey," said Villiers, "mine had claims
of friendship to which the former was not insensible: they induced him to
bestow on me, very early in life, a commission, which, though it brought with
it many years of painful service, in a climate injurious to my health, ought to
be remembered with kindness. Attentive to me even during his last illness, by a
letter addressed to the son whose ingratitude and negligence avowedly shortened
his days, he repeated his earnest desire that I might be promoted in my
profession, and relieved from various pecuniary embarrassments, in which the
indiscretions of my father had involved his family. By the young lord Lindsey I
was at first treated with kindness and distinction. Reiterated promises taught
me to hope every thing; but I hoped, only to be disappointed. I knew enough of
the world, however, to have sustained that like a man; -- but when to neglect
he dared to add injury -- when he presumed to violate -- in short -- why should
I dissemble? when he would have trafficked upon the sister's honor for the
brother's promotion, it was then I felt like a soldier."

Arundel, whose cheek glowed with indignation and remorse, started hastily from
his seat; which Villiers, with a smile of kindness, motioned to him to resume.
-- "By an intercepted letter I became apprized of a secret which my sister's
sears for my safety had induced her to conceal. With what determination I
afterward saw lord Lindsey, I hardly know myself; but I well recollect, that
respect for the memory of his father, and his own inability to sight, alone
prevented my pursuing those violent measures I was but too well inclined to,
when the ill fortune of both induced you to request an interview with me. I saw
you with prejudiced eyes: had I seen you with any other, our swords had never
been drawn. Yet let me do you the justice of acknowledging, that, even in the
short conversation which preceded our appointment, I perceived I had an
adversary to encounter, of whose dignity of character I was little aware; and
though unable to reduce either my resentment or my pride to a tardy
explanation, I met you with a reluctance, that perhaps contributed, with your
own skill, to give you the advantage you obtained."

Arundel, at once grieved and flattered, cemented the growing friendship by a
confidence, not indeed minutely detailed, for the health of Villiers allowed
not of long conversation, but unbounded as far as related to lord Lindsey, and
departed with an invitation to repeat his visit next day.

The visit was repeated again -- and again -- and again. Miss Villiers was
almost constantly with her brother, and as constantly pursued the method she
had first adopted, of retiring at the entrance of his friend. Arundel could not
avoid feeling some pique at the beautiful statue he had so little power of
animating: not that he allowed beauty to be any advantage -- oh, no! "Louisa
had cured him! Louisa had rendered him forever indifferent to so illusive an
attraction;" and he repeated this so often that he really believed it. It was
the mind -- the visible expression of it in the countenance of Henrietta with
which he was now charmed. It was the sweet seriousness of her eyes -- so like
her brother's, only heightened by the finest long lashes in the world, that
made an irresistible impression on his memory. Yet, never to speak, never to
permit him the common claims of an acquaintance eternally to curtsey and
withdraw it was so strange, so cruel, so singular an instance of coquetry, that
really all the philosophy he was master of could not stand it.

Chance, however, did for him what miss Villiers would not do. After spending
the morning with her brother as usual tete-a-tete, he had taken his leave,
when, on walking the length of the street, somewhat occurred that he had
neglected to mention; and hastily returning, he threw open the door of the
apartment, where Henrietta was then sitting alone. A conscious -- a half
reproachful smile brightened the features of Arundel, as he respectfully
advanced and addressed her. Miss Villiers, on the contrary, turned pale,
blushed, and, dropping her eyes, faintly replied to his questions; but the
voice was not to be mistaken -- a voice so touching, so inimitably soft --
Heaven and earth! what was his astonishment when it was immediately recognized
to be that of Theresa! -- Theresa, -- the tender friend so long and so
ungratefully forgotten.

If Arundel was transported, far different were the feelings of miss Villiers.
-- Conscious, abashed, devoid of all power of feigning -- (...) recollecting
what she ought to know, or what she ought to tell; it was amidst blushes,
hesitation, and tremor, that he learnt she was the daughter of Mortimer! -- The
daughter of Mortimer! Ah! he learnt not that only: there was a suspicion, there
was a truth remained behind, at which, though his heart beat with exultation
and hope, he ventured not even remotely to glance. Yet who else should write to
Mortimer that she did not blush to acknowledge an interest for him? -- Who else
should tell his guardian and his friend, "that he had every grace that wins
affection, and every virtue that justifies it?" Who but Henrietta had
opportunity, whilst he was in pursuit of another object, to dwell unobserved
upon his character -- to trace all its energies -- to feel all its
disappointments -- and unconsciously to cherish a treacherous sentiment under
the name of a generous one?

Captain Villiers, who was only in the adjoining apartment, entered at this
moment, and saw with surprise Arundel holding the hand of his sister, and
speaking with an eagerness that marked the tenderest interest in what he
uttered.

"Dear Villiers!" said the latter, recovering himself to spare her
embarrassment, "Would you believe that I have found in your sister an old and
tenderly beloved friend?"

"So it appears," said Villiers smiling; "but how came you to take advantage of
my absence to make this discovery?"

"Mr. Arundel," said Henrietta, striving to command herself, "had forgotten his
friend, and I was not willing to obtrude her upon his memory."

Every truth but one was now avowed on all sides; and Villiers was not so dull
of comprehension as to overlook that.

"The veil -- the cruel veil," cried Arundel reproachfully, as they recounted
their interviews in the convent --

" -- Was once at least withdrawn," added Henrietta blushing; -- "but the
features it shaded were not worthy of retaining your eye."

Arundel, who too well recollected the circumstances of their first meeting,
could only answer by a look -- a look that at once conveyed his own
self-reproach. Yet time, that had matured his understanding, had also matured
the beauty of Henrietta; whose features, though ever regular, were far from
possessing, while in the convent, that lovely finish her whole person had since
attained.

The older mr. Villiers, obliged by his necessities to renounce his own name,
had, under that of Mortimer, afforded the parental protection to Arundel which
nature had designed for his own children. Of these children one had been
committed to the care of lord Lindsey, who, by embarking him early in a
military line, deprived him of the opportunity to make troublesome enquiries.
For his daughter, unprotected and dowerless, mr. Villiers's religion enabled
him to allot a life of seclusion in the convent where she had been educated;
nor was it till lord Lindsey himself started the proposal of marrying Arundel
abroad, that he thought of a scheme by which all their views might be
conciliated. With this scheme, however, Henrietta alone had ever been made
acquainted; and though Arundel and her brother could not fail, in the course of
the explanation, to surmise it, she earnestly guarded the idea from obtruding.

To captain Villiers, indeed, all this was new: his father's caution had kept
from his knowledge the change of his name -- the companion of his travels -- in
a word, every thing but what related to the embarrassment of their affairs, or
the welfare of his sister. Unconscious, therefore, that such a being as Arundel
existed, till he met him in the house of the young lord Lindsey, it was on the
event of the duel that his name first transpired to Henrietta. Why her previous
acquaintance with it had been so cautiously omitted in all conversations with
her brother relative to her father's visit at Lions, neither gentleman presumed
to ask, probably for the best of all reasons -- that both of them could guess.

The moment of final discovery now seemed dawning upon Arundel -- but it was
only a gleam. Of his birth, captain Villiers knew nothing; and Henrietta, to
whom her father never confided more of his plans than was necessary for their
accomplishment, only faintly recollected to have heard him once say that he was
the son of a mr. Arundel of Cornwall.

"It is strange that my father should leave no papers by which to guess at this
mystery," said Villiers. The anxious eyes of his sister half sought those of
Arundel, and her cheek was flushed with apprehension for his answer.

"Very strange," replied the latter with a duplicity love first had taught him
-- "It was, I know, his custom to burn all his letters after reading them: the
few lines that alone fell into my hands we will take an early opportunity of
examining together."

Re-assured by the carelessness of his answer, Henrietta recovered herself. Her
secret safe -- her lover and her brother thus perfectly united -- could the
world present a livelier pleasure than that which glowed round her heart? The
fireside of Villiers was now embellished with the smiles of happiness, and a
long, a lengthened evening succeeded, during which Arundel drank deep draughts
of a passion which he attempted not to resist; and which beauty, merit,
cultivated understanding, and polished manners, united to justify.

Strolling through the city the next morning with Villiers, a man who seemed
guarding the door of a narrow and dirty entry attempted to put a printed paper
in his hand. It would have been rejected, had not the unexpected enforcement of
"You had better take it, mr. Arundel," induced him to stop. He looked earnestly
at the figure by whom it was presented, and, under an immense bush of wig, a
threadbare coat and a scarlet waistcoat laced with gold, discovered his quondam
acquaintance, the German philosopher.

"You cannot oblige an old friend with less than a shilling, mr. Arundel," said
the German, "so pray have the goodness to walk in." Arundel complied; but he
must have been a philosopher himself to forbear smiling when he perceived his
friend's collection of minerals and fossils converted into what be called a
very pretty " rarce show;" by which, with the assistance of a few common
philosophical experiments medical advice offered gratis, and a small pretense
at judicial astrology, the German assured him he gained a tolerable livelihood.

"Not," said he, "but I had better have studied a system of the world than that
of the earth, and then I should have been aware of some of its revolutions,
which all my knowledge of the stars even did not inform me of."

Arundel, who knew his acquaintance's head to be filled with as much real
learning as might have supplied half a university, could not but smile at the
singular stoicism displayed in his conduct; and though he felt not that tender
interest with which the quick sensibility and embittered spirit of the Italian
had inspired him, yet was his smile insensibly chastened by a sigh, when he
contrasted the character of the German and his fate.

"The romantic days of chivalry, and the despotic ones of seudal authority, are
both vanished," said he, as he commented with his friend on the events they had
lately witnessed. "M^n, at that period, was contented to barter independency
for protection, and found in the cherishing power of rank somewhat that
consoled him for its superiority. The grosser ligaments that then bound the
great to the little have insensibly refined into the nicer ones of benevolence,
distinction, or patronage. How careful ought the great to be that they snap not
these by selfishness, pride or caprice! -- How, instead of weakening, ought
they to strengthen, ties, by which the human species is allured to that
subordination to which no mortal effort can ever, perhaps, awe them!"

"You think deeply," returned his friend.

"No, dear Villiers, I only feel deeply -- feel for the virtues I have seen
betrayed -- the talents I have seen blighted -- the sensibilities," he added,
half smothering a sigh, "I have known rejected; and by a man to whom it would
have cost so little to have cultivated all."

The sight of miss Villiers at once dissipated spleen and philosophy. A
thousand more interesting topics occurred; and the subject of his birth engaged
the attention both of Arundel and his friends. The paper he believed to have
been written by his father was vainly examined by each.

"The clue my sister has given us," said captain Villiers, "seems, after all,
the only possible one to lead to a discovery. You must go into Cornwall, and
the sooner the better; for we are none of us rich enough to spend either money
or time in unnecessary delays. Suppose you set off tomorrow!"

"Tomorrow is surely too soon!" answered Arundel, intuitively fixing his eyes
on miss Villiers.

"I think not," said her brother smiling; "rather remember, dear Arundel,
Tomorrow is too late:
The wise lived yesterday!"


"Ah!" cried Arundel warmly, "it was indeed only yesterday that I began to
live! However, I will go tomorrow, if you think it advisable. A family of
consequence enough to mention an heir cannot be unknown in the country; and I
may at least find ground for conjecture, whether I am able to make the
wished-for discovery or not."

"I have good presentiments," said Villiers as he quitted the room to attend a
troublesome visitor in the next -- "though certainly that nothing should even
accidentally remain but those lines is very extraordinary!"

Henrietta and her lover were left tete-a-tete; she felt embarrassed; and with
the ill fortune that generally follows the attempt at dispelling an awkward
silence, hastily repeated her brother's words, that it was very extraordinary!
Arundel, unable to resist the temptation, advanced toward her.

"Will miss Villiers," said he, "do me the honor of becoming my confidante?"

"Most undoubtedly," faltered she, turning pale.

"And may I -- dare I venture to tell her that there was yet another paper?" --

"Is it not better -- would it not be right, I mean -- why not rather tell my
brother?" again incoherently cried Henrietta, still paler than before.

"Because," interrupted Arundel, "if my surmises are true, the writing is too
sacred to be profaned by any eye but my own; because on their decision
probably depends the happiness or misery of my life; and because," added he,
taking it from his bosom, "with miss Villiers alone it remains to tell me
which."

She cast a timid eye upon the paper, and, too conscious of the hand, as well
as the probable purport of it, would have sunk from her chair, had not the
supporting arms of Arundel prevented her. He was at her feet when captain
Villiers returned; nor could the latter forbear asking with a smile, whether
these tender demonstrations of regard were meant for the old friend, or the new
one?

Arundel, who had not been able to resolve on the journey of the morrow without
previous explanation to both, now hesitated not to disclose his whole heart.
Villiere heard him with undisguised pleasure; and though not apprized, by any
part of the conversation, of his sister's partiality, thought he ran no risque
of violently offending her by sanctioning the hopes of her lover.

Pleasure, however, is a fleeting good! So thought Arundel as he looked the
next day through the dingy panes of glass in an inn window about thirty miles
from London. His gaiety was not greatly increased by the probability of having
nothing better to do than to look through them for two hours longer. Luxury had
not yet provided for travelers as in more modern times; and the only
post-horse the stables afforded, Arundel, from a principle of humanity and
goodnature, had resigned to a gentleman whom the landlord had described to be
in a state of agitation that bespoke his journey a matter of the utmost
importance. He was somewhat tempted, however, to repent of his goodnature,
when passing through the entry he cast his eyes on this gentleman, and
discovered him to be the valet of lord Lindsey; a man who had long reigned over
his master with most unbounded influence, and whose insolent manners rendered
him the detestation of all within his circle.

"Ah, mr. Arundel," said Verney, starting at the sight of him, "is it you,
then, to whom I am so greatly obliged? You were always good and generous, and I
am almost tempted -- "

"To profit by the example, I hope," said Arundel, coldly smiling, and passing
on. The man seemed struck with the speech.

"Mr. Arundel, for the love of Heaven, stop!" said he, eagerly seizing his
hand: favor me with a moment's conversation. It may be of more importance to
you than you are aware of." Arundel hesitated; yet, somewhat impressed with his
manner, went with him into an adjoining apartment. Verney shut the door.

"You have been, sir, for a long time now, the companion and intimate of my
lord: you have been the confidant of many of his secrets; yet I believe -- nay,
I am very sure, that you did not know him to be your brother."

"My brother! said Arundel, starting back with amazement. -- "Lord Lindsey my
brother!"

"As surely, sir, as that he was the seducer of miss Louisa, and the murderer
of mr. Mortimer!"

"Have a care, Verney, of what you say!" cried Arundel aghast with horror.

"I can stand to it upon oath, sir, when, and where you please; but my time is
precious, and I must tell my story in few words. It was just after you set out
for Swisserland, mr. Arundel, that I came into confidence with my lord; I used
often to carry messages and notes between him and ma'amselle Louise; who, to
say the truth, I believe courted him as much as he did her. However that was,
he fell into a very great passion when he found that she had told you of their
correspondence, and swore he would never see her more. Nay, he actually made
you the same promise, or something like it, as you may remember, and left Lions
accordingly. His heart, however, failed him before he had gone many miles; for
they were to have met that night -- as I should have told you they often did --
when miss Louise could make a pretense for getting out of the convent to visit
her acquaintance. Nothing then would serve my lord but returning; and a
melancholy return it was for poor mr. Mortimer, whom we overtook as we passed
through the short cut that leads to the high road. My lord at first would have
avoided him; but perceiving he was already known, determined to ride boldly on.
They soon came up with one another, and interchanged salutations; not very
civil. Some conversation ensued; and though I was at a distance, I could
understand that mr. Mortimer upbraided my lord with treachery, and falsehood.
Falsehood was the word. You may guess how this was taken; both of them fell
into such a passion that I verily believe they knew not what they said, or did:
and as curiosity drew me nearer, I distinctly heard mr. Mortimer tell my lord
that he had no occasion to value himself upon his birth; that he was only a
younger brother; and that you were both son and heir to lord Lindsey, as he
could sufficiently prove by letters then in his pocketbook. All my lord's
passion before was nothing at all to this. As ill-luck would have it, we had
pistols in the holsters for it was then dusk, and we were to go out of the city
again that night. -- To be short, I held their horses while they both fired,
and I saw mr. Mortimer drop. By my lord's command I myself took the pocketbook
from him, for he, poor man! was quite gone; and away we rode as if the devil
was behind us, and so to be sure he was. My lord was very moody, and, as I
thought, very penitent; and often said he did not intend the old gentleman's
death, but that it was an even chance, and therefore done in an honorable way.
However, as honorable as it was, he made no scruple of keeping the
pocketbook, in which, sure enough, there were some chosen letters from the old
lord, that sufficiently confirmed the truth of mr. Mortimer's story. Not that I
got sight of them at first; so far from it, that he would have persuaded me
they contained nothing of consequence. However, I knew my opportunities, and
when I had once seen them, we used to talk them over very often; and he even
told me that he should never have fallen into such a rage at first hearing of
them, but that his father, when angry with him once, let fall an odd saying,
that dwelt upon his mind. All this, mr. Arundel, I will say, and swear too! --
As to the rest, to be sure it grieved me to see you forced by ill treatment to
quit your own father's house, and throw yourself upon the wide world; while, on
the other hand, my lord -- " Here Verney began to stammer, and Arundel, to
whose overburdened and agitated mind a pause seemed necessary, threw open the
sash, and, leaning against the window-frame, endeavored to recover a composure
of which the dreadful train of facts he had listened to, seemed wholly to have
deprived him.

"Well, mr. Arundel, I must go," said Verney, abruptly starting up, as if
himself awakened to some new recollections.

"Whither?" returned the other.

"That I cannot immediately tell -- Not to my lord, you may be sure. This
confounded gambling has so ruined his temper, that a man had better live in
Bedlam than with him. However, if you will tell me where a line may find you,
depend upon receiving one 'ere long; and, if I can do you justice, justice you
shall have."

To part in so light a manner with a testimony of such importance, and of which
he might be so easily deprived, either by corruption or accident, appeared so
Arundel the extreme of folly; and he urged every motive either of justice, or
interest, that might induce Verney to return with him to town. The man seemed
irresolute, yet more inclined to pursue his own route, than that pointed out to
him. The horse at length was brought to the door.

"Mr. Arundel," said Verney, as the former still opposed his departure, "what I
have said may well show you how much I am disposed to do you a service. I will
go greater lengths, however; but you must first swear, that, after the proof I
am going to give you of my confidence, you will neither attempt to follow, nor
detain me a single moment." Arundel hesitated; but, as no alternative presented
itself, at length complied with the requisition.

" There, sir!" said Verney taking some papers from his portmanteau, " there
are the very letters found in mr. Mortimer's pocketbook. Ask no questions, but
remember your promise." So saying, he snatched up the portmanteau, ran hastily
out of the room, and left Arundel in an astonishment from which he was first
roused by the clattering of the horse's hoofs.

The man was quickly out of sight; but in his hand Arundel indeed held the
strange, the affecting testimonials of his birth -- so long concealed, so
wonderfully brought to light. That Verney had robbed his lord could not be
doubted; so often does "even handed justice Return the ingredients of the
poisoned chalice
To our own lips."


Had the speed with which Arundel returned to town allowed more time for
reflection, how new, how brilliant was the prospect that now opened before him!
To conceal his birth was once easy, but to trace it could no longer be
difficult. Miss Villiers raised to fortune and rank by his means -- miss
Villiers, the ornament of his family, and the restorer of her own, swam before
his imagination, and diffused an enchanting sense of pleasure throughout his
heart -- a pleasure softened into grateful sensibility, when he recollected
that he was paying to the daughter of Mortimer, those dues his affection vainly
lavished on the ashes of the father.

To captain Villiers his return was as desirable as unexpected. A chance
enquiry had already discovered to him that Arundel was the original name of the
Lindsey family; and a comparison of circumstances had inspired him with a
suspicion of that truth now so wonderfully confirmed. Yet Arundel the legal
son, the heir of a noble name, surpassed even his most sanguine expectations;
and, in a tumult of various emotions, both friends repaired to the house of
lord Lindsey, whose concern in the death of Mortimer, however, Arundel
carefully suppressed. They were told he was indisposed, and could see no one,
but to a subterfuge apparently the result either of cunning, or pride, neither
gave credit; and the following billet was by their mutual desire sent up to him.

When informed that it is but a few hours since I parted with Verney, you will
not be surprised that I return to a roof which ingratitude had induced me to
abjure. Nor can you, if yet sensible either of prudence or honor, refuse to
see, and acknowledge a brother, in

HENRY ARUNDEL.


"My lord wishes to speak to mr. Arundel," said the servant, returning; "but
captain Villiers he begs will excuse him."

The verbal message, the oftentatious approach, the ceremonious introduction,
had already, in the bosom of Arundel, repelled the generous tide of nature. Oh
God! how did the impetuous current return upon his heart, when, stretched on a
couch at one end of a magnificent dressing room, he cast his eyes on the
spectre of that gay, and beautiful Lindsey, whom he had parted with but six
weeks before, blooming in health, and vigourous in youth! -- A sigh -- almost a
groan of exquisite anguish burst from the heart of Arundel, as, the hand of his
brother, he bent his face over it in womanish emotion. The short and sudden
cough -- the agonizing pain that seemed to seize upon lord Lindsey, as
instantly recalled his reason.

"My brother -- my friend!" cried he incoherently, "recover -- compose
yourself. I come not to upbraid. Oh, why," added he more vehemently, "did I
mistrust your message? Why did I thus suddenly force myself upon you?" Lord
Lindsey, choked by agitation, could not speak; and Arundel, unable to witness
sufferings he could not assuage, flew into the antichamber, while the
attendants administered relief. From one of them he learnt what had in part
effected this devastation. Lord Lindsey, a month before, had attended a rural
fete given by the duchess of Portsmouth, where, after a night of dancing and
violent excess, he had fallen asleep, undiscovered for many hours, upon the wet
grass. The servant had no time for further information. Recalled by the found
of his brother's voice, Arundel eagerly returned to the apartment. The former
tenderly pressed his hand, and by slow and painful efforts was now able to
speak. But the long-lavished hours of prosperity and health, that make
atonement virtue, were lost to Lindsey; and though in speaking he failed not to
render Arundel a noble justice, yet from it, his own bosom extracted not that
balm which might in happier days have proved so healing.

It was not, however, without an exquisite sense of suffering, that his
generous brother discovered Verney to be a principal instrument in the
catastrophe which the appearance of Lindsey announced to be so near; a
suffering considerably augmented, when he found that it was to a latent spark
of tenderness and remorse in the latter, he had owed the two hundred pounds
lodged for his use at the banker's.

Hardly had lord Lindsey got rid of some of those alarming symptoms which were
produced by the violent and dangerous cold he had taken, when Verney, who was
dressing him, one morning encroached so far upon his usual insolence as to
exasperate a temper already peevish and fretful. In a transport of rage, lord
Lindsey struck him. The brutal precedent was not lost: Verney returned the
blow. A violent struggle ensued between them; and before Lindsey had either
time or recollection to ring his bell, he was thrown against a cabinet that
stood near, with a force that left him breathless: while Verney, early seduced
to villainy, now profited by the lesson, and escaped with such valuables and
papers as he deemed most likely to secure him either impunity or revenge.

Lindsey revived: but severe irritation and internal injury had done the work
of time; and he revived only to know that he was dying.

Yet within the sweet circle of love and virtue there is an atmosphere that
renders death less painful! Arundel, Villiers, his sister, all united their
cares in alleviating his sufferings; and the acuteness of disease subsided into
insensible decay.

"I give you, miss Villiers," said Lindsey on the day that united her with his
brother, "an invaluable heart. I shall soon leave you," added he faintly
smiling, "those worldly advantages to which that alone gives true nobility."

Ah, what could nobility add to the happiness of Arundel and Henrietta! Love,
friendship, competence! "Flowers of Paradise as yet unsaded," are in
themselves, to tender and well-regulated minds, "all they can guess of Heaven."


