SELF IMMOLATION: OR, THE SACRIFICE OF LOVE. A PLAY IN THREE ACTS.

TRANSLATED FROM THE GERMAN OF KOTZEBUE.

NEW YORK: Printed for CHARLES SMITH and S. STEPHENS. 1800.

DRAMATIS PERSONAE.
ROBERT MAXWELL, a decayed Merchant. ARABELLA, his wife. HARRY, a boy, his son.
An old blind Lady, his mother. JANE, maidservant in the house. Landlord of the
House, in which Maxwell lives. HARRINGTON, a rich wine-merchant. WALWYN.
DEMPSTER, a gambler. A JEW. FLOOD. DUMFRIES. JOHN HARTOPP, a porter. A Servant
and other Persons.
SELF IMMOLATION; OR, THE SACRIFICE OF LOVE.
ACT I.
SCENE I.
A spacious and elegant Room, poorly furnished. ARABELLA is employed in
Needlework. Her MOTHER-IN-LAW, old and blind, is seated in an Arm-Chair, with
her hands crossed on her Lap. Mother. TOM!


Arab. What is your pleasure, dear mother?


Moth. Nothing particular, daughter; I want Tom*


Arab. (Perplexed) Tom -- is ill.


Moth. Is he? Poor fellow! -- Well, then, another may come.


Arab. Cannot I serve you?


Moth. If you please. I wish to have my breakfast, I have already asked three
times for it.


Arab. Your breakfast -- Yes, dear Mother. ( She lays down her work, and folds
her hands with a deep sigh.)


Moth. Unless I have my tea and toast as soon as I rise in the morning -- I am
ill for the day. I have been accustomed, these fifty years, to breakfast the
moment I rise; and it does not look well, daughter, when an old blind woman is
obliged to wait hours for a little hot water.


Arab. Excuse us, dear mother; Jane is gone for some bread; and you know, she
is rather slow.


Moth. But why send Jane? Have we not other servants in the house?


Arab. ( Aside, with a sigh) Yes, we had. ( Aloud) We have lately endeavored
to do with fewer servants.


Moth. Very well; it is prudently done! When I was married, my late husband and
I were very poor, indeed; and when my Robert, your husband, was born I put
myself to many, many, little inconveniences, that my child might want nothing.
Now, it is your turn to make these sacrifices. When children are small, the
mother should forego many of her wishes, to provide for their wants.


Arab. We do, with the utmost pleasure.


Moth. Do not take this amiss, daughter; but, I must say, that, for some time
past, great disorder has prevailed in this house. Something or other is always
wanting. I am blind; I cannot see -- it is true. Yet I can discern more than
gives me pleasure.


Arab. My Robert, you know, has met with misfortunes in trade.


Moth. He has, child; but no merchant is always fortunate.


Arab. His loss from Belton's failure, was very great.


Moth. But Robert is not a Bankrupt.


Arab. ( Aside with a sigh) Ah, that you had spoken the truth!


Moth. His property was great: and though a part be lost, his mother's
breakfast should not be wanting. I know my son: he will never forget, that, at
the risk of my health (...) supplied him myself with his first food. I was then
sickly; yet I had no wet nurse for him. And I am confident, he would rather
deprive himself of something, than suffer his old blind mother to want.


Arab. He does deny himself, to supply you, mother.


Moth. And let me tell you daughter, what you do for me now, your little Harry
shall do for you when you are old.


Arab. Dear mother -- You do not suppose, I hope, that I -- that through any
neglect of mine --


Moth. Well! well! I would not judge unkindly.


Arab. ( aside) Good God! The whole night through have I been at work!


SCENE II.
Enter HARRY. Har. Pray mother, is it time now?


Arab. Presently, my dear.


Har. confidentially, and in a half whisper. I Will tell you what, Mama -- I am
hungry.


Arab. ( suppressing her tears) Presently, child; only wait till Jane comes
back.


Moth. Poor boy! he has had no breakfast then! -- Good God one should think
there was not a morsel of bread in the house!


Arab. Alas!


Moth. Come this way, Harry: are you hungry?


Har. I am, grandmother.


Moth. Have you had nothing to eat, this morning?


Har. No, grandmother.


Moth. Poor thing! You should have saved some of your bread-and-butter, last
night.


Har. I had not a bit, last night.


Moth. Is it possible? Did your unkind parents give you nothing?


Har. Father and mother had nothing to eat themselves?


Moth. Why did you not come to me?


Har. I did, and saw you eat your soup: I thought you would have left me some;
but you eat all.


Arab. Harry eat so heartily of currants, yesterday in the afternoon, that I
was afraid another meal before he went to bed, might make him ill.


Moth. Nonsense! children should be fed well; their growth requires a good deal
of nourishment.


Arab. (aside) How readily would I foster him with my blood!


Moth. Go, child, and ask your Mama to give you a roll.


Har. (goes to Arabella) Pray, dear Mama, do give me a roll.


Arab. But one moment's patience, my dear; Jane will soon be here.


Moth. But, for goodness' sake, why is he to wait till Jane returns? When my
Robert was of his age, he would often teaze me, and draw me away from my work;
yet I did not care for that; I always got him what he wanted -- But now, ladies
are grown so fashionable and so indolent --


Arab. You wrong me, dear mother you do, indeed! -- it happens at present, that
there are no rolls in the house.


Moth. So much the worse; in a well regulated family, such things should never
be wanting.


Har. Don't be angry, grandmama. I Will go and look for Jane. Runs off.


SCENE III.
Moth. Yes, daughter, I should deserve censure myself, were I to be silent. I
am old and blind: work I cannot* but I must speak my mind; do not take it amiss.


Arab. Your parental admonitions shall be ever dear to me; even when they wound
my heart.


Moth. You know, when my son married you, I did not greatly approve of your
union.


Arab. I was poor.


Moth. Has, during eight years, a word dropped from my lips, like a reproach on
that head?


Arab. No, dear good mother, never!


Moth. Certainly, I had been better satisfied, had you possessed some fortune;
but then I always said to myself, love goes a great way. My late husband, poor
man, at first, had no property, nor had I; but we were very happy. My son is a
rich man, through our industry: for God's sake! let him choose as his heart
directs! if the young woman is poor, she will be grateful, and the more readily
nurse me when I am old. I want but little; but that little I ought not to be at
the trouble of asking for. She will always have it ready, before I open my lips.


Arab. Surely, it has always been my most earnest wish --


Moth. Aye, daughter, it has been -- it has been -- but it is no more. Every
thing has of late taken a most singular turn, and grows worse daily. Old people
are a little difficult, and are fond of order. What to young people seems the
effect of caprice, often is indispensably necessary to the old. The variety of
youthful enjoyments is so great, that some may well be spared: but old age is
confined to so few enjoyments, that it can ill afford to lose any. And yet,
daughter, (with a tone of increasing animation) I will rather suffer want
myself, than that my poor little grandson be neglected: this goes to my very
soul! You are his mother: You may love him dearly, very dearly indeed! but I am
his grandmother, and love him still more. ( Arabella silently wipes away her
tears.)


SCENE IV.
Enter HARRY and JANE. Har. ( skipping up to Arabella) Mama, Mama, here is
Jane. Now I am to have a roll!


Arab. ( rises hastily, and draws Jane aside) Well! have you brought me any
money?


Jane. No, madam, I have not indeed. Five places I have been at; and -- it is a
shame -- they offer me no more than half a crown for such a pair of ruffles as
these are!


Arab. Half a crown! the materials cost me as much.


Jane. Certainly they did, and so I told them; but these unfeeling wretches
take advantage of the distress of their fellow christians to enrich themselves.


Arab. Distress! -- Distress indeed! -- Run back, Jane; take the half crown;
bring tea for the old lady; and rolls for the boy. At dinnertime, God may
befriend us. I can no more -- my fingers are sore with working.


Jane. ( wiping her eyes) Poor, dear Lady!


Har. Jane, will not you give me my rolls?


Jane. Come along, my little man, you shall choose them at the baker's yourself.


Moth. Jane, bring me my tea.


Jane. Immediately, madam. goes out with Harry.


Moth. Immediately! -- For this hour past have I received the same answer! I
perceive I grow burdensome in this house. Myself and my chair are both out of
fashion; we are always in the way.


Arab. ( aside) Oh, God! thou alone know I do what I can! Assist me to bear
more than poverty; assist me to bear unjust reproach, and to remain silent!


SCENE V.
(MAXWELL enters with a dejected countenance; on seeing him, ARABELLA endeavors
to appear more composed.) Max. Good morning, mother. Good morning, dear wife.


Arab. How are you, my love? You went abroad very early this morning.


Max. (in a half whisper to Arabella) Yet came too late every where! ( Arabella
casts down her eyes, and heaves a sigh)


Moth. Let me tell you, Robert, your people are not worth a rush. I mean the
servants.


Max. (With a tone of sarcasm and anguish) The servants!


Moth. One may call them twenty times, and not one comes.


Max. I suppose so.


Moth. They preserve no respect for me.


Max. Nor for me, mother.


Moth. Well, then, turn the unmannerly fellows out of the house.


Max. I have done so already.


Moth. Have you indeed? Are they all discharged?


Max. All.


Moth. H'm! h'm! -- John, however, you might have kept; he used to play so
obligingly with Harry.


Max. Perhaps it was for that reason he made free with the child's little box,
which he took with him.


Moth. Was he so dishonest? it had a gold coin of Charles the first in it, a
present of my godmother to me. But, William -- is he gone, too? He was a pious
young man, and often in the evening read me a chapter in the bible.


Max I imagine he fell in love with your bible.


Moth. Which bible are you speaking of?


Max. The large one, ornamented with silver. He packed it up with his things.


Moth. The villain! Your poor father set down your birthday in it with his own
hand.


Max. My birthday is not lost for that.


Moth. No! no! I have it by heart; the 14th of February, 1772.


Max. (aside, wringing his hands) Who will tell me the day of my death?


Moth. Old James was then a brisk lad; he was sent on the full gallop, to my
mother at Greenwich. You have not discharged old James, I hope?


Max. No; he discharged himself.


Moth. Indeed! But why so?


Max. I cannot tell. About three weeks since, I enquired after him one morning,
but he was not at home.


Moth. And is not returned?


Max. Not yet.


Moth. I dare-say, child, some misfortune has befallen him. Poor old man!


Max. Yes, mother: The greatesst misfortune that can befall a man -- he has
beocme a rogue.


Moth. Impossible!


Max. He took up several hundreds of pounds in my name.


Moth. The hoary villain!


Max. A mere trifle, dear mother! This world of ours you know, is composed of
the miserable leavings of all the rest. To be old, is to have been more
frequently cheated than others; and an old man is a man who knows a great many
rogues.


Moth. Robert, Robert, that is a wicked speech. A great deal depends on our
manner of treating people. -- When there is proper management in a house, and
the servants are duly paid their wages, they never think of robbing their
masters in this manner.


Max. But now, mother, I defy any one to rob me.


Moth. When, indeed, confusion reigns throughout the house, and the mistress
takes care of nothing --


Max. (impatiently) How, mother! Hold, mother!


Moth. When parents and children are alike neglected --


Max. Mother, for God's sake!


Moth. When the mistress is too indolent to go herself, and make a cup of tea
for an old blind mother, or cut a bit of bread for an only child --


Max. (throwing himself into the arms of his wife) -- Arabella, forgive me!


Arab. ( with a kind smile) I have nothing to forgive.


Max. ( in a low voice) Reproaches so unmerited!


Arab. They would wound to the heart, if they were merited.


Max. To calumniate an angel!


Arab. She means no ill.


Max. A wife, who, these five weeks past, has supported mother and child with
the work of her hands!


Arab. There are few wives that can reckon up five weeks equally happy.


SCENE VI.
Enter JANE with tea, and HARRY with rolls. Jane. Here is tea, madam.


Moth. At last! ( Jane places the tea before the old lady, and pours out a cup.)


Har. Good morning, pappa. Look here, what fine rolls I have got!


Max. But have you thanked your mother for them?


Har. No, pappa, I have not.


Max. ( in a voice struggling for utterance, after taking Harry up and holding
him to Arabella) Oh! thank her! thank her!


Har. Thank you, dear mama.


Arab. ( kissing the child) But why this, Robert! Can there be any thing more
pleasing to a mother, than to see in the hands of her child, a morsel of bread
which she herself has earned?


Moth. What is this? This is not my cup! ( Jane looks in a perplexed manner at
Arabella.) You know, Robert, that for these ten years past, I have constantly
used the cup, which John Pringle brought me from China; and now they have given
me another, not half so smooth and handsome!


Max. Where is the cup?


Arab. (In a low voice to Maxwell) I have sold it, dear husband. Harry had no
shoes; and I hoped she would not perceive the difference. ( Maxwell casts down
his eyes sorrowfully) Will you forgive me, dear mother; I always made it my
business, you know, to wash your cup myself: and I always did it, with the
utmost care -- but yesterday -- somehow -- I know not how -- I broke your cup.


Moth. Broke it! -- Well, well, daughter, my old heart will also break at last!
-- I say it, once more: things grow worse every day. The bible is gone; the
child's plaything is carried off; and now my cup is broken! -- Son, son, if thy
poor father could know it -- Remember his last words -- "May my blessing be
converted into a curse, should your mother ever complain of you!" -- Now, I do
not complain; I will not convert thy father's blessing into a curse; I will
suffer, and not complain! Come, Harry, lead me into my room; ride about on thy
hobbyhorse, and be as noisy as thou will, that my heart, and the conscience of
thy parents may be stunned to rest. ( Exit, conducted by Harry and Jane.)


SCENE VII.
Max. (with a laugh of agony) Ha, ha, ha!


Arab. (taking his hand in hers) Dear good Robert -- Put confidence in the God
of mercy!


Max. ( withdrawing his hand and looking earnestly at hers) What is this? Blood!


Arab. I pricked myself with a needle; that is all.


Max. Let me see -- Good God! Your fingers are all torn and bleeding!


Arab. (with assumed carelessness) It Is owing entirely to the childish vanity
of having delicate hands. The skin at last grows so tender, that it can bear no
work.


Max. ( deeply affected) Good God!


Arab. Now, how you take that again! Often, very often have I seen you in the
sun at midday, till the sweat has poured down from your brow. Is a drop of
sweat of less value than a drop of blood?


Max. Have mercy upon me, thou author of my involuntary existence! Point out to
me some honest livelihood, however mean it may be* Oh, Arabella, nothing have I
left untried! The whole of this morning have I run from house to house, to get
a clerk's place on the lowest terms, in vain; nobody wants me. Oh God! thou
know, that while I was prosperous, I would have given any person in
distress, that applied to me, a news-paper to copy, rather than not give him
the means of earning a few shillings,


Arab. What has not succeeded to day, may succeed tomorrow.


Max. To write, to keep accounts, and to be an honest man, is all I can boast
of. -- When a boy I learned to work at a turning-loom; and yesterday I made a
trial of that. I intended to make toys for children, and carry them to market;
but you know I sprained my ancle two months since, and it is too weak to turn
the wheel.


Arab. The wheel of our fortune will turn at last.


Max. I tell you, my ancle is too weak.


Arab. Our sufferings are unmerited!


Max. Is that a consolation?


Arab. Assuredly, Robert, it is a powerful consolation. Hunger scarcely gnaws,
where conscience does not gnaw; despair overwhelms only the guilty; hope is
sweet only to the honest mind; and confidence is the attendant of innocence.


Max. Hope! in what? -- Confidence? in whom?


Arab. In God, and men.


Max. Men? Ha! Ha! -- Had you been a (...) this morning --


Arab. Did you make your distress known?


Max. ( Haughtily) Heaven forbid!


Arab. But, how should any one know? --


Max. Aye! that is the point! such is man. He that does not appear before him,
with wooden legs, or covered with rags, that cannot cry aloud -- I am wretched
-- I ask charity -- is passed by. Nobody will take the trouble to trace sorrow
in pale cheeks, and aid the timid, whose lips are closed with shame.


Arab. Have not you often done this? and would you be so vain as to suppose
there are not others good like yourself?


Max No! No: by no means! -- Yet where? -- But, stay -- I am wrong -- one I
found this morning --


Arab. Well?


Max. The only one of whom I would not accept a drop of water in the burning
thirst of a fever.


Arab. I don't understand you --


Max. (After a pause) Walwyn.


Arab. Walwyn! You did well. No from him you must not accept any thing; though
he deserves, more than any other person, the confidence of a generous mind.


Max. We met near St. Paul's -- "Good morning, Maxwell; how fare you?" -- "Very
well." -- "You look poorly." -- "Some time since, I hurt my leg, which obliged
me to keep my bed, and has made me rather thin." -- He looked steadfastly in my
face. I dare say I looked confused. He seized my hand: and I gaped with
astonishment. -- "Should you need a friend?" said he, in a tone which from any
other lips, would have subdued my heart. I answered carelessly, and with a
forced smile -- "Friends we want daily." -- "You will not understand me," he
replied; "and perhaps I suspect the reason. But a true friend you should never
reject, in whatever form he may appear. Can I be of service to you? Try me* and
call me monster, if I fail you!" Here he pressed my hand, and hastened away
from me.


Arab. (Greatly Affected) Walwyn is a worthy man.


Max. (After a pause during which he observes Arabella with some degree of
uneasiness) Ah! I should not have told you this!


Arab. ( Gently chiding him) Why not?


Max. A man whom once you loved!


Arab. I am your wife.


Max. A man who undoubtedly loves you still!


Arab. Men like him may love me.


Max. To whom you would have given your hand, but for my unhappy intervention.


Arab. Pray, my love, no more of this.


Max. Poor Walwyn was compelled to give way to the wealthy Maxwell. -- Now
Walwyn is rich and Maxwell a beggar.


Arab. Does that increase his worth, or lessen yours?


Max. But for me, you were now a happy wife.


Arab. Am I unhappy? ( Maxwell takes her hand and points to her fingers) That
is no reply. Such sores heal easily. Have I nothing that may be envied in my
fortune? -- I am the mother of a lovely boy: I am the wife of an honest man: he
is poor, but not poor in his love for me: he has been defrauded of his
property, but no one shall beguile him of his domestic happiness! He who can
still give and receive joy, has no right to complain of wretchedness.


Max. It Is in vain dear wife; you cannot efface from my mind, the agonizing
thought, that I have entangled you in my misery. When I first addressed you,
and the gentle Walwyn withdrew his pretensions; your heart belonged to him.


Arab. Yes, I loved him. I confessed it to you, and my frankness gained your
confidence. Shall I forfeit that confidence by the same confession, now that it
would be without foundation?


Max. You became mine, because your father interposed his authority; because
you were poor, and he longed to see you decently provided for.


Arab. And now I am yours, by my own choice. Nature has united us with her
strongest tie; you are the father of my child.


Max. Which your feeble hands must support.


Arab. The clergyman, who married us, spoke to us of both good and ill.


Max. Woe, woe be to me, wretched being! This noble, this adorable woman might
have been happy by the side of a worthy man! But forth came the wealthy
Maxwell, possessed of thousands, not earned by him, but inherited from his
father, improved this miserable advantage, and purchased a heart whose value
far exceeds all the riches of Peru. He stole the best of wives -- to -- to let
her perish with hunger. Woe, woe to me, wretched man! (He grows faint and
endeavors to conceal it, and takes hold of the back of a chair.)


Arab. How ingenious you are to torture yourself! What do we want? We are poor;
that is all. May not one single moment change our fate? On seeing, yesterday,
the burial of our neighbor's child -- his only child -- on seeing the
sorrow-stricken father tottering behind the coffin -- on hearing the mother's
cries through the window -- you said yourself -- These people are still more
unfortunate than we!


Max. But the child did not perish for hunger! --


Arab. No: Nor shall our child perish for hunger. -- He has a mother, who, when
she can work no longer, will not be ashamed to beg for her child. ( Maxwell
staggers, and is obliged to sit down) Dear Robert, what is the matter? You are
ill?


Max. No, no -- I am very well -- only a little faint --


Arab. No wonder; you have been running about since the dawn -- perhaps you
have not even broken your fast!


Max. Yes; I have.


Arab. Where, pray?


Max. At the coffee-house.


Arab. Robert! I know you had no money!


Max. I had a few shillings left.


Arab. For some days past, it seems, you purposely absent yourself, when our
scanty dinners and suppers are served up --


Max. (With some bitterness) If you have plenty invite guests!


Arab. Robert, you do not deprive yourself, I hope, of food? -- Do you? ( With
great anxiety) Look at me! -- Where have you dined of late?


Max. ( With a forced smile) You think, I suppose, that I have fasted. -- Be
comforted, my Arabella; I have a numerous acquaintance: and though they may
fear my asking for assistance; a bit of dinner they will not refuse me.


SCENE VIII.
Enter a MESSENGER, with a letter Mess. ( delivering the letter) Mr. Robert
Maxwell.


Going. Max. Is no answer required?


Mess. No sir. Exit.


Max. ( reads) "Mr. Edward Cibson, the banker, has an order to advance Mr.
Robert Maxwell the sum of one thousand pounds, to enable him to carry on his
interrupted business. Should fortune smile on him again, his creditor will make
himself known."


Arab. Well, Robert, are there not still some good men in the world?


Max. ( sits long in profound meditation; then again looks steadfastly at the
note) I do not know the hand.


Arab. What does that matter? It is the hand of a worthy man.


Max. (after a pause, rises from his chair, and holds the paper up to Arabella)
Do you know the hand?


Arab. ( casting a slight glance at the note) I do not.


Max. Arabella -- You never yet deceived me -- I conjure you, by the life of
our only child -- Do you know the hand? ( Arabella remains silent) It is
Walwyn's hand, is it not? ( Arabella bursts into tears, and withdraws) -- No!
no! rather starve! -- Stand I will -- or must fall -- but I will not be crushed!


SCENE IX.
Enter LANDLORD. Land. Good morning, sir.


Max. Good morning, my friend.


Land. These rooms are very fine -- an't they?


Max. Certainly, very fine.


Land. Handsome rooms, indeed -- convenient, and elegant -- But they also cost
a rare deal of money -- upon my soul, they did!


Max. I have no doubt.


Land. A load of money, hard earned! -- have nothing but this house here --
must live upon the rent -- You understand me.


Max. Yes, I do.


Land. You are a fine gentleman, sir -- A very civil gentleman -- but for these
four months past, I have not seen a shilling of rent.


Max. Indeed, I am extremely sorry it has happened so.


Land. So am I. But that will not do -- I must have money.


Max. But a little patience --


Land. Aye, aye! -- Patience is a special fine virtue; -- one may be as patient
as you please. But with me, it is from hand to mouth; the stomach knows of no
patience.


Max I beg only a few days longer.


Land. A day, do you see, contains twenty-four hours, and in twenty-four hours
one wants three meals. One word for all, I can wait no longer. Tomorrow I must
have my money, or provide a lodging for you, which will not cost you a farthing.


Max. Hard-hearted man!


Land. Hard or soft, just as it happens. When I see money, I am as soft as
melting wax.


Max. You will not, I hope, thrust out of doors, a blind helpless woman,
seventy years old!


Land. Thrust her out of doors! Heaven forbid! -- That would be so rude! I
shall lead her out of the house very gently.


Max. And leave her in the street?


Land. What Is that to me? I did not build my house to make it a hospital for
blind women.


Max. ( with vehemence) Be gone, sir! leave the room! While I inhabit these
apartments, I am the master here.


Land. Very well -- the mastership will not last long, I believe. "Begone -- leave
the room," indeed! -- let me tell you, my fine gentleman, such language will not
do for people of empty purses and empty pockets. The rich have the privilege of
being rude, that one puts up with -- that is the custom; money makes amends for
every thing -- but without money the finest gentleman in the land must stoop,
and be humble, or he marches to Newgate -- Do you understand me? Exit.


SCENE X.
Max. Full well do I understand you! Wife and child reduced to beggary! -- My
old blind mother in the streets -- and I in gaol! -- Belton! Belton! thou who
did rob thy creditors, and by a fraudulent bankruptcy, did plunge me into
this misery -- could thou behold this extreme distress of an innocent
family? -- Oh! never have I yet cursed any human being! Belton, I curse thee!


SCENE XI.
Enter a JEW. Jew. Good day to you, sir.


Max That grant me, gracious God!


Jew. You owe me fifty pounds.


Max. I know I do.


Jew. Can you pay me?


Max. No.


Jew. That Is very bad indeed. ( Maxwell shrugs his shoulders) I have got your
note for the sum.


Max. I know you have.


Jew. And know also what I can do?


Max. Yes, throw me into gaol.


Jew. Yet, I should not like to do that.


Max. I am obliged to you for your compassion.


Jew. You were formerly a regular honest man.


Max. Honest I am still.


Jew. You used to pay me very punctually indeed.


Max. But now I am undone.


Jew. H'm -- What shall I do?


Max. What you please. But before you make your resolution, pray step into this
room; you will there find a wife, pale with grief, a helpless babe, and an old
blind matron.


Jew. But you -- do not take it amiss -- you are a man of information -- and
accustomed to industrious pursuits --


Max. Sir, for the last three days have I run about with the perseverance of
the ant, in quest of some person who would give me bread for work. Sir, you are
a Jew; to you I will confess it -- to a Christian I would not. For these two
days not a morsel have I tasted -- (the Jew puts his hand hastily into his
pocket, and seizing Maxwell's hand, endeavors to slip a linen purse into it)
No, no! -- that must not be.


Jew. Why not? Because I am a Jew?


Max Fie, fie, if such were my sentiments, I should deserve my sufferings!


Jew. Well, then, take it.


Max. I am unable to repay you.


Jew. The God of my forefathers will repay me.


Max. God! If it was thy will that I should be poor -- why did thou plant
this pride in my bosom? -- No, sir, charity I cannot accept: but procure me
work, and I will thank you. Grant me some respite with regard to my debt; --
and I, with my wife and child, will thank you.


Jew. Sir, I was a stranger to your misfortunes -- otherwise I should not come
to ask my money. No, by the God of my forefathers, I would not have come for it
-- Farewell, sir. ( he tears the note and throws it away) -- There lies the
paltry scrap! goes out hastily.


Max. Sir, sir! -- ( is going after him, but seeing the Jew gone, he stops)
Yes, yes, there yet are men -- but not among Christians. Blockhead that I was,
to pass by an Israelite at the Exchange, as if the humanity of that people had
been drowned in the Red Sea -- Blockhead that I was, not to recollect the
important truth, that in ninety-nine cases of an hundred, the despised is more
worthy than the man who despises him. Yes, I will once more crawl about; in
every public place exhibit the image of my distress; this Jew has rekindled the
smothered spark of my confidence in human kindness. Among a million of
inhabitants, surely I may find one, who has a letter to write, or an account to
sum up.


SCENE XII.
Enter HARRY. Har. I have eaten enough, papa -- Will you save me this roll?


Max. I save bread for you, child! -- ten diamonds rather than one roll!


Har. Diamonds! -- I have none.


Max. Let me see that roll. ( the boy gives it him) -- You have eaten enough,
did you say?


Har. Yes, papa, quite enough. ( he amuses himself with play-things; Maxwell is
silent for some time, eyeing the roll with desire, and an evident struggle
between his hunger, and his regard for the boy's wants.)


Max. When do you think you shall be hungry again?


Har. Oh, very soon.


Max. Soon! -- (he puts the roll on the table, and turns away with evident
uneasiness) How long is it till dinnertime?


Har. About an hour, papa.


Max ( looking eagerly at the roll) Before dinner, you will not eat any thing,
shall you?


Har. No, papa. (Maxwell reaches out his hand for the roll) But at present I
always get so little.


Max. Little! (withdrawing his hand.)


Har. Mama, to be sure helps me often from her own plate -- But, then, she has
not got much herself.


Max. ( hastily) There, there -- take care of your roll yourself.


Har. And Phylax, -- papa -- poor old Phylax -- You may count every rib he has!
-- Yesterday, he stole a bone in the landlord's kitchen, and got such a beating
-- Poor creature!


Max. My Phylax! -- Child, you mistake -- The poor old dog can hardly crawl.


Har. But he crawled down the staircase! -- He must have been very hungry
indeed!


Max. Poor old Phylax! -- Thou once did rescue me from a robber -- and I then
promised to feed thee carefully till death -- Do, Harry, give Phylax your roll.
( he hastens away.)


Har. (Running out with the roll) -- Phylax! -- Phylax!


END OF THE FIRST ACT.
ACT II.
SCENE I.
A public Garden. In the Back-ground, a Pharo-Table; DEMPSTER and several other
Gamblers sitting around it. Apart from the rest, and nearer to the front of the
Stage, sits HARRINGTON, with a Bottle of Wine before him: He rests his chin on
the head of his Cane; and seems to take little notice of what is going on
around him. On the opposite side sits DUMFRIES, smoking a Pipe. MAXWELL walks
about with an air of deep affliction: casts a scrutinizing look, now on
HARRINGTON, now on DUMFRIES; then turns for some moments to the Pharo-Table.
Despair, Scorn, and a misanthropical aversion for all around him; writhes his
Countenance with convulsive movements of the Features. For some time, only
single words relative to the Game, such as Cinq et Roi -- Paroli -- Dame et
Dame -- Soli, etc. -- are heard from the Pharo-Table) (DEMPSTER, at last
rising, advances; views MAXWELL with keen eye, measuring him, as it were, from
head to foot: then beckons to him.) MAXWELL ( approaching with an air of
hesitation) Do you wish to speak with me, sir?


Demp. Yes, sir, I wish to have the honor of your acquaintance.


Max. A very obliging wish! Can I in any manner serve you?


Demp. I believe that you can.


Max. I shall do it with pleasure.


Demp. But I, perhaps, mistake, in regard to you? --


Max. Not -- if you suppose me an honest man.


Demp. Honest? -- yes -- certainly -- we are, among ourselves, the most honest
people living.


Max. I do not understand you, Sir.


Demp. Why; we account to each other, with the strictest honor, for whatever
we earn; one, for instance, plays at Brookes's -- another at White's: -- and
they share the winnings equally between them, without the concealment of a
single shilling.


Max. Very well, Sir! But what is this to me? --


Demp. You are a deep one: but I have found you out -- I know my men! -- Place
any stranger you please, at the pharo-table: and within a quarter of an hour, I
will tell you, exactly, how far he understands the game.


Max. You think that I understand it?


Demp. (Smiling) Do not dissemble, -- Pray, don't: -- I have long observed you.
-- There is, among us, a novice whom we dislike: -- he who now holds the cards.
-- Your looks, -- the air of bitter scorn, with which you more than once,
viewed his blunders, -- have convinced me, that I address myself to one who is
master in our profession. Only confirm me in this opinion, by a trial; -- and
your fortune is made! --


Max. How, Sir?


Demp. I do assure you, Sir, that you will find yourself in a company of honest
good-humoured fellows; who look upon the whole world, as a large gambling
house; in which every one banks his talents, and where no one loses but he who
punts the cried-down coin of virtue.


Max. ( Struggling to restrain his indignation) Sir! your principles are as new
to me, as your game, to which I am an utter stranger.


Demp. Sure, Sir, you jest? -- You are, perhaps, already connected with a
different company. If so, then ( Putting his fingers to his lips) you can be
silent! Brothers of a trade must not betray one another. But if you hesitate on
another score; if you mistrust my character; -- I would have you to know, Sir,
that I am a man of known and undoubted honor. I am well received in all the
first houses. My name is Baron Dempster. Tonight I shall be at the Duchess's
route in Pall Mall. ( He turns from Maxwell, and sits again down at the
Pharo-table.)


Max. (Continues standing, with his arms folded) So, then! If I choose to become
a rascal, I shall not want for bread, -- I may riot in plenty. -- A rascal! --
No. -- Baron Dempster is well received in the first houses. -- (With a laugh of
mingled scorn and anguish) Oh! for your first houses! Ha! ha! ha!


SCENE II.
Enter FLOOD, who walks about, looking among the company, with an air of keen
observation and enquiry. Max. (Perceiving him) Ha! this man seems in eager
search for something. O that he may want work! -- work that I can perform!


Flood. ( Coming up to him, and looking earnestly on him.)


Max. Sir, if you want a man who will be happy to earn a shilling; he is before
you.


Flood. It is exactly such a man I want.


Max. Pray, then, take me; if the task be not above my strength?


Flood. The task is the easiest in the world. I am engaged in a lawsuit: my
opponent has produced three witnesses, who have sworn in his favor: I must
bring six to outswear them. Five I have procured. If you will be the sixth, you
may earn a guinea in an instant?


Max. I -- a witness -- in a cause entirely unknown to me? --


Flood. What of that? -- Sure, you know the practice of the courts! -- A bell
rings. You step forward, -- kiss the bible, are examined. -- answer agreeably
to instructions with which I shall have furnished you, -- after a few minutes,
walk off, with a guinea in your pocket, -- and spend it as you please.


Max. And, pray, what shall I do with my conscience?


Flood. Poh! poh! Such things are done, in London, every day. Besides, a juster
cause than mine was never brought before a court. My opponent is a swindler, a
fraudulent banker, one Belton.


Max. ( With anxious surprise) Belton! --


Flood. Ay! Belton, -- Do you know the man?


Max. Know him! -- I do know him.


Flood. You cannot know any thing good of him.


Max. I cannot say that I do. But if I were even thoroughly acquainted with the
particulars of your cause; against this man, I cannot come forward as a witness.


Flood. Why not?


Max. He is my enemy.


Flood. So much the better!


Max. He has reduced me to misery.


Flood. Has he? Better still! -- You shall have your revenge; and bear witness,
for me against him.


Max. No, Sir! I am in want, in extreme want. A guinea would be to me a
treasure. Yet not for worlds, would I earn it at your price!


Flood. As you please. Two of my witnesses cost me but half what I offered you:
and I should easily find a dozen before night, ready to serve me for the same
money. ( Flood retires.)


Max. (Looking earnestly after him) O God! O God! How capricious and false are
the moral judgments of men! -- I may send the fellow who picks my pocket, to
the gaol, and to the gallows* yet such wretches as those walk proudly about,
and are respected as gentlemen!


SCENE III.
JOHN HARTOPP bears across the stage, a burden, which he puts down, for a
moment, while he removes his hair from his face, and wipes the sweat from his
brow. Max. This is a heavy burden, friend.


Heart. Very heavy!


Max. To what place do you bear it?


Heart. To Golden Square.


Max. You have still a good way to go.


Heart. A great way.


Max. How much are you paid for the carriage?


Heart. A shilling.


Max. It is little enough.


Heart. But, I can earn my three and four shillings a day.


Max. And does that support you?


Heart. Be sure it does.


Max. Have you a wife and children?


Heart. Ay; a very good creature for a wife, and three fine boys.


Max. And, what little you earn supports them all?


Heart. Little! it is enough: we never yet went to bed hungry. On Sundays, we
have our hot dinner, and our pint of ale, as well as other folks.


Max. And you are happy?


Heart. Happy! Aye, master, that we are, in our very hearts. When I come home at
night, my three boys run so joyfully about me, and their mother brings the dish
for supper, full of hot potatoes; -- there is a relish for you, master! --
there is a relish!


Max. ( Aside) Good! very good! since so little suffices to man, for happiness,
and for the support of life; why may not I procure that little? ( Aloud) Let me
try my friend whether I cannot lift your load?


Har. With all my heart.


Max. Put it on my shoulders. I wish to try how far I can carry it.


Har. (laughing) Ha, ha, ha,! You will find it too heavy for you, master. ( he
puts it on Maxwell's shoulders, who sinks under it to the ground.)


Heart. It will not do.


Max. (rising up -- in a tone of anguish) No, no, it will not!


Heart. ( taking up his burden) A good day to you, master. Poor folks must not
lose their time in chatting idly. (Exit.)


Max. (alone) Fool! -- Unlucky wretch! thou have not for these two days tasted
even a cup of tea -- and thou would carry a porter's load! (he wrings his
hands in despair) Poor Robert! Is it then come to this, a man must be either a
villain or a beggar. Oh! to die for Arabella, were easier far than to beg for
her! Yet, by dying, I cannot better any thing here -- Away! away! vain pride!
down, thou haughty swelling heart! a wife! a child! a mother, old and blind! --


SCENE IV.
Max. ( coming up to Harrington) -- Sir --


Har. ( starting in surprise) What is the matter?


Max. I am unfortunate; -- and a man of honor is doubly so, when his distress
forces him to be troublesome.


Har. ( looks on him with a vacant stare)


Max. I solicit not alms, but the means of earning wages.


Har. ( sarcastically) Unfortunate? -- Hear me, Sir! Are you married?


Max. I am; I have the best of wives.


Har. Any children?


Max A fine boy.


Har. So! this is ever the answer. Wife and child -- child and wife; yet
unfortunate! Your complaint is very unreasonable, sir!


Max. Much as I love them, I should be less miserable without my wife and my
child. I should then starve and die alone!


Har. Want, then, constitutes the only misery you know. And whenever you meet
with a person sufficiently humane to share with you his superfluity; your
distress will be removed. But what remains for me, who possess, perhaps, a
million of money, and am yet miserable, beyond the power of man to relieve?


Max. Why should you deem your condition so hopeless? ( with looks of surprise
and perplexity).


Har. You, sir, can walk about, and make your complaint: and though you should
meet with nothing but unfeeling insolence from ninety-nine out of an hundred of
those you apply to; perhaps the hundredth may take you kindly by the hand, and
say, "Come, I will assist you." The bank of England is rich; yet cannot pay me
for my son! -- The king is great, yet cannot restore to me my son!


Max. Sir, I pity you.


Har. I want not your pity. A rich man finds every where enough to pity him. But,
a tear! a tear -- I cannot weep. And no eye sheds a tear for my sorrows!


Max. That a man of such feelings should ask in vain, for compassion and
sympathy! --


Har. No, no -- cousins of every degree, are flocking about me; rubbing their
eyes with onions, and laughing behind their handkerchiefs; "So! old
Harrington!" -- say they, "is now childless! A rich interitance! turned of
seventy! he cannot weather it long!"


Max. Poor man!


Har. Poor, indeed! yes sir, though master of more than half a million of money;
I may envy you who crave my charity. People have too long misnamed me, the rich
Harrington. But nobody knew what was the only riches I valued: nobody knew,
that my George, my only child, was, to me, all my wealth!


Max. And this son died?


Har. Ah! had he but died; -- had but a fever cut him off; -- I might then have
passed some weeks in nursing him, by his bedside: hope might have contented
for a while, with fear, in my bosom: and if his illnes had been increased, in
spite of all our cares, to the last agony; paternal affection might have wrung
from my heart, this last prayer; Oh God! end his sufferings!" -- But, thus!
thus in the bloom of youth -- in all the flash and vigor of health -- he was
drowned, Sir, was drowned yesterday while bathing! --


Max. Unhappy father! --


Har. No more a father -- Yesterday, when the sun rose, my sun lived -- Today,
no one bade me -- Good Morrow! I stand alone, on the brink of the cold yawning
grave -- There is none to take me by that hand, and bid me -- goodnight, while
I descend into the dark and silent abode! --


Max. And, was there no means to save him? --


Har. None.


Max. The Humane Society --?


Har. Could --


Max. Have not hundreds been recovered by the means of this benevolent
institution?


Har. True -- I am myself a member of the Society -- I have known the joy of
restoring a husband to his wife, a son to his mother. I may say, in truth, that
I was ever one of the most active members. My associates eagerly flew to
attempt the recovery of my son. No means was left untried. For hours I hung
over his breathless body, pressed his palid lips with mine, and employed every
conceivable art to rekindle the flame of life -- in vain. -- I kneeled till my
knees were stiffened: till my voice was hoarse -- I called on the God of mercy.
God heard me not -- No, he heard me not. I have lost my all. Nothing remains to
me, but money, money, which I would give all away ten thousand times -- to hear
but once more the voice of my son, even as he called to me for the last time,
"Father!" -- from the stream -- Go, sir, leave me, leave me alone! You have
made me to open my lips to complain! -- And I had resolved not to complain! --
You have brought, burning tears into my eyes! -- and I had determined not to
weep. No, my grief shall suffocate me in silence. And should you still talk of
misfortunes, after having thus seen the lacerated bleeding heart of a father,
then, sir -- then you are a common beggar! (Arises and withdraws)


Max. He wrongs me, cruelly wrongs me. But his heart is full. All his
sensibilities are absorbed in the contemplation of his own griefs. But, it is
surely less miserable to see one's darling child lie dead before you -- than to
behold that child pine away by inches, and perish for hunger. -- Time passes.
-- Once I could feel for the sufferings of others. The tale now whistles by my
ears, but cannot touch my writhing heart.


SCENE V.
MAXWELL accosts DUMFRIES. Max. Sir, you are, I believe, a man of business.


Dum. I am a man of business, sir.


Max. You may, perhaps, want a person who can write and calculate accounts,
understands book-keeping by double and single entry, and is master of the
French and English languages.


Dum. ( after viewing him) Upon what terms, pray would you expect to be
employed?


Max. I ask but a bare maintenance.


Dum. That is to be obtained.


Max. My benefactor! -- my deliverer!


Dum. Are you willing to go out to India?


Max. (alarmed) To India! --


Dum. If you can give me a respectable reference for your character; I am
willing to procure you a writer's place in the service of the East India
company.


Max. I am married.


Dum. That is against you.


Max. I have a child and a mother who is old and blind.


Dum. Then you will not do for me. But if you can leave your wife, and your
child, and your mother, you may go on board within a few days.


Max. Leave my wife and child? -- my life sooner! --


Dum. Who talks of your leaving life, Sir?


Max. Sir I cannot leave them.


Dum. As you please. ( He knocks out his pipe) Think over the matter by
yourself. You are not the first man that has left a wife and a child. You will
not be the last. Beware of losing an opportunity, such as may not, every day,
recur to you. You will find me, every morning, at the Golden Anchor, near
Grovenors-Square. ( Exit.)


( The GAMBLERS rise from the table in the back ground, and withdraw.) SCENE VI.
MAXWELL Alone. Max. O God! thou openest to me, a path of escape out of this
maze of suffering -- but, a path I cannot tread! -- Leave Arabella! -- Leave my
mother, aged and blind! -- No: -- Never! ( He walks about wildly) Are there no
other means? Cannot I take a brush, and present myself to clean people's shoes,
as they pass? No honest shift that will supply bread to my family, can be
disgraceful. (Pauses) Or, shall I follow the gambler, and make myself his
accomplice in robbery? Would it be an unpardonable crime, to commit an act of
robbery -- but for once in my life? -- And this, to prevent all that is dear to
me, from perishing for hunger? -- No, Maxwell! think of the noble soul of thy
wife! Do not wound her heart with worse than the pangs of death. ( Pauses
again) That gentleman was in the right: better, better far, to leave wife and
child, than by my presence, to enhance their sufferings. Must they not live
without me, because I cannot live without them? I will be gone: I will go to
India. Fool! Will that give them bread? Oh! could I, but by any honest means,
secure to them subsistence; I would set off for India, this moment. They might
weep for my absence. But, if they had only bread to eat; what, though they
should moisten it with their tears? ( Again a pause) O God! thou who feedest
the fowls of the air, who clothest the callow young in the nest! -- pour but
one ray of cheering light into my soul! Show me only a protector for my wife! (
He gazes wildly around him) Faces, every where, -- human faces but, no men --
no humanity! ( Shudders) Ah! there! Walwyn comes. (With a faint hollow voice)
Walwyn! ( Stops as if suddenly rooted to the ground, and pores with downcast
eyes) What was this? What darted through my brain? Oh -- h -- h! I shudder at
the thought! Let me grasp thee, thou terrible stranger! -- Thou wearest a
hideous mask! Yet art, perhaps, destined the savior of my wife. Stay! Let me
accustom myself to thy view! (pauses) Well, and what matters it? Thou go to
India -- art dead to Arabella -- but, wilt live in her remembrance, while Harry
lives -- Thy blind and aged mother is provided for -- Happy! ( deeply affected)
happy! Why not? Is she to be miserable, because I am so? Do thou love her as
dearly as she deserves? ( with mild dignity) Well, then, true love is capable
of sacrificing even itself. ( pauses) No, it is not any malignant influence,
imposing on my disordered fancy! This is the path which fate points out -- the
only one. No tenderness for my own feelings, shall draw me back. ( casts a look
toward Walwyn) Oh God! let me find him as I wish! -- as I wish? No, as I am
forced to wish! --


SCENE VII.
Enter WALWYN. Max. (in great agitation, walks up to him, and grasps his hand)
Good Walwyn! how fortunate it is to me, that you happen to come this way!


Wall. I shall rejoice if I can make it so.


Max. I have much to say to you.


Wall. Shall I attend you to my house?


Max. ( looks around) We are alone, I must give my heart vent.


Wall. You are exceedingly agitated. Say, how can I serve you?


Max. You this morning offered me your assistance.


Wall. Sincerely, from my heart.


Max. And soon after sent me a most generous present.


Wall. You mistake, Maxwell.


Max. I do not. These lines (producing Walwyn's letter from his pocket) are in
your own handwriting. -- They have indelibly impressed themselves upon my
heart. They bespeak the worth of the man whom I robbed of the object of his
love, the man who ought to hate me!


Wall. How could I hate the man who has made Arabella happy?


Max. I am, indeed, deeply affected by the delicacy of your conduct; Your
magnanimity overpowers me. I was never accustomed to receive favors. Take back
your present. (forces the paper into his hand)


Wall. Why, Maxwell, since you know that I mean well, should you disdain my
assistance?


Max. I shall not scruple to lay open my heart to you. It is not haughty
disdain; it is self-torturing caprice -- But my feelings are those of man; and
I will not strive against them -- Walwyn -- of all human beings, you are the
last, whose assistance I would accept.


Wall. Unreasonable caprice!


Max. Is it caprice? can a man of such feelings name it so; when my whole heart
revolts with horror, against the idea of assistance from you? My Arabella loved
you -- To assist us, would give you a degree of merit, in the eyes of my wife,
which I could not patiently think of. Could I look upon her without shame and
anguish, while her conscious looks might seem to tell me -- that we were
supported by the bounty of him, who was once, my rival in her love? Could I
bear to reflect -- could I suffer her to reflect, while I eat each meal --
"This morsel we owe to Walwyn: but for his charity, we might starve?" -- No,
no, generous man, I should thank you, and -- hate you!


Wall. Maxwell, drive all such thoughts from your mind. Your misfortunes have
disordered your imagination. What are a thousand pounds to me? Besides, it is
but a loan. A man like you, must soon rise by industry and activity, above
misfortune. You shall, at a future time, repay my money -- with interest, if
you will have it so.


Max. And, to whose hand, should I then owe my restoration from ruin?


Wall. But, Maxwell, will you leave your family to the agonies of extreme want;
rather than suppress these overrefined feelings?


Max. You mistake me, Walwyn, my family shall not be left to pine in want. It
is but for myself, I refuse your proffered kindness. Me you shall not relieve;
-- me alone!


Wall. Whom else?


Max. ( pausing endeavors to summon up all his firmness) Walwyn, I have an
important question to put to you -- a most interesting question!


Wall. ( with anxious expectation) Well?


Max. Do you still love Arabella?


Wall. ( evasively) Why?


Max. By your belief in that Infinite and Supreme Being, who is in us and about
us -- by your benevolence and my despair -- I conjure you, answer me sincerely!
-- Do you still love Arabella?


Wall. Good God! Maxwell, what means this? -- Your lips tremble -- Your eyes
roll --


Max. You would force upon me a present of a thousand pounds -- Will you not,
in mercy, utter a few syllables to relieve my despair? Pity these agonies, this
almost alienation of mind, under which you behold me! --


Wall. Though I am at a loss to conceive, how my answer can give you relief; yet
your demand is so earnest and so singular, and my feelings are so pure and
sanctified that I do not hesitate a moment to confess -- I still love Arabella.


Max. Is your love but a pensive remembrance? -- Or is it lively as the
cherished dream of yesterday? have the colors of the picture faded? -- or are
they still bright and vivid?


Wall. A man, who has for these eight years, studiously avoided all intercourse
with you -- a man who has religiously respected the rights of the husband, and
the virtue of the wife -- may answer without hesitation; -- I still love her,
as on the first day I wished her mine! She was my all; she is so still; till
death, she shall continue so! -- I have now answered you, Maxwell. But, why
would you urge the enquiry? Why strive to make old wounds bleed afresh, or
inflict new ones?


Max. I have gained what I wished. The decisive moment is come. ( after a
pause, he proceeds) Walwyn* will you be a son to my mother -- a father to my
son -- a husband to my Arabella?


Wall. What is your meaning?


Max. Yes: these are the conditions. Give me, with the faith of a brother, your
hand; and promise, that you will support my old blind mother, and will bear
with the frailties of her humor; promise that you will form my Harry's mind --
will bring him up to be an honest man, and will provide for him, if I shall be
myself unable to do it!


Wall. Maxwell, whither does your imagination wander?


Max. And lastly, you must pledge to me your solemn oath, that you will make
Arabella happy! Vain fool! he has loved her these eight years, even while she
was mine; as his own, he will adore her! -- No, this oath is unnecessary.


Wall. Recollect your bewildered senses, -- Thou art beside thyself. Do thou
meditate suicide?


Max. I do not; why should I anticipate the work of hunger or despair? -- I am
in my right senses, good Walwyn! I know what I am doing. For these three days I
have in vain sought to find the means of earning subsistence for my family. I
must either see them starve -- or must beg or steal for them. At last, however,
I have found a man who will supply sustenance to myself, if I choose to go to
India.


Wall. And you are willing --


Max. Yes -- to go -- if Walwyn promise to be to my wife, and child, and
mother, the guardian and protector I can prove no longer! -- Go! -- if in thee,
Walwyn, I may leave behind me a brother!


Wall. Nay, remain here; and you shall experience me a a brother!


Max. Never more shall my eyes view my native shore -- Never shall my woe-worn
aspect disturb your tranquillity. Should my unwearying industry be one day
rewarded with the acquisition of some small property -- I will write to you;
and you shall send my Harry to me, -- but not, till you are yourself a father,
-- till he is no more the only filial object of my mother's love -- Walwyn! I
have yet one hope left, I am not utterly bereft of every good. An hour may yet
come, when happiness shall be mine. Figure to yourself the grey-haired father,
awaiting as he stands on the banks of the Ganges, the arrival of his son. (With
enthusiasm) A youth spring upon the shore -- I advance with feeble steps to
meet him I behold my Arabella's features. -- I sink into his arms -- Oh,
moments of rapture, sufficient to repair long years of misery!


Wall. Dear Maxwell, your distresses have disordered your mind. A mist swims
before your fancy; -- and through it, you see none but forms of horror. These
are unreal visions. All will yet be cleared up. Confide in me. Call not that a
favor, which I feel myself irresistibly urged to give. If you are still
obstinate in the refusal of gratuitous assistance; let me call upon my friends;
you shall not want for opportunities of earning bread for your family by your
own exertion -- the harder the exertion the better -- if so, you will have it.


Max. Well, then, do what you can. Procure me but the lowest meanest place. Let
this triumph be yours! I will endure it. But, if this way you cannot save me;
-- then abandon me to the storm of fate, and be Arabella's husband! Do you
promise me?


Wall. Ah! unhappy, disordered mind!


Max. Promise me, good Walwyn! -- Plight your faith to this unhappy being,
before you! ( holds out his arms in a suppliant attitude)


Wall. Is your intention known to Arabella?


Max. Not yet.


Wall. You expect her to consent?


Max. If duty no longer attach her to me; her love for you will revive.


Wall. Go! tell her what you intend.


Max. I have then your promise.


Wall. (giving his hand) You have?


Max. With this pressure of my hand, I betroth her to thee. (he becomes faint,
and clings to Walwyn's arm) Ha! I am now strong again; my family are saved.
Walwyn I thank thee! ( he sinks down almost upon his knees) -- Why do thou
stagger, wrethed body? The spirit thou shall not prostrate. ( sinks down)


Wall. For Gods's sake, Maxwell, how is it with you?


Max. I scorn the pangs of hunger -- Victory! -- my family are saved!


Wall. Why, man! you are faint with hunger! -- with hunger!


Max. (Very faint) For these two days -- (exerting all his strentgth) Victory!
my family are saved!


Wall. (snatches from the table a full glass of wine, which Harrington had left
upon it) Cruel man! -- drink! drink! --


Max. May I drink? my family still thirst!


Wall. Drink -- and rely on my word!


Max. I do rely on thy word. drinks.


Wall. Shall I send for a sedan-chair?


Max. No, good Walwyn, I am not ill. Let me but rest a moment longer on this
ground. It is my native earth! These flowers are the same as those which I
delighted, when a child, to see in their full bloom.


Wall. You torture me, Maxwell! Let me call a physician!


Max. Thou, thou art my physician! ( Stretches out his hand) Assist me to rise:
see! I stand! Nay, legs do not totter! -- Think not that the wine refreshed me
-- brother: it was your promise -- the saving of my family -- this was the
reviving potion. -- Yet it shook me and cast me down.


Wall. Your want of food --


Max. Pray speak not of my want of food -- What I have suffered, is so
trifling, that it deserves not to be mentioned. Hear me, Walwyn, stoop down and
hear me -- For these five weeks, Arabella has worked day and night. Her eyes
are red and heavy. Her fingers are pierced to the bone. She this morning laid
her hand on mine -- ( in a whisper) -- Look here, this is her blood! -- Can you
now conceive, what burns within me? -- Arabella's blood is on my hand! -- with
her blood, she has supported my mother and my child. To her, I in return,
sacrifice more than my life! -- my love! What a wife I resign to you! I will go
to her -- see her for the last time -- prepare her for your visit. Within an
hour, I shall expect you, Farewell! my benefactor! an hour hence, you shall
reverence me -- as your benefactor! (walks feebly off)


SCENE VIII.
WALWYN alone. (Looks long after him) God forbid, I should: Yes, I will see her
once more -- but, without making myself unworthy of that happiness. Be still my
heart -- do thou want fortitude? fear not; I shall see her bleeding fingers;
and every motion, but those of exalted virtue will die away within me. Walwyn,
save the beloved of thy soul -- restore to her arms the husband and the father!
-- Then may thine own heart whisper to thee -- thou wast worthy of her love.
Exit hastily.


END OF THE SECOND ACT.
ACT III.
SCENE I.
MAXWELL's Apartments. ARABELLA alone. She is at Work. Pope's Essay on Man,
lies open before her. After reading a Passage, she pauses, and seems to reflect
upon it. POETRY! how exalted are they ends, if thou can give comfort to the
wretched! excellent Pope! why do not all the unfortunate get by heart thy
verses?

( Reads.) "Go, wiser thou! and in thy scale of sense,
"Weigh thy opinion against Providence;
"Call imperfection, what thou fancy'st such;
"Say, -- here he gives too little, -- there too much!"
Shame on thee, Arabella! thou, also, have murmured! ( Turns the leaf and
reads.)

"What nothing earthly gives or can destroy,
"The soul's calm sunshine, and the heartfelt joy,
"Is virtue's prize" --
Yes I know this calm. It refuses not to reside in the house of want. It even
now cheers my bosom!

SCENE II.
Enter JANE. Jane. O dear madam! in the street, just now, I was accosted by a
gentleman, who asked me whether I was not the servant of Mrs. Maxwell. Oh! he
said a great deal about you, -- a great deal indeed!


Arab. Do you know who he is?


Jane. I cannot say I do, -- but he must needs know you; for he asked me to
tell him all about you; and while I spoke, he listened with an air of deep
devotion* as one might do at prayers. His face glowed whenever he pronounced
your name. Yet he was sad, and his cheeks were wet with tears.


Arab. Say no more, Jane! (Aside) Ah! it was Walwyn!


Jane. He asked me, too, if you were in want of money?


Arab. I hope you did not --


Jane. Heaven forbid! -- No, says I, my mistress works night and day! and, says
I, if you should want any ruffles or handkerchiefs, my mistress embroiders
wonderfully neat and cheap. He now seemed quite beside himself for joy; and
told me to go, fetch my goods, quick, quick, and ask for him at the next
coffeehouse.


Arab. ( In confusion) You know, Jane, I sold the last this morning; -- I must
now spare my fingers for a few days. Go! do not let the good gentleman wait in
vain.


Jane. With what an air of disappointment will he look, when he sees that I
bring him nothing!


SCENE III.
ARABELLA Alone. Is this my boasted peace? this the virtue on which I valued
myself? At the name of a stranger my heart throbs, and the blood rushes into my
cheeks. A stranger! Is Walwyn to me a stranger? Can he ever be as a stranger to
me? Oh, God! thou know whether he deserved it. (weeps gently) Oh, I still
love him; he was my first, my only love. Reason, and a daughter's duty might
deny him my hand, but could not banish him from my heart. Can it be a crime
that I, in vain strive to forget him! -- No, Walwyn, no, thou excellent and
generous man, to whom I once plighted my faith and who did so nobly release
it; thy resignation -- thy silent suffering -- the magnanimity thou have this
day displayed -- where is the way of captivating a woman's heart -- if; it be
not this?


SCENE IV.
Enter MAXWELL. Arab. ( endeavors to assume an air of serenity) Welcome, dear
Robert!


Maxwell. ( Walks* backward and forward in violent emotion, then stops before
her, and attempts several times to speak, but is still unable.)


Arab. What is the matter? something oppresses your mind!


Max. ( with a faint and hollow voice, repeats the words) Welcome! dear Robert!
( after a long pause) Tell me, Arabella, would you feel it hard, to say,
"farewell, dear Robert!"


Arab. What a question! -- Death alone can command husband and wife to bid each
other farewell!


Max. It is not always so -- There are cases, in which reason and their mutual
love may command a wedded pair to part.


Arab. Reason! -- That you men know -- Love is better understood by us. And it
is the command of love to husband and wife -- "Journey on, hand in hand,
together to the grave."


Max. Can you suppose, Arabella, that aught but love for you, can thus oppress
my heart, thus convulsively strain my whole frame?


Arab. To what does all this lead?


Max. We -- must part.


Arab. We?


Max. I have found a place -- I go to India.


Arab. ( in terrified alarm) To India? ( collecting herself) Well, I go with
you.


Max. No, Arabella; that cannot, must not be.


Arab. Where then, must I remain?


Max. Here, with my mother, with Harry.


Arab. I cheerfully submit to any trial which fate imposes: but that you, also,
should try me! --


Max. Hear me, dearest, best of wives! I have summoned up all my remaining
strength of mind. Interrupt me not; for it is extremely difficult for me to
pursue any connected chain of ideas. Hear the unalterable resolution which the
iron hand of necessity has compelled me to take -- Might I even take you with
me: Were I capable of draging you, in return for all that you have sacrificed
for me, into a foreign land -- Yet, my mother, my poor old mother, must not be
left blind, forlorn, and helpless. Can I, at once, deprive her of daughter,
son, and grandson? -- Can I abandon her to public charity? Must her eyes flow
with anguish, when they can no longer light her steps? You and her little
darling may assist her to endure the loss of me! You will not forsake her --
no, not even then, when you no longer bear her name!


Arab. No longer bear her name!


Max. Arabella, this is an awful hour; -- To me, who have in your arms, enjoyed
the divinest bliss of love -- to me, who, to preserve you mine, would gladly
shed my life's blood to its last drop -- to me your welfare is ten thousand
times more precious than my own -- Oh! Oh! -- I bid farewell to far more than
life -- when I thus solemnly renounce you!


Arab. You! -- renounce me!


Max. Cursed be the wretch, who, when his own hopes, his own joys are in the
scale -- and in the other the happiness of her he loves -- can a moment
hesitate to make himself the sacrifice! -- You gave me your hand, because your
father declared, that he should not, otherwise have peace in his mind. And
should not I resign that hand, when your welfare, your preservation, demand
this of me? Did you love your father with affection more sincere than mine for
you? -- Away! ye boasted heroes of antiquity! who knew not to die for those who
were dear to you! -- I shall do what requires a far harder effort -- resign my
wife into the arms of another husband -- hide my face -- and hie me hence!


Arab. God of mercy! has suffering distracted him to madness?


Max. Hear me! Oh, hear me to a close! I release thee from the vows of
connubial faith! -- erase from thy youth, these last eight years! -- Forget
what thou wast to me -- but, ah! forget not my love! -- You are again free:
free to dispose of your hand and your heart! -- Walwyn still loves you: --
Reward his unshaken constancy. -- Be his wife -- his happy wife! -- But, ah!
forget not my love! He will be a father to Harry! -- to my mother, a son! --
These duties he has sworn to perform! -- His tenderness will revive the fading
roses on Arabella's cheeks -- She shall, yet, remember, with delight, the
sweets of her early love. And, while hand in hand, you move onward together, in
a path strewed with flowers, -- Oh, do not, do not then forget my love!


Arab. (throws herself into his arms) Most generous, most heroic of men! how
little have I known thy worth! to what a giddy height do thou call me to look
up to the elevation of thy sentiments! -- I supposed that I had thoroughly
known all the worth and magnanimity of your mind; it is a temple awful and
sublime, above human imagination, which you open to my view! -- Forsake you! I
forsake you! -- No! -- Had I even never loved you before; this day, this day
alone, would knit my heart to yours, with indissoluble ties!! -- I can also
distinguish what is noble and good. I can feel all the value of what you would
do for me. To feel it is my pride -- my shame. I forsake you! -- Do but try to
tear yourself from me! -- I will still cling to you. Under every zone, will I
attend and serve you! Under the south pole, I will defy the arrows of the
inhospitable savage; amid the cold horrors of the farthest north, I will dig
for you a cave in the snows! --


Max. ( deeply affected) Arabella!


Arab. You would go to India! -- Would see Indian wives throw themselves, with
triumph, to perish on the funeral pile of a husband! -- How must you then,
scorn the faithless English wife, who could throw her husband from her arms, to
wander alone, through the world; because he was -- not harsh -- not unfaithful
-- but poor!


Max. Arabella!


Arab. You are the father of my child! You have taught me to know the enjoyment
of maternal love -- the dearest upon earth! Do you fancy that I would purchase
wealth at the price of ingratitude? It may be, that the world would not
reproach me. To gold, the world will pardon any crime. -- A dinner, a ball,
will purchase friends, and panegyrists, in any number -- But -- here -- here
(laying her hand on her breast) -- is there a more wretched -- a more
despicable being, than she who dares not look within -- who cannot look upon
the horrors of her own heart, without starting back aghast? Want and hunger may
unnerve my strength; my conscience defies their power -- No! -- father of my
child, I quit thee not! (clasps him in her arms.)


Max. ( pressing her to his bosom) O God! what a moment of felicity have thou
vouchsafed to me! -- Ye great ones, ye deities of the earth, behold and envy!
-- Angel-woman! -- I had thought that I knew and prized the full measure of thy
worth! -- How much do thou exceed my boldest expectations! Enough, Arabella;
it is enough! ( withdrawing from her arms) We cannot arrest the movements of
the wheel of fate. I have no choice between parting and starving -- Lament me
as a husband, whom death has ravished from you. The worthy Walwyn will not
chide your tears.


Arab. How! Still this sad purpose?


Max. It is fixed.


Arab. But, if you have solemnly renounced me -- I as solemnly declare, that I
cannot renounce you. Go! -- embark! -- Shall I think you, find no ship to
convey a disconsolate wife, after her husband, to India? With my Harry by my
side, will I ask alms at the harbor -- With my Harry in my hand, I will
present myself before the first captain who is about to sail -- I solemnly vow,
Robert, I will follow thee. So may God, hear my dearest prayers!


Max. Wife of my heart, drive me not to despair -- Force me not to seek refuge
in a country to which thou can not follow me.


Arab. There is no such country.


Max. ( muttering) Beyond the grave.


Arab. Even there will I follow thee.


Max. Mother of my Henry, thou have a son!


Arab. And thou have a mother!


Max. Arabella, I understand your meaning -- You would make the sacrifice
easier to me. I would renounce -- even your love -- You ask -- but my life! --


Arab. You are ill, Robert -- very ill! -- I will go for Harry. He shall effect
that which I have attempted in vain, drive away the fiend of melancholy, and
smile hope into your heart! Exit hastily.


SCENE V.
MAXWELL alone. Die? -- Yes; it is easier far to die. Thanks, thou best of
women? Thou have pronounced the sentence of my death! -- No: into that unknown
country, thou will not follow me. Thy helpless child is the pledge that thou will live: -- Ha! thou have lightened my breast of a mountain's weight, How the
pleasure of this new idea glows through my whole frame! -- A freezing coldness
chilled my blood. But Arabella has breathed a divine spark that electerizes my
whole body and soul. -- Yes! my death will put all again into its due order. --
She will weep -- oh, she will weep! But time will combine her in happy union,
with the object of her first love -- an union that will dry up all her tears.
And, when returning spring shall dress with flowers the turf that covers my
poor remains, she will give her hand, over my grave, to the worthy Walwyn! --
and now, Robert, thou have well nigh drained the cup of sorrows -- Will thou
now shrink with loathing from the last dregs? Am I as one of those fools whom a
satiety of sensual enjoyment drives, to rid themselves of an existence of which
they are unworthy? as those idiots of superstition who cast themselves, to be
crushed under the chariot wheels of their idol! -- No! I die for my wife, for
the beloved of my soul! I die for my mother! for my child! Let the marble
statue, the brazen bust, be consecrated to him who dies for his country! -- My
grave will not be always unhonoured, should it even be dug in a cross-way! --


SCENE VI.
Enter ARABELLA, leading HARRY by the hand. Arab. ( in a tone of soothing
gentleness) Here is Harry. He entreats you to remember, that you are his father!


Har. (carressing his father) I have not seen you for a long while.


Max. ( absorbed in gloomy enthusiasm, without looking at the child) Boy, what
call thou a long while? -- Break the frame through which the soul at so dear
a rate acquires its perceptions -- and time and space are vanished!


Arab. Harry, your father intends to go on a journey.


Har. Will Not you take me along with you, father?


Max. No, Harry.


Har. Are you going far?


Max. The swallow journeys after the spring.


Har. Will you soon return?


Max. Every thing returns. The crumbling dust revives in flowers.


Har. Will Not you bring me something?


Max. What I yet have I leave to you -- my blessing!


Arab. Robert, cease from torturing me thus -- For these some weeks past, I
thought I suffered much -- to day, however, I feel that to have been little!


Max. Have patience with me -- it shall soon be otherwise -- soon. (Muttering)
Man! why delay? (He looks sorrowfully upon Harry, lifts him up and kisses his
forehead) God bless thee my son! (Approaches Arabella, takes her hands and
eagerly kisses her fingers) Accept my thanks my dearest wife! (He turns away
from her, puts his hands, with trembling emotion, on Harry's head, and utters
in agony) God bless thee, my son! (Then, throwing himself into Arabella's arms)
Thanks to you, dearest wife! (Now raises his weeping eyes to heaven) Oh, God!
these last tears are yet bitterer than I imagined*


Arab. Robert! what is it you mean to do? Robert, pity my distress!


Max. Be comforted, Arabella, I go not to India.


Arab. May I trust that you do not? --


Max. I do not! -- I have yet a friend whom I had shamefully forgotten. To him
will I go -- from him will I entreat assistance, Pray for me, that he may
receive me kindly!


Arab. A friend? -- You deceive me?


Max. Ah, Arabella! this hour allows not deception!


Arab. Who is he? where is he? why have you never named him to me?


Max. Because in our prosperity, our best friends are often slighted. Yet, fear
not; he will receive me kindly; his arms are ever open to the wretched!


Arab. Then, go; and your good angel attend you!


Max. I go, guided by the angel of love! -- Farewell, Arabella! -- When next we
meet, we shall be happy!


Arab. God grant we may!


Max. ( Takes both her hands, and shakes them, in great anguish) Till we meet
again --


Arab. It will be soon.


Max. At break of day. ( He retires into a corner, wrings his hands
unconsciously, makes a severe effort to restrain his tears, undergoes with deep
agony the struggle of parting, at last summons up his fortitude, and says) The
hardest task is over! -- Now to my mother! ( Rushes into his mother's room.)


Arab. (Kneeling, raises her eyes and hands to heaven.)


Har. What are you doing, Mother?


Arab. I pray for your father.


Har. I will also pray for him. ( Kneels down by his mother. After some
moments, Maxwell rushes out of his mother's room. He is going; but at sight of
his wife and child, stops in great agitation. He stands as if rooted to the
ground: the muscles of his face are convulsed; his wild, maddened agony
dissolves at last into tears. He slowly, and with trembling emotion, lifts up
his hands, presses them to his eyes, and reels off.)


SCENE VII.
Enter the MOTHER of MAXWELL, grouping her way. Moth. Robert! what means this?
-- Is no one here?


Arab. (Arising from the posture of prayer) Dear mother, we are here.


Moth. You and my son?


Arab. I and Harry.


Moth. Where is my son?


Arab. Gone to a friend.


Moth. But why was he so deeply affected when he took leave of me?


Arab. He is uneasy in mind, today.


Moth. Comes bursting into my room -- kisses my hand -- wets it with his tears
-- bids me farewell -- thanks me for my love -- says I shall not want -- then
runs off before I can even ask him -- "Robert, what means this?" -- And after
all, he goes to a friend! -- One should have thought he was going to die!


Arab. (Starts with violent emotion) God forbid!


Moth. Is it right thus to alarm an old, feeble mother? Every limb of me yet
shakes with the fright. Come, Harry, lead me back to my chair, that I may
recover myself. (Exeunt.)


Arab. ( Stands for some time in amazed and speechless anguish, occasioned by
the idea which the old woman's words would have awakened in her mind) No, no --
he will not -- three other lives, he knows, depehd upon his. ( Steps to the
table, and turns several leaves in the book upon it, while her looks are fixed
on the ground) No -- that he never will do. ( She strives to compose her mind,
sits down at the tambour-frame, and begins to work: but her agitation is
renewed; her tears fall; she rises) My tears will spoil my work. ( Takes up her
knitting-needles; but her arms sink down) Robert! Robert! thou have unnerved my
last strength; I can work no more; I can only pray!


SCENE VIII.
Enter WALWYN. Arab. (Perceiving him, starts convulsively) Ha, Walwyn!


Wall. (Approaching with a modest and timed air) After eight years of
separation, I again see Arabella.


Arab. (Endeavoring to compose herself) Arabella Maxwell is happy to receive
an old friend in her house.


Wall. The title of your friend invests me with precious rights.


Arab. Your own magnanimity has this day invested you with rights still
superior. Accept the thanks which, as a mother and a wife, I owe you.


Wall. Arabella's thanks were to me an invaluable prize -- had not the offer for
which they were made, been disdained!


Arab. That offer was not less a favor. It flowed I know, from the purest
motives.


Wall. This testimony gives me pride. But I am conscious, that I have deserved
it. (With animation) Yes, Arabella, I am yet entirely such as I was eight years
since. Fortune has, indeed, made me rich; but my heart, my soul, are still the
same. ( He perceives Arabella to be under embarrassment, and moderates his
ardour) Pardon, me for having hinted at what is no more to be mentioned. At
sight of you, I felt as an old man might do, who meeting with an ancient
friend, remembers his spring of life. -- And I seemed to myself, for the
moment, to grow young again. Ah, no wonder, that your dear image should to me
dissolve into a dream, the realities of eight long years: and should, with the
efficacy of enchantment bring back the moment, when you last gave me your hand.
Your cheeks were then, as now, pale; tears then flowed from your eyes as now.


Arab. And I then entreated of you, as I now do to spare me.


Wall. For eight long years have I avoided your presence. The desire of your
husband, brings me, this day, hither, Arabella! Oh know you but the hopes he
would teach me to conceive! No, never did the tempter wear a more seductive
guise! --


Arab. You allude to a wild idea, which my husband has recently hinted to me.


Wall. I guess that he kept his word!


Arab. You --


Wall. Heard him with amazement.


Arab. And let me hope -- corrected him -- gently --


Wall. Oh! Arabella!


Arab. That sigh -- this familiar address! -- Should I be mistaken in regard to
Walwyn? Should he be capable of trampling on the unfortunate wretch whom he
sees writhing at his feet, in the dust* then, oh, then would I be compelled to
let him look into my heart, -- then would I repeat to him those last words
which he heard, eight years since, from my lips. -- Do you still remember them!


Wall. They are imprinted on my heart.


Arab. Walwyn, I said, -- I love you. Fate unites me to another. Were you
capable of asking me to tear this bond asunder; -- did but one look of yours,
invite me to it: -- I should lose my last consolation -- the consolation of
loving and respecting you -- On my hand you pronounced the vow of virtue. --


Wall. Which I have ever kept sacred.


Arab. Holding your hand, I swore eternal fidelity to my husband. I, too, have
kept my oath. I do not say I have found the task a hard one; No: I have found
it easy; for, I possess a worthy man. For the first year, I might devote many a
secret tear to the remembrance of the sweet dreams of younger years; yet these
have been long assuaged by the new feelings of a mother's fondness. --
Maxwell's wild fancy of this day, might perhaps have been to me less
extravagant, before I was a mother. A childless pair might dare to part! But,
now, Walwyn, now, no power on earth can break asunder the bonds of my duty, --
No, not the power of love itself.


Wall. I have not interrupted you: for, where I love, I delight to admire. The
word escaped; but it came from the heart of a man who knows no wish of which he
can need to be ashamed. Arabella misunderstood me. I listened to your husband,
merely to gain time, to sooth the fever of his soul, to save him from the wild
phrenzy of despair. His sufferings have awakened within him, powers hitherto
unknown to himself, of which the newborn consciousness is pleasing. To
sacrifice himself for his wife -- is the splendid idea, on which he, at
present, delights to gaze till his mind's eye becomes blind to every ray of
other hope. -- It is for this, that his pride devises so many refined
pretensions for refusing the assitance of a friend. These would he scarce
resign for the sake of the salvation of his family and himself; for resigning
these, -- he would lose the idol of his fancy, created by love, nutured by want
and despair, raised by disordered nerves to be the tyrant of his soul. -- He
must be gently and softly led back from the precipice to which he is hurried.
As to the night-walker, -- we must not call him by his name, but, in silence
stretch out our arms, that if he fall, he may sink on the bosom of a friend!


Arab. (Deeply affected, gives him her hand) Excellent Walwyn! -- friend in
distress! -- how could I for a moment, mistake you! --


Wall. It is only misfortune that excites distrust against the man who once
possessed the heart of Arabella! --


Arab. And was worthy of possessing it! --


Wall. Wealth could not corrupt a heart sacred to you, I came to concert with
you, the means of saving Maxwell. without suffering it to appear the work of my
hand. Might we not devise some harmless artifice, -- the bequest of some
Nabob's fortune, -- or the fortunate gaining of some capital prize in the
lottery. Pray, assist me to find out something?


Arab. Generous man! this tear --


SCENE IX.
Enter JANE hastily. Jane, (out of breath) Oh madam! -- how I am frightened!


Arab. What is the matter?


Jane. There is a mob gathering in the streets.


Arab. Well?


Jane. They talk such dreadful things! -- They say -- they say -- that my
master --


SCENE X.
Enter LANDLORD, in a bustling manner. Landl. There now, -- a fine sight, -- a
fine credit to my house.


Arab. (anxiously) What is it you want, friend?


Landl. Want? Why, I want that the corpse be not dragged hither.


Arab. The corpse? Gracious God!


Wall. ( at the same time) Whose corpse?


Landl. Don't you know, then? Mr. Maxwell has thrown himself into the Thames.


Wall. Oh! too late!


Arab. ( drops upon the ground.)


Jane. (kneeling by Arabella, supports her head.)


Landl. The rent gone to the devil! --


Wall. Perhaps, there may be yet means of recovery.


Going. SCENE XI.
Enter JOHN HARTOPP. Heart. Of recovery? -- to be sure, there are. He is already
restored to life!


Wall. and Jane ( at the same time) Does he live?


Heart. As sure as my name is John Hartopp, -- he lives --


Jane. Did you hear, dear madam?


Arab. (Nods.)


Wall. Who saved him?


Heart. Why, -- I drew him out of the Thames --


Wall. You, friend? -- Pray take this. (Offers his purse)


Heart. Pshaw, pshaw! -- such things one don't like to be paid for. Besides, I
cannot say, after all, that it was I who saved him. For when I had laid him on
the bank, he was as dead as a herring. But, there is a society in London, do
you see, who will not let a brave fellow drown himself, without a struggle to
save him. Some of them were quite at hand. Great gentlemen! God knows who! They
instantly seized the body, and continued rubbing warming and blowing, till he
opened his eyes.


Wall. Whither did they carry him?


Heart. To the house of a rich wine-merchant, three doors from this. -- He was
the busiest of them all. -- He belongs also to the society. ( Walwyn exit in
haste) God's blessing on the worthy gentleman! When I perceived that life was
again stirring in him, I had his house shown me; for I am vastly fond of
bringing good news. -- That poor lady on the ground is his wife I dare say?


Arab. Yes; his wife.


Heart. Well! mistress, do not weep now. There is no more danger. His recovery
is sure.


Arab. ( gives her hand)


Heart. ( takes and shakes it heartily) An empty hand, and such a look with it,
pleases me better than the gentleman's full purse. I think my girl we should
help the good lady on her legs again. ( They lift Arabella up, and seat her on
a chair.)


SCENE XII.
Enter MAXWELL, WALWYN, and HARRINGTON. Max. ( Still of a death-like paleness
in his countenance -- his hair hanging down in disorder, -- his looks downcast,
-- is led by Walwyn to Arabella.)


Arab. (Attempting to rise, is unable, but sinks back, and holds out her arms)


Max. ( Kneel before her, and with involuntary feebleness, lays his head in her
lap)


Arab. ( Bends sobbing over him.)


Heart. (Wipes his eyes with his fingers awkwardly.)


Harrington. ( Stands lost in deep thought; and now and then casts a look on
the reunited pair.)


Max. ( Lifts up his head, and looks on Arabella with an expression of
anguish.)


Arab. ( Clasps his neck, and joins her cheek to his.)


Wall. (Beholds them with strong emotion.)


Heart. By my soul, it is the man, who this morning tried my load. He perhaps
carried heavier than I. --


Harring. Are you not the same person, who this morning asked my assistance in
the tea-garden?


Max. I am.


Harring. I am, then, perhaps, in part, tht author of your despair. I have much
to atone for. (Taking Walwyn aside) Sir, I know you to be an honest man. May I
entirely confide in the truth of what you just now mentioned?


Wall. You may, upon my honor! --


Harring. (To Maxwell, after a short pause) Sir, my son was yesterday drowned
in bathing. I have, this day saved your life. Today then, has God restored to
me a son. You, Sir, must supply the place of my lost child. I adopt you as mine.


Max. ( Turns to him, kneels, and with ardent emotions of gratitude, stretches
out his hands.)


Harring. I understand -- no words -- there is no need -- your excellent wife
will not she be my daughter?


Arab. ( Folds her hands and smiles.)


Harring. I understand -- it is settled -- I am not childless. -- God forgive
my murmurs.


Arab. (Sinks on her knees beside her husband, clasps him in her arms, and
presses him to her heart.)


Heart. Ha! the next load I shall have to carry will be as light as a feather! (
The curtain falls.)


THE END.

