THE WIDOW, AND THE RIDING HORSE. A DRAMATIC TRIFLE, IN ONE ACT.

TRANSLATED FROM THE GERMAN OF KOTZEBUE

NEW-Y0RK: PRINTED FOR CHARLES SMITH AND S. STEPHENS. 1800.

Advertisement.
THE following translation is the original, from which Mr, Dibdin, Junior,
formed the pleasant interlude of the HORSE AND THE WIDOW, as performed at
Covent Garden Theater.

The Translator has retained the German title of the WIDOW AND THE RIDING
HORSE, though not perhaps a strictly correct English one; but no English term
would sufficiently express all that the German is meant to include; since what
are classed in Germany, under the general description of Riding Horses, in
England would be divided into Saddle and Running Horses.

DRAMATIS PERSONAE.
THOMAS FULLARTON, Esquire. a Country Gentleman. ANGELICA, his Wife. COUNT VALCOUR,
a French Emigrant. RONSARD, his Servant. WARSIFAX, an Attorney. A GROOM.
The SCENE lies in England.

This little Piece is taken from an anecdote in Archenholz's Annals, vol. ix.
page 425.

THE WIDOW, AND THE RIDING HORSE.
SCENE I.
A saloon at FULLARTON's country seat. ANGELICA sitting upon a sopha, playing
with a hermit. The Hermit is a game common in Germany, and played by only one
person.

Translator.
ANGELICA. THIS game bears a strong resemblance to love; it pleases only while
it is new. After a while, the hand places every pin in its right place,
mechanically, without the attention's being engaged -- as in love the tongue
continues habitually to pronounce the tender names, " my life," and " my dear,"
long after all affection has ceased.


SCENE II.
Enter FULLARTON. Full. Your humble servant, madam.


Ang. Yours, sir.


Full. For ever with the hermit in your hands?


Ang. For ever with gloom upon your brow?


Full. The post is just arrived.


Ang. And the news it brings? --


Full. Is not very pleasing.


Ang. The vile republicans, I suppose, are still successful?


Full. The news I speak of relates to ourselves.


Ang. Are we still considered as among the living?


Full. Strange rumors are abroad.


Ang. From Holland?


Full. No, from London.


Ang. What concern have I with London?


Full. You profess to love monarchy, madam.


Ang. With my whole heart.


Full. Yet are a rebel in your own house.


Ang. That only proves that my husband is no monarch.


Full. So much the worse both for him and you.


Ang. So much the better. Monarchy may be very well in a state, but in wedlock,
give me the English constitution. Let the wife be the Parliament, the husband
the executive power.


Full. The Parliament should then learn to manage the finances better.


Ang. What do you mean?


Full. The particulars of my father's will are not unknown to you.


Ang. Oh, no! -- I know them well! [Yawns.]


Full. He left me a fortune of eighty thousand pounds.


Ang. He showed himself a man of judgment.


Full. But under the express conditions that I should never marry a WIDOW, or
keep a RIDING-HORSE.


Ang. Ridiculous whims.


Full. That is not so clear. He knew the national failing, and was not
insensible to my propensity to horse-racing. Many a lord has been reduced to a
pedestrian, solely from keeping too many horses.


Ang. And what was the objection to widows?


Full. That clause was dictated by his own woeful experience.


Ang. No great flattery to your mother.


Full. Let the dead rest in peace. In short, my father irrevocably ordained,
that in case of my failing in either of these conditions, the whole fortune
should revert to my cousin.


Ang. I have heard that about a hundred times.


Full. But your memory is so faithless, that I must take the liberty of
repeating it for the hundred and first time.


Ang. Do you know which of all the animals that inhabit the earth is the most
tiresome?


Full. Well? --


Ang. An Englishman.


Full. Humph! -- Since you are so learned in zoology, you probably know also
what the most thoughtless and ungrateful of all creatures are called?


Ang. Well? --


Full. French women.


Ang. Give vent to your spleen as freely as you please, sir; but don't expect
that I should stay and listen to it.


Full. Yes, madam, I do expect that you should stay! -- that you should listen
while I lead back your attention to that unhappy day when I first saw you in
Flanders in a miserable cottage, a prey to the severest want, with no remains
of your former splendour, save the empty title of countess.


Ang. Did not Francis the first, after the battle of Pavia, write to his
mother, " We have lost every thing but our honor?"


Full. Your melancholy situation made a stronger impression upon me, even than
your beauty.


Ang. Then you do allow me to be handsome?


Full. Alas! -- men are, with respect to women, like strangers cast upon a
desert island; prone to taste of every fruit that looks fair to the eye, though
perhaps they are eating what may prove their bane.


Ang. A true husband's compliment. Indeed, my dear Mr. Fullarton, you might
take out a patent for making fine speeches.


Full. Joke, if you please; but to me the recollection is fatally serious. My
compassion awakened, love but too soon followed.


Ang. A splendid triumph for my charms.


Full. I made you an offer of my hand --


Ang. Which necessity compelled me to accept.


Full. Necessity! -- But even this confession, insulting as it is, shall be
turned to your shame. Your husband had died for his native country upon the
field of honor, as you were pleased to inform me, and left you wholly
destitute. I imparted to you the conditions of my father's will, showed you
what hazards I was ready to run for your sake, and explained the necessity of
your former situation remaining a profound secret.


Ang. Well! -- and I have never revealed it.


Full. Not in plain and positive terms; but scarcely do we eat a single meal
without my being reminded, by hints and allusions, of the superior merits of
the dear deceased -- nay even in mixed companies do you not perpetually refer
to the same subject, in broken sentences that can scarcely be mistaken.


Ang. It Is impossible to weigh every word one utters.


Full. When a word may cost eighty thousand pounds, I should think it worth the
trouble of weighing.


Ang. Really you wear out my patience.


Full. Then mine may be called to your assistance; for it has been so long kept
in constant exercise, that it is now grown callous against fatigue.


Ang. Gallant again.


Full. But to the point. This day, madam, I have received a threatening letter
from London. -- My cousin, who has a strong inclination for my fortune, keeps
his spies here, and these right honorable gentlemen have taken the trouble of
weighing your unweighed words, in consequence of which, their employer is
endeavoring to obtain proofs of your former widowhood, and I stand no bad
chance of taking your fair hand a begging with me.


Ang. I would rather beg, than drag on this dull solitary life any longer.


Full. I don't pretend to be so well acquainted with the pleasures of begging as
yourself, since you know them by experience.


Ang. What an indelicate allusion.


Full. Well, it may at length be exhausted by means of a single cup.


Ang. Why did not you leave me in Flanders?


Full. Because I was a fool. Would to God that I had avoided widows as
cautiously as I have riding-horses.


Ang. Ha! ha! ha! -- Had you rather have been reduced to beggary by a horse
than a fine woman?


Full. Nearly so! -- Love is the most dangerous race that a man can run, since
his life's repose is staked upon the course.


Ang. Repose! -- An Englishman's only idea of repose is in being left to eat
his roast-beef unmolested! -- Your father was a short-sighted fool, but for
that I am not responsible. If he was so much afraid of these terrible evils, he
should have sent you to Hindostan, where the widows burn themselves with their
husbands, and then his eighty thousand pounds would have been secure on one
side, while, on the other, the sacred cows of the Bramins would have effaced
all ideas of riding-horses. -- Ha! ha! ha! Exit.


SCENE III.
FULLARTON alone. Job! Cato! Socrates! and all ye who have been
fellow sufferers with myself from vixen wives, look down upon me with
compassion from your immortal mansions, and teach me the difficult task of
bearing my own folly with patience! -- Happy the man who can ascribe his
misfortunes to others! -- Woe to him who must impute them solely to himself!

SCENE IV.
RONSARD puts his head in at the door. Ron. Hist! Hist! --


Full. What Is the matter? -- Come in.


Ron. [Coming forwards.] My good friend, may you be valet to the most noble
gentleman who owns this mansion?


Full. Say rather to the most noble lady -- I am -- her valet.


Ron. No matter which. Introduce me then if you please.


Full. By what name?


Ron. As Monsieur Pierre Ronsard, formerly Major-Domo at the Castle of Bellevue
in Champagne, now first valet-de-chambre, and privy-counsellor to the gracious
Count my master, a volunteer in the troops of the holy Roman Empire.


Full. An emigrant, I presume?


Ron. We are upon our travels.


Full. For your pleasure?


Ron. Honor is our tyrant, we obey her nod.


Full. Well, sir, you are introduced. -- And now, what do you want.


Ron. How! -- Have I entered the temple of hospitality without paying due
homage to the high priest? -- He must excuse it, since he was not in his
costume.


Full. A truce to ceremony. I tell you I am Mr. Fullarton the master of this
house.


Ron. Was I blind that I could not instantly discern the stamp of honor
impressed upon that brow?


Full. Enough, my friend, I see your aim. Flattery is a muddy pool, and those
who dabble in it, though they may catch good fish, yet can never come away with
unsoiled hands. Probably you are in want of solid coin, and would give in
exchange the specious currency of the tongue, but I am a Briton, and do not
value things for outside show. Take this, [Offers him a piece of gold.]


Ron. Heaven forbid! -- Shall I who have the honor of serving a Count, who will
shortly be created Marechal of France, accept an alms?


Full. [Smiling.] Since he is not yet a marechal --


Ron. I beg you to hear my story. -- We came to the inn --


Full. With a large suite, I suppose?


Ron. Valet, coachman, groom, game-keeper, butler, steward, cook --


Full. I pity the Count, sincerely, for in so small an inn, he must find very
indifferent accommodations for such a retinue.


Ron. With submission, sir, there is room in plenty. The Count, my master, has
so high an opinion of my talents, that he does me the honor of concentrating
all these offices in my single person.


Full. I understand you. Does your master want my assistance?


Ron. His Excellency has fallen into a trifling embarrassment, and
understanding this mansion to be inhabited by a very noble-minded gentleman,
has sent me hither in quality of his valet-de-chambre --


Full. To the point, if you please, without circumlocution.


Ron. In my capacity of game-keeper, I this morning shot a partridge --


Full. On my manor, I suppose?


Ron. I trust your Excellency will pardon it; and I am authorized, by my Lord,
the Count, to say that he earnestly requests you will in return shoot as much
game as you please upon his estates in Champagne.


Full. [Smiling.] And is this all?


Ron. Not quite. -- When we arrived at the inn, I was summoned into my master's
presence, in quality of cook, and ordered to dress the aforesaid partridge.
While it was at the fire, the London coach arrived, and in it a lawyer, who
appeared very hungry.


Full. As is commonly the case with lawyers in this country.


Ron. My master's politeness being unbounded, he ordered me, as his butler, to
lay a knife and fork for this lawyer. The partridge was served up -- it was
soon demolished -- and, after dinner, a game at piquet was proposed. Here
fortune was not favorable to the Count, though indeed his loss was
insignificant, the trifling sum of three guineas, for the payment of which he
offered to pledge his word of honor.


Full. A precious pledge!


Ron. Yet the lawyer had the unparallelled impudence to assert, that it was not
a safe mortgage.


Full. In few words, then, your master is short of money?


Ron. By no means! -- He has several thousands now by him.


Full. Yet could not pay three guineas?


Ron. His pocketbook is full of notes and bills of exchange, but unfortunately
he is short of running cash. A cursed highwayman stopped us yesterday, and
would not be satisfied till I had surrendered to him the sum of five hundred
guineas, which I carried as cashier to his Excellency.


Full. Then the upshot is, that your master is in want of three guineas. -- Take
them.


Ron. I acknowledge this liberality with transport and gratitude, and am in
despair that I cannot avail myself of it.


Full. Then what the devil do you want?


Ron. Honor forbids our accepting any thing in the way of benefaction; but we
have in our possession a nag, which we wish to sell, and which, as coachman and
groom to his Lordship, I am commissioned to do myself the honor of offering you
at the small sum of three guineas.


Full. A riding-horse!


Ron. A nag, if you please -- I only said a nag. He is now below in the court.


Full. I wish to oblige your master, but I can by no means make this purchase.


Ron. It Is a very clever beast I assure you. It was our intention to have
taught him by degrees the valuable art of living entirely without food, and he
has already made a considerable progress in acquiring it.


Full. And does the Count mean to pursue his travels on foot?


Ron. He is fond of pedestrianizing; it is a mere unconstrained mode of
traveling. -- If one comes to a fine prospect, there is nothing to do but to
sit down on the smooth turf, under the shade of a spreading tree, and feast
one's eyes all day on the lovely scene.


Full. But such travelers are seldom well received at English inns.


Ron. When a man feels his own consequence, he concerns himself little about
the opinion of the multitude.


Full. My friend, the money is entirely at your service, but I cannot permit the
beast to be left.


Ron. No money without barter. I entreat you, noble sir, to favor us upon this
point! -- I must not touch a shilling, unless I am to leave our traveling
companion.


Full. But I do not want a nag, I never ride.


Ron. So much the better for him; he will have nothing to do but to recover the
fatigues he has undergone in our service. In one word, sir, I entreat you to
oblige my master! -- You may depend upon the most noble proofs of his gratitude
the moment he is restored to his estates.


Full. Well, well! here are the three guineas. I am much obliged to the Count
for the confidence he has placed in me, and if he loves partridges, I beg the
favor of his company to supper this evening.


Ron. Commend me to the English, say I -- there is nothing like them for
helping a man of quality out of his distresses. I hasten to the Count to carry
him the money, together with this most obliging invitation -- and if your honor
should wish for a specimen of excellent French cookery, I entreat you to lay
your commands upon Monsieur Pierre Ronsard, first cook to the gracious Count
his master, a volunteer in the service of the holy Roman empire. Exit.


SCENE V.
FULLARTON alone. The poor devil excites my compassion. He has indeed no
country, but flatters himself he has, like the lunatic in chains, who believes
himself a king, or emperor. Yet I ought to be one of the last people in the
world to feel compassion toward an Emigrant, since my life is daily embittered
by one of that class. Today, however, I hope she will be in a tolerable humor,
since I have invited one of her own countrymen to be our guest.

SCENE VI.
Enter the GROOM. Groom. Your honor --


Full. Well, what is the matter?


Groom. Your honor has made a devilish bad bargain.


Full. How so?


Groom. The beast is lame.


Full. Very well.


Groom. Has lost an eye.


Full. No matter.


Groom. He Is nothing but skin and bone.


Full. Put him in the stable, and feed him well.


Groom. He is not worth five shillings.


Full. Go, and do as I bid you.


Groom. Well, for my part. Exit.


SCENE VII.
FULLARTON alone. Bravo, Count! -- And so to spare yourself the weight of an
obligation, you have burdened your benefactor with an useless animal. This
reluctance to accept a kindness is a hateful principle in man's nature -- often
as he is obliged to seek assistance, why should he be ashamed of receiving it?
Yet to acknowledge an obligation is to confess weakness, and from such a
confession, the pride of our hearts ever revolts.

SCENE VIII.
Enter WARBIFAX. War. Peace and happiness rest on this house!


Full. That depends upon Heaven, and my wife. -- To whom am I indebted for this
benevolent wish?


War. My name is Warbifax, by profession an attorney.


Full. Peace is seldom the wish of your profession.


War. I hope to accommodate all matters peaceably.


Full. You are come upon some negotiation?


War. That is my business.


Full. May I ask whence you come, and from whom?


War. From London, from your cousin.


Full. Indeed, and what does my cousin want?


War. A trifle! -- Only the possession of eighty thousand pounds.


Full. His desires are moderate -- but as I bear him a sincere good will, I
should be happy to hear he had attained the object of them. And how does he
hope to acquire such a treasure?


War. By inheritance.


Full. From whom can he expect so noble a bequest?


War. Fortunately it does not rest upon expectation -- it is already bequeathed.


Full. So much the better. -- May one ask by whom?


War. The late William Fullarton, Esquire.


Full. Ha! that was my father's name!


War. The same.


Full. You joke.


War. I never joked in my life.


Full. A second Cato.


War. No such insults I desire; I am a good Christian.


Full. And are come upon a christian-like errand.


War. I stand here as a servant of justice.


Full. Justice, poor lady, is often unfortunate in her servants.


War. And I ask you plainly, sincerely, and audibly, once for all, without
reserve or circumlocution, whether you are inclined freely, voluntarily, and
without let, molestation, or resistance, to resign the abovementioned property
to your cousin?


Full. By no means.


War. You do not forget the conditions of your father's will?


Full. No, I remember them perfectly.


War. That you should not marry a Widow.


Full. Even so!


War. Nor keep a Riding-Horse.


Full. Granted.


War. Both which conditions you have broken.


Full. How so?


War. Your present lady is a Widow.


Full. That I deny.


War. At least was so when you married her.


Full. Your proofs?


War. Her own confession.


Full. Whose confession?


War. Mrs. Fullarton's.


Full. She joked.


War. Perhaps so -- but the property is in consequence demanded in earnest.


Full. First prove your claim to it.


War. We have witnesses sufficient.


Full. How many?


War. Six.


Full. I can produce twelve who will swear the contrary.


War. Then we must send for certain people from Flanders.


Full. [Alarmed.] From Flanders! --


War. Nay, they may possibly be already on their way.


Full. [Aside.] Cursed fate!


War. You see that we know what we are about.


Full. Probably you received your information from the devil, and he was a liar
from the beginning.


War. And, perhaps, the devil lied also when he whispered that you had, this
day, bought a Riding-Horse?


Full. I bought a Riding-Horse?


War. Of a French gentleman now at the neighboring inn.


Full. It Is a miserable beast, blind and lame, which I have taken out of
compassion to itself and its late owner.


War. No matter -- it is still a Riding-Horse.


Full. This clause was made by my father solely to prevent my property's being
squandered away at New Market.


War. No one doubts his meaning.


Full. Then, as every body must be sensible how miserable a figure a blind and
lame animal would make upon the turf, it follows of course that I have not
transgressed my father's injunction, but adhered punctually to the spirit of
his will.


War. I do not speak of the spirit -- my concern is with the letter.


Full. And could my father return back from his heavenly abode, he would explain
his meaning precisely as I have done.


War. But since the dead cannot return to explain their wills, the living have
wisely provided lawyers to see that they be faithfully and literally executed.


Full. I have never sat upon the horse, consequently he is not my Riding-Horse.


War. The will says nothing of sitting upon the horse, it speaks only of
keeping the horse. The animal is now in your stable, you have paid three
guineas for him, consequently he is your horse, consequently you keep a
Riding-Horse, consequently you have not complied with the conditions of the
will, consequently your property devolves to your cousin.


Full. If my father knew that I had done this to help a poor wretch out of his
necessities --


War. Your father cannot know it -- and it could be of no use if he did know
it. The words are clear, and " flourish the dead letter of the law!" say I.


Full. I wish the marechal of France had been at the devil!


War. Amen! in God's name!


SCENE. IX.
Enter VALCOUR and RONSARD. Val. [With a very low bow.] Sir, your most humble
servant.


Full. [Peevishly.] Yours Count.


Val. Accept my most hearty thanks --


Full. For what?


Val. For so generously putting me into a situation to redeem my pledged honor.


Full. I am sorry I did it.


Val. How! -- Is it possible to repent helping a fellow creature out of his
distress?


Full. Very possible, when this kindness may cost a man his whole property.


Val. His whole property?


Full. By a whimsical clause in my father's will, I am to lose my whole
inheritance if ever I keep a Riding-Horse.


Val. Well?


Full. Well! Here stands Mr. Warbifax, a great lawyer --


Val. And a great piquet-player.


Full. Who, on the part of my cousin, claims this inheritance.


Val. On what plea (...)


Full. That I have bought a Riding-Horse.


Val. Of me?


Full. Yes.


Val. Here must be some mistake.


War. No mistake at all.


Val. [To Fullarton.] Have you seen the animal?


Full. No, nor will I see him. If my cousin^ to have my whole property, the
horse shall be included as a part of it.


Val. Ronsard, I hope it was not a Riding-Horse you sold?


Ron. Heaven forbid!


Full. How!


Ron. I was particularly careful to describe the animal as a nag.


War. A Riding-Horse, or a riding-nag, it is all the same.


Ron. By no means. Especially if it be taken into consideration, that the nag
is only a mule.


War. A mule!


Val. Yes, my dear sir, a mule.


Full. I breathe again.


Ron. He carried my master's baggage during the whole of the last campaign, and
for his faithful services was promoted to the rank of a nag.


War. And so the noble Count rode a mule?


Val. He would not be the less a Count, though he were to ride upon a cat -- as
some people would still remain an ass, though mounted upon Bucephalus himself.


Full. Mr. Warbifax, " flourish the dead letter of the law!" say I. -- As my
father only mentions a Riding-Horse --


War. Well, well -- but if I must give up this point, I don't know how you will
get rid of the other clause respecting the Widow?


Val. The Widow? -- What do you mean?


Full. Another of my father's whims. He married a widow himself, with whom he
lived very unhappily, and I am restrained from marrying a Widow, under the same
forfeiture that attaches to my keeping a Riding-Horse.


Val. And this condition? --


Full. The all-knowing Mr. Warbifax, asserts to be broken.


War. And can prove it.


Full. Not so easily as you suppose. I married a young French emigrant in
Flanders, who must herself best know whether she was a widow or not.


War. I have her own confession.


Full. That we shall see. [He opens a side door.] Angelica, your company is
requested here.


Val. [Aside.] A French emigrant, and her name Angelica! Heaven protect me! --


SCENE X.
Enter ANGELICA. Ang. God be thanked, I am once more to see other faces besides
our own! -- [She turns toward Valcour -- utters a loud shriek, hides her face
in her hands, and runs out.]


Full. What can this mean?


War. A twinge of conscience. Ha! ha! ha!


Full. Incomprehensible!


Val. Is that lady your wife?


Full. Alas, she is!


Val. Then I heartily wish you joy, sir, your property is not forfeited.


War. How so?


Val. She was no widow.


War. How do you know that?


Val. By the most incontestable evidence. -- I have myself the honor of being
her husband.


Full. Her husband!


War. Her husband!


Ron. [With a sigh.] Yes, indeed, her husband!


Full. You are then Count Valcour?


Val. The same.


Full. And were not killed in Flanders?


Val. I was severely wounded, and it was chiefly through a contrivance of my
own, that my wife was deceived into a belief of my death.


Full. [Shaking him eagerly by the hand.] Thank Heaven that you are still alive!
-- Yet it grieves me Count --


Val. Oh, do not be uneasy! It gives me no concern at all.


Full. She is yours by right.


Val. I shall not assert my claim.


Full. I resign her most willingly.


Val. You are extremely obliging.


Full. And return your nag into the bargain.


Val. They are both in very good hands.


Full. My conscience will not permit my keeping them.


Val. My repose compels me to decline accepting them.


Ron. Politeness is a most charming thing.


War. Gentlemen, this is all very fine -- but who knows what you may have been
concerting together? -- I demand proofs.


Full. Her own confession, Mr. Attorney.


War. She did not utter a syllable.


Full. She was sufficiently explicit without it.


War. The laws say nothing of such explicitness.


Full. Then we have only to question her. [He opens a side door.] Angelica, your
two husbands wish to speak with you.


SCENE XI.
Enter ANGELICA. Ang. Ha! ha! ha! ha! ha! [She laughs immoderately.]


Full. You laugh?


Ang. Haven't I reason? -- Many a poor girl weeps because she cannot get one
husband, why shouldn't I laugh, when Heaven has blessed me with two. Ha! ha!
ha! ha! ha! --


Full. I cannot say that I find this so very comic.


Ang. [To Valcour.] Welcome, my Lord Count.


Val. Madam, your most obedient.


Ang. [Pointing to Fullarton.] Permit me to have the honor of introducing my
husband to you.


Val. I wish you joy of your good fortune.


Ang. [To Fullarton.] Sir, allow me the honor of presenting my husband to you.


Full. I know not a word in our language sufficiently expressive of your
effrontery.


Ang. I hope Monsieur Ronsard has not forgotten me?


Ron. [Clapping his hands to his cheek.] Oh, no! I recollected your ladyship at
the very first glance.


Ang. [To Valcour.] And so you really are still alive?


Val. Yes, I live to mourn your loss.


Ang. Extremely gallant! -- But how happens this? -- I thought you had died on
the field of honor?


Val. I did almost.


Ang. [To Ronsard.] And I heard that you had been hanged as a spy.


Ron. I was almost.


Ang. Ha! ha! ha! -- You are not shot, and you are not hanged. -- Upon my word,
this places me in a most embarrassing situation.


Full. How so?


Ang. I know not to which husband I properly belong.


Val. Mr. Fullarton is so polite that he would wave his claim.


Full. While the Count is so generous that he insists upon resigning his.


Val. Far be it from me to separate so happy a pair.


Full. I should bear the loss like a philosopher.


Val. I could not endure the thoughts of interrupting the repose of a whole
family.


Full. You will rather restore a guest which has been long banished. Repose was
for many years the sole object of my adoration, till at length I fatally drove
away this mistress to introduce a wife.


Ang. Very flattering upon my word. Yet from you, sir, whose spirits are
clouded with the smoke of your sea-coal, I had nothing better to expect. But
from you, dear husband, [Turning to Valcour.] from you who were educated on the
banks of the Marne --


Val. To forego one's own gratification for the sake of a friend, is the very
quintessence of politeness.


Ang. [To Fullarton.] Then I am to remain with you?


Full. Justice is the idol of a Briton. Older claims must aupercede mine.


Ang. [To Valcour.] Then I am to return to you?


Val. You carry your generosity too far, sir.


Full. And you, your modesty, Count.


Val. Nothing that Angelica could find with me, would compensate for her losses
in leaving you.


Full. And nothing in my house could alone to her for the happiness she would
forego in not returning to you.


Val. With me she would have a dangerous journey to encounter.


Full. Traveling is her passion.


Val. Want would be her companion.


Full. Want is not so dreadful to her as solitude. Did you not say so yourself,
madam?


Ang. A most noble contest! -- My curiosity is extremely excited, to see how
these very gallant gentlemen will settle the affair at last.


Val. Is it a matter of perfect indifference to you, to which husband you are
to be awarded?


Ang. Nearly so -- since neither is good for much.


Val. Then -- if I must speak plainly and explicitly -- I do hereby declare,
that I had rather submit my neck to the guillotine, than bend it a second time
beneath the yoke from which it has once escaped.


Full. Sincerity on one side, has a claim to equal sincerity on the other -- I
shall therefore heartily acknowledge, that I had rather be banished for life to
Botany-Bay, than condemned to reside another week under the same roof with that
lady.


Ang. Bravo! -- I suppose the gentlemen have laid a considerable bet which
shall say the rudest things to an affectionate wife.


Full. Well, Mr. Attorney, you are silent.


War. With astonishment.


Full. How stand matters with the forfeiture?


War. Very ill!


Full. Suppose you carry my cousin a wife instead of the fortune?


War. I am not invested with powers for such an actus in praejudicium tertii.


Ang. Gentlemen, are you aware that my patience is not quite as inexhaustible
as the widow of Sarepta's cruise of oil. I scorn you both with all my heart --
and if a lawyer were here --


Full. If that be all -- here stands Mr. Warbifax, a very celebrated attorney --


Ang. Indeed! -- Then tell me, sir, upon what terms I can engage you to free me
from both these monsters?


War. A woman who has two husbands, according to our laws, is punishable with
death.


Ang. Better than living with either of them.


Full. I had thought of a more pleasant expedient for your emancipation.


War. The law is positive.


Full. But that speaks only of two husbands -- now, if a woman should marry
three? --


War. She would certainly be saved.


Ron. [Aside.] Oh, Lord! -- then I suppose I shall be obliged to take her --


Full. Again I say, " flourish the dead letter of the law!" -- Mr. Warbifax, you
are still a bachelor.


War. At your service.


Full. Suppose we make over the wife to you?


War. That would be most obliging.


Full. What recompense were you to have received from my cousin, had he gained
his suit?


War. A thousand pounds.


Full. Take the lady, and I will make it ten thousand.


War. Ten thousand pounds?


Val. Now indeed, I feel the full pressure of my poverty! How gladly, Mr.
Fullarton, would I emulate your generosity, were my poor nag but still in my
power.


War. If I thought the Esquire were serious in his proposal? --


Full. He never was more serious.


Ang. And my consent is not to be asked?


Full. You will become a person of consequence -- will live within the air of
the court --


Ang. And what do you say, Count?


Val. That I most sincerely wish you happy.


Ang. Then, since to speak the truth, I had rather marry the devil himself,
than continue the slave of either of your humors -- [Turning to Warbifax.] May
I be favored with your name, sir?


War. Jonas Warbifax.


Ang. A most horrid name, in good faith -- yet its owner too is ugly -- they
are even with each other -- and, any thing rather than remain in my present
state. -- [Gives him her hand.] If you are satisfied?


War. Perfectly so.


Full. Thank God!


War. Provided that in the first place all be drawn up in due form.


Full. You may make out the writings yourself.


War. This very hour?


Full. This moment, if you please.


Ang. And when shall we depart?


War. This evening.


Ang. I am transported! -- I shall be ready for my journey in a few minutes.
Gentlemen, your most obedient! -- In the arms of my new husband, I shall soon
forget that I ever had the honor of belonging to either of you; or if I
recollect it, the remembrance will be only as of a horrible dream. Adieu! and
be assured that deeply as I interest myself in your fates, nothing would give
me greater pleasure than to hear that you had both yawned yourselves to death!
-- Ha! ha! ha! -- [Exit with a low curtesy, and a sarcastic look.]


Val. Upon my word, the lady seems pleased with her new destiny!


War. It Is very extraordinary! -- but not less advantageous! --


Full. Indeed a most singular adventure!


Val. And would afford materials for a very affecting ballad.


Full. Or for an excellent comedy.


Val. But where would be the moral?


Full. That a man cannot purchase repose at too dear a rate, and that it is no
bad bargain to get rid of a vixen wise even at the expense of half one's
property.


Val. And one's last Riding-Horse into the bargain.


The curtain falls. FINIS.

