THE HAPPY FAMILY; A DRAMA, IN FIVE ACTS.

TRANSLATED FROM THE GERMAN OF KOTZEBUE.

New York: PRINTED FOR C. SMITH AND S. STEPHENS. 1800.

DRAMATIS PERSONAE.
WELLING, a rich Farmer. Mrs. WELLING, his Wife. their Children.
FREDERICK, PAULINA, ROSA,
LEWIS, their adopted Child. REHBERG, a poor Clergyman. DALNER, chief Forester.
ERNORF, Under-Secretary of the District. COUNT LOHRSTEIN. BRAVE, Lieutenant of
Hussars. ZAHN, a Courtier. Count Lohrstein's Servants.
FRANCIS, JACOB,

The scene lies in a village on the borders of a German principality, and an
adjoining wood.

THE HAPPY FAMILY.
ACT THE FIRST.
SCENE, A room in Welling's house, from which are various doors to a
diningroom, a study, his daughters' chambers, etc. On one side is a large
closet. The furniture is strong. Taste and elegance every where prevail,
unmixed with ostentation, but evidently showing the owner of the house to be in
good circumstances. -- Paulina and Rosa are discovered spinning; Frederick and
Lewis are engaged in maxing a large net. The clock strikes five.

Lew. FIVE o'clock.


Pau. They Will soon rise, now.


Fre. I heard my father cough.


Ros. And I saw my mother throw barley out of the window to the pigeons.


Fre. Have you all your presents ready?


Pau. Mine is in my pocket.


Ros. Pointing at the table. Mine is under that white cloth.


Fre. And mine is in the court.


Lew. Aside, with a sigh. I alone have nothing to offer.


Pau. To Fre. May one ask what it is?


Fre. Jocosely. Can you keep a secret?


Pau. Oh yes.


Fre. So can I.


Pau. Well, I am not so cruel. I have woven some handkerchiefs for my mother;
and for my father -- guess.


Fre. It will not be worth while.


Pau. Ha! ha! ha! do you hear, Lewis? What think you?


Lew. He is probably right.


Pau. How modest! But, Frederick, I Will tell you -- Lewis has made some verses
for me: they are so sweet and affecting --


Fre. I don't understand verses.


Lew. Paulina is so kind as to think them tolerable.


Pau. Mr. Ernorf makes verses too, but nobody can understand them.


Fre. Hark! They are coming.


All rise, and stand in anxious suspense. Ros. No -- it was the servant below.


They return to their work. Fre. My father and mother must be very happy today.


Pau. That they always are.


Fre. Yes; but only consider, they have been married twenty-five years today.


Ros. And did you hear what my father said when they went to bed last night?
They had not quarrelled, during all that time, for twenty-five minutes.


Pau. He had tears in his eyes when he mentioned it.


Ros. My mother pressed his hand, too.


Fre. And looked as affectionate as a bride.


Lew. Sighing. It is a singular happiness.


Pau. They are singular people.


Ros. God bless them!


Fre. And soon send me a wife!


Pau. Archly. You have made a choice, I think?


Fre. Perhaps I have.


Ros. The Forester's daughter?


Fre. She is a good girl.


Lew. Brother, I wish you joy.


Pau. I wish her father may not have higher views.


Fre. Well! who knows what may happen?


Ros. Hark! Now they are coming.


All again rise and look anxiously around. Enter ERNORF. Ros. Oh no -- It is
Mr. Ernorf.


Pau. In a disappointed tone. Only Mr. Ernorf.


Fre. The same. Good morning to you, Mr. Ernorf. How happens it that you are
abroad so early?


Ern. The Muses and Graces awoke me.


Pau. The cock awoke us by crowing.


Ern. This is Mr. Welling's wedding day.


Ros. Do you mean that for news?


Ern. The news is to come. As Miss Paulina yesterday signified that she wished
to celebrate the happy event by an ode, I have prepared one.


Draws a paper from his pocket, and delivers it with self-satisfaction. Pau. I
am much obliged to you, but it is too late.


Ern. Too late!


Pau. I am already provided with one.


Ern. Consequentially. I should like to know where a poet could be found within
many miles, who --


Pau. You need not go so far to find him.


Ros. Laughing. Not many steps.


Fre. Lewis --


Ern. With a smile of contempt and derision. This young man? -- Ha! ha! -- May
one be allowed a sight of the attempt?


Pau. Here it is.


Ern. Muttering as he reads. Happy pair -- knows no care -- domestic joy --
never cloy -- very tolerable, if they had a little energy in them. I always
say, that when one reads a solemn poem, the breast ought to be contracted, the
breath to fail, the eye to start from the head, and every vein to swell.


Fre. Heaven forbid!


Pau. I like the poetry which inspires gentle sensibility.


Ern. Oh, that was the fashion thirty years ago, when your Yoricks used to take
their sentimental trips, but in our days nothing will do but hexameters.


Fre. What are those?


Ern. You shall hear directly. To Lewis. Don't be ashamed, young man. Rome was
not built in a day. Coughs, and prepares to read.


Pau. I thank you, Mr. Ernorf, but if your verses be the best that were ever
written, they cannot now be of any use to me.


Ern. Oh, I beg pardon. Only listen. Scans."Rise with splendour a bove the ho
rizon hot sweating Phoebus."


Fre. Who is that poor fellow?


Ern. Pst! -- "Look on thy humble bard and smile from thy e therial coach-box."


Pau. Far too high, Mr. Ernorf.


Ern. Be patient. We shall soon descend. "Here see a couple with love's
wrinkles like Phi lemon and Baucis."


Lew. Love has no wrinkles.


Ern. I almost believe you mean to criticize, sir.


Lew. Apologizing. By no means. I beg pardon.


Ern. There! You cannot support the character you assume, for a critic never
begs pardon. You will, therefore, do better if you employ yourself in procuring
a certificate of your birth. The times are dangerous, and our prince will not
harbor any --


Lew. Speak it boldly -- vagrants.


Ern. Exactly.


Fre. Gravely. Enough, Mr. Ernorf.


Pau. Exasperated. Too much, I think. He, who is treated by my father as his
own son, must be a good man, though he may not be able to write hexameters.


Lew. I thank you, dear Paulina.


Ern. Your father is not in office as I am. He has not such heavy duties upon
him. But -- I fear --


Pau. What?


Ern. That some investigation must be made.


Pau. Into what?


Ern. Into the rank, age, name, origin and employment of this young man -- this
votary of the muses.


Pau. Oh Lewis! It would have been better if you had suffered love to be
covered with wrinkles.


Lew. He who makes use of his office to revenge a fancied insult --


Fre. Is a --


Ros. An under-secretary.


Pau. My father and mother are coming. All rise. The girls collect their
presents.


Ern. Aside. How provoking! Why could they not sleep another hour?


Enter WELLING, and Mrs. WELLING. They are immediately surrounded by their
children, who call: Good morning, dear father! Many more happy years to you,
dear mother!

Well. and Mrs. W. Thank you -- thank you, good-children.


Pau. Mother,. I have --


Ros. Father, here is --


Fre. Stop! I am the oldest.


Pau. In filial affection age has no claim.


Ros. Look here, father.


Fre. Come to the window, father.


Pau. Read this, father.


Well. Children, one after another. What have you there, Rosa?


Ros. A pair of gloves made by myself.


Well. I thank you, my dear girl.


Pau. And here are some handkerchiefs for you, mother, spun and made by myself
-- and a poem for my father.


Well. Reads it. The sentiments are beautifully expressed. I guess who is the
author. Lewis, why do you stand in that corner?


Lew. Distressed. I have nothing to give you.


Well. A kind word, at least, I hope -- a sincere congratulation?


Lew. God sees my heart.


Well. Come nearer, then, that I may see it too.


Lew. Oh my benefactor! How I wish you could!


Well. I do. Shakes his hand. It is swimming in your eye. -- Well, Frederick?


Fre. To the window, father.


Well. Why? Goes to it.


Fre. Do you see what the man is leading across the court?


Well. A handsome horse.


Fre. You don't remember it?


Well. No.


Fre. Don't you recollect, about three years ago, that you admired our
neighbor's foal?


Well. I did, and afterward heard that it was dead.


Fre. That was a deception, for I bought it with my pocket money, and was
resolved, when it was in condition, to surprise you agreeably with the sight of
it.


Well. I thank you, my son.


Pau. Dear, good parents, give us your blessing.


Ros. Your blessing. The children kneel.


Well. and Mrs. W. Bending with emotion over them. God bless you!


Well. To Lewis, who wipes his eyes. You too, good Lewis!


Lew. Seizes his hand, and eagerly kisses it. Then have I again found a father.


Well. As long as I live. The children rise.


Well. Good morning, Mr. Ernorf. Don't take it amiss that I did not welcome you
sooner. The heart has its privileges.


Ern. "See, I come to your hospita ble board congratu lating."


Well. At which I shall be glad to see you.


Ern. I will have that pleasure. It is a family jubilee; and perhaps --


Fre. Father!


Ern. Perhaps, I say --


Fre. All our people are assembled in the court.


Ern. Perhaps, I say --


Fre. They want to congratulate you.


Pau. They have all made garlands and wreaths.


Well. Come then, such wreaths are more valuable than crowns, for affection
twined them together.

Exeunt Well. Mrs. Well. Fre. Pau. and Lew.
Ern. Perhaps, I say -- very civil conduct indeed!


Lew. You must make some allowances for the bustle of the day.


Ern. So it seems your fine verses are liked?


Lew. These good people consider my good intention.


Ern. You have been at school, then, as you think yourself capable of writing
poetry?


Lew. I seldom write poetry.


Ern. In that you are perfectly right, for your muse would not repay the many
obligations which this family --


Lew. I often remind myself of those obligations, and should be ashamed if it
were necessary for another to do it.


Ern. It certainly was a lucky circumstance for you, that Mr. Welling should
just happen to enter the inn, as the recruiting party was going to take you
away.


Lew. I acknowledge it.


Ern. And that he should be so generous or weak as to pay forty dollars for
your discharge.


Lew. You, sir, I suppose, only do this in poetry.


Ern. What do you mean by that?


Lew. It is said that poets are, from the nature of their profession, only
capable of describing good actions.


Ern. Offended. I am much inclined to prove the contrary this very day, by
ridding the neighborhood of a conceited fellow.


Lew. In that you would be perfectly right.


Ern. And this conceited fellow is yourself* Dixi.


Lew. I do not regard your scornful language, for it cannot disgrace me: but I
should like to know by what right --


Ern. Enraged. What! I no right! I, under-secretary to his serene highness, own
cousin to the cabinet-president's housekeeper -- joint editor of a critical
journal! --


Enter PAULINA. Pau. For Heaven's sake, what is the cause of all this noise.


Lew. Smiling. Mr. under-secretary Ernorf is just demonstrating to me that he
has a right to be rude.


Pau. I think no one has that right; especially in a stranger's house.


Ern. Suddenly assuming a look of friendly complacency. Can I consider this as
a stranger's house?


Pau. As far as I know, you may.


Ern. Not a word, then, of the confidential connection between us?


Pau. Between us! -- But yes. We stood as godfather and godmother together,
about two years ago.


Ern. Oh, that is only a spiritual connection.


Pau. We will let it rest there, then.


Ern. You are joking, fair Paulina; but when I have spoken a serious word to
your parents, you will joke no more.


Pau. That I believe.


Ern. Who knows what may happen today?


Pau. Oh!


Ern. This timid sigh assures me that my happiness is not far distant.


Pau. I think, Mr. Ernorf, you should have a wife, who understands hexameters
better than I do.


Ern. Had I but been allowed to proceed --


Pau. We had but just left our beds -- Yawning. -- were we so soon again --


Ern. Offended. Miss Paulina is very witty and sarcastic. The melodious lines
of this Arcadian swain probably pleased her better.


Pau. Most certainly they did.


Ern. But they will probably be the last which he will make in this country.


Pau. Well, we can live without verses.


Ern. And without the poet, for he will tomorrow be cited to appear, and if he
cannot produce the necessary credentials, will be transported beyond the
confines. Dixi.

Exit.
Pau. He threatens.


Lew. To give satisfaction to his vanity.


Pau. But he may involve you in difficulties. It would be better to declare who
you are.


Lew. Does Paulina wish to know it?


Pau. It makes no difference to me. I know you are a good man.


Lew. Is not that the best title?


Pau. In our house it is.


Lew. Your house is my world.


Pau. But should my father be compelled to send you away?


Lew. Then I Will go.


Pau. And will you distress us thus by obstinacy?


Lew. You wrong me.


Pau. We are all so fond of you.


Lew. Paulina too?


Pau. I am indeed, and was before you drew the poor child out of the pond, and
--


Lew. I shall then take your good wishes with me into banishment.


Pau. Rather stay and be happy with us.


Lew. That I am.


Pau. Yet sometimes you seem to forget yourself, and your eyes are full of
tears.


Lew. I do not complain.


Pau. So much the worse, for, if you did, one might relieve you.


Lew. Alas, no.


Pau. But at least console you.


Lew. No.


Pau. Have you then no hope on earth?


Lew. None.


Pau. Seriously. Lewis -- you have not committed any crime?


Lew. Lays his hand on his breast. That have I not.


Pau. None but the guilty can be quite devoid of hope.


Lew. That is a pious falsehood.


Pau. A good man every where inspires confidence.


Lew. I have found it.


Pau. And friendship --


Lew. Sustains my life.


Pau. With timid uncertainty. And love --


Lew. Alas! love I must renounce.


Pau. Why?


Lew. Poor, without a name --


Pau. Who falls in love with names?


Lew. Without parents, without --


Pau. Any more?


Lew. Perhaps I have too long remained in a house, where captivating innocence,
united with sisterly affection have deceived my heart with lovely visions --
where the danger of appearing ungrateful increases every hour, and the pleasure
of daily beholding Paulina may at last rob me of my only treasure -- a good
conscience.

Exit hastily.
Pau. What does he mean? -- Is it a sin to love me? -- When there was a great
fire in our village, and he carried the old man on his back through the flames,
did not my father himself allow him to call me sister? "Love him as your
brother," he said to us all, "for he deserves it." I have loved him as my
brother, and what is the consequence? Mysterious man!


Enter FREDERICK hastily. Fre. Away, sister!


Pau. Why?


Fre. My father and mother are coming.


Pau. Why should I run away from them?


Fre. I have been talking to my mother, about my dear Louisa, and she is going
to mention it to my father.


Pau. I wish you success, brother.


Fre. And Mr. Dalner will soon be here too.


Pau. Hark! They are coming.


Fre. Go, then, and tell Rosa not to disturb them, while I run to the dove-cot,
and watch when Mr. Dalner comes.

Runs away.
Pau. Now will he be so violent that he will spoil a nest or two. The poor
pigeons! Sighing. Poor Paulina!

Exit into her room.
Enter WELLING and Mrs. WELLING, arm in arm. Mrs. W. I hope you approve of my
having sent to invite my poor relations.


Well. Approve! I do indeed, and am angry with myself that it did not occur to
me.


Mrs. W. The good people come so seldom, and are so reserved on account of
their poverty.


Well. For that reason we must give them a more hearty welcome, that they may
not reckon us among the creatures, who find delight in ostentatiously
exhibiting their wealth to poor relations, and making every morsel nauseous by
humiliating arrogance.


Mrs. W. I may place my old uncle at the top of the table -- may I not?


Well. Certainly.


Mrs. W. Mr. Dalner will not be offended?


Well. Not he -- nor Rehberg.


Mrs. W. Oh, I am not afraid of his being so; for he had rather himself belong
to the family.


Well. How so?


Mrs. W. Have not you perceived that he is fond of Rosa?


Well. The mother is always quicker in discoveries of this kind than the father,
but I am glad to hear it.


Mrs. W. Yet I don't altogether like it.


Well. Why not? Rehberg is a worthy young man.


Mrs. W. The world says a great deal against him.


Well. Scandal.


Mrs. W. It is said that he does not strictly conform to the orthodox belief.


Well. His conduct is upright, and I have often before remarked, that calumny
does not attack a man's opinions till his conduct is found to be irreproachable.


Mrs. W. His intercourse with the Secretary's daughters appears to many of a
suspicious nature.


Well. Because many feel what many would do in Rehberg's situation.


Mrs. W. It is said, too, that he squanders his small fortune away at cards,
when at the Secretary's house.


Well. Ann, you know I hate that term, "It is said," when an honest man's
character is concerned. Is he in debt?


Mrs. W. Not exactly that, but he had a good library, which he lately sold for
a trifle to an antiquarian, who was passing through the place.


Well. What is that to us?


Mrs. W. I am sorry for it. The schoolmaster says that when the man took the
books away, Rehberg looked out of the window after him, and tears stood in his
eyes.


Well. Pshaw! If you will give the schoolmaster a pint of beer, and his wife a
cup of coffee, you may hear a hundred such stories. I cannot bear that any
one's good name should be destroyed to afford conversation at a tea-table, that
the gosling should catch it from the goose, and learn to hiss at every one, who
is quietly passing by.


Mrs. W. Surveying him calmly and affectionately. I know this censure was not
intended for me.


Well. Gives her his hand. Heaven forbid! You are a good woman, and I dare be
sworn you will receive Rehberg kindly.


Mrs. W. That I will.


Well. I would willingly see none but smiling countenances today.


Mrs. W. Then I fear Frederick must not come to table.


Well. Why not?


Mrs. W. He has something on his mind.


Well. Nothing wrong, I hope?


Mrs. W. Oh no -- he thinks of marrying.


Well. If his choice be proper --


Mrs. W. It is.


Well. And the girl likes him --


Mrs. W. She does -- but her rank is rather above his -- Dalner's daughter.


Well. H-m -- with all my heart -- if the father will give his consent.


Mrs. W. There lies the difficulty. He shook his head.


Well. He is a sensible man, and my friend.


Mrs. W. He is coming hither to converse with you on the subject.


Well. I am glad of it. Such men as he and I shall soon understand each other.


Mrs. W. May I give Frederick any encouragement? I see the poor fellow's
stationed at the door.


Well. Turns round. Frederick, what are you doing there? Do you avoid your
father?


Enter FREDERICK fearfully. Fre. Father, Mr. Dalner will be here directly.


Well. Are you afraid of him?


Fre. I don't know. I am not timorous in general; but for several weeks I have
felt all day, as if there was a storm in the air, and all night as if a fire
would break out in the village.


Well. Smiling. Yes, yes. -- But are you thoroughly convinced that you will be
happy with the girl?


Fre. Strikes his breast with both hands. I am indeed.


Well. As happy as your parents?


Fre. We love each other as sincerely as they do.


Well. We are not speaking of days but years.


Fre. So will I by God's assistance, speak to my son in five and twenty years.


Well. It Is well. Go with your mother, while I speak to Dalner.


Fre. Kisses his hand in great emotion. Father -- yes, father -- you must speak
-- for I -- I cannot speak.

Exeunt Mrs. W. and Frederick.
Well. Alone. Yes. From my heart I wish to bind him to his present rank in life
for ever. A good wife will complete what habit and education have founded. --
Then I shall die in peace, and he may pry into the secrets of yon closet. What
he finds there will not cause him a sleepless night.


Enter DALNER. Dal. Joy be with you neighbor! Your hand! Shakes it. Understood?


Well. It is the congratulation of an honest man.


Dal. Right, by my soul. It comes from the heart. I walked hither, and stumbled
so often that I nearly broke my neck two or three times, for I was calling to
mind those happy days, when my Maria was alive, and we so often used to spend
our Sundays together like good neighbors --


Well. Talking of peace and war --


Dal. While our wives talked of pies and puddings --


Well. And our children were playing round us.


Dal. Then we used to wander to the tall oak. Neighbor, when I passed that oak
today, I felt an odd sensation. I could see the churchyard from it --
Understood? The trees which I planted there -- you know where -- are grown
large and handsome. I saw them peering above the wall, and my eyes --
Understood?


Well. You would have been married almost as long as myself.


Dal. True. -- When I espied your house, I was well again. It is the house,
thought I, of a man, whom I have known for twenty-seven years. I have two
things on which I can still rely -- my gun and my friend Welling.


Well. Kindly offers his hand. Your sincere friend, Welling.


Dal. Well, we may perhaps be united still closer, if we do as two young people
seem to wish. Understood?


Well. Almost.


Dal. Your son has taken a liking to my daughter, and she by no means seems
cruel.


Well. So much the better.


Dal. Perhaps it may be so, but allow me, neighbor, to ask what your intentions
are respecting the young man.


Well. He is my only son, and my heir.


Dal. What do you mean to make of him.


Well. A countryman, like his father.


Dal. To that I have no objection. Heaven bless all honest countrymen! They are
the trees, and all other people the caterpillars, who feast upon their leaves.


Well. It Is well. If such be your sentiments --


Dal. Such are my sentiments, but I have still to ask another question. Were we
not old friends I should be ashamed of doing it -- but you know me. You know I
never was tormented by that demon -- pride. We have lived on the terms of
brothers. I have never asked where you came from, who you are, and so forth.


Well. I have often felt the obligation you conferred upon me by this silence.


Dal. Nor should I have ever said a word on that subject, had not this affair
of the children -- understand me properly, neighbor -- not that I have any
scruples. No. An honest man is a nobleman. But I have two brothers who are as
proud as Lucifer. They are both rich, and my daughter will inherit their
property -- nota been, if she marries with their consent.


Well. Poor Frederick!


Dal. Why so? You are rich and that goes a great way. But one stone lies in the
way -- your origin. With sincere good humor. Don't be offended.


Well. By no means.


Dal. People are fond of talking, and some account of you has reached the ears
of my brothers. When you arrived here twenty-seven years ago, and your late
father-in-law farmer Wiedeman treated you so kindly, it was said you were a
foundling, and when the magistracy insisted on your producing a certificate of
your birth --


Well. I appealed to the Prince in person.


Dal. Very true. And as the secretary here dropped the subject, nay was
afterward seen to take off his hat as he passed you, it was rumored that he
had received orders from court not to molest you.


Well. He probably had.


Dal. The wise folks then maintained, that you were certainly the natural son
of some distinguished personage. -- Understood?


Well. Perfectly.


Dal. One of my brothers was then tutor to the pages at court, and stated that
your audience with the Prince exceeded an hour.


Well. It did.


Dal. The world, therefore, not knowing what to make of the matter --


Well. Made something bad of it. That is natural.


Dal. But you see if I could retain the family property for my daughter -- but
without a mean action -- Understood?


Well. Certainly, you would be glad to do it.


Dal. You would therefore oblige me, if you would entrust me with a few
particulars of your descent.


Well. My dear friend, I will do it with pleasure, for I am sure you will not
make a bad use of my confidence. The time too, when this discovery might be
attended with danger, is past, for my enemies have forgotten me. -- I am, by
birth, a nobleman --


Dal. A nobleman!


Well. The last branch of the old house of Wellingrode. I was fortunate enough
in my youth to become the favorite of a Prince, and unfortunate enough to have
none but honest intentions toward him.


Dal. I understand. You wanted to introduce truth at court.


Well. The intrigues of an ambitious woman (who wished to raise her husband to
the rank of prime-minister in order to govern through him) hurled me from my
eminence. I was accused of treason, my property was confiscated and bestowed
upon the new favorite. I escaped imprisonment by flight. How I was pursued and
what I endured I will relate at another time. At present I will merely confine
myself to the lucky turn of my fortunes.


Dal. Right -- how you were metamorphosed from a nobleman into a peasant?


Well. My late father-in-law had rented a farm on my mother's estate, and I had
always heard him mentioned as an upright man.


Dal. He was one.


Well. No longer knowing where I could be secure from the spies of my victorious
rival, I suddenly remembered this old faithful servant. I clothed myself as a
peasant, cut my hair, and on a summer's evening arrived at the house of Hans
Wiedeman.


Dal. I Will bet a wager you were received with open arms.


Well. Gently rest the ashes of that worthy man! -- At first I merely meant to
stay with him till the storm was blown over, and I forgotten. That I might not,
in the mean time, be without employment, I began to cultivate a part of the
garden. My Ann was then but fourteen years of age, and assisted me.


Dal. Yes, yes -- I understand.


Well. You are mistaken. Much as I admired her, I little thought that we should
celebrate a day like this. But the garden soon became too confined for me, and
I began to accompany good Wiedeman to the field. I acquired a love of
agriculture. I daily felt fresh air and industry enliven both my body and the
mind. I was healthier than before, and I was happier than before.


Dal. I can easily conceive it.


Well. One evening, as I was walking alone across the meadows, the idea suddenly
struck me -- Oh I could show you the very spot -- to forget the distressing
vision of my younger days, to renounce the airy phantoms of ambition, and
become a quiet peasant.


Dal. What thought honest old Wiedeman to this?


Well. He shook his head.


Dal. I should have done so, too.


Well. He thought my intention a mere whim, and that, when the times altered, I
should repent my resolution. In vain did I represent to him that he was old,
that he wanted a hale son-in-law --


Dal. He shook his head again, I suppose?


Well. He smiled, wished to convince me I was wrong, and when he found his
arguments were ineffectual, he said he would try my resolution for two years.
Finding, after the expiration of them, that I thought no more of court, and
that his daughter sincerely loved me, he said: "God bless you!" -- and God has
blessed us.


Dal. H-m! -- Do your children know --


Well. No.


Dal. But your wife --?


Well. Nor she. Her father carried the secret with him to the grave. She is
happy in her present situation.


Dal. Well, I will say no more to my brothers than is absolutely necessary --
Understood? But --


Well. Another But!


Dal. You injure your son by this connection.


Well. How so?


Dal. My daughter has no ancestors.


Well. And my son is a farmer.


Dal. Well, then -- if you be so inclined --


Well. I am from my heart.


Dal. Let me embrace you, then. -- I may call you, as hitherto friend and
neighbor?


Well. Most certainly.


Dal. If my good Maria had lived to see this day -- or if those above know what
passes here below -- Understood?


Enter Mrs. WELLING and FREDERICK. Mrs. W. I can restrain him no longer.


Fre. With eager anxiety. Well, Father! You look kind -- so does Mr. Dalner.


Dal. We are agreed.


Fre. Huzza!

Running away.
Well. Frederick, where are you going?


Fre. To Louisa.


Well. Hold! Has your mother consented?


Dal. If you have no objection --


Mrs. W. Objection! It makes me shed tears of joy.


Fre. Now I may --

Is again going.
Dal. Stop! Such intelligence as this ought to be conveyed by the father.


Fre. But I may go with you.


Dal. Go you may, but instead of going you will run, and I am not in a hurry to
provoke the asthma. No, be patient till evening -- then I Will bring my daughter
hither. Till then, good bye, neighbors.

Exit.
Fre. Following him. Afternoon, instead of evening.

Exit.
Mrs. W. He is in love indeed!


Well. He will be so.


Mrs. W. He is so.


Well. Impossible, for real love never exists till after marriage. The passion
of the youth is only smoke -- but the husband's affection is the pure flame,
with which he is warmed even in old age.


Mrs. W. As is our case.


Well. Yes, good Ann, as is our case. In spite of all our Frederick's warmth, I
dare be sworn that I shall be, when sixty years of age, still more in love than
he.


Mrs. W. Smiling. You in love! With whom?


Well. Can you ask? Affectionately giving his hand. With you, who have for a
quarter of a century been my faithful companion -- with you, who have so
cheerfully, so excellently adhered to the duties of a wife and mother.


Mrs. W. I have but done my duty.


Well. And always did it cheerfully.


Mrs. W. God has rewarded me.


Well. God bless you! Come into my arms!


Mrs. W. Good William!


Well. presses her with emotion in his arms. The curtain falls. End of the First
Act.
ACT THE SECOND.
Enter Ernorf, in full dress. His pockets are full of papers. He surveys
himself in the glass, and arranges his cravat. Ern. Now she may decide. If she
likes the under-secretary, the man of business -- Laying his hand on his right
coat-pocket. here he is. If she likes the poet, the author -- Pointing to his
left coat-pocket. here he is. The right pocket will suit the father and mother
-- the left the daughters -- both will, I think, overpower the Arcadian
shepherd, Mr. Lewis. -- Today will I bestow this hand, which has written so
many a folio -- so many a quarto, on -- Paulina or Rosa? Immaterial. --


Enter FREDERICK and REHBERG. Fre. Come in, sir -- we are all happy.


Reh. It is your father's wedding day.


Fre. Oh yes, but other weddings will soon take place.


Ern. Aside. Yes, yes, no doubt.


Fre. You shall perform the ceremony --


Reh. For whom?


Fre. Jocosely. Guess.


Reh. Perhaps Miss Paulina.


Ern. Aside. Perhaps.


Fre. You are wrong.


Reh. In great agitation. Or perhaps Miss Rosa?


Ern. Aside. Perhaps.


Fre. Wrong again.


Reh. Recovering. Then I know nobody --


Fre. How! Am I nobody?


Reh. You yourself, dear Frederick?


Fre. Yes, I myself, and somebody else too -- Louisa Dalner -- eh? -- What say
you now?


Reh. I am really glad to hear it, and as all the family is so happy, I cannot
suppose that Miss Rosa will attend to her harpsichord today.


Fre. I don't know, but I Will call her.

Exit.
Reh. Happy man!


Ern. Under the rose, Mr. Rehberg, you will, ere long, have to read the
marriage-ceremony for one of his sisters.


Reh. Which?


Ern. That is not yet determined. Cupid gropes in the dark, as at the rape of
the Sabines.


Reh. Perhaps you yourself are Cupid.


Ern. With self-satisfaction. At your service.


Reh. You are about to marry, then?


Ern. Prosaically answered: Yes.


Reh. Marry without affection!


Ern. Who said that? I love -- I burn!


Reh. Yet you said you had not made a choice.


Ern. My heart certainly inclines rather toward Paulina --


Reh. Obey the impulse, I beseech you.


Ern. But she wants taste. Her sister is, I think, in many respects superior --
and she has so poetical a name -- Rosa!


Reh. -- You have spoken to Mr. Welling, I presume?


Ern. Not yet. He is a good honest kind of man. -- But -- Looking at his watch.
it grows late, and I must attend to the duties of my office.

Exit.
Reh. This fellow is a silly coxcomb -- but can I, for that reason, feel at
ease? He is rich, and oh, how many fools, how many villains have I known, who
have obtained the most amiable wives, because they were rich! I have hitherto
been silent, but my intentions are upright -- why, therefore, should I be
ashamed of declaring them?


Enter ROSA. Ros. Good morning, Mr. Rehberg, I was almost afraid you would come.


Reh. Afraid!


Ros. Because I have been idle. Look, only, what a quantity of dust there is
upon the harpsichord.


Reh. That is indeed unusual.


Ros. I have been making a present for my father and mother, on their
wedding day --


Reh. You have, then, certainly been far better employed than in attending to
music.


Ros. Yet I have often been singing; for when I am alone I always sing -- and
you know my favorite words:

" Why, fate, do thou thine ear thus shut,
" And why my supplications mock? --

Reh. " All I require is but a hut,
" And friend, and little humble flock.

Ros. " Blessed with such gifts, I still should know*
" Peace and contentment felt by few --

Reh. " Yet how much more my breast would glow,
" If I might share those joys with you."

Ros. You repeat the last lines as if you were the author of them.


Reh. How if I were?


Ros. Jocosely. Why, then I would ask who it is for whom your breast would glow?


Reh. And I would answer, a cheerful, good, pretty girl.


Ros. Do I know her?


Reh. Perhaps you do.


Ros. She must live in our village, then, for I have scarcely been half a mile
from it.


Reh. Will you say a good word for me?


Ros. Why don't you speak to her yourself?


Reh. I am afraid of displeasing her.


Ros. Well, that is odd. Mr. Ernorf, whom nobody likes, torments every girl in
the village with his nonsense, and you, whom we all like --


Reh. Mr. Ernorf is rich -- I am poor.


Ros. But a good man without a dollar is preferable to him and all his riches.


Reh. Poverty is oppressive. --


Ros. Without affection it is.


Reh. Are you in earnest, dear Rosa? Would a good man's poverty not deter you
from marrying him?


Ros. If I liked him, certainly not.


Reh. You are accustomed to affluence.


Ros. There you are mistaken. My father is, to be sure, reckoned rich --


Reh. He certainly is rich.


Ros. Then he has acted very properly in not letting us discover it. We are as
industrious and economical as any peasant's family in the village.


Reh. What you say makes me truly happy.


Ros. Indeed! Why so?


Reh. Because it seems not so difficult to gain your affections as I supposed.


Ros. Does any one wish to gain them?


Reh. After a pause. " Blessed with such gifts I still should know
" Peace and contentment felt by few,
" Yet how much more my breast would glow,
" Might I but share the joys with you."

Ros. Confused. What do you mean -- am I the You?


Reh. Ask your heart.


Ros. My heart is a flatterer.


Reh. Will you share my fate?


Ros. Does that depend on me?


Reh. Will you make me happy?


Ros. Can I?


Reh. A poor mother is my only property.


Ros. I should then have two good mothers.


Reh. I live in a small hut.


Ros. Content is not a friend of palaces.


Reh. I live on scanty fare.


Ros. And are healthy with it.


Reh. May I speak to your father?


Ros. With downcast eyes. My mother must know it, too.


Reh. And if they both consent --


Ros. I must obey.


Reh. Must!


Ros. I will most cheerfully.


Reh. Thanks, good Rosa, you shall not repent it.


Ros. Much confused. Shall we go to the harpsichord?


Reh. You would learn nothing of me today.


Ros. I Will fetch my notes. Runs away to conceal her confusion.


Reh. Sweet lovely being! What a friendly look will every thing assume, when
you come to inhabit my hut? The coughing old servant will no longer awake me,
but Rosa's simple song. -- And my mother -- my good mother! -- On her too I
shall bestow comfort in her latter days. -- Oh God! bend the hearts of the
parents, that when they find I am honest, they may not ask whether I am rich.


Enter WELLING. Well. Welcome, Mr. Rehberg. I thank you for your well-meant
congratulation.


Reh. It is indeed well-meant, though you have not allowed me time to offer it.


Well. Sincerity is sparing in words. I hope, therefore, you will be silent, and
celebrate this happy day by drinking a glass of wine with me.


Reh. With great pleasure.


Well. You must play us a good tune -- Rosa shall sing, and we will join in
chorus. We will pass the bottle round to the health of every honest man, with a
wish that after days of toil he may enjoy such happiness as ours.


Reh. Alas, Mr. Welling! Such happiness is seldom found.


Well. True, and most seldom among those who are bred to a profession. You waste
your best years in study, and are often at last obliged to be satisfied with a
single dish upon your table.


Reh. But the professional man can also feel the charms of love, and sometimes
find a girl, who is willing to share his poverty.


Well. Oh yes, but the girl is, with your permission, a very silly one.


Reh. Starts. Such sentiments astonish me from your lips.


Well. Love is a pretty flower, but it must grow in the shade of a fruitful tree.


Reh. You think, then, that riches only can make the married state happy.


Well. Heaven forbid that I should have such an idea! There is a pleasant easy
track, between the high-road of wealth and the thorny path of penury. I only
mean that a man who marries with no other prospect than care and poverty is
either very unwise -- or very much in love.


Reh. Aside. Oh misery! Aloud. You would, therefore, not bestow your daughters
upon any but men of tolerable means?


Well. I think, at least, that no man of honor would wish to be supported
entirely by his wife's means.


Reh. Checking his sensibility. Such a declaration would silence any one.


Enter ERNORF and Mrs. WELLING. Ern. Have I at last found you, worthy Mr.
Welling.


Mrs. W. Mr. Ernorf wishes to have some conversation with you.


Ern. Wishes to unburden his over-loaded heart.


Well. How happens it that your heart is over-loaded?


Ern. Through the sly maneuvers of the little god, who tames the lion --
through a wanton frolic of the little urchin, who put into the hands of
Hercules the distaff of fair Deianira.


Well. Mr. Ernorf, your mode of explaining is original, but unintelligible.


Reh. I will assist him, sir. He is in love.


Well. With one of my daughters?


Reh. Laughing. With both.


Mrs. W. Shaking her head. With both?


Ern. Yes. This is a privilege which belongs exclusively to us poets. We may be
in love with two or three women at the same time.


Well. And you wish to marry both?


Ern. My wishes are more limited. If either of the ladies --


Reh. My presence may be unpleasant. Allow me to withdraw.


Well. For what reason?


Reh. With a degree of sensibility but without asperity. To make room for a man
of property.

Exit.
Well. Aside. So, so! -- Understood, as my friend Dalner would say.


Ern. Calling after him. Stay! Stay! We shall want a black coat at the wedding.


Well. Are matters advanced so far?


Ern. They very soon will be. In the first place it is proper that I should
ascertain my pedigree. Presents a large scroll. Here is the testimonial of my
matriculations at the university. Here his highness's appointment of me to my
present office.


Well. We read that in the newspapers.


Ern. Here are some bonds, and --


Well. Enough, enough, Mr. Ernorf!


Ern. Yes, enough indeed. I flatter myself there are few sons-in-law, who could
produce so much.


Well. The choice of my daughters depends upon their hearts.


Mrs. W. Is it to Paulina or to Rosa that your intentions are directed?


Ern. That I leave entirely to the decision of the lovely creatures, themselves.


Enter PAULINA and ROSA. Well. It Is well. Here come the lovely creatures. Talk
to them, yourself; for if I know their dispositions, I may quietly remain a
silent spectator.


Mrs. W. Children, Mr. Ernorf wishes to marry one of you.


Pau. and Ros. Make low curtsies. He does us great honor.

Ernorf returns their compliments by two low bows.
Well. He thinks you both so amiable, that he finds it impossible to make a
choice.


Pau. and Ros. As above. He does us great honor.


Mrs. W. And leaves you, therefore, to decide.


Ros. My sister is the oldest, and has a right to the preference.


Pau. But Rosa excels me in accomplishments.


Ros. Such modesty deserves to be rewarded.


Pau. It is only your modesty, which makes you not feel superior to me.


Ern. Ha! ha! ha! What a noble contest! -- I perceive I must advance to the aid
of their reserve. -- Solemnly. Accept, beauteous Paulina, a heart, which --


Pau. I beg your pardon, Mr. Ernorf, but I accept no present, which I cannot
return.


Ern. Somewhat confused, but suppressing his mortification. Indeed! -- Well
then, do accept it, fair Rosa --


Ros. Indeed, Mr. Ernorf, I cannot.


Ern. What! -- How! -- Both! -- How am I to understand this?


Mrs. W. My daughters are grateful for the honor you wish to confer upon them.


Pau. and Ros. Curtsying. Yes, we are grateful for the honor.


Mrs. W. But do not as yet feel inclined to marry.


Ern. Whose mortification begins to appear, and soon after increases to rage.
Such may be your opinion, Mrs. Welling, but you are much mistaken. The ladies
had rather be married today than tomorrow -- yes, rather today than
tomorrow, I say.


Pau. How do you know that?


Ern. The girls are in love -- yes, they are in love, I say.


Ros. You seem to be an interpreter of hearts.


Ern. And a certain stripling in this house, a shallow poetaster is a conqueror
of hearts.


Well. Seriously. What do you mean, sir?


Ern. A fellow, of whom we know no more than we do of the wind, where he comes
from, or is going to?


Well. Emphatically. Mr. Ernorf, I request an explanation.


Ern. You shall have it. I came here to make an explanation. The dapper spark,
Lewis, whose release you thought proper to buy of a recruiting party, has in
return enlisted your daughters.


Mrs. W. Mr. Ernorf, my daughters are virtuous women.


Ern. Virtuous they may be; but they are in love. The whole village, the whole
neighborhood, the whole country talks of it. They are in love with a vagrant,
who will be cited to appear before the magistracy, tomorrow, and be sent over
the boundaries next day.


Well. Sir, can you prove your accusation?


Ern. Pshaw! The world seldom requires proofs. The worse any thing appears to
be, the readier it is believed.


Well. Alas! True.


Ern. I, therefore, advise you as a friend, Mr. Welling, and I advise you, Mrs.
Welling, to keep a watchful eye upon these two lovesick damsels, and as to the
gentle rhymster -- tomorrow before the magistracy! -- Dixi.

Exit. Paulina and Rosa burst into a fit of laughter.
Well. I am not pleased to seeing you laugh.


Pau. Dear father, he is only a fool.


Well. How often have I told you that fools do more mischief in the world than
villains! A villain is generally possessed of sense, and does not deal in
defamation, unless he can thereby attain some end, but a fool is continually
prating. I, therefore, merely go out of a rascal's road, but I conceal myself
from a blockhead. As to what Ernorf said, it cannot be his own invention.


Pau. It is indeed. The whole secret is, that Lewis writes better poetry than
he does.


Well. Perhaps I have too much relied upon the idea that fraternal intercourse
is seldom dangerous to the heart. Perhaps the young man has really made some
impression upon you. Surveys them attentively. How! -- Silent! -- Have your
parents lost your confidence?


Ros. Oh no! -- I really like Lewis very much -- but I don't love him.


Well. And you, Paulina? -- You cast down your eyes.


Pau. Stammering. I own, father -- that I think Lewis -- the most amiable man I
ever saw.


Well. You mean, in other words --


Pau. I cannot express it by words; but I feel that if I were allowed to love
him -- With a sigh. I should love him most ardently.


Well. How long have you known this sensation?


Pau. I almost feel as if I had been born with it.


Well. Did he himself endeavor to gain your affections?


Pau. Never. You know how reserved and bashful he is.


Mrs. W. So much the more dangerous is he to a woman's heart.


Pau. Sighing. True, dear mother.


Ros. The same. Yes, true indeed.


Well. Do you believe your affection is returned?


Pau. I do.


Mrs. W. Perhaps because you wish it?


Pau. Perhaps.


Well. I see but two modes of settling this. Lewis must either marry you, or
leave the house.


Pau. Fearfully. Which shall you embrace?


Well. Let us hear your mother's opinion.


Mrs. W. Well -- Lewis is a good young man --


Well. But poor.


Mrs. W. So were you, my dear William.


Well. We don't know who he is.


Mrs. W. Nor did we know who you were.


Well. Yes, yes. Your father knew it.


Mrs. W. I don't know it to this very hour.


Pau. Oh! If I were in twenty-five years to know Lewis as well as you know my
father --


Well. Paulina, I can explain no further, but before Lewis can become my
son-in-law, I must learn his fortunes, and must be convinced his conduct has
always been as praiseworthy as since he lived with us. Go, Rosa, and call him.

Exit Rosa.
Mrs. W. Would you just today --?


Well. Instantly, or I should not enjoy the pleasures of today.


Mrs. W. Go, then, Paulina, it is not proper that you should be present on this
occasion.


Pau. Oh! If it were proper, I am sure I could not stay.

Exit.
Well. Lewis is become dear to me by his honesty and diligence -- perhaps still
more so, by a certain similarity in our fates. If, therefore, I find every
thing accordant to my wishes, and you have no objection --


Mrs. W. It would certainly be the best means of silencing the world.


Enter LEWIS. Lew. I understand you want me.


Well. Did Rosa tell you for what purpose?


Lew. No.


Mrs. W. The under-secretary dislikes you.


Lew. Because my verses are liked.


Well. He insists upon knowing who you are.


Lew. That he will not learn.


Well. If the secretary unites with him --


Lew. And you cannot protect me, I will go.


Well. Will that be so easy to you?


Lew. No. Very difficult.


Well. You may avoid it.


Lew. How?


Well. Tell us your story.


Lew. I cannot.


Well. You have lived with us two years. I have observed you narrowly, and am
sure you are incapable of a crime. -- If you have been guilty of any juvenile
indiscretion, avow it. You know my sentiments.


Lew My conscience does not accuse me of a crime, or even levity. I am only
unfortunate.


Mrs. W. We will assist you in sustaining your misfortunes.


Lew. I must sustain them alone; for if I confess them, I shall be acting
against a sacred duty.


Well. Enough! Let us drop the subject.


Mrs. W. Our intentions were good.


Lew. Oh, you have not confined yourselves to intentions. Your house was my
asylum, and the small measure of enjoyment, of which my heart was susceptible,
you have bestowed on me.


Well. We would willingly double it by reconciling you to your fate.


Lew. Let me then dwell in private as hitherto. Do not, do not rob me of the
bliss I feel in calling you my parents.


Well. I would not do it for my own sake, were I not compelled to it. When you
entered my house, my daughters were still almost children, and we thought not
that your presence would ever injure their reputation.


Lew. You alarm me.


Mrs. W. Do you now perceive why it was necessary we should speak to you.


Lew. Oh God! yes.


Well. If you be such a man as I have fancied you, I may at once declare, that
not only the reputation, but the peace of one of my daughters depends on your
departure.


Lew. After a pause. I will go.


Well. I acted imprudently in having desired Paulina to consider you as her
brother, and in having been silent, while her attachment increased.


Lew. Oh! I would fall at your feet, and say -- "Consider not my poverty, but
look at my heart, and let me marry your Paulina," -- but --


Well. You do not love her?


Lew. I love her from my soul.


Well. And yet --?


Lew. After a pause. I am already married.


Mrs. W. Married!


Well. And have forsaken your wife?


Lew. Condemn me not.


Mrs. W. Shaking her head. Such conduct, Lewis --


Well. Do not reproach him, Ann. If he be guilty, he bears a judge within
himself, before whom he cannot be a hypocrite.


Lew. Oh! you will send me away far poorer than I was when I came, if my
confession has robbed me of your regard.


Well. I do not decide upon it. Two years of upright conduct are to be placed in
competition with this apparently bad action and -- I do not decide. But my duty
as a father, commands me seriously to repeat that your presence disturbs the
tranquillity of my family.


Lew. Shall I depart today -- immediately?


Well. After a moment's consideration. It will hurt me not to see you sitting
tonight among my children -- but -- act as you think I have deserved.

Exit.
Lew. Oh! Allow me to remain one hour.


Mrs. W. Yes, Lewis, he did not mean it in that light. Stay 'till morning.


Lew. I will creep into some corner, and not disturb your happiness --


Mrs. W. Oh that this should just happen today!


Lew. Let me but wander once more through the house and garden. When the guests
come, I will steal away.


Mrs. W. Not without taking leave?


Lew. I cannot take leave of you.


Mrs. W. Lewis, do you think we wish to turn you out of doors like a dishonest
servant? Despair shall not force you to enlist again. I know my husband. He
parts with you because he feels he must; but he will not abandon you -- I will
not abandon you. What he will do for you I don't know, but -- Secretly draws
from her pocket a small leather purse. -- for my part, my love and blessing
shall be a substitute for what is wanting -- in the amount. Puts the purse into
his hand, wipes her eyes, and exit hastily.


Lew. After a pause, during which he mournfully surveys the purse. Wretched
outcast that I am! Have I at length found a mother, only to be doomed doubly to
feel the loss of her? Have I gained a lovely girl's affections, only to make my
chains the heavier? He stands in an attitude of deep reflection and despondency.


Enter PAULINA. Pau. Softly steals behind him, and puts her hands upon his
eyes. Guess who it is. Draws her hands back with sudden alarm, and looks at
them. What does this mean? Your eyes are full of tears.


Lew. You should not have seen them.


Pau. Why are you in tears?


Lew. They are the lot of humanity.


Pau. What is the matter? What has happened? What have you to do with my
mother's purse?


Lew. After a pause. It contains money to defray the expenses of my journey.


Pau. Terrified. Are you going to leave us?


Lew. I must.


Pau. Where are you going?


Lew. Any where. The further, the better.


Pau. Have you, then, staid too long with us?


Lew. Much too long.


Pau. With a sigh. I almost think so, myself.


Lew. Gives her his hand. You have always been kind and affectionate toward me.


Pau. With innocence and fervor. I am so still. Somewhat confused. My father --
wanted to speak to you.


Lew. He has done it.


Pau. And does he approve of your intention?


Lew. I go by his desire.


Pau. Your answers are enigmas.


Lew. My whole being is an enigma, which death alone can solve. -- Farewell,
Paulina -- do not forget me. I have loved all this family -- but you
particularly. -- Wherever I go, your image will accompany me. When you sit
under the great lime-tree -- think sometimes of me.


Pau. Lewis!


Lew. Remember me to the old woman, who used to receive your charities through
me.


Pau. Bursts into tears. Lewis, what does this mean? If you love me --


Lew. My affection for you is a crime -- my heart is sinning against a hateful
duty.


Pau. Oh! Speak more plainly, I beseech you.


Lew. Yes, good Paulina, you shall not learn from another what separates us. It
is hard to tell you -- but tell you I must, that -- I am married.


Pau. Almost shrieking. Married! -- That is not true.


Lew. Would to God it were not!


Pau. Married! -- Oh Lewis! Why did you conceal it?


Lew. Do not hate me.


Pau. Go, go to your wife, and tell her you have robbed Paulina of her peace
for ever. Coveys her face with both hands, and rushes out.


Lew. Paulina! Is that your farewell? Strikes his forehead, and rests his head
against the wall.


The curtain falls. End of the Second Act.
ACT THE THIRD.
SCENE -- A WOOD.
Count Lohrstein is discovered in the back ground, sleeping under a tree -- at
his head lies a casket. Francis and Jacob are in conversation toward the front
of the stage.

Fra. He is asleep. What think you, Jacob? Do you choose to follow him through
woods and bogs any longer? It Is a strange kind of inclination.


Jac. Scratching his head. It Is not exactly inclination.


Fra. Why, a dog leads a better life.


Jac. But our master himself fares no better.


Fra. The cook was the wisest of us, for he ran away, when he had only
traveled one stage.


Jac. The count smiled at that; but last night when his valet disappeared, on
whom he placed such firm reliance --


Fra. Yes, yes -- no doubt he took some valuable effects with him. My advice
is, Jacob, that we do the same.


Jac. What! Leave the old gentleman quite alone!


Fra. Why, he must dismiss us in a day or two, for how can he support us?


Jac. That Is true, to be sure.


Fra. And how long shall we be able to endure such a life at this? We have
passed six nights in the open air. If we espy a chimney, we leave it a quarter
of a mile on one side. We buy our coarse bread at solitary shepherd's huts, and
have nothing to drink but water from the springs we meet with.


Jac. But we have known better days in his service.


Fra. Was it our fault that there was an end to those days? Who knows what
crime he has committed? The prince would scarcely send huzzars in pursuit of
him for nothing.


Jac. Damn those fellows! They nearly caught us once or twice.


Fra. And if they should catch us, we may perhaps be doomed to keep our master
company in prison.


Jac. But we must be near the borders now.


Fra. Well -- cannot the huzzars ride over the borders? -- Besides, we are now
in a worse situation than ever. Our horses are so tired that we shall be
obliged to leave them, and if we be seen creeping through the thickets, we may
be mistaken for robbers, and shot.


Jac. Hang it, Francis, you frighten me.


Fra. Therefore, I say, let us be off before he awakes. Believe me, we shall be
doing him a kindness.


Jac. If I thought so --


Fra. He will not dismiss us, and he cannot pay us. But if, when he awakes, he
finds we have decamped, he will be heartily glad to have got rid of us.


Jac. Casting a glance toward the Count. See! He begins to move.


Fra. Let us lose no more time. Does he owe you any wages?


Jac. Yes, for a couple of months.


Fra. And me for a quarter of a year. We cannot afford to make him a present of
that. In the casket, there, he has several trinkets, rings, and so forth.


Jac. Surely you would not take them?


Fra. Blockhead! Why not?


Jac. What! Rob him?


Fra. Does Not he owe us money?


Jac. But not so much.


Fra. Pshaw! Who knows what the baubles are worth? We can sell them at the
first place we come to, and if they produce more than is due to us, we can send
it to him by the post.


Jac. Why, yes, if that can be done --


Fra. Follow that foot-path. I Will be with you in a minute.


Jac. Good old master! I pity him, nevertheless.

Exit.
Fra. Walks gently to the count, takes the casket, and then returns on tip-toe.
When arrived at some yards distance, he bows sarcastically. Good bye to your
excellency! Your lordship will now not be over-burdened.

Exit.
Loh. Tormented by frightful dreams. Oh! not into this subterraneous dungeon.
-- Give me air! -- Give me air! -- Awakes. Where am I? -- Raises himself.
Heaven be praised, not yet in the hands of my persecutors -- not yet in the
power of the most abandoned of women. -- Alas! My sleep has not refreshed me.
-- The rain has drenched my clothes: -- I must hasten toward the borders, that
I may at least find a house, where I may die. Raises himself with difficulty.
Perhaps my people have, meanwhile, discovered a safe path. Calls. Francis!
Jacob! The honest fellows are endeavoring to find the shortest road through
the thickets. -- Francis! Jacob! -- Yet I ordered them not to go far. -- Where
can they be? My strength is exhausted, and I am no longer able to call.
Exerting himself. Francis! Jacob! -- What can this mean? -- No answer! -- Can
they -- impossible! -- Draws out a littl whistle, gives a signal toward
different quarters, and listens for a reply. Not yet? -- Can they too have
forsaken me? -- Must I then despair of finding honesty among mankind? -- His
casket suddenly occurs to him -- he looks at the place where it lay, and
strikes his forehead. Yes. It Is true. -- Forsaken and robbed! -- They have
deprived me of my last resource. -- Rivets his eyes on the earth -- a pause. --
Here do I stand -- I, who but ten days ago possessed half a million -- and have
not now a morsel of bread to share with my dog -- Looks hastily around. Sultan!
Sultan! -- Alas! My dog too has forsaken me. A pause of dreadful anguish. --
God protect me from insanity! I Will tear a bough from yonder tree, and wander
through the wood -- then, if I hunger, I must gnaw the bark from my staff. --
Yes, they have plundered me, and stolen from my heart all confidence in God or
man. -- Feels his pockets. Nothing, nothing have they left me. -- Stops
suddenly. Yes, yes -- they have. One friend I still possess. -- Draws out a
pistol. Welcome thou friend in need, thou last resource of a despairing man! A
pause. Answer me, philosophy, thou sweet companion of my better days, thou
phantom of my brain -- I am now in earnest -- answer me. May that man, who has
been hurled from the pinnacle of greatness into the gulf of misery, who has
been sold by a faithless wife, and whom each step conducts to an eternal
prison. -- May that man, who has no child, no friend, no hope -- Puts the
pistol to his forehead.


Enter DALNER. Dal. As he is passing, hears part of the above soliloquy, rushes
toward the Count, and wrenches the pistol from his hand. Hold! -- Zounds! That
must not be. -- An old man, too! How short a time will it be ere death of his
own accord will summon you?


Loh. Oh that he would!


Dal. This trigger is soon pulled, but how do you expect to be received above?
-- Understood?


Loh. Oh, my friend! Your intentions are, doubtless good, but a man in despair
has no ear for your cool precepts.


Dal. Why, you are right there, to be sure. But can I help you, eh?


Loh. I am a wretched fugitive, pursued by enemies, and forsaken by every
friend.


Dal. H-m! -- I could ask why, but there is no time for that just now. If,
therefore, I can be of any assistance to you, I will with all my heart.


Loh. Are we far from the borders?


Dal. A hundred yards, perhaps.


Loh. Oh tell me instantly -- to the right or left?


Dal. Where you see a little bridge over the stream yonder. But which way are
you going?


Loh. Any way. I only wish to find a hovel or barn where I can rest 'till
morning, for I have slept six nights beneath the canopy of Heaven.


Dal. Do you suppose, then, we have no beds, eh?


Loh. I have been robbed and can only pay with gratitude.


Dal. I Will take you to a house where that coin is always current. At night you
shall come home with me, but at present we'll go to a cottage hard by, for you
seem in want of refreshment.


Loh. Generous man, who are you?


Dal. Henry Dalner, chief forester of this district -- but that is of no
consequence -- Understood? -- I Will take you to an old farmer, who is
celebrating his twenty-sixth wedding day.


Loh. Uneasy. I wish we were beyond the borders.


Dal. Farmer Welling lives just on the other side of them. Oh? there comes his
son. He Will soon be my son too. -- Understood?


Enter FREDERICK. Fre. Well, father, where is Louisa.


Dal. She is staying to nurse her old aunt, and cannot come 'till evening.


Fre. But couldn't the maid have nursed the old aunt?


Dal. That old aunt acted as a mother to Louisa, and never entrusted her
education to the maid.


Fre. I came to meet you in such spirits --


Dal. You shall not have come in vain, for though you don't find Louisa, you
find an opportunity of doing good. Here is a poor man, whom I have promised to
take with me, and I hope you will receive my guest kindly.


Fre. Of course. If he be unfortunate, he needs no recommendation.


Dal. Look in good humor, then.


Fre. How can I, when Louisa is not at home? To the Count. Don't mind my
countenance, sir. At night, when Louisa is with me, you will see me in spirits.


Dal. Come, then --


Loh. Exhausted. Good man lend me your stick.


Dal. Pshaw! As long as I have an arm, why should I lend my stick. Understood?

Exeunt.
SCENE -- WELLING'S HOUSE.
Mrs. Welling is discovered at her needle work. Welling brings Lewis in.

Well. I have brought a man, whom I surprised, as he was endeavoring to escape
through the back door, without having taken leave.


Mrs. W. Indeed! would he not even accept this linen which I have been
selecting for him?


Lew. You have already given me so much --


Mrs. W. Pst!


Lew. And my father has been so generous.


Well. Silence! I did not bring you hither to hear myself praised.


Lew. Oh! how painful do I find it to bid you farewell! -- I had rather forsake
the world than this house.


Well. We are travelers, whose journey has hitherto been the same way; but we
have now reached the cross road, and must part.


Lew. Adieu, then, father -- adieu, good mother. Wherever my road may conduct
me, it will never lead to ingratitude. -- Words fail me at this bitter hour --
God sees my heart -- and you my tears.


Well. Much affected. A father's benediction be upon thee, youth! May thou,
like me, at length enjoy the blessings of affection, industry and health, and
thank Providence for having, by early sufferings, enhanced the value of your
later bliss.


Mrs. W. Let us often hear where you are, and how you do.


Well. And, Lewis, if you should ever be in want of any thing -- you have given
me your promise?


Lew. You have taught me to work.


Mrs. W. But you may fall sick.


Lew. With a look toward Heaven, expressive of his wishes. And die.


Mrs. W. You break my heart.


Well. Go, my son. It is time that we should part.

Lewis is going.
Mrs. W. Follows and embraces him. Alas! It was thus I felt when my eldest boy
died -- His name was Lewis, too -- I have lost him -- who knows whether I shall
ever see you again?


Well. Let him go, good Ann. He has enough to bear.


Lew. Scarcely able to speak. Father, grant me my last request.


Well. Willingly, my son.


Lew. Let me see Paulina once again.


Well. Would you add to the horrors of the separation?


Lew. Oh, let me see her once again.


Well. To Mrs. W. Where is she?


Mrs. W. In her own room.


Well. Let her come.


Mrs. W. Goes to the door and opens it. Paulina! Lewis is here, and wishes to
bid you farewell.


Enter PAULINA. Her eyes are red with weeping -- She gives Lewis her hand. --
They stand opposite each other silent and trembling. -- A long pause. Well. With
great emotion. Embrace each other, children.


Lewis and Paulina embrace. Paulina walks sobbing to her chamber, and Lewis
rushes out. Mrs. W. Following him. Lewis -- the linen!

Exit.
Well. Short-sighted mortals! Thus you often do harm, while striving to do good.
Had I left this poor youth to his fate, perhaps, ere now, some cannot-ball
might have swept him from the world. He would then have been happy. -- Well, be
this as it may, I will not cease to do what conviction tells me is right.


Enter ROSA. Ros. Father, Lewis is gone.


Well. I know it.


Ros. I heard him sob, as he disappeared behind the hedge.


Well. God be with him!


Ros. My mother is in tears.


Well. Go, and console her.


Ros. I shall only weep with her.


Well. Go, then, to your sister.


Ros. Father, you are, in general, so good -- tell me -- why may not Paulina
marry him?


Well. Because he is already married.


Ros. Already married! -- Then, she must submit to her fate.


Well. She will, I am sure.


Ros. And is that the only reason why Lewis is obliged to leave us?


Well. It is.


Ros. Not because he is poor?


Well. By no means.


Ros. Timidly advancing toward her object. You would have let him marry
Paulina, in spite of his poverty?


Well. I would!


Ros. And if I were -- to like a man -- who was not married -- but poor --


Well. If he were honest and industrious --


Ros. Eagerly. That he is.


Well. Who?


Ros. Much confused. I mean -- but you are not angry, dear father?


Well. At what?


Ros. I would have told you it sooner -- but I only learnt it myself an hour or
two ago.


Well. What?


Ros. That I -- that I love Mr. Rehberg.


Well. Indeed! And how did you learn it?


Ros. He asked me about it.


Well. And you, with your usual openness --


Ros. I referred him to you.


Well. He has not mentioned the subject to me.


Ros. Oh, he durst not. You frightened him.


Well. I!


Ros. You railed against the poverty of professional men.


Well. Hence, then, the sensibility which I remarked.


Ros. But I am certain he misunderstood you. Honesty and industry are all the
qualifications my father requires.


Well. But as I told him, the industry of a professional man will not always
support a family. You are but sixteen years of age, and can wait.


Ros. For Rehberg!


Well. Why not? If in a few years he should obtain a moderate living, and his
sentiments, as well as yours, remain the same --


Ros. Oh! There is no doubt of that.


Well. Why, then, we can talk further on the subject.


Ros. But now? What shall I say to him?


Well. Nothing.


Ros. But he is walking so sorrowfully in the garden.


Well. Go, then, and send him hither.


Ros. Stroking his cheek. Dear father!


Well. What now?


Ros. Talk kindly to him.


Well. I almost think I see a tear in your eye.


Ros. I love him so sincerely.

Exit.
Well. Alone. Rehberg is a sensible man, and that is all I know of him. -- But
who can decide whether poverty or affection be the another of his wishes? --
Wretched indeed would be my Rosa, if she borrowed charms from her father's
coffers.


Enter REHBERG: Reh. With reserve. Rosa has just told me --


Well. Half joking, half in earnest. My dear sir, she has told you many things
too soon, and I must own I had rather have heard from you, what she has just
confessed to me.


Reh. Appearances are against me.


Well. Yet good news is welcome from any one.


Reh. How happy should I be, if I could think you serious!


Well. Can I make a joke of my daughter's happiness? When I tell you that I have
observed qualities in you which claim my respect, I speak the truth.


Reh. The respect of a worthy man satisfies my ambition, but not my heart.


Well. After a pause. Our relative situations give me a right to be candid with
you.


Reh. I shall evade no question you may please to ask.


Well. You have enemies.


Reh. That is a compliment to me.


Well. How so?


Reh. He who injures no man, and yet has enemies, cannot be a common kind of
man.


Well. The secretary's house is not in the best repute. You are often there.


Reh. Because I give lessons in music there, as well as here.


Well. It is said you admire one of his daughters.


Reh. I have heard as much.


Well. And do not cease your visits?


Reh. No. Because there no regard is paid to so absurd a report, and I myself
cannot afford to renounce the profits of my attendance.


Well. Why not? -- Forgive me if I seem too forward. -- You are a single man.


Reh. I have a poor mother. --

A pause.
Well. But it is said you play -- and play for large sums.


Reh. To this assertion I shall answer with a mere No.


Well. You do not play?


Reh. I have once or twice taken the cards of another, when called away -- I
myself never play.


Well. You had, as I am told, a good library?


Reh. I had.


Well. You sold it?


Reh. With a sigh. I did.


Well. I have heard that the money you obtained for it was lost at the
secretary's card-table.


Reh. That is an infamous falsehood.


Well. I guess -- your poor mother --


Reh. Confused. No. After a pause. It Is well. I will not conceal from you even
this circumstance, but I beg you to believe that nothing but my present
situation should induce me to disclose it. I am of low origin, and my father
was seized with the pious whim of making me a clergyman, without being able to
bestow any thing on my education. My humble talents, however, procured me a
patron, who was in easy circumstances, and who defrayed the expenses of my
studies. To him I was obliged for every thing; and the library you have
mentioned, was his present. About a year ago, this worthy man was plundered by
the French, and obliged in his age to become a beggar. It was then I sold my
books.


Well. And sent him the money?


Reh. I could do no more for him.


Well. I know enough, and as you are not satisfied with my respect Offers his
hand. accept my admiration -- regard -- affection --


Reh. With warmth. Will you be my father?


Well. Good Rehberg! You consider not what weighty duties already rest on you. A
poor mother -- a poor benefactor -- and a wife too -- children -- or do you
calculate on my daughter's fortune?


Reh. No.


Well. Perhaps you have prospects at our vicar's death?


Reh. None. -- I had prospects elsewhere, but within an hour my hopes from that
quarter have been destroyed, and had I sooner received the intelligence I would
have been silent.


Well. Explain yourself.


Reh. I had succeeded in interesting some men of consequence for me at the
neighboring court.


Well. Starts. At the neighboring court!


Reh. A pamphlet, in which at least my patriotic zeal was evident, excited the
attention of the minister.


Well. Confused and agitated. The minister. Oh, I know him.


Reh. He is a man of great influence --


Well. Certainly.


Reh. He has large estates --


Well. True -- he has -- confiscated estates.


Reh. Among others, the living of Birkendorf is in his gift.


Well. Aside. Birkendorf! Oh God!


Reh. This living was described to me as a very profitable one, and the place
as comfortable and retired.


Well. Suppressing his agitation. Oh! It Is a sweet place -- I was once there. --
Well? You received a promise --?


Reh. I was almost certain of success.


Well. And were, nevertheless, disappointed? By what means?


Reh. Of that I am ignorant. A letter, which I received about an hour ago,
briefly states that unexpected circumstances have taken place, which deprive me
of all hope at present.


Well. I am sorry, good Rehberg, I am sorry that I cannot make you vicar of
Birkendorf, but it really is not in my power.


Reh. Somewhat surprised. That I know.


Well. Yet -- if you have resolution enough to wait -- you shall have Rosa.


Reh. Enraptured. Thanks, dearest sir! I care not how rough the path, if she be
the object to which it leads.


Well. I should have liked to have visited you at Birkendorf very much -- oh,
very much.


Enter Mrs. WELLING. Mrs. W. My dear William, our neighbor Dalner is bringing
another guest with him.


Well. Whom?


Mrs. W. Frederick says, he found him in the wood.


Well. I don't like strangers.


Mrs. W. A poor man in distress --


Well. Then he is welcome. I should ill deserve my present happiness, were I on
such a day as this to send a fellow, creature in distress from my door.


Mrs. W. Poor Lewis!


Well. We have lost a son in him -- but here stands a man who will supply his
place.


Mrs. W. With formal civility. Indeed!


Well. Come, come, Ann. I have proved him, and will be surety for him.


Mrs. W. You!


Well. The reports you heard are false.


Mrs. W. I am glad they are.


Well. Pshaw, wife! You don't speak from your heart.


Mrs. W. With warmth. Indeed I am glad.


Well. He is a good son, and a grateful man.


Reh. With diffidence. Dear Mr. Welling!


Well. You know, Ann, that I only give this title to those who remain so longer
than the kindness itself endures, and whose gratitude is not like a crayon
picture, which every year loses a portion of its colors. Such men are rare,
and he is one of them.


Mrs. W. I am ashamed of having done him an injustice.


Well. Embrace him, then, as your future son-in-law.


Mrs. W. With all my heart!

She does it.
Well. That is, as soon as he obtains a living, which will banish all cares for
subsistence. Instill this idea in Rosa's mind, and tell her to be patient.


Mrs. W. But, my dear husband, why delay their happiness? With our fortune --


Well. You know my sentiments. A good wife is so great a treasure, that I am not
at all surprised when I read of nations who receive money from the bridegroom,
when they bestow a daughter upon him. A girl ought to have no dowry but beauty
and virtue. Thus thought your father -- thus think I. --


Reh. Who would not think such a dowry sufficient?


Enter Mr. DALNER, Count LOHRSTEIN, and FREDERICK. Fre. Father, Louisa is not
come.


Dal. With your permission, neighbor, I Will introduce a stranger.

Welling gazes full at the Count.
Loh. Encouraged by this worthy man, I have ventured to intrude upon you.

Welling, without making any reply, surveys him with close attention.
Mrs. W. You are sincerely welcome.


Loh. If misfortunes give me any claim on your compassion --


Dal. Whispering to Welling, who stands like a statue. Speak a kind word, or
two. He is a poor fellow, whom fate seems to have dealt hardly by. I found him
in the wood just when he was going -- Imitates the action of holding the pistol
to his head. Understood?


Well. Recovering. I -- sir -- I rejoice -- consider my house as your own --
and, if you are in search of an asylum -- you have found it.


Loh. I thank you. That is the first word of consolation I have heard after six
days of horror. Am I over the borders, here?


Well. Always agitated. You are.


Loh. In safety, then?


Well. Perfectly.


Loh. And if my pursuers were even to force their way hither --


Well. Here dwells no traitor.


Loh. Your hand, honest old man! -- Welling gives it. The trembling of it might
make me suspicious --


Dal. Never fear, sir. This man's promise, with a shake of the hand, is as safe
as a bond with a dozeh seals to it.


Well. In a broken voice. My wife -- and my children -- will take care -- that
you want nothing. -- I myself -- forgive me -- I must leave you for a few
moments.


Mrs. W. Alarmed. What is the matter, dear William?


Dal. Neighbor, you grow pale.


Well. I am not well. Frederick and Mrs. W. run to him.


Fre. Father!


Mrs. W. For Heaven's sake --


Well. Let me go -- it will soon be over -- I Will step into my chamber -- stay --
stay -- I wish to be alone. Reels a few steps -- then supports himself on a
chair, which stands near him. I cannot -- Frederick -- assist me. -- Frederick
runs and conducts him to the chamber.


Mrs. W. Heavens! What is this?


Dal. A serious accident. To Rehberg. Something like an apoplectic fit.


Welling having reached the door, is unable any longer to keep his feet, and
sinks into the arms of his son. Mrs. W. Shrieks. He is dying! He is dying!

Dalner and Rehberg hasten to his assistance.
Reh. Heaven forbid!


Dal. Put him to bed directly.

They carry him in.
Loh. Alone. Of all my followers none has remained with me but misery. Am I
then doomed to bring sorrow into this peaceful hut too?


Mrs. W. Rushes from her chamber. Paulina! Rosa! Your father --

Runs back.
Pau. Without. What is the matter?


Fre. Meeting her. My father is ill. We must send for a surgeon directly.

Runs out.
Pau. Without paying any attention to the stranger. Heavens! So suddenly!

Runs into the chamber.
Ros. Without. My father! My father!

Rushes shrieking across the stage into the chamber.
Fre. Returning -- as he crosses the stage. Oh God! Help us! Help us!

Runs in.
Loh. Alone. Oh that I could die thus! Oh that I had children, who thus loved
me!


Mrs. W. With Paulina. There Is the key -- in the little cupboard -- on the
right -- a brown vial -- or on the left -- or right -- oh, I don't know.
Returns. Paulina runs out.


Loh. Alone, and deeply moved. I thank thee, God! -- I still can feel for
other's woes.


Paulina crosses the stage with the vial in her hand, and sobbing violently.
Loh. Alone What was my rank -- my splendid station? What has my life been,
compared with this man's death?


Dal. Gently pushing Mrs. W. and her daughters out of the chamber. Pshaw! Your
groans and cries only make the evil the greater. Pray stay here. Nothing shall
be neglected.

Returns.
Mrs. W. Transported beyond herself. Heavens! After living twenty-five years
with him, must I leave him at his dying hour?


Pau. Mother, he will not die.


Ros. Oh no, no! He will not die.


Mrs. W. Let me go to fulfill my duty. When you were born, Paulina, and I was
dangerously ill, your father never left my side. -- Shall I then leave him in
the hands of strangers?


Reh. Opens the door. Be quiet. He recovers.


Ros. Did you hear that, mother? He recovers.


Pau. Falling on Mrs. Welling's neck. Mother! Mother! Rejoice! Heaven will
restore him to us.


Mrs. W. Is it, then true? Oh yes! It must be true. God will not separate two
such loving hearts. -- Come, children, kneel, and pray with me for your
father's recovery. Sinks on her knees. Paulina and Rosa kneel on each side of
her. All raise their hands toward Heaven, and pray.


Fre. From the chamber. Joy! Mother! My father is come to himself again.


Mrs. W. Stretches her arms toward him -- He raises her. Frederick, I thought
I had blessed you as far as I was able -- I was mistaken -- Heaven bless you a
thousand times for this intelligence!


Pau. Hanging on him. Are you sure of it, brother?


Ros. The same. Is all the danger over?


Fre. I believe it is. He can stand again. He is only rather weak, and has just
drank a glass of wine.


Mrs. W. May I, then, go to him? In a tone of entreaty. Yes, yes. Let me go to
him.


Fre. Good mother, this has affected you very much. Come! I Will support you.


Mrs. W. I have him again. -- Oh God! Forgive me -- as yet I cannot thank thee.
Goes slowly toward the chamber supported by Frederick. The door opens.


Fre. See! There he is!


Welling appears at the door, leaning on Dalner and Rehberg. Mrs. W. Flies into
his arms. My husband!


The three children kneel round him, the Count stands in a corner, and casts a
look of bitter sorrow on the group. The curtain falls. End of the Third Act.
ACT THE FOURTH.
Welling is discovered, sitting in the middle of the stage, surrounded by his
wife and children. On each side of him stand Dalner and Rehberg -- the Count is
more toward the front of the stage.

Well. Good Ann, be at ease. It is over.


Mrs. W. Will Not you put on your bed-grown?


Pau. I Will go for it.


Ros. I Will fetch your slippers.


Well. Will you, then, make me ill by compulsion? I tell you I am well. Give me
a glass of wine. That is all I want.

Mrs. W. and her daughters runs to the door.
Well. Hold! Why you need not all go for it.


Pau. I was the first.


Ros. No -- I was.


Pau. No -- I was.


Mrs. W. And I am your mother. Where are the keys?


Well. You know, Ann, I don't like you any longer to fatigue yourself by going
into the cellar.


Pau. There -- you hear mother -- I am to go.


Ros. No, it is my week.


Pau. You have nothing to do with the cellar. Your week only relates to the
kitchen.


Ros. But I love my father as much as you do.


Well. Children at this rate, I shall not have any thing. I love you both. Go,
both of you.

They run out.
Dal. Neighbor, I am thinking that* what is passing round you must revive you
more than wine. Understood?


Well. True. If there be any medicine, which can promote long life, it must be
affection.


Re-enter PAULINA and ROSA. One brings a bottle -- the other a silver goblet.
Pau. Number 4.


Ros. With a black seal.


Pau. There is Hochheim upon it.


Ros. And 1776.


Well. Drinks and says to Rosa. Fill it. She obeys -- he turns to the Count.
Sir, I am sorry that, added to your own misfortunes, you have been obliged to
witness the distress of others. -- Raises the goblet. -- According to the
ancient custom of our country I sincerely bid you welcome.


Paulina takes the goblet and delivers it to the Count with a curtsey. Loh.
Empties it. To the health of my worthy bost! -- Now, sir, if you really remain
true to the customs of our forefathers, I am secure in your house, for we have
drank from the same goblet.


Well. Here lurks no traitor.


Dal. Spies gain nothing here.


Fre. But a drubbing.


Reh. And contempt.


Mrs. W. If you be weary, sir, I Will conduct you to a retired chamber.


Pau. You shall sleep on linen which we wove ourselves.


Ros. And feathers of our own geese.


Loh. Heaven be praised that I again find myself among men! All I see and hear
inspires confidence. I should like, good old man, to have a little conversation
with you in private.


Well. With all my heart! My friends, and children, you will find employment
enough, if you will go into the court, and assist in the preparations for our
little country feast.


Dal. I sent you a few poles for the occasion, from the forest.


Pau. And I made the garlands for them.

Exeunt Dal. and Pau.
Ros. Mr. Rehberg will teach us a chorus, in the mean time.


Reh. With all my heart.

Exeunt Ros. and Reh.
Fre. I cannot sing, but I can join with my violin.

Exit.
Mrs. W. You Will not be long before you follow us?


Well. As soon as possible.

Exit Mrs. W.
Loh. Generous man, it is my duty to make a discovery of my rank and situation
to you, that you may know you are not harboring a criminal.


Well. Of a crime I hold Count Lohrstein to be incapable.


Loh. Alarmed. How! You know me.


Well. Steadfastly. Yes, Count, business has sometimes carried me to your
Prince's residence, where I have seen you.


Loh. Then you are probably not ignorant what rank and honors I possessed but a
few days since?


Well. You were your Prince's all-powerful minister.


Loh. In reality an office, but all adapted to my inclination. Alas! There was
a time, when domestic felicity in the arms of my first consort left me no other
wish. -- She died. -- I forsook my solitary country dwelling, rushed into the
whirlpool of the city to dissipate my grief and to seek another affectionate
heart; instead of which I found a deceitful and ambitious woman, who from an
admirer of a country life transformed me into a courtier, and used me as the
tool of her designs.


Well. I know the Countess, too.


Loh. By situations for ever new and intricate she kept me remote from nature
and affection. By inexhaustible intrigues and plots she, for a train of years,
bound to our house the favor of the court, 'till the old Prince, feeling the
approach of death --


Well. In involuntary agitation. He died?


Loh. Some months previous to his dissolution, my wife, in combination with an
abandoned daughter-in-law, engendered new plans. She knew the hereditary Prince
disliked me, and that his father's death would be the signal for my dismissal;
but she also knew the connection which subsisted between the young Prince and
my daughter-in-law. With her, therefore, she began to cabal, finding she could
no longer maintain her station by her own devices. Two furies suppressed the
hatred which had endured for years, and the snakes from their hair were
intertwined. Over powered with agony. Oh!


Well. It is to your praise, my lord, that you were not invited to share in this
coalition.


Loh. I was. I had been persuaded to so many things -- had so often
despotically forced my heart to silence, that, on this occasion too, they
thought their game an easy one. Yet although I had breathed none but court-air
for seven-and-twenty years, I found it impossible to cringe to a woman, who had
plunged my son into misery, and branded my name with infamy. I was not even
able to suppress some severe remarks occasioned by the abandoned life of my
daughter-in-law. She thirsted for revenge, and my wife prudently took the
strongest side. The Prince died --


Well. With an involuntary sigh. He was a good man, and not formed for the
intrigues of a court.


Loh. Astonished. Your opinion is just. How happens it that you --


Well. Interrupting him. It was not exactly my opinion. Proceed, my lord.


Loh. I was prepared to receive my dismissal, but not to give account of every
weakness, which might be laid to my charge during the twenty-seven years of my
administration, of every injustice perhaps, to which at the pressing
instigation of my wife and her adherents, I had now and then been led. I was
not prepared against proofs, which my wife had stolen from my cabinet, and
lodged in the hands of my enemies. -- Her reward was the permission to remain
at court, and wander like the ghost of her former greatness, while I was doomed
to perpetual imprisonment.


Well. Which you escaped by flight?


Loh. Forsaken by all, who had been obliged to me for their situations, I was
apprized of the impending danger by an old man, for whom I had done nothing --
whom I had always considered as a cipher. Heaven's blessings be shed on honest
Zahn!


Well. Starts. Zahn!


Loh. At the peril of losing his scanty subsistence, he forced his way at
midnight to my chamber. "My Lord," said he, "I am under no obligation to you,
and I do not like you; but you are about to be ill-treated. Fly, or at break of
day you will be imprisoned in the castle."


Well. Aside. Such conduct is what I should expect of honest Zahn.


Loh. I fled -- and was pursued with such alacrity and fury as none but female
vengeance could devise. Twice have I been surrounded by hussars. My escape was
almost a miracle, and who knows whether even here --


Well. Be at ease, my Lord. No force shall intrude upon you here. You are on the
borders of a just Prince, and in the house of a man, who honors hospitality.


Loh. You engage I am secure?


Well. I do.


Loh. And will you allow me to remain with you, 'till a trusty friend, informed
of my situation, can assist me in proceeding further?


Well. As long as you please.


Loh. For I must confess to you that my sudden flight allowed me to rescue but
little, and even this little has been stolen by people, on whose fidelity I
relied.


Well. Command my purse.


Loh. Good man, you carry your generosity too far.


Well. Not so, my lord. I merely pay an old debt.


Loh. To me!


Well. I too was once a wretched fugitive, and therefore consider every
unfortunate man as a creditor sent by God.


Enter Mrs. WELLING. Mrs. W. Dear William, I beg pardon for disturbing you, but
the people below are talking about soldiers.


Loh. Alarmed. What kind of soldiers?


Mrs. W. They are listening and looking among the bushes in the wood -- they
certainly are on no good errand.


Well. Who can know that; for we live peaceably? They are, perhaps, looking for
strawberries.


Enter PAULINA. Pau. Father, there are hussars belonging to the neighboring
Prince in the village.


Loh. Oh God!


Well. Well, what is that to us?


Pau. They go from house to house, and break open every room that is locked,
like robbers.


Well. Then they must be taken into custody, like robbers.


Pau. They are in search of somebody.


Well. They have no right to search here.


Enter ROSA. Ros. Father, there are hussars at the gate.


Well. Let the gate be locked.


Ros. They have been asking our men whether there was not a stranger in the
house.


Well. And what answer was returned?


Ros. As you had not forbidden it, the men told the truth.


Well. The truth is never forbidden in my house.


Loh. I am lost.


Well. Be at ease. I am surety for your safety.


Enter REHBERG. Reh. The whole court is full of hussars.


Well. My dear Ann, these people have had a great deal of trouble to no purpose.
Give them a little beer.


Reh. They insist with violence on your delivering up a prisoner.


Well. They will be more civil, when they learn my determination.


Reh. They threaten.


Well. How many of them are there?


Reh. About twenty.


Well. Then their threats are ridiculous.


Loh. Oh, rather deliver me into their hands. Shall I plunge you too, worthy
man, and your whole family into ruin?


Well. Well, my Lord, I have pledged to you my word, that you are in safety. I
will abide by it.


Enter DALNER. Dal. The devil has let loose a set of rascals, who act as if
they were in an enemy's country.


Well. Paulina, send some one by the back way into the village, and ask a dozen
young fellows to come hither.

Exit. Pau.
Loh. How! Would you oppose them?


Well. Be patient. We shall not be obliged to have recourse to extremities.


Dal. Hark ye, Rosa. Send a man to my house with orders that all the foresters
come hither directly with their guns, and hangers. Do you hear?

Exit. Ros.
Loh. Oh, sir! Return me the friend, of whom you robbed me in the wood.


Dal. Be quiet. Not a hair of your head shall be touched, by God. Understood?


Fre. Without. Back!


Brave. The same. Out of my way, boy!


Fre. This is not a pot-house.


Well. Let him come, my son.


Enter FREDERICK and BRAVE. Bra. Sees the Count. Ha! Ha! Have I found you at
last? Follow me, my Lord, without opposition.


Loh. Sir, the person, in whose hands you are an instrument --


Bra. I am not an instrument, but a servant of my Prince. Come with me
instantly. The carriage waits.


Dal. Suppressing his anger. But you must know, sir, that in this country it is
not usual for people to break into a house, like a hawk into a lark's nest --
understood? -- You must know, sir, that we understand a little law, if you do
not.


Fre. Attacking him on the other side. And you must know that the carriage may
perhaps wait some time.


Mrs. W. Pulling him away. Frederick!


Bra. Who are you, and what do you mean?


Dal. We are people who belong to this place -- understood?


Fre. Yes, and the word of command is: To the right about face, and ride home
again.


Mrs. W. Pulling him away. Frederick! Frederick!


Bra. What! Dare you attempt by abusive language --


Well. Hold, hold! Your pardon, sir. My friend and son are rather incensed at
the illegal way in which you have entered this house.


Bra. Illegal! How do you know that?


Well. How! I am the master of this house, and know my privileges.


Bra. I want nothing of you.


Well. But you want to take away one, who is enjoying the rights of hospitality
here. You want to do it by compulsion.


Bra. I hope you will be rational, and not oblige me to do so.


Well. I beg you will produce your orders.


Bra. My orders! I don't know that I am answerable to you for my conduct -- but
that is of no consequence. Here are my orders.


Well. Opens the paper. You are surely joking, lieutenant. These orders are not
from my Prince.


Bra. But they are from mine.


Well. To whom I owe no obedience.


Bra. But I do, and by my soul I have neglected it too long.


Well. I do not perceive one syllable in these orders, which justifies you in
disturbing the dominions of a neighboring Prince.


Bra. Enough! I know how far I dare proceed.


Well. Has your Prince commanded this?


Bra. I am not bound to answer that question.


Well. And will mine submit to it?


Bra. With that I have nothing to do. In a word, the Count will please to come
with me.


Well. In a word, lieutenant, he shall not.


Bra. Starts. Shall not!


Well. Emphatically. No.


Bra. Sir, I advise you to retract this declaration, or it will be the cause of
bloodshed.


Enter PAULINA. Pau. Father, there are not twelve, but forty of the villagers
assembled in the court, and armed with forks.


Well. Do you hear, lieutenant?


Bra. We are not afraid of such rabble.


Enter ROSA. Ros. Mr. Dalner, the foresters are running down the hill.


Dal. These, sir, are my lads, armed with guns and hangers. -- Marksmen, sir,
who can hit a button. Understood?


Bra. You surely do not mean to oppose my orders. Beware what you do. The Count
is a criminal.


Loh. That am I not.


Well. Lieutenant, you and I are no longer young. Let us have a little
conversation together, in private. Strange will it be, if men like us, cannot
part with each other on friendly terms.


Bra. With all my heart.


Well. My dear Ann, take your daughters into another room.


Mrs. W. In a tone of apprehension. But, dearest husband --


Pau. and Ros. Dear father!


Well. Be at ease. There is no danger. Mr. Rehberg, be kind enough to accompany
them. Your assurances of my safety may make them less afraid.

Exeunt Mrs. W. Pau. Ros. and Reh.
Well. To Dalner. Go you, my friend, with Frederick into the court, and see that
our peasants do not begin a quarrel with the hussars.


Dal. I will. Not one of them shall move.

Exit.
Fre. But if the hussars behave improperly, I Will not answer for them.

Exit.
Well. Calls after him in a serious tone. I command you to keep them quiet. You,
my Lord, will be kind enough to step into the next room.


Bra. Hold! I shall not allow my prisoner to be out of sight.


Well. After a pause. Well, then, he may remain here. -- I did not indeed wish
-- but circumstances make it necessary. He must, however, promise not to
interrupt our conversation.


Loh. You know that here I must obey, and you, generous man, I willingly obey.


Bra. Wave all further preface, for my time is short.


Well. Enough! -- Lieutenant, you seem determined rigidly to follow your
instructions.


Bra. I have been thirty years in service, and must know what I have to do.


Well. But I well know, that in the execution of severe orders, you have not
always been so exact.


Bra. Mr. Farmer, or whatever else you may be, this is very presumptuous
language to an old officer.


Well. Had you never before any orders of a similar nature?


Bra. None that I recollect.


Well. It is, I own, a long time ago, and the circumstances may have escaped
your memory. About twenty-seven years since, when Baron Wellingrode fled --
Brave starts. were not you sent in pursuit of him?


Bra. Somewhat confused. How do you know that?


Well. I know still more. You overtook him, made him a prisoner in your own
Prince's territories, and yet -- allowed him to escape.


Bra. H-m -- yes -- I remember -- he escaped.


Well. With your consent.


Bra. Who says that?


Well. You ventured it at the risk of being cashiered.


Bra. Who can prove that?


Well. You even shared your purse with him. -- You were then a youth, whose
heart could feel for the misfortunes of another. Has age made it callous?


Bra. Well -- I own this account is true, but the case was quite different.
Baron Wellingrode was rewarded by his Prince with ingratitude, and the people
loved him as their father, whereas Count Lohrstein --


Well. Are you appointed his judge, or were you then the Baron's judge?


Bra. You strike home to me. -- You are right -- I ought not to have connived
at his escape, but I was under material obligations to him. He was my
benefactor. When I was but a poor orphan, he procured me a situation in the
military academy. Through his recommendation I was made a cornet, and had he
not fallen, I should long since have had a troop. Never, never can I think of
that man without being affected. Gently rest his ashes!


Well. Aside. Oh! what a blissful moment!


Bra. I undertook to go in pursuit of him only that I might escort him to a
place of safety. Sooner should my hand have withered than I would have laid it
on my benefactor.


Well. If the memory of this man be so dear to you, give liberty to the Count
for his sake.


Bra. To the Count. Why, he it was, who ruined Baron Wellingrode.


Loh. Not I -- my wife --


Well. Immaterial. If Wellingrode has pardoned him, and taken him under his
protection --


Bra. Let him go, and throw himself upon his grave. That place of refuge will
be more sacred to me than the altar.


Well. Why upon his grave? Let him throw himself into his arms Goes toward the
Count with open arms. and find safety on the bosom of ^ reconciled enemy.


Loh. Heavens! What is this?


Well. Presses him to his heart. Now, Brave, tear him from your old patron's
arms.


Bra. In the utmost astonishment. What! Can you -- you be --


Well. I am Baron Wellingrode. The Count sinks on his knee. Welling raises him
and gently seats him on a chair.


Bra. After a pause, during which he endeavors to compose himself, presses
Welling's hand between both his own, and gazes intently at him for several
moments. Yes, it is he -- it is my benefactor. -- Alas! Have I then found him
in this situation?


Well. Content has no peculiar situation; but whether clad in ermine or the
peasant's frock, dwells only with affection and domestic comfort. Good Brave, I
am truly happy.


Bra. That declaration will console me, at my dying hour. Oh thou, whose ashes
I so often have blessed, whom I a thousand times have wished back to our world
that I might be able to evince my gratitude, tell me, can old Brave do nothing
for you? -- I Will inform the Prince you are alive. I Will summon all your friends
to appear in your behalf. Oh, how many still remember you, and bless you!


Well. Not so, honest Brave. If I merit any recompense, bestow on me the liberty
of this old man, whom the inscrutable ways of Providence have directed to my
house -- perhaps to try whether I was worthy of my present happiness.


Bra. Will you protect this man?


Well. As long as I am able.


Bra. You have forgotten --


Well. Every thing.


Bra. Revenge is sweet.


Well. Forgiveness sweeter.


Bra. Deeply affected. Yes. Could I not have called to mind those venerable
features, I should have known you by these noble sentiments. -- Feel, Count
Lohrstein, feel how this man acts. -- You are free. My people shall depart
immediately.

Wipes his eye, shakes Welling's hand, and goes.
Loh. Quite abashed. My Lord --


Well. Dear Count, I am no longer accustomed to hear that title.


Loh. Your revenge is sweet to your own sensations, but to mine, bitter.


Well. He, who can feel thus deserves no other vengeance to be practiced toward
him.


Loh. To be confounded and ashamed before an enemy is insupportable sensation.


Well. Am I your enemy?


Loh. My wife's ambition robbed you of every thing.


Well. And my heart restored to me every thing.


Loh. Your estates --


Well. Those you mean I but inherited -- those I now possess I have earned. Oh,
my Lord, a tree raised by ourselves affords more pleasure than a whole wood
planted by chance.


Loh. You (...) deprived of your rank. --


Well. I am loved here for my own sake.


Loh. The favor of the Prince --


Well. Favor I never aimed at. I only sought friendship in a soil, where it does
not grow.


Loh. The power of doing good.


Well. That dwells in every one, and may, like air, be compressed into a narrow
compass. Even the beggar can purchase, with his farthing, this happy conviction.


Loh. You will, perhaps, at last even convince me that I am your benefactor,
and --


Well. Hastily interrupting him. That you are Count. By the Almighty, that you
are, for, had not your power been directed against me, I never should have
gained this pleasing harmony of all my feelings, this perfect satisfaction,
this peace, which neither passion nor reproach can disturb. I am healthy, in
easy circumstances, and possessed of an affectionate wife, and three good
children -- I am never peevish, never tormented by that demon, ennui -- I am
familiar with nature, and surrounded by uncorrupted people. I find sincerity in
every hut, affection in every eye, and peace in my own breast. -- Point out to
me the man at court, who, while basking in the sunshine of favor, can say as
much -- Yes, Count, you are indeed my benefactor.


Loh. Is it not enough to have abashed me? Would you excite my envy too?


Well. Share my happiness by remaining with us.


Loh. Alas! it is too late. The art of being happy must, like other arts, be
learnt in youth. When old, it can no longer be comprehended.


Well. You are mistaken. The art of being happy, consists in seriously wishing
to be so.


Loh. Yes, if you could raise my first wife from the dead, if you could restore
my unhappy son to me --


PAULINA rushes breathless into the room. Pau. Father! Father!


Well. What now, my child? Is your mother ill?


Pau. No. Lewis -- Lewis --


Well. Well?


Pau. Scarcely able to articulate. He is dead.

Sinks upon a chair.
Well. God forbid! Has he killed himself?


Pau. No -- the hussars --

Well. is going.
Enter ERNORF. Ern. In a tone of triumph. Such are the consequences --


Well. What is the matter, Mr. Ernorf? Speak! My poor girl cannot.


Ern. Thus it is, when all sorts of people are admitted into a family.


Well. I beseech you, for Heaven's sake to wave your comments, and relate what
has happened.


Ern. Well, then -- Mr. Lewis, with his usual forwardness, has thought proper
to attack, the hussars, who, in return, have struck off his nose and ears, and
split his scull completely asunder.


Well. Is he dead?


Ern. He is struggling, as yet -- but that will soon be over.


Well. Where is he?


Ern. He was carried into the room, where your laborers sit. Exit. Well.
hastily. He Will not make any more verses now, but I will be so generous as to
sketch an elegy for him.

Exit.
Paulina sheds not a tear, but looks around her with wild despair. Loh.
Approaching her compassionately. Good lady, who is this Lewis?


Pau. With a convulsive smile. Don't you know him?


Loh. Perhaps your brother?


Pau. With heartfelt sorrow. Yes -- my brother.


Loh. Compose yourself. He may still recover.


Pau. May he? Are you a surgeon? Oh, save him!


Loh. No. dear lady, I am not a surgeon.


Pau. Sinks on her knees before the chair. Then save him, thou, oh God!


Loh. Looks at her with sympathy. Good father! Where is thy peace and happiness
now?


The curtain falls. End of the Fourth Act.
ACT THE FIFTH.
Enter Mrs. WELLING, quite exhausted. Mrs. W. Seats herself. I can no more. --
Weary as I am, I can find no rest.


Enter DALNER. Dal. Wiping his forehead. A hot day this, good neighbor --
understood?


Mrs. W. Alas, Mr. Dalner! What an intermixture of joy and sorrow!


Dal. All Is well that ends well.


Mrs. W. They will not admit me to my Lewis.


Dal. He must be kept quite composed.


Mrs. W. Have you seen him?


Dal. No -- nor do I wish it. I don't like even to be present when a stag is
dying.


Mrs. W. Oh Heavens! Then you really think he will die?


Enter PAULINA. Pau. I can stay no longer with the stranger.


Mrs. W. Who sent you to him?


Pau. My father wished it. He thought it might dissipate my anxiety, but his
conduct is so strange, that he quite alarms me. He walks up and down the room,
talking to himself. When I speak to him he smiles, and if he makes any reply,
it is quite unintelligible.


Dal. His misfortunes may perhaps have -- Pointing to his head. Understood?


Pau. And no one was compassionate enough to bring me any tidings of Lewis. Is
he still alive?


Mrs. W. Yes, he is.


Pau. Will he recover?


Mrs. W. The surgeon and your father are with him, but they will not allow any
other person to enter the room.


Pau. Oh! You will not tell me -- but I am sure he is dead.


Dal. He is not indeed. A couple of wounds seldom kill a man.


Enter FREDERICK hastily. Fre. In ill-humor. The infernal scoundrels have
better horses than our's.


Mrs. W. Where have you been? You seem quite heated.


Fre. Your foresters, Mr. Dalner, and I, and a dozen of the villagers, followed
the hussars as long as we could see the dust, but we couldn't keep pace with
them.


Dal. Well, and suppose you had overtaken them?


Fre. Then, as I hope to be saved, they should have paid dearly for every drop
of blood, which Lewis has shed.


Pau. I thank you, brother.


Mrs. W. And if they had wounded you in the same way?


Dal. What a hotheaded stripling! How do you know whether Lewis was not guilty
of the first provocation?


Pau. I am sure he was not.


Fre. If he attacked them, I am sure he had good reason for it.


Mrs. W. Does nobody yet know how the quarrel arose?


Fre. How can any body know it? Lewis is unable to speak, and the hussars have
run away.


Mrs. W. Were none of our people concerned, then?


Fre. Not one.


Enter WELLING. All surround him. Pau. Well, father?


Dal. How go matters on?


Mrs. W. Is Lewis better?


Fre. Will he recover?


Well. He is out of danger.


Mrs. W. and Pau. Heaven be praised!


Dal. I am glad to hear it.


Fre. I must go to him.


Well. Hold, Frederick! The surgeon has prescribed quiet as the most effectual
medicine. His wounds have been examined. That in the head is of no consequence
-- the one in his arm is larger, but not dangerous. It was only the loss of
blood which overpowered him, and he is come to himself again.


Mrs. W. You know, then, what has happened?


Well. No. He was going to tell me, but the surgeon would not allow him to
speak, and desired us to leave the room, as repose was absolutely necessary.
Nobody but Mr. Rehberg remained with him.


Mrs. W. He is not in want of any thing, I hope?


Well. I have provided every thing necessary.


Pau. Are you sure of that, father? If you would allow me -- if I might --


Well. In a tone of admonition. Paulina?


Pau. You are right. It is improper.


Enter REHBERG. Reh. Lewis insists on speaking to you.


Well. I will come to him, when he has slept awhile.


Reh. He says he cannot sleep, be easy, or recover, 'till he has had some
conversation with you.


Well. If the surgeon will allow it --


Reh. The surgeon thinks composure of mind still more necessary than sleep, and
I too am of opinion, that if his soul be wounded, you may effect more than the
whole faculty.


Well. Enough! I hasten to him.

Going.
Pau. Shrieks. Oh! There he is.


Enter LEWIS, Pale and rather weak, with his head bound, and his arm in a
sling. Mrs. W. Runs to him, and embraces him. Lewis!


Fre. Shakes him by the hand. Brave lad!


Well. Lewis, can you, when scarcely recovering from a swoon, thus creep up
stairs again?


Lew. Oh, I am not ill -- I was only stunned.


Well. I was just coming to you.


Lew. My impatience and anxiety have driven me hither. Allow me a few words
without a witness.


Well. Be seated, then. Go, friends. Neighbor, I know you will not take it amiss.


Dal. Not another word. Come, neighbor Rehberg.

Exeunt Dal. and Reh.
Fre. Lewis, I have such a regard for you, that I have not thought of Louisa
before. I Will away to meet her.


Pau. Oh Lewis! How pale you look!

Hides her face, and exit into her chamber.
Mrs. W. Don't let him talk too much, good William, lest he should irritate his
wounds.


Lew. Be not afraid, dear mother. He will heal my deepest wound.

Exit. Mrs. W.
Well. Now, Lewis, we are alone.


Lew. Father, I am obliged to you for inestimable kindnesses, and beg today a
greater than any of them.


Well. You know me. Speak.


Lew. You must have been surprised on hearing that I attacked the hussars.


Well. I was, indeed, for I have always thought you of a peaceable disposition.


Lew. When I left you, I intended to travel a few miles before sunset, but my
heart was so heavy, that my feet could not support me. I went to the little
inn, which was full of hussars. I left them -- wandered into the garden, and
seated myself under an elm, where I indulged myself in a flood of tears. Ere
long two of the hussars joined me. They laughed at me for my effeminacy -- as
they called it -- but I paid no regard to them. At length they ceased their
taunts, and began to converse about their own concerns -- in which, alas, I was
too nearly concerned.


Well. You!


Lew. They spoke in opprobrious terms of my father.


Well. Your father!


Lew. They called him a villain, and by the Almighty that he is not.


Well. Who is your father?


Lew. A weak, but a good man. He was high in office -- Heaven knows what has
lately happened to him! He must have fled, and these hussars, as far as I can
learn, are in pursuit of him. -- The two I mentioned, having spoken of him in
terms the most abusive, I could no longer refrain -- I considered not that I
alone was opposing twenty -- I considered nothing but my father's honor, and
struck the villain, whose language had been most opprobrious, to the earth. Of
course, I immediately became the victim of my rashness.


Well. Lewis! -- Is it possible? -- Who are you?


Lew. Oh!


Well. You are in search of one Count Lohrstein?


Lew. He it is.


Well. He is your father!


Lew. Yes.


Well. Aside. Oh God, what bliss have thou reserved for me on this day! Aloud.
Speak, worthy youth! Let me have all your confidence. Let not two fathers be
too many for you. Relate to me the mysterious particulars of your fate.


Lew. My first education and my heart destined me to act a happy, but not a
brilliant part in the world. My mother was formed for domestic comfort, and
formed me for the enjoyment of domestic comfort. She died. An ambitious
deceitful woman succeeded to my father's affections. Through her, he became
minister -- through her I too was to make my fortune (as it is called) at
court. I was married to a woman, whom I knew not, but whom I discovered, when
too late, to be the Prince's mistress. Yes. Then I might have raised myself,
from step to step, in splendid infamy, and bending under the load of turpitude,
might have climbed to the summit of courtly favor. But, thanks to Heaven, the
sentiments, which she, who now enjoys celestial bliss, had graven in my mind,
could not be eradicated by my stepmother. Soon as I discovered the labyrinth,
in which they had involved my inexperience, my resolution was irrevocably
formed. I fled. From a delicacy, which was, perhaps carried to too great an
excess, I took nothing with me. Beg I could not -- I knew not how to work, so
that at last, driven by hunger and despair, I accepted the offers of the
recruiting party, with which you found me.


Well. Now, all is plain -- and how do I rejoice to find it thus! How Willingly
do I request your pardon for the suspicion, which today I could not quite
suppress!


Lew. My character must have appeared dubious to you, and alas! that alone made
my separation from you so painful.


Well. Why did you not sooner discover yourself?


Lew. Could I accuse my father -- or could I assist him? Even now, I would not
have broken my silence, had not anxiety for his safety compelled me to do it.
He is pursued and suspected to be in this neighborhood. I am, at present
incapable of assisting him; for my arm is maimed, and the loss of blood has so
much reduced me, that I cannot even go in search of him, to give him notice
that he is pursued. Oh, I beseech you, kind, benevolent, generous man, I
beseech you, send all your people through the wood, the roads, the hills, and
if they find him -- have compassion on his age -- on his misfortunes.


Well. I engage that he shall find beneath my roof a safe retreat. But at
present attend to the wounds, which reflect so much honor upon you, and quietly
await the issue. Will you do this?


Lew. Quietly! Oh!


Well. Go into my study. Throw yourself upon the couch, and sleep if you can.


Lew. Bring me some account of my father. 'Till then I cannot sleep.

Exit.
Well. Looking after him in great emotion. Indeed! -- God has been pleased to
place in my hands the means of rewarding thy virtue, noble youth. To release
thee from bondage so unworthy of thy heart is my lot. Goes to a chamber door.
Paulina!


Enter PAULINA. Pau. My father!


Well. Lewis is in my study.


Pau. Alarmed. Not ill again?


Well. Not ill, but alone, and that he dislikes. Go, and keep him company.


Pau. Astonished. How, my father?


Well. Have you not understood me? I wish you to keep Lewis company. Is that so
difficult to you?


Pau. Oh no -- I do not understand it -- but I obey most willingly.

Exit to Lewis.
Well. What extatic moments now await me! -- Yes, good Brave, you are right:
Such revenge is sweet -- But they are both weak, and exausted. -- How shall I
prepare them for the interview? I must consult my Ann.

Going.
Enter ZAHN. Zah. Unannounced, but not I hope unwelcome --


Well. Heavens! What do I see? Zahn! My honest Zahn!


Zah. Will your Excellency allow a faithful old servant --


Well. Silence! Silence! No Excellency dwells here. Come into my arms, thou
honest man, thou only friend, from whom misfortune has not severed me. Clasps
him with ferver in his arms.


Zah. Returning his embrace with reserve. An honor -- as well as a pleasure --
Oh that I should live to enjoy this hour in my old age!


Well. What, for Heaven's sake, has brought you to my peaceful retreat?


Zah. Somewhat ceremoniously. His Serene Highness has been pleased to command
-- had he been pleased to appoint me one of his Privy Council, he would not
have so highly honored me --


Well. What is your business, then, dear Zahn? I see tears in your eyes.


Zah. I humbly beg pardon -- but just at this moment I cannot suppress them.

Turns away, and wipes his eyes.
Well. Surveys him, and turns aside, much affected. Fifty years has he lived at
court, yet has it had no influence but on his manners. Aside. I hear the old
Prince is dead?


Zah. Composing himself. Yes, it has pleased the Highest to take him home, and
what I prophesied twenty-seven years ago has happened. The prayers of the poor
and forsaken, whose father you always were, have been heard, and his Serene
Highness restores to you all your former offices, estates, and dignities.


Well. How could the Prince learn --


Zah. Pardon me, my Lord. When his Highness was pleased to manifest his
sentiments, I found it impossible to keep silence any longer. I therefore
announced myself, obtained an audience, and reported what I knew.


Well. Your intentions were good, but --


Zah. His Highness was highly delighted. "Such a man," he was pleased to
observe, "is wanting both for me and my subjects. Haste, and invite him to
court."


Well. I again appear at court!


Zah. Yes, I, old as I am, shall have the honor of again serving in the
administration of your Excellency. I own I cannot proceed with the same
facility as twenty-seven years ago, but the pleasure of doing my duty under my
old worthy director, will make me young again.


Well. No, dear Zahn. To court I shall not return. I am not disposed again to
encounter the cabals of Countess Lohrstein.


Zah. No, my Lord. The Countess has finished her cabals, and at present is a
prisoner in the castle.


Well. How! Was she not closely allied to the Prince's female friend?


Zah. Ladies, who are allied in that way, seldom hold their post ad dies vitae.
The order of the privy council was indeed issued at the instigation of the
Countess Lohrstein's late daughter-in-law.


Well. Late! -- How so?


Zah. His Serene Highness has been pleased to declare the marriage null and
void.


Well. Indeed!


Zah. On account of her having been shamefully forsaken by her husband.


Well. Embracing him with fervor. Oh, my friend! This intelligence is more
welcome to me than the restoration of my estates and rank.


Zah. I do not exactly comprehend --


Well. You soon will. You soon shall share with me the enjoyment of this evening.


Zah. It is his Highness's wish that you should return with me immediately.


Well. No, dear Zahn, I shall not return with you.


Zah. This most gracious invitation is written by his own hand.


Well. Breaks the seal, and reads it. Most kind, most gracious, and I could
almost say, most sincere -- but I shall not go.


Zah. I am astonished.


Well. Sit but one evening at my frugal board, and you will no longer be
astonished. Draws out a small key. Look, dear Zahn, this key is rusty. Opens
the closet with much difficulty. It will scarcely do its duty. Takes a packet
out of the closet. Here are the insignia of the order to which I belonged -- my
diploma -- and all the remains of my former greatness. I pledge to you my word,
that this closet has not been opened during five-and-twenty years.


Zah. Your Excellency opens it today for the good of your country.


Well. Can my country be so devoid of honest men, as to make this necessary? No.
Virtue will appear at court, as soon as the court will respect her.


Zah. For the good of your family --


Well. Enough, my family shall decide the matter. 'Till then, good Zahn, I claim
your secrecy.


Zah. I know how to obey.


Well. Let me but have time to recollect myself; occurrences have followed each
other so rapidly today, that I feel I am appointed by Heaven to make many
people happy, yet know not how to begin. Come, honest Zahn! Takes his hand.
Walk into this room -- we shall soon see each other again. Opens the door, and
calls. Neighbor, I send another friend to you, and put him under your
protection, 'till I have finished some business, which just now engages me.


Dal. Within. Understood. Come in.

Zahn goes in
Well. Mr. Rehberg, I wish to have a little conversation with you.


Enter REHBERG. Reh. Here I am.


Well. You wish to marry my daughter Rosa, I presume?


Reh. What a question!


Well. She is yours.


Reh. Mr. Welling! -- Why this sudden alteration in your sentiments? I am as
poor as I was!


Well. But I am not so pertinacious as I was.


Reh. If you be not in earnest -- this is cruel.


Well. If you any longer doubt it, you will hurt me.


Reh. Falls on his neck. Oh, worthy mysterious man!


Well. As to the mysterious part of my character, it will soon be explained.
Have the goodness, my son, to assemble my whole family, and all my friends in
this room immediately. You will find Paulina there. I wish to converse on a
subject, which relates to us all, and on the decision of which, each shall have
a vote. Takes the packet from the table and is going. Rosa meets him.


Well. Ha! -- Just at the right time. Takes her hand, ads her to Rehberg, joins
their hands, and embraces them. God bless you!

Exit
Ros. What does this mean?


Reh. That Rosa is mine.


Ros. How! -- I must rub my eyes to be certain that I am not dreaming. -- Have
you obtained a living?


Reh. No.


Ros. Oh, I don't ask on my own account, for I am really glad you are poor. I
always think one cannot convince a rich man, how much one loves him.


Reh. Whom do you call a rich man? Oh, I am rich indeed.

Clasps her in his arms.
Enter Mrs. WELLING. Mrs. W. Rosa, remember that you are still a great distance
from the altar.


Reh. No. We have reached it, if your blessing be our conductor.


Mrs. W. How am I to understand this?


Ros. My father has consented.


Mrs. W. Indeed!


Reh. And if his parental blessing be echoed from your lips --


Mrs. W. With all my heart -- although I do not comprehend --


Reh. He will soon be here again. My transport had almost made me forget what
he desired. All, who are united to him by affection or by friendship are to
assemble in this room. Goes to the door of the dining room. Mr. Dalner -- sir
-- we request your company here.


Enter DALNER, ZAHN, and FREDERICK. Fre. Mother, this gentleman is one of my
father's friends.


Mrs. W. You are welcome, sir.


Dal. Mr. Zahn, this is the lady of the house.


Zah. Accept, madam, the assurances of my respect and --


Mrs. W. No more, I beg sir. You are among ^imple country people.


Reh. Who has in the mean time opened the door of the study. By order of your
father, dear Paulina, I invite you hither -- as well as Lewis, if strength with
allow it.


Enter PAULINA and LEWIS. Mrs. W. Astonished. How, Paulina! -- You in that room!


Pau. My ^^ther himself sent me to keep Lewis company.


Mrs. W. Well, for the first time in my life I cannot discover the motives for
your father's conduct.


Zah. Attentively observing Lewis -- aside. I should know that young man.


Lew. Aside. Heavens! What can this man want here?


Enter WELLING, With a star upon his coat, and the ribband of the order. He
holds in his hand the Prince's letter. On his appearance all speak confusedly
among each other. Mrs. W. Dear husband, what means this?


Pau. Father, is it you?


Dal. Neighbor, are we going to have a masquerade?


Reh. I suspect a secret, here.


Ros. Brother, what is all this?


Fre. Don't you see I am as much astonished as yourself?


Lew. Aside. That is the order to which my father belonged.


Zah. Aside. I alone have the key to this enigma.


Well. You seem as if you think me little better than a lunatic? -- Be patient.
In one moment the mystery will be solved -- but let me not be interrupted.
Lewis, how do you feel? Have you sufficient strength to receive from me a
present, which your filial affection has obtained from fate?


Lew. Starts. Father, I do not comprehend you.


Well. Has your heart no presages?


Lew. With tremulous utterance. Were it so -- if my heart deceive me not -- oh,
do not keep me in suspense.


Well. Paulina, go for our guest.

Exit. Pau.
Lew. In great agitation. Guest! -- And these mysterious words -- may I
accompany Paulina?


Well. Stay Where you are. I have said enough. Doubt -- hope -- think of your
wounds -- and moderate your rapture. Lewis breathes with difficulty and rivets
his eye upon the door, no longer observing what passes around him. Welling
points to Rehberg. I have given this man my promise, dear wife, that he shall
have Rosa.


Mrs. W. I could scarcely believe it for ^^^ording to our conversation
yesterday --


Well. He was first to obtain a benefice -- and he has obtained one. My son, I
congratulate you on your appointment to the living of Birkendorf.


Reh. Quite astonished. Birkendorf! -- Dear sir -- how can you --


Well. Be so forward as to promise what --


Zah. Smiling. The gentleman may be at ease.


Mrs. W. But explain to us --


Dal. In truth, neighbor --


Lew. Distracted with anxiety. I hear footsteps.


Well. Make room for him, children. He has been long enough deprived of his
father.


All. His father!


Enter LOHRSTEIN and PAULINA. Lewis stands at a short distance from the Count,
and in great agitation stretches out the arm which is at liberty. Loh.
Violently terrified. What phantom do I behold? -- Were thou slain, bloody form,
and come thou to demand revenge?


Lew. Kneeling. Forgive your son.


Loh. Forgive! -- I, thee! -- Oh, if I be not wrong in thinking thee a spirit
-- come into my arms. Lewis rushes into his arms. -- What is this? -- I again
feel a heart beating against mine -- I feel a warm tear upon my cheek. -- Am I,
then, still beloved by any one on earth? Lewis, do thou still love me?


Lewis kneels, and covers his father's hand with tears and kisses. Well. Spare
him, my Lord. That he loves you these wounds declare, which he received today
in defense of your honor.


Loh. And thou kneel'st to me! -- Let me -- let me kneel.

Is sinking.
Lew. Hinders it, and presses him with fervor to his heart. Father!


Loh. What have I lost? I hear a voice, which calls me father.


Lew. Wealth and dignity divided us -- poverty and lowliness restore us to each
other.


Loh. Where was I? What apathy had crept around my heart? -- Forgive me, Lewis,
for thy mother's sake.


Lew. I have not been in distress -- thanks to this worthy man, who received me
as his son.


Loh. How! Has he been thy benefactor too? -- Could you consider the son of
your enemy as your own son?


All. His enemy!


Dal. I guess how this is.


Loh. Oh my Lord!


All. Lord!


Loh. What revenge is this!


Well. The only revenge which becomes me.


Lew. What means this?


Well. My friends, it is time that I solve this enigma. Will you pardon me, my
dearest Ann, if I have concealed this only secret from you? You will, I am
certain, when I tell you I was obliged to promise inviolable secrecy to your
father on his deathbed.


Mrs. W. Confused and astonished. Are you really a Lord, then?


Well. I am Baron Wellingrode, formerly the favorite of a Prince and not happy
-- now an honest farmer, and the happiest man on earth. All show signs of
astonishment. This letter from a good Prince restores to me my rank, estates,
and former office. This man is come to conduct me to court.


Mrs. W. Fre. Pau. and Ros. Alarmed. To court!


Well. The hand, which has here so long held the plough has forgotten how to
guide the rudder of a state. Nevertheless, if you, my dear wife and children,
think this alteration in our fortunes enviable, I will comply with your wishes.


Mrs. W. Oh no!


Fre. Pau. and Ros. No, no!


Well. Consider well. What thousands sigh for, in vain, is offered you by chance.


Pau. What do we want?


Fre. We are accustomed to our present situation.


Ros. What can we do at court?


Well. You may hereafter repent --


Fre. Pau. and Ros. Never! Never!


Well. Is this your firm desire?


Fre. Pau. and Ros. It is! It is!


Well. Opens his arms. Come, then, to my heart.

The children approach with a degree of timidity.
Well. What now? Are you afraid of me?


Fre. Oh no -- but the star --


Pau. The ribband --


Ros. You are grown a Baron so suddenly --


Well. My dear Ann, you seem to keep at a distance, too.


Mrs. W. My dear William, I am sorry to do it -- but you appear almost a
stranger to me --


Well. And shall I return to a situation, which causes a distance between me and
my family? Shall I wear a star, which withholds my wife and children from my
bosom. Throws the ribband away with violence. Take it -- take it -- release me
from this gew-gaw.


The children run to him with delight, take the star from his breast, and lay
it aside with the ribband. Fre. There! -- Now you are our father again.


Pau. Now we know you.


Ros. Now we love you.


Well. And you, good Ann?


Mrs. W. Thus you offered me your hand twenty-five years ago.


Well. You see, dear Zahn --


Zah. Wiping his eyes. I do, and wish his Serene Highness had seen it also.


Well. To court I Will go, but only to thank the Prince, and petition for the
pardon of this man.


Loh. You destroy me.


Well. How? By acting a self-interested part? I shall only be promoting the
happiness of our son. -- Lewis, the Prince has declared your marriage void.

Lewis gazes at him in silent astonishment.
Well. Count, the young people like each other. Will you seal our reconciliation?


Loh. Will I! How can you ask? Lewis clasps Paulina with ardor in his arms. Oh
God!


Ros. Giving her hand to Rehberg. Now we are all happy.


Fre. All.


Mrs. W. Much affected. All.


Well. And through me. -- My children I have doubled, and I have found a brother.

Pointing to the Count.
Dal. Two brothers, neighbor -- understood?


Well. Come then to me, all. Come into the arms of the happiest man on earth.
Are you still afraid of me? No star now hides my heart. Let me press you all to
it.


Mrs. Welling sinks on his bosom, while the surrounding children hang on him
and caress him. The curtain falls. THE END.

