THE CHRISTMAS DISPUTE REVIVED, IN A LETTER FROM MR. WILLIAM SMITH, OF NORWALK,
CONNCTICUT, TO ELDER ELIAS LEE, OF BALLSTON, STATE OF NEW YORK. NOW PUBLISHED
WITH A REPLY BY MR. LEE.

BALLSTON -- PRINTED BY W. CHILD FOR ELDER ELIAS LEE. -- A FEW RODS NORTH OF
THE COURTHOUSE. 1800.

A Letter from Connecticut to Elder ELIAS LEE, Anabaptist Teacher in the
Vicinity of Ballston, State of New York.
Norwalk, November 16th, 1799. SIR,
A CONTROVERSY between you and Mr. Rogers the Episcopal Minister of Ballston,
having lately fallen into my hands, wherein you are pleased to treat the
Episcopalians of these States in a very ungentlemanly manner. I shall at
present only advert to your assertions, that no man can ascertain the precise
day of the Nativity of our Lord, and of consequence that Episcopalians are
superstitious and absurd in their observance of the 25th of December, as the
anniversary of Christmas. Hereafter, I shall do myself the pleasure of
addressing you on the other observances and doctrius sacred to Episcopalians,
with which you have taken, in my judgment, very unwarrantable freedoms.

To a man so conversant with the sacred Scripture, and so replenished with the
plenitude of the Holy Spirit, as you profess to be, the circumstance of St.
Luke's beginning his Gospel with a chronological account of an event
immediately connected with our Savior's Incarnation, and a virtual repetition
of the same thing by the Holy Angel as the time of the Annuciation, can hardly
be supposed matters of indifference: And yet it is evident that you have either
overlooked or mistaken the meaning of both; for you say it is a matter of
indifference whether the day can be ascertained or not: The which I deny, and
think it a matter of great consequence to Christianity that the day of our
Lord's Nativity should be chronologically ascertained. I will therefore,
present you, and the candid public, a calculation of the precise day of the
Nativity founded upon two data, viz. the Old and New Testament.

I. Chron. chapter 24, v. 7 to v. 20, -- we find the twenty-four Courses of the
Jewish Priests established by David, who was "a Prophet and a man after God's
own heart," and knew perfectly what he was about when he made this
establishment. Of these 24 Courses, the 8th at the institution, fell by lot to
Abijah or Abias, to which course Zacharias the Father of the Baptist belonged.
One course attended upon the Service of the Temple, eight days, from sabbath to
sabbath. The ministry of each course began at the morning service of the first,
and ended at the morning service of the next sabbath; the High Priest entering
into the Temple with the course which succeeded, blessed and dismissed the
course, which had fulfilled their ministrations, the Priests of which then
departed to their own city. And both these facts are authenticated both by
Josephus, and the Jewish Liturgy. The Jewish historian (book 6) says, "The High
Priest went into the Temple with the other Priests, not every day, but only
every sabbath day, the calends of every month, and the annaversary Feasts." And
in the Jewish Liturgy we read, "On the Sabbath the High Priest added one
benediction upon that course, which then went out of their ministration."

Therefore, as the ministry of one course is 7 complete days, and the number of
courses 24: -- the complete cycle or period of time, wherein the 24 courses
return to the same day and hour wherein they first mininstered is 224 years.
But as the above cycle is somewhat unwieldy for calculation, a smaller cycle
becomes necessary, and there is one of 50 revolutions concluding at the end of
23 years after their first institution, or any revolution of the great cycle of
^24 years, with an overplus of 18 hours.

From the dedication of the second Temple, in the 6th year of Darius Nothus, on
the 3d day of the Heb. month Adas, that is on the 19th of February, to the
destruction thereof, (according to Eusebius' Chron. of Daniel's 70 weeks, chap.
9) are exactly 490 years.

From our Savior's birth to the destruction of Jerusalem, and just 71 years,
(according to Scaliger and others) and from the 15th of Tiberus to the
destruction of Jerusalem by Titus Vespasian are 40 years.

From these data, the calculation of the time of Zacharias' ministration (which
St. Luke mentions so particularly) may be calculated thus:

In the 490 years that the Temple stood, there are two complete great
sacerdotal cycles ending with the year 448. There remains till the fall of the
Temple 42 years: which subtract from the year of our Lord 71, in which the
Temple fell, and there remains 29, the year of Christ, when the second great
sacerdotal cycle ended and the third began, out of which deduct the imperfect
cycle of 50 revolutions, or 23 years, the remaining ^ denote the year of
Christ, when the course began precisely on the same day on which they
originally commenced, with an orverplus of 18 hours.

Therefore in these 6 years previous to the Nativity of our Lord, the
sacerdotal courses stand thus, viz. In the 6th year, the 1st course, that of
Jehoiarib began, Feb. 19 In the 5th year, the first, etc. Jan. 19 In the 4th
year, the first, etc. Dec. 19 In the 3d year, the first, etc. Nov. 19 In the 2d
year, the first, etc. Oct. 19 In the 1st year, the first, etc. Sept. 19


Therefore, the first course in the year of Christ's Conception began on the
19th of August; from whence, if we reckon to the 8th week, we come to the 8th
course, the course of Abijah, or Abias which commences on the 7th of October,
and ends on the 14th of the same month. On the 14th of October Zacharias having
fulfilled his week's ministry, returned home on the 15th, when his wife
conceived precisely 5 months and 3 days, before the Annunciation.

Now from the 15th of Oct. to the Annunciation March 25th are 5m. 3w. 1d. --
and just so long was Elizabeth advanced in her pregnancy at the time of the
Angel's Salutation to the Virgin Mother -- "This is the sixth month with her
who was called barren." This circumstance is hinted at afterward by the
Evangilist, when he says, -- (chapter 1. v. 56.) "Mary abode with her about three
months," that is, until the 24th of June, the day which the Church celebrates
as the Nativity of the Baptist.

If then the Baptist was conceived on the 15th of October, and was advanced
five months, three weeks and one day, at the time of the Conception of our
Lord, that is the 25th of March, the day celebrated by the Church, in
commemoration of so signal a mercy; it follows, that the 25th of December is
the true day of the Nativity of the Son of God.

And hence it is evident, that the time of the Nativity of our Lord has been
fairly transmitted down to us, by our forefathers, and that the Christian
Church is a faithful guardain, of so inestimable a piece of chronology. God saw
proper to conceal the burial place of the body of Moses, lest it should in
future times become an object of adoration; -- but on the body of Christ he
bestowed such honor, that all the Angels of God, and the sons of men worship
it; -- and as the Law and the Prophets, with the divine Shekina pointed to the
Birthplace of the Son of God; so the courses of the Priests offered an
infallible calculation to point out the precise time, when the Word became
incarnate, and took delight to be with the sons of men.

Yours, etc. WILLIAM SMITH.

A Letter to Mr. WILLIAM SMITH, of Norwalk, Connecticut, being a reply to a
Letter addressed by him to Elder ELIAS LEE, of Ballston, State of New York,
upon the subject of Christmas.
Ballston, March 21, 1800. SIR,
ON the 9th of February last, I received a letter from a Mr. HUBBARD, of
New Haven, in which were enclosed two copies of a printed letter addressed by
you to me. In this letter you inform me, that you have seen the controversy
which transpired last winter, between Mr. Rogers, the Episcopal minister of
this town and myself, upon the subject of Christmas; and in which also, you
have attempted a flual decision of it. I confess that I was somewhat surprised
at first, for as Mr. Rogers had represented me in a very mean and contemptable
light; and also pretended, that he had effectually answered my arguments, I
never expected that any Episcopal Minister would take so much (...) of me
again, as to write against me upon that or any other subject; nor was I under
any great concern about it. But this attempt of yours, leads me to conclude,
that you consider it as a matter of great consequence to your cause, and the
only means to avoid the charge of superstition, to render it certain that Jesus
Christ was born upon the 25th day of December; it seems also, that you are of
opinion, that your friend Rogers, with all his pretenses is quite inadequate to
this important task. Indeed, it has furnished me with one conclusion more, and
that is, that you are sensible of so much weight in the arguments, and
testimonies, which I produced from scripture and history, that unless you
introduced this savourite point to the public in some new method; or by a
circumlocution of calculation, could bring it round at a distance from those
objections, it would be of no avail to undertake to support it. But as it is,
whether you have spent your strength for naught, and your labor for that which
fatisfieth not, the public will judge from what follows.

The sole question, to be decided between us at present is, whether there be
any certainty, that the birth of Christ happened upon the 25th of December. You
say there is, and have given your reasons for it. I say, that notwithstanding
all you have said, there is not; and shall now proceed to give the reasons
which I have for my assertion.

The first thing I shall remark in your letter, is your asserting that I said,
it was a matter of indfference whether the day can be ascertained or not. But
sir, you should look sharper, and read with more attention; for though such a
conclusion might be drawn from the nature of my reasoning, yet the observation
was made by Mr. Rogers himself, and I have only made my remarks upon it. What
you have said concerning the courses of the Jewish Priests will answer you no
purpose, unless you can prove that they kept an exact pace in their service,
with the order of time in your calculation; for the argument does not depend
upon the time, as being regulated by their service, but upon their service, as
being regulated by the time; one interruption therefore, would throw your whole
system into confusion, and wholly disappoint you of finding Zacharias in the
temple at the expected time. And that there have been several interruptions, is
certain; for when the ark was inducted into the sacred oracle, and the temple
dedicated by Solomon, the priests officiated altogether, and did not wait by
course. Something similar, happened also in the days of king Hezekiah; and even
some who have attempted to prove by their courses, that Christ was born in
September, have failed to give satisfaction, because it could not be determined
to a certainty, what number of years passed between the restoration of the
temple worship, by Judas Maccabeus, and the time that Zacharias was struck
dumb; neither with what course of priests Judas began the restoration.

But after giving a statement of these courses, it seems your whole dependence
for the use of them, in this controversy, is rested upon Eusebius' calculation
of the 70 weeks of Daniel; should there however be an uncertainty here also,
your theory will appear in a worse situation than before. And now sir, I might
launch into an almost boundless abyss of calculation, but I have no inclination
to venture out, nor is my little bark, by any means sufficient to pass the
unsettled ocean of cronological difficulties; and even you, with all your skill
and learning, will in my opinion, soon appear to have run fast aground upon the
shoals of conjecture, while you imagine, that you have safely arrived at that
cardinal point in the Christian era, the certain day of our Savior's
nativity. If you are a gentleman of much reading, you cannot be ignorant, that
some writers have made of these weeks 70 years; so that the whole would amount
to 4000 and 900 years. Some Rabbis make of them 49 years, reckoning from one
jubilee to another; so that they would consist of 3000, 400 and 30 years.
Others make an hundred years of them, which would bring the whole up to 7000
years. Most interpreters however, consider them as weeks of years, which makes
exactly 490 years; but even those who believe the prediction marks out the time
of the birth and passion of our Savior, are exceedingly divided, as to the
certain time of their beginning and ending. Some begin them from the 1st year
of Cyrus, and end them at the destruction of the temple by the Romans; but if
the temple was destroyed in the year 70, or 71, as some say; then according to
the bible chronology, which is as correct, and I believe the most adhered to of
any, the term of time from the 1st year of Cyrus to that event, was 606, or 7
years. Others begin them from the 1st year of Darius the Mede, and end them at
the birth of Christ, as near as they can come to it; but this makes an interim
of 538 years. Others begin them at the 1st year of Darius, and conclude them at
the profanation of the temple by Antiochus Epiphanes, which makes a period
only of 370 years. I have not read Eusebius, but according to your account, he
begins them at the dedication of the second temple, and ends them with the
destruction of it; but instead of 490 years, you will find the space of time
between these events, to be 585 or 6 years. Julius Africanus, begins them in
the 2d year of Artaxerxes, and ends them at the death of Christ, which he
thinks happened in the 15th year of Tiberius. This calculation comes within two
or three years of it, and as a learned anonymous writer observes, is the most
rational system of any proposed by the ancients, and to which a few things
excepted, the greatest part of interpreters, and Chronologers agree. I confess
however, that I differ a little from it; it being plain, that both the
beginning, and end of this period, is hinted at in the prophecy -- Know
therefore, and understand, that from the going forth of the comandment, to
restore, and to build Jerusalem etc. This appers to be the substance in part,
of what is couched in the foregoing verse; and taking the sense of the whole
verse complete, it finishes the period at the death of Christ; for the
finishing of transgression, making an end of fins, making reconciliation for
iniquity, bringing in everlasting righteousness, sealing up the vision and
prophecy, and anointing the most holy, sounds to me so much like the
declaration of the dying Savior on the cross -- it is finished -- that I can
hardly believe it refers to any thing else. Almost all interpreters agree that
Christ died between the age of 30, and 34 years; so that if we suppose the
commandment, refers to the decrees given out in the 7th year of Artaxerxes
Longimanus, as recorded in the 7th chap. of Ezra, which was in the year before
Christ 457, and then add 33 years for the life of Christ, it makes out the 490
years exactly. There are however so many difficulties attending these different
hypothesis, that it would be folly to the last degree, to pretend to find an
absolute certainty in any of them; much less in that of Eusebius, which is as
destitute of probability, and perhaps as little attended to as any one of the
whole, and is therefore, but a poor foundation for you to trust to in this case.

But Sir, supposing you was quite safe hitherto, yet what follows would
completely unhinge your conclusion, and set all afloat at once. You say that
Elizabeth conceived on the 15th of October, precisely 5 months, and 3 days
before the annunciation; but according to this, the annunciation must happen on
the 18th of March. You then proceed to observe, that from the 15th of October
to the annunciation, March 25th, are 5 months, 3 weeks, and one day; and just
so long was Elizabeth advanced in her pregnancy, at the time of the angels
salutation to the virgin mother -- but by what rule you have made this out, I
cannot tell, unless you have split some of the days and made two of them, for I
cannot find from the 15th of October to the 25th of March, but 5 months, 1
week, and 3 days. I thought this at first to have been a typographical error;
but finding it a little after repeated at full length, I began to search after
the mystery, and soon found, that from the conception of Christ to his birth,
you had allowed just 23 days more than you had allowed for John in the same
case. And since you calculate from the conception, to find the certain time of
a birth; to make such a difference between these two, must appear very
extraordinary indeed; it seems you were therefere sensible that the 3 weeks and
1 day, must be thrust in somewhere between the 15th of October, and the 24th of
June. Your opinion however, that the 3 months, in which Mary tarried with
Elizabeth extended from the 25th of March to the period last mentioned, left no
room for them there; you have therefore, crowded them between the 15th of
October, and the annunciation; but as only ten days of them are there, I shall
leave you to search for the other 12 wherever you can find them.

Now Sir, to make your calculation consistent with the principle you set out
upon, viz. of finding the time of a birth, by the conception; if we reckon by
the month, from the 25th of March to the 25th of December, and from the 15th of
Octo. to the 15th of July, are just 9 months each; but if we reckon by the day,
there is a difference of 2 days; and as Mary visited Elizabeth about the time
of the annunciation, and tarried with her 3 months, until John was born, or to
the 15th of July the annunciation must have happened about the 15th of April,
and Christmas must come about the middle of January. But if you suppose that
John was born on the 24th of June, then you must either insist upon it, that
John was born 23 days sooner, after he was conceived, than Christ was, which
will evidently destroy the principle above referred to; or frankly admit that
Elizabeth conceived on the 24th of September, which will effectually operate
against the order of your calculation, so that turn which way you will, your
whole system is unhinged, and must inevitably fall to the ground. And again, if
Elizabeth conceived on the 15th of Octo. and was advanced 5 months, 3 weeks and
a day, at the time of the annunciation, as you affirm; then the annunciation
must happen upon the 6th day of April, and Christmas would come of course upon
the 6th of January, the precise day on which most of the Greek Fathers after
the 4th century, thought the Savior was born.

But dear Sir, where now is the infalliable calculation you speak of, which
renders it so certain, that the 25th of December is the true Christmas? For my
part, I think it evident, that as God saw fit to conceal the Sepulcher of
Moses, lest it should afterward become an object of adoration; so he has
providentially obscured the day of Christ's nativity, lest it should be more
reverenced by the sons of men, than Christ himself; -- but notwithstanding all
this, superstition has prevailed, a day has been appointed at uncertainty, and
religious devotion paid to it, in such a manner, as in my opinion, highly
derogates from the honor of the ever Adorable Redeemer. It is however
improbable to me, that this will have any salutary effect upon your mind; I
must therefore say to you, as Paul said to the Galatians of old, "ye observe
days, and months, and times, and years; I am afraid of you, lest I have
bestowed upon you labor in vain." I was thinking to make a few more remarks,
but I finally conclude to lay up my pen, till I hear something from you, upon
the other observances, and doctrines sacred to Episcopalians.

Yours, etc. ELIAS LEE.


