ILDEGERTE, QUEEN OF NORWAY. IN TWO VOLUMES. FROM THE GERMAN OF AUGUSTUS VON
KOTZEBUE, AUTHOR OF THE STRANGER.

BY BENJAMIN THOMPSON, JUN. TRANSLATOR OF THE STRANGER, AS PERFORMED AT THE
THEATER ROYAL DRURY LANE.

VOL. I.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED FOR ROBERT CAMPBELL, No. 30, Chesnut-Street. 1800.

TO THE READER.
AS it is possible that my Reader may not be acquainted with the Runic
mythology, I have added Notes, at the end of each Volume of this Work (to which
the Numbers are a direction), explaining as much as is necessary to make it
perfectly intelligible. Any further elucidation may be obtained by a reference
to MR. MALLET'S "Northern Antiquities;" which publication contains the Edda,
translated from the ancient Islandic tongue, and has principally supplied me
with my Notes.

ILDEGERTE, QUEEN OF NORWAY.
WHO art thou, Oh heroine! endowed with the powerful spirit of Odin ODIN, also
called Woden, Father of the Gods. He, his wife Freya, and son Thor, compose the
supreme council of heaven. He is called the Universal Father, The Terrible and
Severe God, The King of Slaughter, The God that carries Desolation and Fire,
the Active and Roaring Deity, The Giver of Victory, etc. The fourth day of the
week is consecrated to him, and therefore called Woden's day.
, and graced with the captivating sweetness of Freya? Frea, or Freya, wife of
Odin, and mother of the inferior Deities. These names are, by some, ascribed to
two Goddesses, the former being Queen of the Gods, and the latter, sister of
Erey. To her the sixth day of the week is consecrated.
. -- Who art thou, whose image darts its rays so bright through the cloud which
veils the wonders of antiquity? -- Rise, rise, sacred shade of Ildegerte, rise
from the holy habitations of Vingolf Vingolf, the mansion of Love and
Friendship.
-- thou, before whose name I bend my knee, as heroine, as wife, as mother!

Swend was the Prince's name whom Thora bore, to reign hereafter over Norway.
-- As yet, the cradle was his throne, the rose-bud his scepter. As yet he felt
no pain but hunger, and no rest but sleep. With female penetration and manly
spirit, Thora ruled the raw Norwegians; -- with female gentleness and manly
firmness, she conducted her beloved son, from the narrow limits of infancy to
the wide-extending path of youth. He grew. Upon his countenance bloomed the
hope of the approaching morn, and grey-headed warriors, when they saw him,
stroked their beards, and smiled.

No costly ornaments and silken garments, no studied smiles and borrowed roses,
at that time, occupied the morning hours of Northern women. The girl who wished
to please a Norwegian, must renounce the common employments of a female, and
accustom herself to the warlike toils of man; must curb the steed of Iceland
with uncovered hand, must kill the flying game with certain arrow, and oppose
her glittering shield to the threatening sword of her companion.

Thora, herself a perfect mistress of these exercises, assembled a troop of
Amazons, who, led by her, chased the wolf and bear through almost impenetrable
forests. Often did the Queen sit on some lofty bank, and feast upon these sports;
yet ever did her eye beam most friendly on her dearest companion Ildegerte; for
none like her could vault upon the back of the impetuous steed; none sent the
arrow so certain to its mark; none broke a lance with so much grace. And when
she raised her visor to regain her breath; when her full blue eye glanced round
more dangerous than her sword; when she moved, and the plume upon her helmet
slowly nodded; when she spoke, and her voice surpassed the sweetness of the
flute -- Oh! then arose in the heart of the young Prince an indescribable
sensation, which his wary mother saw, now in his glowing eye, now in his
glowing cheek. She saw it with a smile of content; for though no royal blood
flowed in the veins of Ildegerte, yet was she the last surviving branch of a
noble family, and would, if the daughter of a boor, have been worthy of the
first throne on earth. Who was able to enchant each heart like Ildegerte? Who
seemed so little to intend it? Her companions saw her, and were envious; they
spoke to her, and envy vanished.

About that time Canfried, the young King of Sweden, was traveling through the
Northern Courts. Ambition brooded in the dark recesses of his soul. The thirst
for power flashed from his scowling eye. Not content to sway the groaning
inhabitants of Sweden with an iron scepter, he resolved, by the success of a
robber's arms, to encircle his brow with a triple crown. For this purpose was
it that he traversed Denmark and Norway -- for this purpose was it that he
cautiously approached their thrones, and spied into the situation of their
strength and weakness. He was handsome as Utgarda-Loke Utgarda Look, an evil
spirit, nearly resembling our devil. He is described in the Edda (or Bible of
the Northern nations) as exceeding handsome, but crafty and persidious. He is
called, The Artificer of Fraud, The Calumniator of the Gods, etc. He,
nevertheless, dwelt in Heaven, till, as a punishment for his repeated crimes
and attacks upon the Gods, they chained him to three sharp stones, which are
for ever cutting his flesh; while a serpent, hanging over him, distills its
venom, drop by drop, upon his face. In this situation he is to remain till the
destruction of the world.
, and villainous as he; cruel as the wolf Fenris The wolf Fenris, a son of
Utgarda Look. He was bred among the Gods; but they, being warned by oracles
that he might one day become fatal to them, resolved to confine him. No chains,
however, could be forged which were strong enough to hold him. At length a
dwarf, in the land of the Black Genii, supplied Odin with a bandage of uncommon
strength. Goranson's description of its texture is so ludicrous, that I am
induced to transcribe it:

"Hic nervus sex constabat rebus; strepitu nempe pedum felis, ex barba
mulieris, radicibus montium, nervis ursinis, halitu piscium, and sputo avium."

"This string consisted of six things, viz. the noise made by a cat's feet, the
beard of a woman, the roots of mountains, the nerves of bears, the breath of
fishes, and the spittle of birds."

Having bound the wolf with this cord, they drew it through a huge rock, to
which he is doomed to be confined till the last day, when he is to break loose,
and devour the sun.


, and poisonous as the Midgard The serpent of Midgard, one of Utgarda Loke's
children, and an enemy of the Gods. Odin threw him to the bottom of the ocean,
where he grew so large, that he wound himself around the whole globe of earth.
serpent.

In honor of her guest, Thora appointed a splended tournament. Toward the
decline of day, when the Knights, weary of warlike diversions, had
disencumbered themselves of their helmets, the young heroines of Norway (such
was Thora's will) entered the lists with courteous air, and demanded that
Canfried should break a lance with them. With a smile the young King seized his
spear (for he was well versed in chivalry); with a smile he threw himself upon
his prancing charger, and rode into the open lists. But against his nervous arm
the force of the Amazons was vain; their lances split against his shield, like
the light gondola on the craggy rock. At length appeared Ildegerte. The purple
beams of the setting sun shone on her polished helm; the steed soon felt her
spur; swift as an arrow she rushed against the King. Her lance shivered; but
Canfried's feet flew from the stirrups, and scarce could he preserve his seat.

"Thou art strong," cried the astonished Swede, "let me behold the countenance
of my antagonist."

Ildegerte sprung nimbly from her horse, cast away her helmet, and her auburn
locks fell in artess ringlets down her snow-white neck. The look which she cast
on Canfried subdued him on the spot: it was a look full of dignity, sweetened
by a half-smile; but even half a smile from Ildegerte might have animated a
stone. The proud tyrant of Sweden stammered forth his admiration, and, like a
lonesome flower upon a barren heath, love took root in his heart.

Already was the lamp of day extinguished in the ocean; already the bright moon
had risen in the unclouded sky, when the jocund troop, after having quaffed the
overflowing horn, wandered into the cool refreshing wood. Here some Knight was
stretched upon the grass, and suing to the dear object of his love for the
reward of constancy. There the Scalds Scald, the name given to the ancient
bards, who were employed to compose odes and hymns, which were chaunted at
every solemnity. These songs were, in general, descriptions of eminent
exploits, and were animated by an enthusiastic spirit.
were heard to chaunt the deeds of ancient times, and blissful spirits of
Valhall Valhall, the palace of Odin, to which warriors are conveyed after
death. Here they pass their mornings in tournaments and battles; the rest of
the day is employed in feasting on the wild boar Serimner (which, though
dressed every morning, becomes entire again every night), and in quaffing
Hydromel (or mead), which is administered to them in the sculls of those
enemies whom they had slain while on earth.
; while the nightingale sweetly intermixed her warblings with the lofty song.
Here two friends sauntered, arm in arm, engaged in confidential discourse;
there a dozen nymphs were sporting near a murmuring rill.

Deep in the thickets was a fall of water, which formed a basin at the
mountain's foot. Near to the grassy edge there laid a mossy stone, warmed by
the heat of day. Here, in the cool of eve, was Ildegerte wont to bathe. Naked
she sat upon the stone, while the small waves curled to the bank, and kissed
her feet. Today too she stole away (perceived, as she thought, by none but the
chaste moon), far from the gay bustle of the Court, to this her favorite spot.
As the wood resounded still with noise and jubilee, she ventured not, as usual,
to cast away her burdensome attire; but drawing her garment to her knees, and
throwing her sandals on the grass, she stepped into the water where it was so
shallow that it scarce sprinkled her ancles. -- Chaste girl! the invisible hand
of Gefione Gefione, the Goddess of Chastity.
was stretched above thee; for, inspired with brutal passion, Canfried watched
thy steps, rushed through the thicket, and, with a peal of laughter, took the
sandals from the bank.

"Prince," said Ildegerte, turning round, and letting her garment fall,
"Prince, in this country we think such conduct improper."

"How!" replied Canfried, "improper to surprise a lovely girl when she is
bathing! Then, pardon me, the Norwegians deserve to have no lovely girls among
them."

"And if the females of your land," returned Ildegerte, "allow themselves to be
surprised so willingly, they indeed deserve such conduct as yours. -- Return
my sandals, and begone."

"You might as well desire me to lose my ^^nses," answered Canfried.

"Then, Prince," cried Ildegerte, enraged, "you have lost all sense of decency;
and sense, without decency, is a tree without leaves."

"Admirable!" exclaimed the King, "you can play on words as well as hearts.
But, with due deference to your decency and sense, allow me to bind these
sandals to your feet again."

"I command you to begone," cried the fair heroine.

"Do you think yourself in danger?" returned Canfried.

"Oh no!" answered Ildegerte disdainfully.

"You are severe," said he. "You do not even think me dangerous? Come, away
with this derision and this scorn! Ildegerte I love you."

"Likely enough truly, after an acquaintance of two hours," rejoined she.

"So much the more flattering to you," said the King.

"I must own I did not know it," replied she; "I can at least find nothing but
my face to thank for it."

"No, Ildegerte; thou have wounded me deeply. Fair thou art as Nossa Noffa, the
daughter of Frea, a Goddess of such exquisite beauty that whoever is lovely and
handsome, or whatever is precious, is called by her name.
-- wise as Vora Vora, the Goddess of Prudence and Wisdom, who is so
penetrating, that nothing can remain hidden from her.
. -- I have a wife whom I dare not spurn from me, for her father is a powerful
Prince; but come to my arms! Thou shall be treated as a Queen. Come, share my
heart and bed."

"To such a proposition," answered she, "Ildegerte has but one reply."

She struck him on the face, and fled. -- Furious and vengeful he rushed after
her; but with airy steps, that scarcely skimmed the tender grass, Ildegerte
glided through the wood, led by the echoing horn, which ever attended on the
Queen. There she humbled herself at the feet of Thora, and was silent. The
pursy Swede, who likewise soon arrived, felt no desire to mention, in the
presence of witnesses, the indignity he had sustained. But, ere long, the Queen
discovered Ildegerte's naked foot, and asked her favorite why she was without
sandals.

"I went," answered Ildegerte, with unaltered look, "to wash my feet; I threw
my sandals on the grass, and conclude that some beast of the forest must have
stolen them."

"That beast was I," roared out Canfried, with grim ferocity; "that the sandals
belonged to you, I knew not; for had I known it they had lain there still."

With these words he cast them at Ildegerte's feet.

"Prince," said Thora, with an air of solemn majesty, "when next you come into
my kingdom, remember that it is my kingdom."

Canfried returned no answer. Swend looked askance at him. The courtiers
murmured. Ildegerte smiled. This moment was the dreadful source of many a
crime, of many a fatal hour. The enraged Swede, whose heart was the lurking
place of every villainy, returned that very night to his native country, and
carried the fable poison of revenge deeply rankling in his breast.

Slowly and mournfully approached the hour in which Thora, the mother of her
people, paid the debt of nature, and was transported to the everlasting joys of
Vingolf. She expired in the arms of Ildegerte and her son; -- she expired as
she pronounced her blessing upon both. -- Amidst the unfeigned lamentations of
many thousands of her subjects was the grave prepared, which was to cover her
remains. Silent, and with overflowing eyes, the poorest person brought some
gift to be buried, according to the custom of the country, with the dead. No
Knight was ashamed of the tear which started in his eye. Swend sobbed, and hid
his face. Ildegerte threw herself upon the grave, and washed her dishevelled
locks with tears. -- Still was she lying there, in torpid grief, when Midnight
had spread her mantle over wood and sea.

The murmuring waves, the rustling pines, and Ildegerte's groans, were the only
interruptions of the deep tranquillity. At length the morning broke upon her
sorrows, but it presaged a dreary rainy day. The feathered songsters crept into
their nests; the ravenous vulture only hovered in the air. Ildegerte sprung up
-- cast another inexpressible look of sorrow on the grave, wet with the dew of
heaven and her tears -- threw a lock of hair upon it, and fled -- fled with her
companions to the innermost recess of a wood, where, in the shade of rugged
oaks, an ancient castle offered an asylum to the fugitives, who long taught its
walls to echo sighs for the loss of Norway's benefactress.

Swend, now nineteen years of age, mounted his mother's throne, and followed
her instructions by promoting the happiness of his people, by listening to, and
relieving the unfortunate, by choosing proper objects for his friendship, and by
fulfilling all the duties of a Knight.

But love accompanied him to the throne. In the midst of state concerns, in the
assemblage of his Knights, in the temple of justice, at the altar of Odin, his
eye wandered round in search of Ildegerte. His heart missed her at the jocund
feast, at the chorus of the virgins, and combat of the lance.

"What strange sensation" said he to himself (when he had one day stolen from
the table, where the sparkling brimmer invited him in vain, where the Scalds in
vain struck the silver chords, and sung the noble deeds of his forefathers),
"what strange sensation makes my throne to me a dreary sepulcher -- my heart
insensible to the joys of benevolence and friendship? Away with this splendid
slavery! The holy raptures of Valhall could not force a smile from me, as long
as Fate forbids me to enjoy it doubly in the arms of love. What binds my
tongue, that it makes not the confession which floats upon my lips? What chains
my hand, that it lays not crown and scepter at her feet, for whom the crown and
scepter seem to have been formed? -- Away to Ildegerte! -- What is birth? Can
royal blood make a fool wise, or a villain virtuous? -- Oh! in her alone can
Thora live again! With her alone can I taste the pleasures of a throne!"

He spoke, and went to sacrifice in Louna's Losna, or Louna, the Goddess who
assists lovers, and makes up differences between them and married persons, be
they ever so much at variance.
temple.

"Reverend old man," said he, addressing the Priest, "the servants of Odin have
foretold to me the fate of my throne. Their words were dark, but I am easy; for
it is the tyrant only who can fear futurity. Do thou foretell to me the fate of
my heart, which is to me of no less value. But let thy words be clear as light,
for every lover fears futurity."

The hoary Priest, with reverence, bent his knee, and proceeded to invoke the
Deity of the Temple. The flame mounted from the altar, and Swend's heart, clear
and chaste, toward heaven. -- The Priest returned with solemn aspect; a cloud
hung upon his brow, but mortal eye could not distinguish whether some baleful
planet, or the sun of hope was hid beneath this cloud. After a short, but awful
pause, he spoke:

"Beloved of the Gods and of thy people, a good Prince finds his reward in the
arms of a Valkyrie Valkyries, Virgins who are sent by Odin into the field of
battle, to inspire the warriors, to make choice of those who are to be slain,
and to alleviate the pangs of death. They are likewise employed in attending on
the heroes who inhabit Valhall.
."

"'It Is she! it is she!" cried the enraptured Monarch. "To what mortal female in
my realms could Louna give a title more than mortal? To her alone! To
Ildegerte! I thank thee, reverend old man. Soon shall thou hear from me -- soon
shall the steps of this your temple groan beneath the weight of gifts which I
will heap upon your altars. Farewell! Give me thy hand. Farewell! Pray for me!"

"Prince," stammered the Priest, shaking his silver locks with warning mien. --

But Swend no longer heard him. Swend flew through the wood, surpassed in speed
by nothing but his thoughts. The form of Ildegerte swam before his sight. The
name of Ildegerte floated on his lips. His sweet interpretation of the delusive
oracle seemed to him the only one within the scope of possibility. Panting, he
arrived at the gates of his castle, and ordered his swiftest steed to be
prepared. In glowing colors Fancy painted the delight of a first meeting,
after the separation of a year; but the warlike trumpet soon awoke him from his
visionary bliss.

"Yes," cried Tott, the chief of all his troops, "prepare thy swiftest steed,
collect thy Knights and warriors, and march against the traitor Canfried. See
thou that weeping multitude of fugitives, which increases every moment? One
left his house in flames; another saw his wife defiled; a third fled over his
ravaged fields; a fourth beheld the murder of his helpless father! With a troop
of banditti, Canfried is spreading desolation through thy territories. -- Yes!
prepare thy swiftest steed; assemble the valiant Norwegians. Away against the
villain! Let him feel that the blood of thy ancestors flows in thy veins, that
the arms of thy Knights are firmly nerved, and that old Tott is still alive."

Like a man who wakes from golden dreams by the stab of an assassin, Swend
started at this dreadful news; but a single glance toward his wretched
subjects subdued the lover, and called forth the hero. He dispatched expresses
to his faithful Knights throughout the land. From every quarter they crowded
with their hardy trains of well-armed vassals. With beating heart, Swend in a
few days beheld, beneath his castle's walls, a numerous army, and at their head
the dauntless Tott.

"I go to relieve my subjects," whispered the powerful voice of valor in the
Prince's breast, "their misery and groans demand my help. Silent be the milder
voice of love, till I can lay the laurels, and my people's gratitude at
Ildegerte's feet."

Clad in his burnished armor, the young hero pressed his charger; at his side
rode the intrepid Tott. The warriors struck their shields; the ^^^lds sung
solemn hymns; the army marched. Old men, women, and children, were assembled on
the road. They blessed their Ruler, who saluted all with friendly air; and,
with uplifted eyes and hands, they sued the Gods for victory and life. -- Thus
went the warriors thirsting for battle and revenge. Succeeding messengers, who
brought accounts of accumulated rapine and murder, blew every Norwegian's heart
into a raging blaze.

The hostile armies were now separated but by half a day's march, when Swend
convened the chiefs and leaders of the people, and standing on a rising ground,
he thus addressed them with the fire of youth:

"My brave and faithful countrymen, be tomorrow the decisive day. Let sacrifice
be offered at the altar of Odin, that he may grant us victory -- the victory of
just revenge. Advance with your troops, under cover of the night, against this
murderer and robber, that at break of day, the sword of my people may send the
plunderer, while he sleeps, into the arms of Hela Hela, or Death, the daughter
of Utgarda Look. She was precipitated into Niflheim by Odin, and there had the
government of nine worlds given to her.
."

"Not so," replied the cool experienced Tott; "let us act honorably, and
according to the laws of war -- let us send a herald to the Swedish camp, to
learn the cause of this attack. If Canfried require what is just, and he be
willing to repair the calamities occasioned by this inroad, then choose, Oh
King! the palm of peace, and sheath the murderous sword."

"Require!" exclaimed Swend, "what can he require? -- Repair! what can he
repair? -- Is he a God, that he can re-animate my faithful subjects?"

"Alas, no!" returned Tott, "the dead are dead; -- never have our eyes again
beheld the mortal who had left this earth. But still live the orphan children
of the slain -- still sighs many a widow, far from the habitation of her
slaughtered husband. To these let Canfried open his treasures, and repay them
trebly for the bloody booty."

"What!" cried Swend, with generous heat, "shall I take payment for my people's
blood? -- Never! -- Canfried's kingdom shall not buy a drop from the meanest of
my subjects."

"Just and true, if that blood were yet unshed," replied the old General;
"false and wrong if it be already shed. -- Or will thou lead thy troops to
death without necessity? -- Thou have lost hundreds, perhaps will sacrifice
thousands."

"Enough!" answered the young King, "be it according to thy wish. I revere thy
counsel as the counsel of a father."

In consequence of this determination, soon as the morning dawned, a herald
came to Canfried's tent, and demanded admittance to the King. Through rows of
scoffing guards he was conducted to the tyrant's feat; who, surrounded by arms,
seemed to read treachery in every eye, and, in the midst of his subjects,
trembled at the rustling of a withered leaf.

"Speak; what would thou here?" said he to the herald.

"Hear me, Canfried, King of Sweden. Through me speaks Swend, the mighty King
of Norway. Why have thou fallen on me, like a robber on the sleeping traveller?
-- Why have thou slain my subjects, and laid waste my realms? -- Why have thou
infringed upon the rights of nations, and not honorably declared war against
me? -- Behold! the blood of my subjects cries to me for vengeance. I am
approaching with my warriors, and Odin will chastise thee by my arm. But if
thou, like an honorable King and Knight, will declare unto me the cause of
this attack, rebuild the habitations of my subjects, silence the complaints of
the widows and orphans thou have made, then will I convene my chiefs and
leaders, state thy demand ingenuously to them, and, if such be found just and
proper, by my royal word will I grant it. But, if thou refuse this offer, let
Odin judge between me and thee. The groans of the dying, and blood of the slain
be upon thy head!"

The herald ceased. Canfried, contracting his bristly eyebrows, darted a
threatening look at him, and thus replied:

"Go, tell the stripling Swend, that Canfried, King of Sweden, Lord of a mighty
empire, at which the whole North trembles, has more than a sufficiency of land
and gold; that he requires not from the Prince of Norway even a span of earth;
that his royal clemency is willing to atone for the calamities occasioned by
his warriors on one condition -- The possession of Ildegerte was the only
motive of my using arms; let Swend, within three days, resign her to my royal
bed, and these threatening troops shall quit his borders. If not, with sword in
hand will Canfried force his way through the Norwegian ranks."

Beneath an aged oak the King was sitting at the feet of Tott, catching each
instructive word that dropped from the lips of the experienced Chief. The
herald came into his presence, and, not without trembling, delivered to him
Canfried's haughty answer. Scarce had he ended, when Swend sprung up, and
gnashed his teeth. Old Tott remained calmly in his place.

"Sooner shall the stone float on the water's surface," cried the King, "sooner
shall the stream return to its source, than I accept this ignominious
condition."

"Not so hasty, young man," answered Tott, "let us coolly examine this
proposal; let us properly place in competition what thou will lose with what
thou may lose: Thou will lose a girl -- thou may lose a kingdom."

"But this girl was the favorite of my mother," rejoined Swend.

"Blessings be upon thee, for thus revering the memory of thy mother," said the
Chief; "but even Thora herself would have sacrificed her favorite for the
welfare of her people."

"And shall I then," cried the Prince, "make Ildegerte miserable? Shall I
deliver her, who never injured me, into the arms of a barbarian -- her, for
whom each Knight would draw his sword with pleasure? Never, never!"

"But is it then so sure," demanded Tott, "that Ildegerte will be miserable?
How many women have, by gentleness and wisdom, transformed blood-thirsty tigers
into men? Has not Ildegerte sufficient talents and perfections to change this
libertine, this enemy of Norway, to a loving husband, and thy country's staunch
ally?

"And is not our defeat," resumed the King, "as doubtful as that Ildegerte will
be happy in the arms of Canfried? -- I mistake thee, Tott; thou art at the head
of a powerful army -- thou art required to sight in the cause of justice, and
thou fear to do it."

"Ah! young man," answered the hoary warrior, with a smile, "when thou art
hereafter transported to Valhall -- when thy father and mother come to meet
thee, let them bear testimony whether sear was ever known by Tott. No! --
Thrice on these borders have I led to victory the warriors of Norway. When I
returned triumphant from the last, I put into thy hands the laurel-crown,
bestowed upon me by thy father, and thou playd'st with it in thy cradle. -- Thy
father shook my hand, and said, 'Dear Tott' -- methinks I still can hear him --
'should Odin summon me before my son arrives at manhood, let thy sword be used
for him, as it has been for me; but teach him, one must never fight, unless for
a better purpose than to be able thus to play with laurels."

"Forgive me, dear old man," exclaimed Swend, "but thou mistakest me in thy
turn. May Vara Vara, the Goddess who receives all oaths, and punishes those who
violate them.
punish me, if mad ambition fires my soul! -- But infamous it seems to me, to
buy a peace at such a price -- infamous to make such a proposal to Ildegerte."

"The latter I will undertake," replied Tott.

Swend started, but the Chief continued --

"I know Ildegerte's exalted sentiments: she is always more than woman -- often
more than man. Her father was my friend, and the companion of my youth; -- he
fell in battle at my side, and his last breath recommended Ildegerte to my
care. I have obeyed him, and she well deserves it. In her dwells the spirit of
her father. Joy will sparkle in her eye when I inform her that the sacrifice
for which she is selected, will save the lives of many thousands -- perhaps too
the life of her King."

Here he rose.

"I hasten to her. Meanwhile conclude with Canfried a truce of six days; before
the expiration of which, I shall bring Ildegerte to the camp."

He attempted to go, when Swend, in violent agitation, held him.

"One moment more, dear Tott -- only a single moment! -- And do thou really
think that -- that --?"

"I think," answered the old man, surveying him with great astonishment, "I
think I do not understand thee, and am ashamed to see thee tremble."

"Oh my friend and father!" exclaimed Swend, throwing himself into the arms of
Tott, "I love Ildegerte!"

A pause ensued.

"Indeed!" said the old man, "now I comprehend all this -- now all is plain
enough. Now too I forgive the accusation against me. Thou love Ildegerte? And
what do thou intend to make her?"

"Can Tott ask such a question?" demanded Swend, with dignity.

"Thy wife then!" replied the Chief, shaking his hoary head. "Young man, young
man, I cannot approve of this. But to convince a lover, is more than to gain
three victories. I am mute. Come let us away to battle."

"Yes, to battle, to battle!" cried Swend. "To fight at thy side is but
pastime."

They went. The young King flew from tent to tent, embraced each Knight, shook
each vassal by the hand, shot fire into each bosom from his eyes, and inspired
the whole army with his youthful ardour. In a few minutes the shouts of battle
echoed through the camp. The King was followed by old Tott, who earnestly
surveyed the field of battle stretched before him, and pointed out to every
Knight the post which he was but to quit as conqueror or corpse. Amid the
clamor of the troops, through which the war-hymns of the Scalds were scarcely
audible, Swend saw, in every polished shield, the form of Ildegerte. Amid the
wild tumultuous shouts he could hear nothing but the lisping voice of
Ildegerte. Retired within his tent, he threw himself upon a couch, and thus
gave vent to his feelings --

"To risk my life and throne for Ildegerte -- to lose my life and throne for
Ildegerte, is a thought devoid of bitterness. But if Odin has resolved to spare
the villain for a longer trial -- if Fate has fixed on me, as an example, that
the cause of justice does not always conquer; if, instead of flying into
Ildegerte's arms, I may tomorrow fly into my parents' arms, who will then
declare what Swend has done for her -- for her, who little fancies what a
sacrifice I am about to offer, who perhaps has never read the avowal of my
passion in my eyes? -- Contented I will die, if sure I am lamented by her. She
shall know the secret, which, till today, has been concealed within my breast;
and then, to Odin I commit the guidance of my days. I shall bear with me the
certainty of Ildegerte's regret to the blissful habitations of Valhall. He
spoke; seized the parchment, and wrote:

"Swend, King of Norway, to Ildegerte.
"Can you, dear companion of my youth, still recollect those blessed days of
innocence and joy, when, under Thora's eye, each evening seemed to come too
soon? -- Does your tongue still sometimes lisp the name of brother, with which
I so often was enraptured? Do you still bear in mind the sacred blessing
bestowed upon us by my mother when she left this world? If you have yet some
faint remembrance of those happy days, passed in fraternal intercourse, when I
concealed no secret from you -- then, censure me that I have hid within my
bosom, for whole months, wishes and hopes which even at this instant, cause my
hand to tremble, and my cheek to glow, as if Thora's son could harbor a
dishonorable thought. I have sacrificed in Louna's temple -- that is my
secret. The possession of Ildegerte -- that is the sum of all my hopes and
wishes. To rob me of you, Canfried has invaded Norway with a powerful army. The
fatal hour approaches which is to decide between his cause and mine. If Love
and Fortune be propitious to my arms, Swend, in a few days, will lay his crown
at Ildegerte's feet, and Ildegerte will complete the blessing which my mother
gave us as she died. But if my rival triumph (and the first moment of his
triumph must be the last of my existence), then, Ildegerte, drop a tear upon my
early grave; lament the loss of a brother -- of a husband."


After he had sealed this letter with the button of his sword, he gave it to a
trusty messenger, whom his longing eye still followed till he vanished among
the intercepting mountains.

He returned with lighter heart into his tent. His attendants came to arm him.
With delight he gazed upon the burnished harness which, ere long, was to be
sullied with the blood of his enemy, or with his own. He thought the iron
helmet easier than before; the corslet far less cumbersome. He vaulted on his
charger, and flew with naked sword to the head of his army. The troops received
him with a joyful shout.

"A blue plume," whispered one to another, "let us not lose sight of him. It Is
the young hero's first campaign, and his fiery looks declare his eagerness.
Haste hither, old experienced Knights, and gather round him."

And now thirty or forty of the bravest warriors encircled the King. Each
breast was another buckler to him; and this small determined troop more
valuable far than all the paltry guards around the throne of Canfried. Old Tott
brandished his glittering sword above his head with youthful strength, and
hark! The trumpet's warlike clangor struck the ear from each end of the troops.
The Scalds chaunted solemn hymns; the Knights closed their visors; the arms of
the vassals clashed; the chargers stamped; the ensigns floated in the air; the
heart of the young King beat high.

"Why delay?" cried he to the deliberate Chief. "Forward, swift as lightning!
See! the nervous arms of my Knights are scarcely able to restrain their
neighing steeds."

"We delay to conquer," answered Tott; "let this first flame subside which
burns so high, yet spreads but little ruin round it."

Slow and determined, like a dark cloud which bears the vengeful lightning in
its breast, he marched against the trembling foe.

Uffo, Tott's valiant son (who had already shared in many a fight the glory of
his father), led a chosen troop of warriors through the valley, and waited for
the signal of attack, that he might fall upon the enemy when least expected,
and strike the dastard hirelings with dismay.

Canfried, meanwhile, attended by his Knights, flew from one wing of his army
to the other, bellowing to each that he should recollect his duty, and
endeavoring to revive the drooping courage of his followers by the hope of
plunder.

But what can servile avarice avail against the arm which is fighting for its
native land? Already had the sword of the Norwegians forced a passage through
the Swedish ranks; already had Tott spread desolation round him; already had
Swend burst into the throng, and piled a mountain of his slaughtered foes upon
the plain; already was Uffo's armor sprinkled with Swedish gore; already the
groans of the dying mounted toward heaven. Canfried saw, trembled, and gnashed
his teeth. In vain did he roar till he was hoarse, to rally the retreating
cowards. In vain did he curse the hour of his birth, Odin, and the habitation
of the Gods. Almost inevitably lost, Despair added vigor to his arm, and
hovered above him with her sooty wings. Impetuous he rushed into the thickest
troops of the Norwegians, followed by a squadron of rash daring youths; they
hewed their way with the destructive sword, until they reached the place where
Swend's blue plume high nodded in the air.

"Art thou here," cried Canfried, in a voice of thunder, "thou cradle-warrior,
who have dared to match thyself with me? Advance thou fiery stripling, nor
crouch inglorious thus beneath the bucklers of thy Knights! Advance, and meet a
man!"

"Welcome! welcome," cried Swend, "thou whom in the heat of battle I so long
have sought. Hither, thou ravisher! The stripling shall chastise thee."

He loosed the reins, and rushed toward Canfried; but his staunch companions
(who had averted many a dangerous blow, and whose number was now much
decreased) threw themselves between the combatants, and cried --

"No, you shall not stake your life against a villain's, who disgraces his own
crown, and wishes to steal yours. He is no more a Knight. Call one of our
baggage-boys, that he may fell him with a tent-staff to the earth."

Foaming with fury, Canfried bellowed to the remnant of his army --

"Advance! advance! Revenge this insult offered to your King."

At these words, a confused multitude, consisting of some hundreds, fell on the
twenty valiant Knights, whose breasts were as a wall to their Monarch. Not one
gave way -- not one fell, without taking five of his enemies to serve him in
Valhall Such were the tenets of the Runic doctrine in some countries, though,
in others, it was supposed that the warriors did not take their enemies to
Valhall as servants, but only their sculls as cups. See Note (8).
. But now the mob, which still increased and fought with blind despair, had
slain the last, and Swend remained alone, at a distance from his army, whither
his youthful intrepidity had led him.

"Yield, yield," cried Canfried, "that I may yoke thee to my chariot, and thus
triumphantly proceed to Ildegerte's castle."

Swend's sword made his reply. Canfried with great agility eluded the attack,
and aimed a mighty stroke at his antagonist, which glided down his polished
armor. A furious combat now began between the tyrant of Sweden and the father
of Norway. The youths in Canfried's retinue rushed against the solitary King,
to drag him from his charger; but two old Knights, the only two in whom the
honor of their order still remained, threatened to slay the first who dared to
lay hands upon him. They formed a circle round the combatants, cast a furious
look upon their dastard countrymen, and maintained the laws of war.

Like lightning flamed the swords of the contending rivals. Ildegerte and a
kingdom were to be the victor's prize. Canfried saw both; Swend, Ildegerte
only. The combat long continued doubtful, for skill and courage fought against
despair and madness. But now, as Canfried raised his sword, in order to
conclude the contest by one deadly blow, Swend perceived an opening where the
armlets fasten to the corslet. He dexterously parried the descending stroke,
and in a moment would his sword have forced a passage to the tyrant's heart,
when a vile assassin from behind struck him with a mace upon the head. He fell
prone from his horse, and streams of blood came gushing from his throat. One of
the old Swedish Knights flew the villain on the spot, bent down to Swend, and
opened his visor. His features swam in blood -- his eye was broken.

"A good Prince finds his reward in the arms of a Valkyrie."

These were the last words he uttered through his sighs. He was laid across his
steed, and slowly taken from the field of battle; but ere he reached the
neighboring spring, at which the Knight had purposed to refresh him, he
expired.

"Swend is dead!" cried Canfried to his troops. "The day is our's. Back to the
battle!"

"Swend is dead!" exclaimed the flying army, and returned.

"Swend is dead!" was heard on every side. "With him fell the courage of the
Norwegians."

Alas! too true!

"Swend is dead!" whispered each vassal to his comrade; "vanished is the plume
which nodded at our head."

"Swend is dead!" said each Knight to his neighbor.

The dire intelligence soon reached the old intrepid Tott, who still was
spreading carnage through the plain.

"Follow me, children," said he with utterance half-choaked, "avenge the death
of your King and benefactor."

But in vain did he once more rush into the heat of battle; but a few hundreds
followed him. Horror and grief had overpowered the almost conquering army. The
Norwegians fled in wild disorder from the field, and thousands fell a prey to
the devouring swords of their pursuers. Tott, with only a small, but valiant
band, retreated to a hill, and there maintained his post against the united
force of Sweden.

"Where is Uffo, my son?" said he to the Knight standing nearest to him. "Is my
son Uffo too among the fugitives?"

"No, venerable Chief," replied the warrior, "he fell, covered with wounds,
amid the fight."

"Did thou see him?" demanded Tott; "Were his wounds in front?"

"All in his breast, and on his head," returned the Knight.

"Odin be praised!" exclaimed old Tott. "Let us fight today; tomorrow we will
mourn."

He spoke, and opened his visor to regain his breath, when lo! a fatal arrow
came hissing through the air, pierced his right eye, and tumbled the last prop
of Norway to the earth. A faint groan from all his followers accompanied the
hero's fall. The sword dropped from every feeble hand, and every arm sunk
impotently down. Yet none would be obliged to the victorious robber for his
life, and Canfried towered the plain with carcases.

FLY, my spirit, far, far from the fatal plains, drenched in the blood of
heroes! -- Why should thou tarry with the dead? -- No longer great and
valiant deeds can signalize the field, for Tott, and Swend, and Uffo are no
more. Lead me, soft Fancy, lead me to the silent bower, where, in the shadowy
twilight, Ildegerte received the messenger who came to announce to her the
King's attachment.

"Art thou a messenger of peace?" cried she hastily, as he approached, and
knelt with reverence before her.

"From the King's hand I have received this letter," answered he, "with orders
to deliver it to Ildegerte."

"Tell me," demanded she, "how did thou leave the camp? Is Canfried's band of
robbers vanquished? Has Odin chastised the traitor?"

"When I left the camp," replied the messenger, "the Scalds were chaunting
hymns; the Knights were closing their visors; the armor was clashing; the
ensigns were flying, and the trumpet's blast proclaimed the attack."

"Oh! then is our King perhaps already victorious," exclaimed she, "and with
the pangs of unsuccessful villainy, Canfried has retreated from our borders."

With these words she opened the letter. She read -- her cheek colored. She
read further -- her cheek glowed. She closed the letter, and a tear trembled in
her sparkling eye.

"Leave me," said she, in a friendly tone, to the messenger.

"Most willingly, fair lady," answered he; "but do not long delay your answer,
for the King awaits me with anxiety."

"With anxiety!" repeated she, blushing. "How do thou know that?"

"Oh! he commanded me a hundred times," returned the messenger, "to outstrip
the wind in speed. He said the message was of consequence, and every minute
dear to him. Nay, after I was mounted and had left the camp, I still could hear
his voice desiring me to hasten; and when I looked far behind me from the dale,
I spied him standing near his tent, and with his hand above his eyes, still
watching me."

"Enough! enough!" said Ildegerte, much affected, "go, feed thy horse, refresh
thyself; -- tomorrow, soon as the sun's first beams have tipped the hills,
thou may return to the camp."

The messenger went. Ildegerte sunk upon her knees, and prayed --

"Oh Thora! now immortal, who, when about to quit mortality, did call me
daughter; if, amid the joys of Vingolf, thou still can feel a happy mother's
joys -- if the name of Swend remain still dear to thee, Oh reveal thyself to
Ildegerte! If I be unworthy of thy son's bed, banish from my heart this growing
passion. Let me fly into some desert, and lament my fate, which made me not the
daughter of a King."

She ceased, and with eyes swimming in tears, surveyed the rising moon. Hark! a
gentle evening breeze swept through the leaves; the blossoms shed their odours
all around; the nightingale, warbled in plaintive solitary notes. Ildegerte's
heart was full. The solemn twilight filled her mind with dark presages. With
wild affrighted looks she hastened through the wood, and hid herself in the
most lonesome chamber of the castle.

Meanwhile the prating messenger had been relating to the curious females, who
surrounded him, all that he knew about the letter -- or knew not; all that
Swend had said to him -- or not said. He had increased the King's anxiety a
hundred fold; a hundred times repeated Swend's eagerness for his return, and at
last, with all the air of wisdom, he observed --

"It must be some great project of the King which my weak intellects cannot
discover; but perhaps Ildegerte may give you further information."

Heavens! what bustle, and what whispers now took place! At length the fair
assembly agreed that they knew nothing, and resolved that at supper the secret
should be drawn from Ildegerte; or that, if her silence was invincible, they
should at least read it in her countenance.

The wished-for hour arrived. All eyes were turned on Ildegerte, as she entered
the saloon, with her usual air of friendly majesty. She was recovered; the
gentle glow of hope shone on her dimpled cheek. They sat to table. All was
silence; -- all was listening expectation, while Ildegerte (not remarking this
silence, or this expectation) talked with indifference to all. One coughed;
another trod upon her neighbor's foot; a third winked to a fourth, and none
dared to speak. But toward the conclusion of the meal, Ildegerte addressed
them, and every hand, about to lift the morsel to the mouth, sunk motionless
upon the lap.

"You, my dear companions, have, in this castle, for many months, with me
lamented Thora. I hope I am beloved by you, and hope that I deserve your love.
-- Hear then the joyful message which our King has sent to me, so undeserving
of it: his choice has fixed on me to be his wife!"

She ceased, and, softly blushing, cast her eyes upon the earth. Astonishment
had chained the tongues of her companions; but soon they rose transported,
surrounded Ildegerte with caresses, and paid homage to their Queen.

It must be owned that here and there an envious glance was seen, but Ildegerte
understood that art so difficult to be acquired, of always maintaining a
serenity of temper; and thus her silent dignity and friendly look subdued the
proudest heart. During the first hours devoted to rest, not one of all the
damsels closed her weary eyes; each imagination was so full of all the events
by which this last was caused, that it spurned the hand of Sleep when it seemed
to offer the balsam of repose.

'Twas well for you, good souls! For why this short repose? Already do the
shrieks of horror rend the air, and draw full near your castle-gates: already
do the groans disturb the midnight silence: already does the cry of murder echo
through the wood. The dwarf upon the tower thrice blew his horn. The guards
roused themselves from sleep, and hastened to the portal, against which the
approaching wretches thundered.

"Who thus disturbs our nightly rest?"

"Open! open to your brethren!"

"Speak! who are you?"

"Conquered wounded fugitives."

"Whence come you through the darkness of the night?"

"From the field of battle. We have marked the path by which we came with the
blood that trickles from our wounds. -- Odin, Odin has pronounced destruction
on the land! Swend is dead, Uffo is fallen, Tott is in Valhall!"

"Destruction, destruction upon you, ye messengers of evil!"

All was confusion through the castle. Questions, shrieks, and cries for arms
were heard on every side. Ildegerte alone was calmly sleeping in the arms of
Hope. The gentle smile of rewarded virtue dimpled her virgin cheek. Her
companions, with dishevelled hair, now burst into the chamber.

"Awake! awake!" cried they, "thy sleep is death."

Ildegerte sprung affrighted from her couch.

"What has happened? Is the castle in flames? Or has some traitor opened our
gates to the enemy?"

In vain did she a hundred times repeat the question. Horror had robbed the
females of their senses; they could make no reply but by weeping, groaning, and
tearing their hair. Ildegerte therefore threw a garment round her, seized a
taper, and with winged footsteps traversed the vaulted galleries, through which
the distant cries assailed her ear. Now her foot struck against a corpse, and
now her wandering eye espied upon the floor a wounded man, who held with both
his hands his bleeding side, and seemed already seized by Hela.

"Who art thou?" cried Ildegerte, shuddering.

"One who fights with Death for Valhall's joys," said he.

"How came thou here?" demanded she. "What hand inflicted this deadly wound?"

"The hand of a Swede," answered he. "Swend is dead, Uffo is fallen, Tott is in
Valhall!"

"Avenging Gods!" stammered forth Ildegerte.

The taper dropped from her hand, and she sunk, devoid of strength, against the
wall. But soon her fleeting spirits were recalled by the groans of the dying
warrior. She crept to her chamber, secured the entrance, and threw herself upon
the floor. There long she laid, nor shed a single tear, nor heaved a single
sigh. This moment of dreadful stupefaction passed away. She drew Swend' letter
from her bosom, and her eye fell upon these words:

"Then, Ildegerte, drop a tear upon my early grave; lament the loss of a
brother -- of a husband."

A sudden flood of tears came to her relief.

"My brother! my husband!" cried she, in a voice half choked by sobs.

No more could she stammer forth; but in these two names her overflowing heart
combined all the shadows of her past happiness, with all the smiling prospects
of her future bliss, which Fancy, a few hours before, had painted to her.

Overpowered by anguish, and almost drowned in tears, laid Ildegerte, till the
ruddy morn colored the castle's turrets. She awoke from the frenzy of despair,
just as the rising sun cast his first beams upon the lance and sword, which,
since Thora's death, had rusted in a lonesome corner.

"Come forth, my arms," cried she, "as yet employed but in the sports of youth
-- come forth, and in my hands become the instrument of burning vengeance.
Inspire me, Thor, Thor, the eldest son of Odin, the strongest and most intrepid
among the Gods. He is said, by some, to launch the thunder of Odin, and to be
principally consulted in heaven relative to the decision of victory. He always
carries a mace or club, which he grasps with gauntlets of iron; and which, as
often as he discharges it, returns immediately to his hand. He is also
possessed of a girdle, which has the virtue of renewing his strength as often
as is needful. The fifth day of the week (Thor's day) is consecrated to him.
with martial ardour; make the din of arms more pleasing to my ear than the
lute's harmonious tones. Pour strength into my frame, and let no female fears
unnerve it. Depart from me, Frey, Frey, the mildest of all the Gods. He
presides over the seasons of the year, and bestows fertility.
thou son of Niord Niord, the God of Winds, who checks the fury of the sea,
storms, and fire.
. Steel my breast, Oh father of the Gods! and thou, Freya, to whom this heart
has offered many a sacrifice, Oh! let thy Lyna Lyna, the Goddess, to whose care
are committed those whom Frea intends to deliver from peril.
guide me safe through danger, till the inhuman tyrant Canfried scoffing stands
before me, that the arm of a woman may hurl him to the everlasting torments of
Niflheim Niflheim, or Hell, literally signifying Evil-Home.
. -- Haste, ye Scalds, and chaunt the hymns of war. I fight for my brother --
for my husband!"

Deep crimson colored Ildegerte's cheeks; her eyes shot fire; her arm
trembled, not with female fear, but manly rage. She enclosed her silken locks
within her crested helm (adorned, by Thora's hand, with three serpents' heads),
locked her struggling bosom in the plated cuirass, girded the sword to her
loins, grasped the lance and buckler, and entered the vaulted hall, where, with
downcast looks, her companions, bewailing the past, and trembling for the
future, shrieked and tore their bosoms.

"Why all these cries and lamentations?" said Ildegerte. "He is dead. Your
tears will not recall him from the clay-cold arms of Hela. Your tears will not
repel the robber from the gates of our late peaceful habitation. Was it then in
vain that Thora snatched the spindle from our hand, and taught us manly
exercise? -- Let those women weep and sigh, whose only arms are tears and
sighs. Let those dastards tremble who would not sell their lives for Valhall's
joys. -- Rise, my companions! Is there a choice between death and ignominy? Why
do we delay? Haste, against the robber, who threatens the destruction of our
innocence. Haste, haste against the murderer, who has robbed me of my brother
-- of my husband. Let him feel that the heroism of the sons of Norway dwells
likewise in her daughters. Let him feel that the arm of a woman was not formed
only to place her suckling to her breast. Rise! Rise! Redeem the honor of your
native land. Revenge your Monarch's death. Conquer, or die with Ildegerte!"

Here grief and fury in contention choked her voice; but the heroine's words
sunk deep into the hearts of her listening friends. They gazed with reverence
at her flaming eye.

Ildegerte leaned exhausted on her lance, and solemn silence reigned. At this
moment, an old Knight, severely wounded, and supported by two 'Squires, slowly
entered the hall. In his hand he bore a helmet with a blue plume. Silent, and
with his mournful eye riveted upon it, he approached Ildegerte. A secret tremor
chilled her blood.

"Ah!" cried she, "'it is Swend's helmet."

"Yes," replied the Knight, "it is indeed Swend's helmet. The blood that
cleaves to this plume, is the blood of my King. This helmet costs me my life. I
have fought honorably for it, and it is all that I could bring. Do thou see
this mark? There a villain struck him from behind. The dastard! From behind!"

Ildegerte swooned.

"Cease! cease!" cried the females, and surrounded her. The old Knight seated
himself, laid the helmet down before him, gazed at it with his hands clasped,
and, regardless of the cries around him, thus proceeded --

"Yes! the assassin struck thee from behind. Thou were a brave youth. Still do
I see this plume towering amid the throng, while the wanton winds were playing
with it; but now it droops, wet with thy royal blood. The barbarous deed calls
loudly for revenge, but in vain does thy departed spirit search for an avenger.
Uffo fell with his troop. Tott has shed the blood, warmed only by the love of
his country. The murderous sword has swept our warriors from the earth. Me, me
only has Odin for a few moments spared, that I might secure this treasure, and
require some one to swear on this cold hand the most terrible of oaths; that I
might, by this helmet, appoint him an avenger; that I might carry his oath to
Valhall, and deliver it to Swend. But my strength declines, my eye fades.
Haste! haste, avengers, ere I die!" -- He looked around. Ildegerte was
recovered. In a moaning voice, the Knight again began --

"Has the angel of death not spared one -- not one youth (had he but just
escaped the rod), that this cold hand might once more draw the bloody sword to
make a Knight? Haste! haste, avengers, ere I die!"

"Make me, make me the avenger, venerable old man!" cried Ildegerte, clasping
his knees with ardour, and throwing her own helmet from her. "To me give
Swend's helmet, that on my head it may become a terror to the enemy; that the
sight of it may make the blood of Canfried stagnant; that this sword may force
it into circulation, and with it wash the gore of my Monarch from this drooping
plume."

"Is Norway then so far humbled," said the dying Knight, "that her liberty and
honor can only be defended by a woman's helpless arm? -- Oh, father of the
Gods! have thou then lengthened out my days -- have thou allowed these eyes to
be yet a little longer open, only that they may see the storm tear up by the
roots that tree, in whose shadow I have rested eighty years, on whose branches
I have hung many a well-earned trophy. Never have I wept but in my mother's
arms -- those were the tears of a child; but today, in my old age, am I doomed
to wash these gray hairs in the tears of despair. Bear me into the open air,
and let me die."

"Stay, I conjure thee, by the honor of thy order," exclaimed Ildegerte. "Thou
despisest the courage of a female, and scornst a woman's helpless arm. Know
then, old man, that she whom Swend had chosen for his wife, is not unworthy to
be his avenger. If the mist of death has not yet dimmed thy eye, peruse this
letter. I am thy Queen. Thy Queen clasps thy knees, and with burning tears
implores thee to make her the avenger of her husband."

The old Knight took the letter with a trembling hand. His eye examined it with
difficulty, line by line, and at last reached the word Husband.

"Be it so," cried he, much agitated, "I acknowledge thee my Queen before I
die. Fear not these clay-cold lips. Kiss me, that I may take thy kiss to the
holy habitations of happiness, where, in the court of warriors, your husband
wanders under Odin's golden bucklers Odin's golden bucklers. The Edda tells us,
that Gylfe, King of Sweden, went disguised to Asgard, the court of the Gods,
and there saw these bucklers.

"Tunc cernebat ille palatium. Tecta ejus erant tecta aureis clypeis."

"Then he beheld a palace. The roof of it was covered with golden shields."

We are likewise told, that Eger, a Danish Nobleman, once visited the Gods, on
which occasion Odin had ranged through the hall swords of such amazing
brilliancy, as to make any other illumination needless, and had covered the
walls with glittering shields.


."

Ildegerte pressed her glowing mouth to the pallid lips of the expiring warrior
--

"Take this kiss," exclaimed she, "to my husband, and with it the solemn oath
to revenge his death, or to die worthy of his love."

"Swear then," said the Knight.

"I swear," replied Ildegerte.

He drew his sword.

"Lay thy hand," proceeded he, "upon this sword -- the eye of the Omnipotent
beholds us. Repeat my words -- the ear of the Omnipotent hears us. With fire
and sword I swear to avenge the death of Swend, King of Norway. May the marrow
dry within my bones, and may my hand be withered, if I sheath the sword before
my vengeance be complete! With fire and sword I swear to pursue Canfried, the
murderer of my husband. If I break this oath, may my name become the derision
of children! May no tomb cover my bones, no tear fall upon my corpse! May it
lie unburied on the earth, a prey to ravenous vultures, and may every honest
man pass by it with a curse! Cursed be the hour of my birth! Cursed be the hour
of my death! Cursed be the bones of my father! Cursed be the bones of my
mother! May the name of Ildegerte be branded with a harlot's infamy for ever!
May the curse of Odin light upon me, and cast me into the horrors of Ni^^heim!
May he show me the image of my murdered husband in a thousand shapes, that I
may feel the pangs of death a thousand times! Be this oath immutable, even if a
hundred sacrifices of atonement smoke upon the altar! Be this oath immutable,
even if a Priest say to me, 'Go thy way, thy sins are forgiven thee!"

Thus swore Ildegerte. The surrounding virgins stood like statues, gazing at
her glowing countenance. The old Knight now cast away his sword, and seizing
with both hands the helmet of the King, exclaimed --

"Then let the sight of this each morn awake thee to the renewal of thy oath.
Still let thine eye behold the blood with which this plume is besmeared, long
after the rain has washed it off! -- Do thou promise this?"

"I promise it," answered Ildegerte.

"Take then the jewel," said he, "which I purchased with my life."

He placed the helmet on her head.

"Brace on thy armor," added he, "and mount thy charger; for thou art
appointed an avenger. My eyes grow dim. My strength is exhausted. Odin, I thank
thee! Not in vain did thou command the scythe of death to wait till now, ere
it cut the feeble thread of my existence, and joined it to eternal bliss. My
last hour is come. My work is done. Bear me into the open air, and let me die
in sight of the sun."

He leaned, devoid of strength, upon his 'Squires. They bore him into the open
air, and he died in sight of the sun.

NATURE created man a medium on the ladder of perfection; he never climbs to
the highest step, never sinks to the lowest; he is never quite so good, never
quite so bad as woman. It Is not of you I speak, ye prattling creatures, whom
Plato doubts whether to reckon among our species: you I mean, ye elevated
beings, for whose sake Lessing makes an accusation against Nature, that in
forming you, she mistook the clay. When you are good, you stand between man and
angel; when you are bad, you stand between man and devil.

Never had such heroic fire glowed in the breast of man. Ildegerte felt a new
being. Unutterable strength was shed upon her. Revenge had subdued the
gentleness of love, and love added fuel to revenge.

"You are witnesses," cried she, after the old Knight had left the hall, "your
are witnesses that I am ordained an avenger. This very day will I depart to
fulfill my appointment. I have no companions but the Gods and Justice. I have no
protectors but this helmet and my sword. Fallen are the mighty warriors of
Norway. No valiant troops will follow me to battle. Ye companions of my joys!
if there be one among you who has also shared my sorrow, who will also share my
vengeance, let her come into her sister's arms, that I may press her to my
beating heart, and breathe into her bosom the fire which burns in mine."

She cast her eyes mournfully around.

"Is there not one?" said she.

"All! all! we will all accompany thee!" cried they, seized with the noble
enthusiasm, which struck them with electric force.

They assembled round Ildegerte, and proceeded --

"Be our leader and our Queen. Appoint us by thy kiss the servants of revenge."

Ildegerte embraced all, and away they fled to their chambers, hung up the harp
and lute, cast away the loom and spindle, and hastened to clean their armor.

The heroic ardour was not long confined within the castle's walls. It echoed
through the wood, and flew upon the wings of wind to the next town, where many
a wife wept over the ashes of her husband, many a mother over the bones of her
son. All dried their tears, tore helmet, mail, and sword from the much-loved
slain, and armed themselves to fight under Ildegerte's banner. Swift flew the
news into the land. From every quarter flocked whole troops of females, and ere
the evening dew was mixed with the blood of the slaughtered, Ildegerte stood at
the head of six thousand Amazons, who (assembled on a plain, beneath the canopy
of Heaven), swore to her the most dreadful oath to avenge the deaths of their
husbands, of their sons, and of their brothers. They began their march under
shadow of the night; and the constellation Orion was their guide. The next
morning, the little army halted at the foot of a hill, when, to their no small
joy, the fugitives who had escaped destruction, joined them, in number about
twelve thousand.

From the summit of the hill, the heroine brooded with meditating gloom over
the warlike preparations at her feet.

"Alas!" said she to herself, "there is the last resource of our impoverished
land. Woe be to Norway if these too be sacrificed! And sure they must, unless a
God fight for us. That triumphant army, which subdued the flower of our
chivalry, will crush this small undisciplined band, as the bear crushes the
ant-hill. I smile at Hela: I have sworn to meet her, and each of my companions
will rush into her arms, rather than wear the tyrant's ignominious chains. But
what must become of those poor innocents whom we have left heedlessly playing
in our streets? Must our aged parents bend to the grave in fetters, and our
children grow beneath an iron yoke?"

Mournfully her head sunk upon her bosom; before her fancy floated the shadows
of a dread futurity. But suddenly a gleam of hope shot through her soul.
Theodoric, King of Denmark, Thora's nephew, was, at Swend's death, heir to the
crown of Norway The hundred tongues of Fame described him to be handsome, just,
and valiant.

"The blood of Thora," said each stranger who had dwelt a few days at his
Court, "the blood of Thora flows in the veins of this young hero."

Ildegerte dispatched, without delay, ambassadors to Theodoric, who spoke to
this effect --

"Swend, thy kinsman, is no more. He is murdered by the villainy of Canfried.
All the Nobles of Norway are destroyed. A female only is advancing, at the head
of females and of fugitives, to avenge her desolated country and her Monarch's
death. Summon thy Knights, and assemble all their vassals. Haste, haste to
defend a land which henceforth owns thee as its King."

Upon the swiftest horses the ambassadors pursued their way to Denmark's
borders; while Ildegerte advanced toward the enemy, who, fearless of attack,
were dispersed over the country, laying waste the fields, plundering the
cottages, and murdering infancy and age.

With a smile of derision Canfried received the first account of the
approaching Amazons. With a look, like the look of the devil, when he sees the
pious sin, he heard that Ildegerte herself was at their head.

"'It Is well," cried he, with a scoffing laugh. "The bird flies of its own
accord into the cage. Welcome! welcome, beauteous bride! In vain do thou
oppose thyself to me. My sword was drawn for thee, and cannot be turned against
thee. Amid the din of war, I Will lead the to my couch, voluptuously unclasp thy
corselet, enjoy thy virgin struggles, and revel in that heaving bosom, ill
adapted to be thus confined in mail."

In these terms did the tyrant, lolling on silken cushions, feast his fancy
with lascivious hopes; and as Ildegerte was not yet within his power, he
summoned some harlot from the camp, and threw himself into her arms.

The scattered bands, of late engaged in murder and in rapine, ere long
returned affrighted to the camp. Ildegerte's out posts had seized part of the
robbers, and the rest had fled to announce the enemy's approach.

"Art thou so near already?" cried Canfried, in a tone of diabolical
exultation. "By my faith, thou seem to have an eager longing for a King's
embrace. But ere the sword be used to lead thee to my bed, let me once more try
the effect of those weapons, which, when artfully forged, will make a female's
anger melt, like snow in spring before the sun -- the weapons of flattery."

He spoke, seized the quill, and from his shallow brain, dried by excess,
forced this epistle.

"Canfried, King of Sweden and Norway, to Ildegerte.
"I am not come to fight against thee, but to be thy slave. Cast away thy
threatening armor; the victory was long since thine. Since the night on which
mistaken raillery divided us, Canfried has ever borne the image of thy beauty
in his heart. For thee he drew his sword; for thee he has sacrificed thousands;
for thee he has hazarded his own life. And would thou fight against him who
lays his laurels at thy feet? Far more noble would it be, were thou generously
to stretch forth thy hand to him, whom thou have conquered, and who wears thy
chains. Or, can thou think, lovely, yet rash enchantress, that, because thy
girls have sometimes broken a lance, they will dare to cope with my victorious
Knights, beneath whose arms fell Tott and Uffo? -- Banish the romantic whim. I
offer thee my heart and peace. Let not thy lovely troops advance. It behooves me
to wait on thee -- me, who am determined to possess thee, as friend or foe."


Beneath a canopy, majestically leaning on her lance, Ildegerte received the
herald, who brought this letter.

"Thank the law of nations," said she to him, "that I do not punish in the
messenger the audacity of the libertine who sent him. Bring a sack hither;
throw some filthy dog into it, and deliver it to this man. When thou openest
the sack in presence of thy master, and the dog runs out covered with sores,
say, This is Ildegerte's answer and her dowry I doubt not that many of our
modern belles will be shocked at this disgusting present of Ildegerte. But, let
them revert to those rude ages, in which barbarism was extolled as virtue, and
delicacy of sentiment condemned as effeminacy. A scabby or mangy dog (for this
is my author's expression, though, from deference to the feelings of those
abovementioned, I have rendered it in terms (...) unexceptionable as I could,
without forfeiting the meaning of the original), is a present, mentioned more
than once in Gothic history, and was often sent as a kind of playful defiance.
Let these nice ladies, then, call to mind the spirit and manners of those
times, and if they be not superfine indeed, Ildegerte will lose nothing in
their eyes.
."

With these words she turned her back to the trembling messenger, and went to
prepare her faithful friends for the decisive hour.

"What! not yet humbled!" cried Canfried, with ferocious mien. "Still that
proud contempt with which I was accused of having stolen thy sandals! Fall then
a sacrifice to thine obstinacy. Alive I Will catch thee, and my vassals shall
deflour thee."

Toward evening, Canfried sent a second herald to the camp.

"Tomorrow," thus ran his message, "shall the rising sun be witness of my
triumph. Arm thyself, girl! Inspire thy girls with courage. Tomorrow will I
send my baggage-boys against thee, who shall bind the rash creatures to their
horses' tails, and drag them to my presence."

A smile was Ildegerte's answer -- a forced smile upon her countenance, and
dark presages of the future in her soul. She could not to herself deny, that
her small band was too weak to contend with an enemy thrice as numerous; and
that the courage and intrepidity of a few troops hastily collected, were not a
match for skill and discipline. Her Amazons, indeed, had devoted themselves to
death, and she herself would think it happiness to die for him, who died for
her. 'Twas not the fear of death that made her tremble, but the thought of
going to Valhall, where the old Knight perhaps might meet her with the
question, "Have thou fulfilled thy oath?" Then to be obliged to answer, "No,"
although a gaping wound in her breast excused that No -- this, this alone --

"Oh Father of the Gods!" exclaimed she, with eyes swimming in tears, "this
evening is perhaps the last of my existence. If thou have decreed that the
battle of tomorrow shall decide for ever the slavery of my country, Oh! at
least permit me, in the heat of action, to find the villain who robbed my
husband of his life, that my arm may search the way to his execrable heart! Let
us fall together. Hurl him not to Niflheim's everlasting darkness; allow him
not the small consolation of suffering with many thousands: take him to
Valhall, where he will be the only sufferer, that, in the happiness of him whom
he persecuted, in the bliss of him whom he murdered, he may feel the bitterest
of agonies."

Thus prayed Ildegerte, in whose heart the thirst for vengeance had choked the
milder sensations of female gentleness.

The stars already sparkled in the sky; Ildegerte sent messengers from tent to
tent.

"Refresh yourselves," said they; "let the cup of joy pass round, and rest till
sunrise. Then brace on your armor, pray to the Gods, and sally forth upon the
plain, for tomorrow is the decisive day."

The troops obeyed; they filled the horn, and drank to a happy meeting in
Valhall.

Meanwhile Ildegerte ascended the hill, upon which the moon shone in awful
majesty, erected a small altar, and sacrificed to the God of war. Helga, one of
her dearest companions, followed her.

"Let me," said she, with sisterly affection, "reveal to you my doubts and
fears. You did not act wisely in dismissing Canfried's messenger so scornfully."

"And what would Helga have done?" demanded Ildegerte.

"You have sent ambassadors to Theodoric, King of Denmark," rejoined she. "Fame
speaks loudly in the praise of this young hero, but our revenge is not his
revenge, nor our impatience his. Allowing that he accedes to your request;
granting that he is allured by the prospect of an empty throne, and takes up
arms to gain a second crown, not being sufficiently oppressed by the weight of
one; still, what can you expect from this? The decisive hour approaches. Pray
to Odin that he will bestow wings upon Theodoric's army. We must conquer
without him, or die without him; for, at all events, the King of Denmark will
come too late."

"And what do you infer from all this?" asked Ildegerte.

"That you would have done better," replied Helga, "had you, for a little
while, cast away these manly arms, and used the arms which Nature grants to all
our sex -- cunning and deception. You might have detained Canfried's messenger
for a few days with promises, and then given some equivocal reply, some gleam
of hope. By this mode we should have gained time -- have gained every thing."

"You are right," returned the heroine; "but for the murderer of her husband,
Ildegerte has but one reply. To have left Canfried in the supposition (were it
but the supposition of a moment) that my ear was open to his vile proposals,
would have been a breach of my oath, would have been treason to the shadow of
our King. No! Of this not a word more. Let us remain true to our honor, and
die."

"I admire your courage, but not your policy," said Helga.

"As you please," rejoined Ildegerte. "I have listened to, and answered your
objections as a friend; I now, as your Chief, command silence. The morning
begins to dawn; our moments are counted. Go; leave me to my devotions. Climb to
the summit of the hill, and observe the Swedish camp. As soon as you perceive
the enemy in motion, call to me, that we may descend, and wake our friends."

Helga went. Ildegerte sacrificed and prayed. The border of the eastern cloud
was tipped with gold.

"Do you see nothing, Helga?" demanded Ildegerte.

"A death-like silence reigns around," said she; "I hear nothing but the
warbling of the early lark."

Ildegerte prayed fervently. The smoke from the altar ascended toward heaven.
The outward edge of the sun appeared in the horizon. Ildegerte repeated her
question.

"I see," returned Helga, "a few men scattered here and there through the camp
of the enemy. They are leading their horses to the water."

"The time draws near," said Ildegerte.

She raised her hands and eyes toward heaven, and prayed aloud. The sun rose
in full majesty.

"What do you now see, Helga?" asked she.

"I see," answered Helga, "a thick cloud of dust far in the west. I see the
glittering of spears far as my eye can reach."

"In the west!" exclaimed Ildegerte. "Does your imagination deceive you?"

"Come yourself, and see," replied Helga.

The heroine mounted the hill. Before her eyes appeared an innumerable army.
The sun cast his beams upon their polished helmets. Already was her ear
assailed by the neighing of their steeds, and the clashing of their arms.

"Heavens!" cried Ildegerte; "we are lost. Odin has given life to stones in
order to yoke our miserable country!"

"See how they spread from side to side," continued Helga; "the wood scems to
be alive. Still, still fresh troops appear."

"Descend! descend!" shouted Ildegerte. "Thunder to our warriors. Let us die at
least with sword in hand."

They rushed together down the hill, and lo! the ambassadors who had been sent
to sue for aid from Denmark, met them.

"Whither," exclaimed Ildegerte, "whither so quick? What means this breathless
haste? Who are the countless troops advancing from the west?"

"The troops of Denmark," answered they, "of our liberater and avenger. But a
day's march from our camp, beyond the wood we found him, at the head of thirty
thousand warriors. Long had Fame announced to him the danger that threatened
this kingdom, yet did the news of our late Monarch's death force tears from his
eyes. He is a friendly Prince, and seems a gallant Knight. He commends himself
to your services, and says, he hopes to know you better. You must immediately
call forth your troops, and take your station on the left, while he draws
toward the river on the right. Listen to the first sound of the trumpet, which
is the signal that Theodoric's army is fording the river; the second announces
to you the safe arrival of the troops on the other side; and the third is the
moment when you and they are to commence the attack. Odin grant success to your
arms!"

They bowed to the earth, and joyfully hastened down the hill to communicate
the tidings, and with them courage through their little camp. What shouts of
transport echoed from every side! The ambassadors were enclosed, and lifted in
the air, while grateful blessings were poured upon Theodoric. The cries of joy
floated to the enemy across the plain. Stunned with horror, they beheld the
innumerable spears, and burnished armor glittering in the sunbeams Long
Ildegerte stood immovable. With uplifted hands, and the tear of gratitude
sparkling in her eye, she looked toward the habitation of the Gods. At length
she threw herself into Helga's arms --

"Now, dear friend, thou see Odin is just. His thunder seems to sleep, but
suddenly the villain feels its force. The hour of vengeance is arrived."

She spoke, and hastened to the troops, who received her with loud
acclamations. Already were they mounted on their chargers; mighty considence
beamed upon every countenance, and each with eagerness awaited the third sound
of the trumpet, the signal of attack.

Toward the lest, as Theodoric commanded, Ildegerte led her valiant troops,
who followed her with songs and jubilee, as if to tournaments and sports. Not
far from Canfried's camp, she ordered them to halt, and with rapture heard the
first sound of the trumpet.

Meanwhile, the tyrant raged from tent to tent. In vain! Fallen was the
robber's courage. Instead of grasping his sword, each trembling coward seized
the plunder, and prepared for flight. Surrounded by dangers, and almost sinking
under despair, Canfried sent a herald to Theodoric, King of Denmark, who thus
addressed him --

"Why art thou come against me, who live in peace with thee? Join thy troops to
mine, that we may annihilate these women, who have sled from the spindle: then
will we fraternally divide the realms of Norway, conquered by my valiant arm."

"Go, tell thy master," said Theodoric, "to reconcile himself with Odin, for
his last hour is come. Norway is my hereditary right, nor will I ever share it
with a robber."

The herald faithfully delivered his message, and Ildegerte heard the second
sound of the trumpet. Despair stretched her sable pinions over Canfried's head.
The sentinels stole one by one from his tent, and he, on whose nod, but
yesterday, the lives of thousands hung, remained alone.

"Is it then resolved?" cried he, foaming with fury. "Must all my high
premeditated schemes be blasted in their bud? -- Ah! then shall my death at
least distinguish me from this base herd of flying dastards. Pale and aghast,
posterity shall hear how Canfried fell. Rise, demons of Niflheim! Cloud my
senses, that I may rush impetuous on their swords, and seek the girl who tears
the laurels from my brow. -- What is this that boils within me? In vain do ye
torment me, sensations, termed by the vulgar, pangs of conscience: in vain does
the bloody recollection of my sins attempt to torture me. -- Thou phantom,
called Virtue, I die without knowing thee. Oh, how wretched is he, whose misery
arises from his own crimes! My heart is my accomplice, and my executioner. But
I will not feel that I am wretched. Death is my hope, and life my punishment.
Cursed be thou, Odin! I hate myself. I hate mankind! Away to death! Down, down
to hell!"

Furious he rushed forward, and saw part of his flying army far away.

"There the cowards fly!" cried he. "Is there then no one who will die with his
King?"

He looked round. His eye fell upon an old Knight, who was attentively
surveying the stump of an oak, which had been lately felled. It was the same
old Swede who slew the murderer of Swend, and led the dying Prince to a
neighboring spring, for the purpose of refreshing him.

"What art thou doing here?" demanded Canfried.

"I am observing this tree," replied the Knight.

"Is it so remarkable a sight that it can make thee forget thine own safety?"
asked the King.

"It is indeed remarkable," answered the Swede. "But yesterday its top defied
the hurricane."

"I understand thee," returned the tyrant, "but even in his fall shall Canfried
still be Canfried. Go. Fly, and leave me to my fate."

"I shall not fly," said the Knight.

"Thou see we are forsaken," rejoined Canfried.

"I am not forsaken," answered he.

"Not forsaken!" exclaimed the King. "On whom do thou place thy hope?"

"On God and my arm."

"On God!" cried Canfried, shuddering.

"Yes," said the Knight, with a look of firmness toward heaven, "on God."

"And on thy arm?" continued Canfried, recovering. "A single arm against two
armies?"

"I know how to die," returned the Knight.

"I know it too," exclaimed the King; "I will not survive the dreadful hour
which robs me of my glory, to be bound in ignominious chains, and dragged
before a woman's throne. Here," proceeded he, drawing his sword, "take this,
and obey thy Monarch's last command: -- Stab me."

"Never!" replied the veteran.

"I will die," said Canfried, "by the hand of a friend and a Knight. Take it
and strike."

"Heaven forbid," rejoined he, "that I should stain my hands with the blood of
my King! Thus far we are not as yet degraded. Let these hirelings fly. The
better half of thy army still remains immovable; and though it be not equal to
the enemy in numbers, still many a valiant Knight defends thy cause. Advance,
my Liege! Show thyself at the head of thy warriors, and if thou must die, die
in battle like a Knight."

"'It Is well!" cried the tyrant. "Follow me. Seas of blood shall pay for every
drop of mine, and if Odin grant me victory today, I Will build a temple, and
confess aloud -- there is a God." --

He hastily vaulted on his charger, and flew to collect the scattered troops,
which fear and cowardice had left him.

The warlike trumpet sounded the third time; Ildegerte heard it with a beating
heart, courageously brandished her sword, and rushed at the head of her Amazons
against the hostile squadrons. At the same moment, like a thick wood, the
lances of the Danes forced their way. At their head fought, with glowing
ardour, Theodoric the King, and Prince Harold, his favorite. A cloud of arrows
darkened the sun. Amid the din of war, the neighboring cataract was heard no
more. In vain did the despairing tyrant atchieve prodigies of valor. The heaps
of slain increased around him every instant; every instant numbers forsook him,
and begged their lives as they fled from the field.

"'It Is done!" cried Canfried, with ghastly fury; "I have reached the goal of my
career. Black demons of Niflheim! dying, I devote myself to you. Help, help me
to find the woman, whom I once so ardently wished to possess. My love is
converted into fury. She refused a Monarch's bed; be she my companion on the
bed of death!"

Wildly he rolled his eyes around the field, in search of Ildegerte. Ildegerte
sought him, and soon they met. An involuntary tremor thrilled through
Canfried's frame, when, by the crowned lion, he recognized, on Ildegerte's
head, Swend's royal helmet.

"Has hell belched thee forth?" cried he, raising his massy sabre to conclude
the combat with one deadly blow.

Ildegerte, unequal to him in strength, but more nimble, escaped the
threatening stroke, which glanced down her polished armor. Now, as he raised
his arm a second time, she spied the opening in his corselet, and before his
stroke descended, plunged her sword into his bosom to the hilt. Bellowing, he
fell at his horse's feet. Black streams of gore rushed down his armor, and
defiled the grass. With the most dreadful curses upon Ildegerte, and blasphemy
upon his dying tongue, he vomited his impious soul.

This combat decided victory for Norway, and restored her liberty. All that
could fly, fled, and those, who saw no way open, fell on their knees, cast away
their arms, and threw themselves upon the generosity of their conquerors.

The old Knight, alone, by whose hand Canfried had wished to die, had fixed
himself against the same tree, which, a few hours before, had foretold to him
his Monarch's fate; and with sword in hand defended himself against the
increasing multitude. Him Theodoric discovered at a distance, sprung forward,
and dispersed his troops, who were basely fighting against a single man.

"Yield!" said he, to the almost exhausted Knight. "Look round; thou art alone.
How comes this youthful rashness in a veteran's breast?"

"'It Is because I am a veteran," replied he, "that I do not wish to survive the
loss of this day's battle. But I yield to thee on one condition."

"Name it," returned Theodoric.

"Let me bear away the body of my King, and go in peace to give it honorable
burial."

"Did thou love thy King?" demanded the young Monarch.

"He was my King," answered the Swede, "and I did my duty."

"Enough!" said Theodoric, much affected, "thy petition is granted."

"I have made no petition," replied he; "I have but required of thee what I
(were thy body lying at my feet) should not deny to one of thy Knights."

"Go then in peace," returned Theodoric, taking his gauntlet off, "but not ere
thou have given the King of Denmark thy hand."

"I thank thee," answered the Knight, shaking his hand, "and in return, young
hero, accept the honest counsel of a man in years. Let not thy conquest make
thee arrogant. Let the example of Canfried be ever present to thee, and teach
thee how much stronger a defense than sword and mail, is -- the love of thy
people."

"I promise," said the young King, "to follow thy instructions. Come with me to
my Court, and witness it."

"No," replied the Swede, "I have a native home, and two infant grandchildren."

"Let me then, at least, take thy friendship with me," said Theodoric.

"Thou have it," rejoined he.

Thus they parted. The body of Canfried was laid upon a carriage, and slowly
borne toward the borders of his kingdom. No lamentation filled the towns
through which it passed. No tear moistened the sand which covered it.

Scarce had Ildegerte fulfilled her oath as an avenger; scarce did she see that
nothing now remained but to bind her temples with the wreath of victory, than
she left the field of battle, accompanied by Helga only, hastened to the camp,
climbed the hill, which had smoked with her sacrifice on the preceding night,
and offered the firstlings of her gratitude to Odin. As she went to rid herself
of her armor, she was met by Theodoric and the Nobles of his Court, among whom
was Prince Harold. With reverence the King alighted from his horse, and
accosted Ildegerte in these words --

"To you, valiant lady, belong my thanks, and the thanks of your country.
Receive them in sight of the whole army, and allow me and my retinue to behold
your face."

Ildegerte humbly answered --

"My Lord and Sovereign! your generosity is pleased to ascribe to me what,
without your powerful assistance, I had never effected. You are the deliverer
of my native land. Allow Ildegerte to be the first who does homage to you."

She opened her visor with downcast eyes, and modestly knelt at his feet. How
enchanting was her appearance! How majestic the air added to her figure by
Swend's helmet, from which a few ringlets had stolen into sight! How
negligently beautiful the belt with golden fringe, that hung from her shoulder!
Theodoric and his courtiers were astonished. The former almost forgot the rules
of courtesy, raised her with a trembling hand, stammered forth a few syllables,
and kissed her forehead. Ildegerte, however, seemed not in the least to have
observed the impression she had made on the assembly, and withdrew to her tent,
in order to exchange her armor for a female dress.

THINK not, mistaken mortals, to escape the inviting dangers, which so often
cost you happiness and peace. It is from them only that the space of many
years, of many miles cannot protect you. Your enemy is your heart, and if you
never had a contest, you have had no enemy. In our bosoms we all bear a great
enchanter, who can make old men young, and beggars Kings. Oh! if we knew not
love and death, what could convince the haughty man that he is but a man?

King Theodoric returned to his pavilion, not as he had left it. Every object
seemed beautiful and fair, for in every object he beheld Ildegerte.

Prince Harold returned to his pavilion, not as he had left it. All was to him
unaccountable vacuity, for his heart was full -- was full of Ildegerte.

It is time to sketch, with a few light touches, the characters of these two
royal youths.

Theodoric was young and inexperienced, open to every impression, easily
deceived, and easily led astray. He had a warm esteem for every good and noble
action, yet often mistook the outward appearance of good and noble, for
reality. In every insinuating smile he saw a friend, into whose arms he threw
himself without consideration.

Harold was older and more subtle, pliant and reserved, ambitious and
voluptuous. He had the look of calmness with a boiling heart. He had a
countenance, which, as the times required, assumed each mask. He was pious with
the pious, and scoffed with the free-thinker. He had once made an attempt to
revive an ancient right to the crown, and his impotence alone restrained him
within the bounds of a subject. In vain did many an aged counselor, who looked
into futurity, warn Theodoric to dismiss this dangerous rival from his throne.
To policy Theodoric seldom listened, for he thought it too much at variance
with humanity; and Harold knew how to silence all suspicion in a way so crafty
-- knew so artfully how to adopt every humor, that to the unsuspecting Monarch
his society soon became indispensible.

Propped on his hand, Theodoric sat, recalling to his mind with rapture every
motion of the heroine; and ruminating upon every word that she had uttered.

With folded arms, with long and hasty steps, Harold measured his pavilion,
fabricating schemes composed of love and of ambition.

Let us surprise them both. Let us fly, swift as thought, from tent to tent.
Lend your right ear to the lovesick sighs of Theodoric, and your left to the
daring plots of Harold: --

THEODORIC. I love Ildegerte. In vain do I endeavor to conceal it from myself.


HAROLD. The girl is beautiful, to desperation beautiful.


THEODORIC. Would that I could possess her!


HAROLD. I must possess her.


THEODORIC. I am a King, but would not owe my conquest to the splendor of my
crown. It Is her heart I wish to gain.


HAROLD. I am a Prince of royal blood, and the road to the throne is not yet
shut to me Her vanity will grant me what perhaps her heart might deny.


THEODORIC. Were she vain enough to be dazzled by the grandeur of a crown, I
had rather lose her.


HAROLD. No matter whether love or ambition bring her to my arms.


THEODORIC. Shall I venture to declare my sentiments to her?


HAROLD. This very day will I find an opportunity of disclosing my passion to
her.


THEODORIC. I should not be able to utter a word.


HAROLD. My captivating eloquence she never can resist.


THEODORIC. For the first time I feel the real force of love.


HAROLD. Today I bade adieu to my knowledge of the sex.


THEODORIC. My heart pants for sympathy. Harold shall know all.


HAROLD. But buried be the secret in my own breast.


THEODORIC. Never, never did I feel such fearful anxiety! I must extricate
myself from this dreadful state of uncertainty.


HAROLD. Not too hasty, be my motto. A wise man, though he love, will sleep in
peace, and leave the ripening of his plants to time; for the most beauteous
blossom is of less value than the meanest fruit.


Such were the soliloquies of both. -- Theodoric dispatched a page to
Ildegerte, to enquire whether she had need of rest after her fatigues, or if he
might have the honor of an audience.

Harold, on his part, had stationed spies to watch each footstep which
approached Ildegerte.

In the meantime, the page brought to Theodoric the wished-for answer, that his
visit would be acceptable. With throbbing heart, and the glow of love upon his
cheek, he entered her tent, and was received with great politeness. The youth
gazed at her full blue eye in mute astonishment. She had cast away her armor;
her auburn tresses were bound in a braid, and no longer buried beneath the
helmet, which had covered her majestic forehead. In a long white robe,
encircled at her slender waist by her blue girdle, which was tied at her left
side, from whence its ends, bordered with silver fringe, hung negligently down;
with a hand so fair and soft, as if intended only for love's pressure, not to
grasp the sword, she sat opposite the King, bewitching as the goddess of youth
and beauty, who, but a few hours before, had seemed the goddess of revenge and
war. It was an eloquent pause, with which the conversation opened. Theodoric's
looks spoke, and Ildegerte involuntarily cast down her eyes.

Since the creation of the world, it has been the custom, when one has nothing,
or any thing of consequence to say, to begin with a remark on the good or bad
weather; which ever be the case, the transition always takes place by a cough.
Theodoric too, pointed out, by stammers, to Ildegerte, the delightful day,
which even the tenth month of the year afforded them. Ildegerte agreed with
him, and that subject was at an end. The transition-cough now followed. Purple
cheeks gave notice that the confession was approaching; downcast eyes announced
it, and fingers, which inadvertently played with the points of Ildegerte's
girdle, accompanied it as interpreters. The most innocent girl feels an inward
sensation arise from these symptoms, which calls to her -- "Be on thy guard.
The enemy approaches."

"Angelic woman!" began Theodoric; "you have conquered friend and foe -- the
foe by your arm, the friend by your eye."

Ildegerte blushed; and, as usual on such occasions, assumed the appearance of
not having understood his meaning.

"Your Majesty speaks in enigmas," answered she.

"Is it possible," exclaimed the King, "that you alone know not the power of
your charms? You had a heart for revenge," proceeded he, seizing her hand,
"have you then none for love?"

"You either banter me, or forget yourself," replied she, withdrawing her hand.

"The former were an insult," said Theodoric, "the latter in your presence very
possible."

"You may mean what you say," returned she, "yet somewhat odd it sounds in the
mouth of a man but just retired from battle."

"Surely not," observed the King, "unless you take the heat of blood for love.
For, in what other respect does the emotion of a soul, after a battle, resemble
that sweet sensation? But say, what do you call love?"

"Go, ask the priests in the temple of their Goddess," rejoined Ildegerte. "I
am not initiated, and know her only from the poems of our bards."

"Can falsehood dwell in such a form?" cried Theodoric. "Am I ignorant that
Swend -- "

"I know what you would say," returned she, interrupting him. "In his arms I
hoped to have learnt it. Till now I have felt but gratitude toward him. It was
the impulse to all that I have done. But I have been told, that to love is but
another step; and, without a blush, I own my heart was resolved to take that
step."

"Ildegerte," replied the young Monarch, "may I hope for your friendship?"

"Whatever is valuable in my friendship," answered she, "I give you willingly."

"Enough!" exclaimed he, again seizing her hand. "From friendship to love is
likewise but a step."

"A step improper both for you and me," rejoined Ildegerte.

"You," said Theodoric, somewhat hurt, "now banter me, or forget yourself. For
indifference I was prepared, but not for contempt."

"Hear me then," returned she. "It were prudery any longer to affect an
ignorance of your meaning. I understand your looks and words. But does it
become you, the King of Denmark and Norway, in the midst of your victorious
career, upon the path of glory, to sue for a woman's heart, who has no other
dowry than her virtue? You are Lord over your realms, yet is your heart their
slave, and must never be your adviser. Subdue this flighty passion. The
daughters of Princes wait for you, and Kings desire you for a son-in-law. You
will make powerful alliances. The name of Theodoric will be revered by your
neighbors, and the basis of your throne will be immovable."

"My throne," replied Theodoric, "is founded on the love of my subjects; and
who is better able to augment this love than Ildegerte? For, even when I hear
you speak, I fancy myself in the midst of my senators. Such exactly are their
arguments."

"You are paying me the greatest compliment," answered she, "perhaps without
intending it."

"Right!" said he. "Ildegerte, you have cast away sword and mail. Be once more
quite a woman. Think you not that I bear enough when my head sustains the
crown? Must it also press upon my heart?"

"You belong entirely to your people," rejoined she.

"'It Is well!" exclaimed Theodoric; "I make the people judges between you and
me. Let them decide whether they know one more worthy of the throne -- whether
they will have any other Queen."

"Not so," returned Ildegerte. "You ought to see clearly even if your subjects
be blind. Believe me, my friend (for by that name I will most willingly address
you), when the first ardour of your youthful passion had subsided, you would
see but too clearly. Then, what a wretch should I be! I entreat you, Theodoric,
to be satisfied with my esteem."

"What you have just said," answered he, "I hope you did not mean it, was
blasphemy to Louna, and treason to your charms. No never -- "

Here the good King was just about to pour forth a solemn declaration of his
passion, accompanied by oaths, sighs, tears, and vows; and my reader would,
without mercy, have been obliged to listen to them, word for word, had not
Prince Harold, as if called for, entered the tent, to inform his Majesty, that
a large body of Swedes had been seen beyond the river, and that he had judged
it expedient to double the guard. In reality it was a mere pretext; for this
large body melted by degrees into a score of straggling fugitives. His spies
had informed him that Theodoric had been seen alone, and in deep meditation,
wandering to Ildegerte's tent. The conversation had already lasted half an
hour, without the presence of a third. Enough for a mistrustful heart! enough
to rouse the seeds of jealousy! Harold therefore hastened to interrupt a visit,
which wore an appearance so suspicious.

The King, unpleasant as it was to be surprised at this decisive moment, obeyed
the duties of the public weal, and, accompanied by the Prince, left the tent.
Ildegerte remained alone, with a perplexity and timidity about her heart, which
seemed not exactly to agree with her late politic advice.

Harold, meanwhile, made every indirect endeavor to draw the secret from the
King. But with Theodoric there was no need of circumlocution. His open heart
offered to the traitor what he had but expected as the reward of artifice.

"Kinsman," began he, with a hearty shake of the hand, "often have thou seen me
roving, like a be, from flower to flower. I thought myself happy, and perhaps
was happy. But my hour at last is come. I love. I love with an ardour unfelt
before, which seems to stretch my heart beyond its limits. Would that I could
make the whole world happy!"

"It almost seems to me," answered Harold, "that there is no occasion to
request a name which your visit has betrayed to me."

"True," replied Theodoric; "the charms of Ildegerte only could have chained
this fickle heart. Sure Odin sent her from a better world, to give us a
foreknowledge of those heavenly joys -- "

"Hold! hold!" cried Harold. "This you must tell herself, before the
enthusiastic fire evaporates; or, probably you have already done it?"

"I scarce know what I told her," said the King; "nothing very wise, I dare
say. What she answered, I know better. The noble girl refused a crown."

"What!" exclaimed Harold. "Is it possible that love can have led you so far
astray, as to make you offer your crown to the daughter of a Knight?"

"The daughter of a Knight!" repeated Theodoric; "What mean thou? Had blind
Fate snatched another lot from Fortune's urn, this Knight as easily had been a
King, as easily a beggar. Still Ildegerte had been Ildegerte."

"But, pardon me," rejoined the Prince, "is it not your duty to consult the
wishes of your subjects, and the welfare of the state?"

"Thou too can talk like my old unfeeling senators," replied Theodoric. "The
wishes of my subjects! -- My subjects adore Ildegerte. The welfare of the
state! What can be more profitable to the state than to bestow on it a Queen,
whose wisdom will share with me the load of government, whose valor will
supply to me the place of an experienced Chief? Our kinsman, Swend, thought
thus. Him Thora formed, and blindfold will I follow his example."

"Not if Love bind the bandage on your eyes," said Harold. "Most willingly
would I assist you in this plan, were it the only one which gained you what you
wish. But why absolutely make a Queen of her?"

"Peace!" cried Theodoric, "I tremble even to imagine what thou art about to
say. For shame!"

"But -- "proceeded Harold.

"Not another word," rejoined the King. "I am resolved. Tomorrow, soon as
propriety allows, go to Ildegerte. Summon all your rhetoric, Harold. Paint to
her, in glowing colors, all I feel, yet am not able to express. A third can do
it better. Tomorrow she must explain, and will too, I dare be sworn. Go; speak
as a friend. I, meanwhile, will act as a lover."

Harold was silent; for he feared, by further opposition, to betray himself. He
went, and felt, as the hawk would feel, if forced to replace the stolen pigeon
in its nest. He threw himself upon his couch, and slept -- little. With
pleasure would he have re-animated every Swede, whose body was stretched upon
the plain, in order, if possible, to quench the blazing fire of love in the
King's bosom, by the hurry of battle. With pleasure would he have recalled the
fugitives, gathered their scattered bands, inspired them with temerity, and
urged them to a nocturnal surprise. But as the flight of the vanquished enemy
forbade him to indulge so frivolous a hope, and as he had to no effect racked
his brain for a pretext, and tossed upon his couch till the morning watch; what
remained but to smile upon the wheel, to curse the past, and await from
futurity what the present moment snatched away.

"Why do I torment myself?" cried he, springing up. "If I cannot enjoy
Ildegerte, I may the Queen of Denmark and Norway. Let fools feast upon the idle
fancy that the first embrace is most delicious. What excites this silly wish in
man? -- Vanity. The idea that he is the first who awakes these sensations in
the girl. Well, be it so, if I be but the first who make her wish for these
once unknown sensations. It Is a mighty leap from the prattling of a child to
the chaunting of a bard, yet must I learn the former ere I can understand the
latter. Success to thee, Theodoric! Teach the girl to prattle, while I tune my
harp."

Thus did the vain fool console himself with the plans, hatched by his heated
brain, while the young King, inspired by ardent love, made preparations in the
camp throughout the night, which I shall not disclose to you, reader, that when
you have long enough puzzled yourself in vain, I may surprise you, as Theodoric
surprised the object of his affection.

Now, when the morning dawned, too late for the impatience of the King, too
early for the Prince's jealousy, Harold slowly crept to Ildegerte's tent, and
enquired of the females, who guarded it without, whether she might be spoken to
so early.

"Whether by you, Prince, I know not," replied one of them, "but her friend
Helga has been with her since break of day."

"Natural enough!" grumbled Harold. "Ildegerte, with all her valor, is but at
last a woman. She must have her confidante. The conquest of hearts flatters
female vanity but little, unless the mouth be allowed to blazon it, or at least
to whisper it in the ear of this, and that, under an injunction of secrecy. --
Go, girl," said he aloud, "and announce me."

The Amazon went, while the Prince, full of choler, stamped into the earth the
harmless daisies that grew around the tent.

Ere long, Helga appeared in a light morning dress, and beckoned to Harold that
he might approach. He found Ildegerte, with her head propped upon her arm. She
appeared to have had but little rest, and the faint smile upon her countenance
seemed almost forced.

"Oh how happy were the King!" began Harold, approaching her with a familiar
air, "had he any share in this meditative posture!"

"How strange," answered she, smiling, "that the first word of man to woman
must always be a compliment! What a mean opinion must you entertain of us!
Well, yes; I was thinking of the King."

"Then would I bet," replied Harold, "that the alluring prospects of futurity
engaged your thoughts."

"You would lose your wager," returned Ildegerte.

"How!" exclaimed the Prince. "After all that Theodoric is ready to do for you?"

"'It Is true," said she, "that you are speaking to a woman -- to a woman who is
not free from the weaknesses of her sex; but I never yet knew the tortures of
ambition."

"You are right," answered Harold. "A crown has greater charms when from the
hand of love."

"The first moment's love," rejoined the heroine, "is but the sunbeam which
awakes the seed. Whether there be a lasting stem, or transient flower,
contained within it, who can now determine? And who would venture to build a
hut, in the hope that from this seed would grow a tree to overshade his hut?"

"Truly," said Harold, "if you can moralize thus, you are not in love."

"Who told you that I was in love?" demanded Ildegerte.

"So much bravery without ambition!" cried he. "So much beauty without love!
Since I first knew that I had feelings, I have considered these two passions as
the grand supports of life. -- A crown, and a beauteous woman! He who offers
such rewards, may pile rocks upon rocks, and increase each drop of rain into a
stream. I scorn the rocks, and laugh at the streams. I climb to the goal, or
sink to the bottom, and die in the attempt."

"If such be your ideas," returned Ildegerte, "I pity you. Ambition towers
aloft, but deep is the abyss to which it leads. Sweet is the draught which Love
presents, but the bitter is at the bottom."

"There let it stay then," replied Harold. "To empty the cup would be excess,
and excess creates disgust."

"True it is," proceeded Ildegerte, "that were I, in the storms of life,
obliged to place reliance on one of these two passions, I should prefer love to
ambition."

"Indeed!" exclaimed Harold. "Thanks, Ildegerte, that you have not quite broken
the staff which supports me; that it is but the throne which you refuse, and
not the man who sits upon it. A heart, which loves you -- a heart which knows
no other wish than to possess you -- a faithful heart may hope at last to move
you. I revive. Without a crown and scepter, I may contend for preference with
him who bears them. I may hope -- "

"Nothing may you hope," rejoined she, "nor any other. I am free, and value my
freedom. Prince, if you came hither in your own name to found me, our discourse
is at an end; but if you came in the King's name, tell him that I have
considered the offer made by him yesterday, that I honor him as my King,
esteem him as my friend, and love him as my brother. Tell him to be satisfied
with these declarations of Ildegerte, who is free. Were she no longer free, she
would glory in her chains, but dreadful indeed would be her lot, if ever forced
to break them. Theodoric is an excellent young man, with a heart devoid of
guile, but soft as wax. Who could be answerable for his fidelity?"

"I!" cried the King, suddenly throwing himself at her feet; "I, who will sell
my life for a broken arrow, my throne for a cup of poison, if Ildegerte refuse
to share both with me. Why, beauteous woman, why this suspicion, so disgraceful
both to you and me? Have you then but one perfection to bind me for ever to
you? Is it your beauty only which has captivated me? Oh wisdom and virtue,
powerful and everlasting ties of feeling souls, still will ye be new and
fascinating, when wrinkles long have furrowed this full cheek, and when these
auburn locks have long been gray. Sweet girl! oppose me no longer. Despise my
crown, but not my heart."

Ildegerte was surprised, and felt herself kindly disposed toward the graceful
youth, who was laying at her feet. With a gentle and half-tender look, she
reached her hand to him, and stammered forth --

"Rise, Theodoric, and leave me alone."

"Not till I can call this hand my own," returned he; "not till I have sealed
the affiance on your lips. -- Approach, Escill; the moment is arrived."

Escill, one of Theodoric's most illustrious Chiefs, entered the tent; in both
hands he held a cushion of purple silk, bordered with golden fringe; upon the
cushion laid a crown, glittering with precious stones. Escill bent his knee,
and at the same moment martial music struck the ear. The tent fell, and
Ildegerte, with astonishment, beheld the whole army drawn up in battle array,
with ensigns floating in the air, and spears sparkling in the sunbeams. She
heard the loud and joyful shout --

"Long live Queen Ildegerte!"

She was no longer able to command her heart. She sunk into Theodoric's arms,
and hid her glowing cheeks in his throbbing bosom. He pressed her to his heart,
seized the dazzling crown, and placed it on her head.

Not far from them stood a triumphant carriage, decked with flowers and
ribands. Four snow-white steeds pranced at its thill, and snorted as they
obeyed the golden rein of the nervous charioteer. The enviable youth lifted the
prize of love with transport into the carriage, and slowly passed the front of
his troops, that he might show his happiness to every vassal. The army received
him with loud acclamations. The kettle-drums rolled, the trumpets clanged, but
louder than both, echoed the joyful cry --

"Long live Queen Ildegerte!"

When they reached the small band of Amazons, the carriage was surrounded, the
traces cut, and a thousand times a thousand hands drew the lovers to the altar
of Siona Siona or Siosna, the Goddess of wedlock.
. There waited a hoary-headed Priest, whose knife still smoked with the blood
of the recent sacrifice. He prayed to Odin, blessed the couple, and received
the oath of everlasting love and fidelity. A sumptuous banquet, by the light of
a thousand torches, closed the festive day. The sweet smile of satisfaction
shone on every countenance but one; -- Harold's alone was gloomy and
contemplative. The veil of night shrouded the happy pair. Theodoric found bliss
and heaven in Ildegerte's arms.

OH! that I were here allowed to cast away my pen! Oh that I might not wake you
from the sweet idea that virtue had passed, enjoying its reward, and surrounded
by unfullied bliss, even to to the grave!

Alas! our sorrows and our happiness are all a dream, and from this ecstatic
vision was Ildegerte to be roused to misery and horror.

NOTES. VOL. I
(1) ODIN, also called Woden, Father of the Gods. He, his wife Freya, and son
Thor, compose the supreme council of heaven. He is called the Universal Father,
The Terrible and Severe God, The King of Slaughter, The God that carries
Desolation and Fire, the Active and Roaring Deity, The Giver of Victory, etc.
The fourth day of the week is consecrated to him, and therefore called Woden's
day.

(2) Frea, or Freya, wife of Odin, and mother of the inferior Deities. These
names are, by some, ascribed to two Goddesses, the former being Queen of the
Gods, and the latter, sister of Erey. To her the sixth day of the week is
consecrated.

(3) Vingolf, the mansion of Love and Friendship.

(4) Utgarda Look, an evil spirit, nearly resembling our devil. He is described
in the Edda (or Bible of the Northern nations) as exceeding handsome, but
crafty and persidious. He is called, The Artificer of Fraud, The Calumniator of
the Gods, etc. He, nevertheless, dwelt in Heaven, till, as a punishment for his
repeated crimes and attacks upon the Gods, they chained him to three sharp
stones, which are for ever cutting his flesh; while a serpent, hanging over
him, distills its venom, drop by drop, upon his face. In this situation he is to
remain till the destruction of the world.

(5) The wolf Fenris, a son of Utgarda Look. He was bred among the Gods; but
they, being warned by oracles that he might one day become fatal to them,
resolved to confine him. No chains, however, could be forged which were strong
enough to hold him. At length a dwarf, in the land of the Black Genii, supplied
Odin with a bandage of uncommon strength. Goranson's description of its texture
is so ludicrous, that I am induced to transcribe it:

"Hic nervus sex constabat rebus; strepitu nempe pedum felis, ex barba
mulieris, radicibus montium, nervis ursinis, halitu piscium, and sputo avium."

"This string consisted of six things, viz. the noise made by a cat's feet, the
beard of a woman, the roots of mountains, the nerves of bears, the breath of
fishes, and the spittle of birds."

Having bound the wolf with this cord, they drew it through a huge rock, to
which he is doomed to be confined till the last day, when he is to break loose,
and devour the sun.

(6) The serpent of Midgard, one of Utgarda Loke's children, and an enemy of
the Gods. Odin threw him to the bottom of the ocean, where he grew so large,
that he wound himself around the whole globe of earth.

(7) Scald, the name given to the ancient bards, who were employed to compose
odes and hymns, which were chaunted at every solemnity. These songs were, in
general, descriptions of eminent exploits, and were animated by an enthusiastic
spirit.

(8) Valhall, the palace of Odin, to which warriors are conveyed after death.
Here they pass their mornings in tournaments and battles; the rest of the day
is employed in feasting on the wild boar Serimner (which, though dressed every
morning, becomes entire again every night), and in quaffing Hydromel (or mead),
which is administered to them in the sculls of those enemies whom they had
slain while on earth.

(9) Gefione, the Goddess of Chastity.

(10) Noffa, the daughter of Frea, a Goddess of such exquisite beauty that
whoever is lovely and handsome, or whatever is precious, is called by her name.

(11) Vora, the Goddess of Prudence and Wisdom, who is so penetrating, that
nothing can remain hidden from her.

(12) Losna, or Louna, the Goddess who assists lovers, and makes up differences
between them and married persons, be they ever so much at variance.

(13) Valkyries, Virgins who are sent by Odin into the field of battle, to
inspire the warriors, to make choice of those who are to be slain, and to
alleviate the pangs of death. They are likewise employed in attending on the
heroes who inhabit Valhall.

(14) Hela, or Death, the daughter of Utgarda Look. She was precipitated into
Niflheim by Odin, and there had the government of nine worlds given to her.

(15) Vara, the Goddess who receives all oaths, and punishes those who violate
them.

(16) Such were the tenets of the Runic doctrine in some countries, though, in
others, it was supposed that the warriors did not take their enemies to Valhall
as servants, but only their sculls as cups. See Note (8).

(17) Thor, the eldest son of Odin, the strongest and most intrepid among the
Gods. He is said, by some, to launch the thunder of Odin, and to be principally
consulted in heaven relative to the decision of victory. He always carries a
mace or club, which he grasps with gauntlets of iron; and which, as often as he
discharges it, returns immediately to his hand. He is also possessed of a
girdle, which has the virtue of renewing his strength as often as is needful.
The fifth day of the week (Thor's day) is consecrated to him.

(18) Frey, the mildest of all the Gods. He presides over the seasons of the
year, and bestows fertility.

(19) Niord, the God of Winds, who checks the fury of the sea, storms, and fire.

(20) Lyna, the Goddess, to whose care are committed those whom Frea intends to
deliver from peril.

(21) Niflheim, or Hell, literally signifying Evil-Home.

(22) Odin's golden bucklers. The Edda tells us, that Gylfe, King of Sweden,
went disguised to Asgard, the court of the Gods, and there saw these bucklers.

"Tunc cernebat ille palatium. Tecta ejus erant tecta aureis clypeis."

"Then he beheld a palace. The roof of it was covered with golden shields."

We are likewise told, that Eger, a Danish Nobleman, once visited the Gods, on
which occasion Odin had ranged through the hall swords of such amazing
brilliancy, as to make any other illumination needless, and had covered the
walls with glittering shields.

(23) I doubt not that many of our modern belles will be shocked at this
disgusting present of Ildegerte. But, let them revert to those rude ages, in
which barbarism was extolled as virtue, and delicacy of sentiment condemned as
effeminacy. A scabby or mangy dog (for this is my author's expression, though,
from deference to the feelings of those abovementioned, I have rendered it in
terms (...) unexceptionable as I could, without forfeiting the meaning of the
original), is a present, mentioned more than once in Gothic history, and was
often sent as a kind of playful defiance. Let these nice ladies, then, call to
mind the spirit and manners of those times, and if they be not superfine
indeed, Ildegerte will lose nothing in their eyes.

(24)Siona or Siosna, the Goddess of wedlock.

END OF THE FIRST VOLUME.
ILDEGERTE, QUEEN OF NORWAY. IN TWO VOLUMES. FROM THE GERMAN OF AUGUSTUS VON
KOTZEBUE, AUTHOR OF THE STRANGER.

BY BENJAMIN THOMPSON, JUN. TRANSLATOR OF THE STRANGER, AS PERFORMED AT THE
THEATER ROYAL DRURY LANE.

VOL. II.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED FOR ROBERT CAMPBELL, No. 30, Chesnut-Street. 1800.

ILDEGERTE, QUEEN OF NORWAY.
OH how blissful are the first enjoyments of pure love! how celestial the
transports of rewarded fidelity! The heart, (which even in the intoxication of
gratified ambition, still creates new wishes) calmly sinks to rest, seeming as
if it could never feel another want, and as if the whim of fickle Fortune had
bound with garlands each deceitful ball which passes over us. Rapturous vision!
To the feeling mortal life derives its only charm from thy delusive
richly-coloured images. And sure it is in our power to prolong this sweet
illusion till almighty Death shall lead us from the arms of love to those
sublimer joys, of which that we may be partakers, our Creator will bestow upon
us finer organs. Yes it is in our power; but heaven-born wisdom only can convert
the cloying sameness of the embrace to a clear stream of ever-flowing bliss. He
who has devoted the day to his duties and the goddess Wisdom, will every
evening find happiness in the arms of his wife, and Love with bounteous hand
will shed upon him from his horn unfaded flowers. But this soft harmony of
souls will not be found in bustling courts and splendid palaces. There all is
dissipation; even love is dissipation; not the mild and grateful hour, which
re-animates the faculties for Wisdom's service.

The first weeks that followed the solemnization of the nuptials flew upon the
wings of Joy to the abode of Love, there to announce the happiness and
gratitude of the young couple. Banquets, tournaments, and festive dances had
their daily turn. From far and near hastened the flower of Knighthood to the
gay metropolis. All crowded to the throne of the fair Queen, and he, who had
but once seen Ildegerte smile, returned contented to his home, feasting on the
fond anticipation of relating to his grandchildren the happy times of his
youth. What a lovely being! what a fascinating sweetness animated every word
and look of the young Queen! There was not a heart which she did not subdue.
When some talkative old man described to her the length and breadth of his
whole life (interesting to him alone), when, as he spoke, his youthful fire
once more inspired him, and sparkled in his sunken eye, Ildegerte listened with
modest attention and without interruption, as if the relation contained all
that was amusing and instructive. The old man departed, extolling her -- "The
Queen is an excellent woman; she reveres old age."

When some old Knight's good wife, blessed by Heaven with more children than
understanding, sat at her side, yawning and lending only half an ear to the
recital of battles and achievements, Ildegerte soon knew how to loose her
tongue. She asked after her sons and daughters, received instructions in
household management, and in idea visited the kitchen. The wife, well pleased,
returned at evening to her husband, and exlaimed --

"Our Queen is an excellent woman, mindful of what she was, and what she is!"

When the young jocund couples skimmed through the mazy dance, and, forgetting
amid their pleasure the etiquette of Court, made the air tremble with their
exclamations, Ildegerte joined them, and far from correcting their playful
pleasantry by regal pomp, she left a lesson to one of the best of princes, who
in later years succeeded to the crown of Denmark FREDERIC the Second, King of
Denmark, when sometimes tired of court-formality, used to say -- "The King's
from home."

In a moment every one gave way to uncontrolled amusements; but as soon as
Frederic exclaimed -- "The King's returned."

The whole Court was at once reinstated within the bounds of etiquette.


, that one may sometimes descend from the throne, and enjoy a scene of
momentary deception, which seems to recall the golden age of Saturn. -- The
young couples retired, loudly and unanimously declaring --

"Our Queen is an excellent woman; she softens the grandeur of the crown!"

None of her perfections escaped the watchful eye of Theodoric. He rose each
morning with an ardent wish for evening, which was again to bring him to her
arms. None of her charms escaped the jealous eye of Harold. He threw himself
each evening on his couch more out of humor, and greeted each morning with a
fresh curse. Whether Harold still possessed sufficient power to subdue this
increasing passion, let Meiners, the philosopher, decide, who probably on some
cold winter's day, sat at his desk in a room without a fire, and while, with
the apathy of a stoic, he proved to us "that it was in every one's power to
fall in love or not," For the attempt to explain this absurd doctrine, see
Meiner's fantastic publication, entitled, "Vermischte Philosophische Schriften."
forgot that the image of unhappy consequences, which, according to his
doctrine, we ought to paint to ourselves, never is so strong and lively in our
souls as the prospect of bliss, which we hope to enjoy in the possession of the
beloved object.

Harold did not subdue his passion, nor did he wish to subdue it. It was no
longer love alone that tortured him, but lust, ambition, envy, and vexation. He
cursed Chance and Fate (two words which with him had but one meaning) for
having cast him so near the throne, and yet robbed him of the power to mount it.

"Was I asked," said he, "when I came into the world, what character I would
assume? am I to blame because my mother was not a peasant's daughter? This
burning thirst for same would then have been confined to the superior
cultivation of my little farm; more numerous herds, more productive land, more
fruitful trees than those of my neighbors, would have been the height of
Harold's wishes. Some good honest wench had shared my hard bed, and labor
would have choked the seeds of ambition, sown by Nature in my restless soul.
What am I now? A miserable medium between dignity and meanness, a fort of chief
slave to the throne, a hanger-on to increase the splendor of the Court; a most
obedient servant to receive the guests, and drink their healths. By Heaven, I
will no longer play this sorry part! Thus, or thus shall it be! Flows not in my
veins the same princely blood to which Theodoric is obliged for empire? Were
not my ancestors Kings? Is it my fault, that one of them was such a fool as to
make a voluntary resignation of his crown, that he might retire to solitude, as
he said, to serve the Gods, or, as his cotemporaries say, to lament his folly?
Could he, by this renunciation, defraud his posterity of their rights? No
truly. Every throne is built upon the right of the stronger, though we pretend
to fancy that we hold it by the grace of God. Give me a well-trained army, and
a teeming treasury -- I Will prove my right to the dominion of half the globe."

These principles soon gave birth to a scheme, which could only sprout and
ripen in a soul so base. The crafty villain knew full well that a feeling heart
may know want even amidst piles of wealth, and in the bitterest poverty never
can be truly wretched: hence the infernal project, founded on Theodoric's
fickle disposition, to rob him of his peace of mind, together with his throne.

Meanwhile a year passed away in blissful uniformity. The eyes of Harold often
spoke with a wild tenderness; Theodoric perceived it not, and Ildegerte seemed
not to perceive it. She would not mortify the man who was her husband's friend;
she would not, by disdain, make him doubly feel the hardship of his lot. And
woe be to you, Oh women! who dismiss the man with contempt, that, without
intending it, has swallowed poison from your charms. You have a thousand other
means, within the bounds which you yourselves have chosen, to keep him at a
respectful distance; you have a thousand antidotes to cure him of his folly:
but scorn and contempt betray a childish pride, and an unpolished mind.

Ildegerte always acted with the mildness of the dove, and cunning of the
serpent. She received the Prince at all times with a friendly cheerful air, and
never courted or avoided an opportunity of being left alone with him. Whenever,
on these occasions, the conversation assumed by distant hints a dubious
meaning, she understood so well how to bend to the direct road, that she often,
without confusion, checked the avowal, which already floated on the Prince's
lips. When he gazed at her with silent tenderness, she never cast her eyes upon
the earth, but looked directly in his face with the mien of virtuous
simplicity, which expects nothing criminal.

Harold was forced to confess that she was not thus to be obtained, and that
the look of artless innocence bound the seducer's tongue with heavier chains,
than the ostentatious virtue, which will have its merits acknowledged and
respected.

The roses now bloomed a second time, since the happiest couple in the North
had ascended the throne, when Ildegerte bore a son, the image of his mother.
His first infantile smiles were a new and more powerful tie, the strongest
which Nature has woven to bind tender hearts together. With a tear of joy,
Theodoric received the dear pledge of love from the nurse's hand. With the most
affectionate solicitude, he sat throughout the first nights at Ildegerte's bed,
angry at every fly that dared to interrupt her slumbers. Town and country
shared the father's happiness, and hailed, with festive joy, the birth of the
young prince. Harold alone saw in this boy the robber of a diadem, which, as he
thought, was formed to grace his brow; and on the day that a whole nation
formed the pleasing hope of seeing the virtues of his father and mother
flourish in young Haldan, (thus the Prince was called) he alone locked himself
within his palace, under pretense of indisposition, which hindered his
appearance at Court; for he was wise enough to know, how great would be the
contrast between his woeful visage, and the general happiness, as well as how
dangerous to his schemes might be some courtier's eye, which had penetration
enough to fathom the bottom of his heart. But while Court, town, and country
passed several weeks in glad festivity, he did not spend his time in idleness.

At Canfried's death, the crown of Sweden devolved to Hermanfried, his brother,
an impetuous youth, whose temper was easily roused, and who was only restrained
from many an act of folly by his gentle sister Luitgardis, yet scarce seventeen
years of age. Long had he observed with jealous eye the increasing power of
Denmark; but the defeat of his brother, with whom fell the flower of Sweden's
warriors, had reduced his kingdom to a state of impotence, and for the present
bound his hands. Harold became acquainted, through his spies, with this young
monarch's views, and failed not as a malecontent to furnish him with projects,
which were eagerly caught at. He offered him his services and assistance,
represented Denmark as an easy conquest, and proposed to accept the conquered
crown as a foedary to Sweden. He was lucky enough to persuade Hermanfried, who
now made preparations for attack, while Theodoric carelessly reposed in the lap
of peace.

But you would deceive yourself, good reader, if you imagined that the
villain's proposals to Hermanfried were his real purpose; he only wished to
plunge his country into a difficulty, from which it could not be extricated but
by a mighty blow, and this blow was to hit Theodoric's heart.

All being settled to his wish, he, one morning, with downcast look and clouded
forehead, entered the King's chamber.

"I bring you bad news," commenced he.

"Well, thanks to Fate for it," answered the King. "He who is too happy, easily
becomes presumptuous. Let me hear it."

"Hermanfried, King of Sweden," rejoined he, "is arming against you."

"Is that all?" said Theodoric.

"All!" replied the Prince, "and enough as I think."

"I thought," proceeded the King," the Swedes were still sufficiently employed
in healing the wounds inflicted by my sword, when Canfried reigned. At all
events their rage is but the madness of a scarce recovered foe, who dares to
cope with his sound antagonist."

"Even were it so," returned Harold, "policy forbids us to despise a weaker
foe. But my information is far different. Hermanfried, (as the spies whom I
sent out inform me), cannot brook the disgrace sustained by Sweden in his
brother's reign. He is resolved to wash it away with blood, and conscious of
his own inability, has bound to his interest the princes of Tartary, Novagorod,
Tiver, Astracan, and Casan, part of whom have joined him as zealous allies, and
the rest lent him their armies for a large sum. It is likewise agreed among
them, that the confederate troops shall be allowed to plunder, murder, rob, and
ravish through the vanquished realms, that all the booty as well as your royal
treasure shall be shared among the Tartarian princes, and your subjects be
doomed to wear their chains, Ildegerte alone excepted, whom Hermanfried, to
avenge his brother's death, intends to be devoured, in sight of his subjects,
by wild beasts."

"Arrogant wretch!" cried Theodoric; "he may force the way to her through my
breast."

"And will too," answered the Prince. "I confess that Harold trembles for the
safety of your throne."

"Haste then!" exclaimed the King. "Collect my whole force on the borders of
Sweden; I myself will lead them to battle."

"Collect your whole force!" repeated Harold, shrugging his shoulders; "it
amounts not to the tenth part of the armies combined against you. A conqueror,
(as you well know) earns not his laurels without loss. The defeat of Canfried
cost us many a hero's life. Many a hardy veteran was sent to Valhall, and men
do not grow like mushrooms."

"Give me your counsel then," rejoined Theodoric; "shall I avert the evil by my
treasures?"

"A mode unworthy of you," said the Prince; "besides, (as may, without the gift
of prophecy, be easily foreseen) of the worst consequences. It would betray our
weakness, and Hermanfried will be revenged. His rage is not to be appeased by
gold. I have already told you, he resigns the booty to the Tartars."

"Let us then seek allies," returned Theodoric.

"Where? whom?" demanded Harold.

"Among the German Princes," answered he.

"Oh! they live in eternal discord with each other," replied Harold. "There
every petty Baron is an absolute Prince, who, from the turrets of his castle
bids defiance to the boors, and nourishes his wife and family by pillage and
road-robberies."

"Well then, among the Britons," said Theodoric.

"Yes," rejoined the Prince, "if the danger did not already beat at your door.
The Britons are at too great a distance, and what interest could they have in
venturing their troops across the ocean, to assist a foreign nation, with whom
they never were allied?"

"Speak then!" cried the King, in a tone of distress, "What must I do?
Sacrifice all to the fury of the foe without defense?"

Harold paused.

"Oh! why," proceeded he at length, "did Fate combine so many amiable qualities
in Ildegerte, and refuse her the title of a king's daughter?"

"Kinsman," returned Theodoric, "your ideas make strange springs."

"Not at all," answered he; "they unite very naturally. Were Ildegerte the
daughter of sister of a mighty Prince we should not be standing here, and
puzzling where to look for an alliance."

"True!" said the King, struck with the truth of the observation.

"And had not my kinder cousin scorned the counsel of state policy," continued
Harold, "he might now, by a tender tie, have founded the welfare of his
subjects; he might, by a single word, have caused the uplifted hand to sink,
and sent the threatening falchion to its scabbard.

"And what may this word be?" asked he.

"I know from certain information," rejoined Harold, "that Hermanfried would
not object, by a marriage between his sister and the King of Denmark, to unite
the Northern realms in friendly compact."

"His sister!" repeated Theodoric, somewhat confused; "I scarce knew he had a
sister."

"A lovely girl," returned the villain, "who has scarce seen seventeen summers:
Luitgardis is her name."

"Indeed!" answered the King. "And you can think that Canfried's brother (who,
as you say, breathes naught but vengeance) would be willing to throw a girl,
such as you describe Luitgardis to be, into the arms of his enemy?"

"I believe he would," answered Harold. "There is a certain anecdote in
circulation at the Swedish Court. Your picture (Heaven knows how) fell into the
hands of the Princess; and, since that time, it is whispered the good creature
often seems quite lost in contemplation, courts solitude in shady groves, and
has positively refused the hand of many a mighty prince. Nay, they even pretend
to have heard from one of her attendants, that she wears the much-loved picture
set in diamonds near her heart, and often wets it with a tear."

Theodoric felt his vanity flattered.

"Were this true," replied he, "I should pity her."

"Now you will easily perceive," continued Harold, "why Hermanfried, who loves
his sister most sincerely, and to whom the sufferings of her heart can be no
secret, would renounce his thoughts of vengeance to see Luitgardis happy."

"Yes, plain enough," rejoined Theodoric, confused.

"Indeed," proceeded the Prince, "I have been privately given to understand --
but I rejected it."

"Speak! what?" demanded the King.

"That you might, in order to spare the effusion of blood, and the desolation
of your kingdoms, marry Luitgardis."

"Absurd idea!" exclaimed he. "How is it possible? Is not Ildegerte --?"

"True. That was my answer," said the crafty villain. "But they pretended that
the welfare of your state might induce you to sacrifice an individual for the
public good."

"Never!" cried he.

"So I told them," replied Harold, "but they thought that you might sweeten the
separation in a thousand ways; that you might send her to her native country,
establish a Court for her under the title of Queen, and -- but how can I
recollect all the nonsense they fabricated to make the scheme practicable?"

"No!" exclaimed Theodoric. "Rather will I die in misery, I and my people."

Harold, who now thought he had for this time done enough, as he plainly saw
that the first spark, which he had carelessly thrown, had already seized the
cinders, that the gloomy frown of discontent and perplexity lowered upon
Theodoric's brow, left to time the task of blowing it into a blaze, and
finished the discourse by once more maliciously describing the misery which
inevitably threatened him, if he did not seize the only thread that could guide
him out of the labyrinth.

"True it is," said he, shrugging his shoulders, "it requires but a couple of
eyes, (even if they cannot penetrate so very far into futurity) to perceive the
issue of this bloody contest. You must descend from the throne of your
forefathers, fly over the bodies of your subjects, and with difficulty save
your life. But Ildegerte and your faithful Harold will every where accompany
you. By the labor of our hands we will fertilize some desert, and earn our
daily morsel by the sweat of the brow. And, when the spirits of the murdered
Danes pour forth their curses upon thee, when their blood cries for vengeance
at the throne of Odin, Oh! may the infant Haldan's artless supplication bend
the hearts of the Gods to thee again!"

With these words he left the weak Theodoric, in a perturbation which drove him
to and fro like the crazy skiff upon the stormy main. Even the wreck of a world
could not have moved him to an act of treachery, had the warmth of his
affection been the same as that which had inspired him on the field of battle;
but it must be owned that unmolested enjoyment had damped his ardour. A calm
esteem, (if not altogether devoid of tenderness, yet conscious of an
undisturbed possession) was alone remaining in his breast. He already allowed
himself many a little infidelity; he was able again to make comparisons between
the charms of Ildegerte and of others: to be sure he still always found the
former far superior, but thought the latter worth enjoyment. In short, he was a
weak young man, without command over any of his passions, and still less so,
when the crafty Harold always knew how to encourage and to satisfy them! Who
but must have observed how dexterously he attacked Theodoric's vanity? This
mine was not the most ineffectual of all that he had sprung. The gentle
Luitgardis had never thought of falling in love with a picture. She was
carelessly roving from one youthful pleasure to another, at the very moment
that Theodoric fancied her wan, wretched, and sinking under the sorrows of an
unhappy attachment.

A few days elapsed. The report of an approaching war spread far and wide. The
danger was magnified by Harold's instigation, and the fate of the kingdom
represented as hanging by a thread. Wherever the King turned his eye, it caught
some gloomy ill-foreboding look. The people groaned and wept. The rich buried
their treasures; the priests offered sacrifice, and poured forth prayers both
day and night.

In the midst of these agonizing circumstances, while Theodoric, with downcast
head, was one morning meditating on his situation, his senators were announced.
Bribed by the favorite in part with words, in part with gold, they threw
themselves at the feet of the King, and in the name of his miserable subjects,
claimed from him the deliverance of the state.

"What must, what can I do?" said he. "To convert stones into men is not in my
power."

"Then you may at least preserve those," replied the chief senator, "who are
now alive, who till the earth, and are the kingdom's chief support."

"What do ye want of me?" demanded Theodoric. "Is it I who wish to violate the
peace?"

"No," answered the senator, "but you are he, who will not, by a trifling
sacrifice, secure it."

"What sacrifice?" asked he. "Name it."

"You know full well," rejoined the senator, "what price Hermanfried has set
upon his friendship. He has fixed it as a dowry for his sister."

"And call'st thou this a trifling sacrifice?" returned Theodoric.

"Trifling it is," said he, "great as it may seem to you; trifling when
compared with that far greater evil, which you will thereby avert. We stand
here in the name of the people. We address you not as father and as husband!
It Is the King to whom we fly for succor. The peasant prays for sunshine to
unclose the ears of corn, even though here and there a blossom may be withered
by the scorching beam."

"How!" cried he. "Could you vote for that noble being's banishment, to whom
you ought to be grateful for an increase of your dignity?"

"'It Is this very gratitude," returned the senator, "which makes us cherish the
fond hope that she will not destroy her own good work. If the welfare of whole
nations was the real motive of her glorious deeds, (and who among us dares to
doubt it?) then may we certainly expect from Ildegerte's elevated mind, that
she will comply with the wishes of the people, seeking her reward in the
blessings of a rescued nation, and truly seeking not in vain."

What could be urged against all this? Theodoric, who already thought a
separation from Ildegerte possible, who could reconcile this action to his
fickle heart, by the specious apology that he was but fulfilling the duties of
a good king, and a father of his subjects; who had no fear of public censure,
since the nation had itself required this sacrifice; who could only dread the
voice of conscience, which he lulled at pleasure, and the voice of suffering
innocence, which, far removed, might echo through the woods of Norway, but
never reach his ear. -- What could you expect from such a man? Strange it is
that it should seem to cost him any pain, strange that he did not immediately
consent to all.

"Go, ask the oracle. Its declaration shall be my decision."

With these words he left his senators, who, sure of conquest, hastened to the
neighboring temple, but too certain that the mysterious cloak, which ever
shrouded the meaning of the oracle, would allow them to explain it as they
pleased. After having placed a costly present on the altar, the priest began
the ceremonies. His distorted countenance, his bristling hair, his rolling
eyes, and foaming mouth announced the presence of the God. At length, inspired
by Odin, he addressed them thus:

"Before my eyes appear two Queens. This bears in her hand a sword, and that a
branch of palm. The serpent, which Theodoric cherishes in his bosom, shall be
crushed by Ildegerte's foot."

With this unintelligible jargon, the senators contentedly departed.

"What can be more evident," said one to the other, "than that the Godhead
sanctions our intentions? Two Queens! How can there be two, if Luitgardis be
not understood as one? She who bears the sword is Ildegerte, because she gave
occasion to the strife. She who bears the branch of palm is the Swedish
Princess, because she brings us golden peace."

The serpent in the King's bosom was the most knotty point to be explained, but
even this they contrived to effect.

"The serpent," said they, "signifies the stubborn opposition of Theodoric to
the wishes of his people; and if Ildegerte willingly submit to her fate,
certainly she may be said to crush the serpent. Never surely was there a decree
less capable of misinterpretation. It Is clear to the meanest capacity. A child
may discover the sense so plainly conveyed."

Thus they cheerfully returned to the palace, and announced the fixed resolves
of Fate; to which the King had given his solemn promise that he would submit.

"Who can oppose the Gods?" said he, after a pause. "I am resolved. I give my
people peace, perhaps to be in everlasting war with myself."

Harold wished no more. Before the wavering King had leisure to recant,
ambassadors were with the utmost secrecy dispatched to Sweden, to sue for the
hand of Luitgardis. They returned in a a few weeks with the wished-for answer,
that, on this condition, Hermanfried was willing to conclude an agreement of
eternal peace. Now the first step was taken. To retreat would be still more to
exasperate a formidable foe. Nothing therefore remained but to swim with the
current. A second embassy soon followed, vested with full powers to settle the
preliminaries of dowry and of jointure.

Who does not at once perceive the road which Harold was paving for himself by
all these machinations? Ildegerte, incensed to the utmost by treatment which,
her proud heart will every moment whisper to her, she so little merits;
Ildegerte, robbed of her husband, together with a throne, will thirst for
vengeance, will seek an instrument to execute it, and in the Prince will find
what her galled ambition and her slighted love require. To wound this ambition
and love beyond all power of cure, she must be witness of her rival's triumph.
For this purpose, he persuaded the king, (who, since the irrevocable
acquiescence, had been whirled in a vortex of perpetual agony, and was easily
persuaded to do any thing) not to remove Ildegerte from the Court till
Luitgardis was approaching the gates of his metropolis.

"For," said he, "how easily may any unforeseen event -- a storm for instance,
or a sudden illness, rob you of your bride; then would you lament the loss of
one, without finding comfort and consolation in the other."

To all this Theodoric consented. Unpleasant things we are ever willing to
defer, and still was the thought of losing Ildegerte painful to his heart. The
arrival of the Princess too (if this parting were deferred till then), might
dissipate his sorrows, which he never could expect to be the case, while left
in solitude to the agonies of conscience.

All therefore ripened according to Harold's wish, and he resigned himself
entirely to the flattering hope of shortly reaping the harvest of his labors.

As yet Ildegerte had not learnt a syllable of the dark designs which an
infernal villain was meditating against her peace. She resigned herself
entirely to the charming novelty of a mother's joys, and spent her time chiefly
in playing with little Haldan as he sat upon her lap, feasting her eye and ear
with the smile and lisp of infancy. The King was cautious not to interrupt her
pleasing dream of happiness, and Harold had taken care to surround her by his
creatures, that she might have no suspicion till a proper time. But now that he
received intelligence of Luitgardis's approach, he thought it right at once to
unveil the infamous design. He visited Ildegerte, and contrived to mingle so
much of the mysterious in his words and looks, to imitate so well the mien of
confusion which in vain attempts concealment, that, at last, the Queen could
not forbear to ask --

"Why so reserved today, Prince? Whence the cloud which hangs upon your brow?"

"Venture not, Oh Queen! to break that cloud!" replied he significantly: "A
flash might dart from it which would annihilate you."

"Would you try," said Ildegerte smiling, "whether I am but a woman to be
frightened by mere words?"

"Words!" repeated he. "Yes, words, of which one would drive this smile of
sweet content for ever from your countenance."

"Then let me hear this one terrific word," answered she. "You know that he who
is acquainted with the full extent of his misfortunes, is far less to be pitied
than he who stands in doubt upon the brink of an abyss, the near approach to
which he has been left to guess."

Here Harold seemed as if he tried in vain to speak.

"No -- impossible -- not from my lips -- pardon -- I have no utterance for
black ingratitude and perfidy."

"You make me uneasy, Prince," rejoined Ildegerte. "What stroke of Fate can
reach me in the arms of love? The King too has for several weeks seemed
troubled and confused. Tell me what misfortune -- Has Ildegerte unknowingly
offended him?"

"How could Ildegerte!" exclaimed he, "the crown of womankind, afford
melancholy a pretext to lower upon Theodoric's forehead? No. You have not
offended him, yet will he doom the best of wives to misery unutterable."

"Me!" cried Ildegerte. "Impossible!"

"But too true," returned Harold. -- "Alas! Beauty, merit, and virtue must bind
every heart in chains, but even beauty, merit, and virtue cannot hold the
fickle libertine in silken bonds for ever. Inexpressible are the services you
have rendered to the state. Your amiable qualities are the admiration of a
whole nation, and exalt you far above the crown you wear. Why was the first of
mortals made a prey to the wanton levity of a voluptuous traitor?"

"Hold, Prince," interrupted she. -- "You go too far. Justify your words."

"You desire it," answered he, "and I obey. Hear then, and comprehend (if with
your good heart you can) a villainy most diabolical. You were a Queen: forget
that! I know you. Still will you remain a Queen, if not upon the throne, yet in
the hearts of all who love you. You were a wife: forget that too! 'Twas all a
dream. Awake. You are a mother: never forget that! What has the guiltless
suckling done, that he should be robbed of his rightful inheritance by his
father's infamy? Who will protect him, if his mother too forsake him?"

"Now by the golden shields of Odin," Golden shields of Odin and Asgard. See
note 22.
exclaimed Ildegerte, "never was oracle delivered in the groves of Asgard
Golden shields of Odin and Asgard. See note 22.
more obscure. I was a Queen! I was a wife! When did I cease to be so?"

"Since Theodoric," replied the Prince, "glutted with bliss, infernally
resolved to cast you from his throne and bed. Since he sent ambassadors to
Hermanfried, to conclude an everlasting union, and the knot which forms this
union is Luitgardis, sister of the King. Know you enough? Or will you drain the
teeming cup of wormwood at a single draught? Since he promised to send
Ildegerte, to whom he is obliged for a kingdom -- Ildegerte, the mother of his
firstborn son, an exile in disgrace to Norway, but not till she has witnessed
the triumphal coronation of her rival:"

Ildegerte --

But why need I describe the broken accents of anger, astonishment, and
indignation, the heavy sighs of horror, discarded tenderness, and mortified
affection? At the first moment, while her mind was unacquainted with a perfidy
to which she neither could nor would give credit; at the first moment such an
action seemed to her as monstrous as to the polished European the account of
people, who in cool blood raise their clubs to send their aged parents to the
grave. She believed not the Prince's words; but Harold swore so solemnly, added
so many corroborations, now pointing out to her the increasing coldness of
Theodoric, now the preparations at Court, which betrayed the approach of some
great festival, (and which indeed had not escaped her eye, though they had too
little occupied her exalted mind to force from her an inquisitive question)
connecting proof to proof so artfully, and making her imperceptibly extract
suspicion from her husband's every look, that he at length planted in her soul
the dreadful certainty of her impending fate. The unhappy being riveted her
eyes upon the earth, unable to shed a single tear, or form a resolution, and
scarcely retaining her senses. This was the situation which Harold had awaited;
upon this first stupor he had formed his plan.

"You perceive, Oh Queen!" proceeded the hypocrite, "that I am hazarding my
life by disclosing to you a secret at which the King himself trembles. But long
have you known how little I regard my happiness and life, if Fate will but
allow me to resign them in your service. Difficult it is to counteract
Theodoric's infidelity, but not impossible. Rouse your courage; I have many
friends, and your Amazons are ready at the first signal to assist and to avenge
you. Summon them to arms; grasp again the sword which already has achieved
such wondrous deeds; press on your head the helm of valiant Swend, (alas! he
would not thus have treated you!) redeem a crown for little Haldan, which by
primogeniture is his; drive the villain, together with the creature for whose
sake he banishes an Ildegerte, drive them into deserved misery, and mount the
throne. My arm, and a thousand arms, at my command, are prepared to draw their
sabres in your cause. My voice shall be the signal for revolt. Beneath your
banners shall Harold perform miracles, and at your side will he mount the
throne, or die."

"No, Prince," replied she. "Far be from me such conduct. True it is, you see
my tears, nor am I able to restrain them; but think not that they flow for the
ideal loss of a crown, which, in the intoxication of his transports, Theodoric
once forced me to accept: they flow for the loss of a heart which was far
dearer to me than the pomp of regal dignity; and if by arms I could recover
this, what should I thereby gain in his heart? No. I have no arms against
Theodoric but my tears."

"Virtue overstrained," said Harold, "degenerates into a fault; you forget that
we are not debating on you and on your rights. If you sink today beneath your
weakness, you are preparing for yourself the bitterest reproaches from a son.
His fortunes now depend on yours, and his rights they are, which (if you feel
the sacred impulse of a mother's duties) you must defend by arms. Or, do you
choose that he should beg his life hereafter at the mercy of your rival's
children?"

"You storm my heart in vain," rejoined Ildegerte. "If Haldan do not inherit
any throne from his mother, still may he feel content in virtuous sensations,
to plant which early in his bosom is the most sacred of a mother's duties."

"Your ideas," answered Harold -- "pardon me, beauteous Queen -- your ideas
have mounted to a better world, and you appear to have forgotten that you are
still an inhabitant of this our earth, on which they never can be realized. I
leave you, for your present disposition favors not the plan of cool,
clear-sighted judgment. I am convinced that the mist, which seems to dim your
eyes, will soon disperse. You will not bear the thought of being a mark for the
derision of your rival. Till then, farewell," continued he, seizing Ildegerte's
hand, and tenderly pressing it, "farewell! and rest assured that Harold, whose
fidelity has long been known to you, will hazard his life a thousand times for
a single tender look from you."

He went, and left Ildegerte in a situation which my pen would in vain attempt
to describe. A copious flood of tears relieved her aching heart; she threw
herself into the arms of her faithful Helga, and was again able to weep and to
complain.

"Fate then destined two powerful Kings to be my husband, only that one might
be torn from me ere I had possessed him, and that I might by the other be
disgracefully banished, to lament in some lone desert an attachment, the first
enjoyment of which I have so dearly bought."

A thousand projects started in her brain. At one time she resolved to throw
herself at Theodoric's feet, and sue for his affection, or death by his hand.
At another, she determined to appear before him, with the dignity of injured
virtue, to raise repentance in his bosom, and then to turn her back upon him
with disdain. But she ever firmly rejected Helga's well-meant counsel, who with
all her rhetoric supported Harold's plan.

"We can at least," thought she, "thereby affright the King, and from his fears
obtain what his love denies."

"No," said Ildegerte, "I require justice from his heart. If it be denied at
that tribunal, I will be silent till we stand before the Highest Judge. Then,
then will Ildegerte -- pardon him!"

"Be silent!" repeated Helga. "What, even when the arrogant derision of a
triumphant rival rends your heart!"

"No, Helga," answered Ildegerte, "I will not be a witness of her triumph. She
shall not feast upon my agonies, nor shall the King. I am resolved. In my bosom
will I hide the dreadful secret, and at Court, where all are liars, my
countenance shall likewise be a liar. With a smile will I appear at table; with
a smile will I present the cup, and wish good night to him. With steadfast step
will I quit the saloon, disguise myself in the habit of a slave, and fly of my
own accord to Norway's woods, that on the day which crowns his second love, he
may at least miss the triumph of beholding Ildegerte's tears. Haste, dear
Helga! Mount my steed, take as much of my treasures as seems needful to you;
haste to the sea shore, and buy a vessel, which may be ready at my signal to
bear me from these hated shores back to my unpolished country, there to dwell
with far more polished mortals."

By this resolution she abided, in despite of all the endeavors used by Helga
to point out an easier remedy.

"You try in vain," said Ildegerte, "to deceive me thus with shadows. By what
other means can I save myself from the disgrace, and assert those sentiments
which ever were my pride? Shall I at his feet implore his love? or am I, by a
husband's infidelity, justified in forgetting that this husband is my King? No.
Let him alone bear the whole burden of a tainted conscience. Far be the wish
from me to share it with him! But thou, Helga, faithful companion of my happier
youth, and of my short-lived dignity, will thou too resign the pleasures of a
Court to follow into misery a banished wretch?"

Helga wept upon her bosom, swore eternal friendship and fidelity, and hastened
to make instant preparations for the secret flight. In a few days she returned
to the Queen with the happy tidings, that in a bay which was surrounded by the
wood, a vessel ready to sail awaited her command.

WEAK Theodoric! thou were not born to be a villain. The mine yielded not the
iron in a dagger's shape, but hateful passions forged a dagger from it. Virtue
has already left thy heart, yet is it less worthy of detestation than
compassion. For what sensations had we given thee credit, if thy heart had
still remained a temple of virtue, combined with wisdom and with love!

Do you see the reed shaken by the wind? Do you see him sleepless, and envying
the trabant, Trabant, the name given to the yeomen of the guard in the Northern
Courts.
who, supported by a quiet conscience more than by his halberd, nods at the
palace-gate? Round him refreshing sleep had rocked all nature to repose. He
alone -- the King, who fears no judge (that excepted who asserts the rights of
virtue in his breast with unrelenting rigor) he alone rambles from room to
room. The silken couch alleviates not the tortures of his conscience; he gazes
through the open window. Before him glitters the evening star, which lighted
once the flowery path of love when he conducted Ildegerte to the bridal
chamber. Alas! then a tear of bliss stood in the eye of the transported
bridegroom, and the star of love sparkled therein with pleasure. Now a cloud of
sad repentant tears hung heavily before his sight; throughout his realms night
was the signal of repose -- to him alone the messenger of renovated torment.
The Court, the chase, the tournament, no longer dissipated care -- all, all was
horror. Oh Solitude! thou smiling friend of Wisdom, how terrific art thou to
the wicked!

Such a night it was, that, overpowered by his feelings, Theodoric rushed from
his room, to follow the irresistible impulse of his heart, which drew him to
Ildegerte. By chance, the trabant, who guarded the chamber of the King, had
sunk under fatigue, and did not even wake at the sudden opening of the folding
doors. It is difficult, during self-suffering, to behold another's peace with
pleasure, and if the sufferer be a King, he will generally become a tyrant. --
The enraged Theodoric seized the trabant, and shook him violently. The wretch
staggered, rubbed his eyes, and by the glare of lamps, which burned in the hall
of the palace, beheld, with dread astonishment, the King before him.

"What!" cried the furious Theodoric, "dare thou then leave thy Monarch's
life a prey to the first murderer, who is bold enough to creep under cover of
darkness to his bed? Out of my sight! thy life is forfeited! The rising sun
shall not behold thee with the living!"

The trembling trabant fell upon his knees, and said --

"Oh may the King hear me, and the man forgive me! I have a dear wife and seven
young children; they daily call for bread, and, Sire, you know our allowance is
but small. Compelled by want, I bound myself for three days' labor to support
my wife and little ones, and ploughed the earth for scanty wages. I returned
from work last night weary, but with a sack of bread; I satisfied my children,
and expected to have slept in my wife's arms. But the lot, Oh King! fell upon
me to guard your royal chamber. I was obliged to come, and having been at
labor for three days, and known but little rest, sleep overpowered me. I have
forfeited my life, but throw myself upon your clemency, not for the sake of
this scar earned in your service; but Oh! have mercy on my wife! have mercy on
my helpless children!"

"Thou happy man!" muttered the restless King between his teeth, "how willingly
would I say to thee, let us exchange situations. Come, throw thyself upon my
silken couch; give me thy halberd, and in thy stead let me lean against the
wall, sinking to rest with the sweet conviction of having done my duty. --
Rise!" proceeded he aloud, "I pardon thee! Go to thy wife, I have no need of
thee -- I am the guardian of you all. Go home, and teach thy children to pray
for their King."

He spoke, and wandered to the Queen's apartment with uncertain steps, tapped
gently at the door, opened it with trembling hand, entered with tottering
knees, and eyes which shunned the light. It was the very night that Ildegerte,
for ever to escape the unmerited disgrace, had determined to forsake the
palace. She was reclining on a couch, with her face turned toward the window,
waiting for the rising moon, in order, by the assistance of her light, to find
the neighboring bay, in which was concealed the ship that was to bear her from
the coast of Denmark. At her feet sat the faithful Helga; both were silent,
both lost in a labyrinth of sorrowful reflections. Hark! Something was heard
without the door! Now it ceased again -- now it seemed to be retreating -- now
it returned, and the door was gently opened.

"The King!" cried Helga, starting as she recognized his features.

Fortunately a dim lamp cast but faint rays upon the couch, and spread a kind
of twilight over Ildegerte's glowing cheeks. -- Theodoric too dared not to look
at her, but riveting his eye upon the ground, observed not her confusion.

"My husband!" commenced she, with a fearful dread that he had been apprized of
her intention. "Whence so late at night?"

"Pardon me, my love," said he, "a frightful dream has forced me from my bed.
Methought as you were laying in my arms, you were torn from me; I wished to
rescue you -- I wished to rise, and hasten after you, but could not. I felt my
arms confined by infrangible chains -- I heard your lamentations and
reproaches. I raged -- I foamed, and yet the more I roused my strength to burst
my fetters, the more, alas! was I confined by some invisible power. I at last
awoke: cold drops trickled from my forehead; I sprung from my bed and hastened
hither!"

"'T was but a dream," replied Ildegerte, "and superstition only seeks reality
in shadows. How could you be thus alarmed? What can tear me from your arms as
long as I am not torn from your heart?"

Theodoric only answered with a sigh. He crept so affectionately into her arms,
kissed her so tenderly, and talked to her so fervently, that Ildegerte, who
thought it all hypocrisy and diabolical deceit, felt bitter sorrow in her
heart. It was painful to see herself mocked (as she fancied) by the villain,
whom with a single word she could unmask. She was silent, but unable to return
the caresses bestowed upon her by the traitor as he hung upon her neck. The
rising moon reminded her of the intended flight. Ildegerte withdrew herself
from the arms of her faithless husband, feigned weariness, and begged repose.
He went. --

Alas! then awoke in her recollection, as if by an electric shock, all the past
joys of love. Before her eyes stood the prospect of a drear futurity.

"Perhaps for the last time," thus whispered her heart to her, "perhaps for the
last time thou see the dear betrayer, the father of thy child."

She pursued him, threw her snow-white arms around him, and stammered forth --

"Farewell! Forgive me, if I for another moment rob you of repose. I forgot to
show you the dear little child, the pledge of our affection."

With these words she drew the King, (whose confusion evidently increased)
partly by force, to the cradle, in which the innocent was slumbering.

"Look!" said she, "here is your son. Kiss him, and bless him, that with his
father's blessing and his mother's love, he may bid defiance to the storms
which Fate perhaps has spread above him."

The King bent to his firstborn son, and kissed him; a tear dropped upon his
little hand.

"For the sake of that tear," cried Ildegerte, "I forgive thee."

She vanished in the inner apartment. -- Theodoric was thunderstruck; he
followed her with fixed eye, and willingly had otherwise interpreted her words
than his conscience too plainly pointed out. Long he stood irresolute. His
heart drew him to Ildegerte's feet, there to confess his crime, and sue to her
affection for pardon. But then the demon Policy whispered in his ear --

"Too far have thou proceeded. Already does the ocean bear the Swedish Princess
to thy shores; thou can but proceed; to retreat a step is war and death."

He turned mournfully around, reached his chamber without knowing how, and
sought that repose which is granted only to the good.

All was again silent. No footstep echoed through the lonesome galleries of the
vaulted palace. Ildegerte dried her tears, and demanded of her companion
whether it was midnight.

"It is," answered she. "All is quiet; above us shines the northern star."

"'It Is well!" cried the Queen; "let us begone. Alas! how is my heart oppressed!
Where is my son?"

"He Is still asleep," said Helga.

Ildegerte approached the cradle, and surveyed him with maternal affection.

"Look, Helga, how calmly innocence can sleep. Is his father's rest so
undisturbed? Oh! How easy is it to discover the traces of conscience in the
features of any one asleep! When the weary eye is closed, the recollection of
evil or of good steals from the deep recesses of the heart, settles upon the
countenance, and is manifest in convulsive motions, or a gentle smile. What a
pity to disturb the innocent's delightful dreams! But his mother has been
roused by the hand of misery from the most delightful of all dreams! -- the
dream of love, and yet dare not complain. Away! I hear the crowing of the cock;
away, before the morning dawns!"

Helga took the little slumberer in her arms, and he awoke not. Ildegerte with
silent caution preceded her companion through the dark passages, and reached at
last a little gate, which was opened to her by a trabant, bought over to her
interest. -- She cast back another mournful look.

"This palace I entered in triumph," said she, "through yonder spacious
portals, and am now doomed to fly from it like a criminal through this small
gate. At that time the sun sparkled in a tear of joy, but now the moon in the
tear of misery. Perfidious husband! Away, that I may not curse the recollection
of him!"

She spoke, and took little Haldan in her arms, (for her affection could not
even trust him to the faithful Helga), and carefully carried him now through
pathless forests, now over craggy cliffs, and now over bottomless morasses. The
night was cold, but large drops trickled from the heroine's forehead. Her face
and hands were lacerated by the briars; her feet, wounded by the pointed
flints, left their bloody marks imprinted in the sand. Already had they been
wandering for two hours, when the Queen asked Helga whether she was weary.

"I dare not tell a falsehood," replied she; "I am very weary."

"True," said Ildegerte; "you have no precious burden to scatter roses on your
path. Forgive me, faithful Helga."

"I am ashamed," answered she; "I Will follow you to death."

They continued their way. As yet they felt not the refreshing sea-breeze. The
thickets grew more impenetrable, the path less beaten.

"Methinks," said Helga, "the morning dawns. Do you see that purple stripe in
the east? Alas! what if the sun betray us!"

"Courage! Courage!" exclaimed Ildegerte. "We shall escape; the night has led
us too much to the left; at break of day we shall discern our road."

The fugitives, urged by anxiety, redoubled their efforts. They sprung like
kids from cliff to cliff; they crept like serpents through the interwoven
bushes. Panting like hunted deer, they forced their way through brooks and
swampy fens.

At once a thick fog arose, which dimmed the breaking day, and spread a second
night around them, far more impenetrable than the former, which had been
enlightened by the moon and stars. The unhappy Queen covered the child with all
the garments she could spare, in order to defend him from the chilly rawness of
the atmosphere. She summoned all her resolution to oppose the horrors of her
situation, and had still a word of comfort left for Helga.

Alas! poor helpless wretches! What avails it that ye wander thus, besmeared
with blood, in tears, and breathless? Do you know whither you are flying? Can
you discern the tree close to you? Are you certain that some hostile demon is
not leading you through this labyrinth back to the Palace gate? Perhaps at that
very moment the sunbeams may disperse the fog, exhibiting your mangled persons
to the derision of the Court and Hell.

"Oh Queen!" cried Helga, falling on a stone, "forgive me, I can go no further."

"Ye Gods! this is too much," cried Ildegerte. "Burden me not, Odin, beyond
what I am able to bear. Collect this mist into a thunder-cloud, and launch the
dart of Hela to my heart."

She threw herself upon the damp cold earth, close to her friend, pressed
little Haldan feebly to her bosom, and warmed him with her tears.

The floodgates of Heaven opened. -- Forth gushed a torrent from the skies,
accompanied by hall; the brooks were swollen beyond their banks, and the fields
inundated; the miserable fugitives were completely drenched. Rapid streams
rolled past them, and in huge drops a river seemed to fall from every tree.

Haldan (who till now had slept as soundly in his mother's arms beneath the
canopy of angry Heaven, as on a bed of down in the palace of his father,)
awoke, as at last the rain, in spite of Ildegerte's care, had forced its way.
He awoke, and availed himself of the only arms which Nature (bounteous to every
beast, to man alone penurious) had granted him. He cried so loudly and
piteously that his voice rent the heart of his afflicted mother, more than the
thorns her feet and hands. Fruitless were her caresses, fruitless the offer of
her breast, in which misery had dried all nourishment. At last her courage, her
belief in a Providence, who superintends the sufferings of innocence, forsook
her; mad with despair and anguish, she wrung her hands, and cursed her
existence.

Hark!

In the thickets barked a dog -- not far distant seemed the sound; fresh (...),
and strength, inspired the weary Queen. -- She sprung nimbly on her feet,
stretched forth her hand to her exhausted friend, raised her, commanded her to
lean upon her arm, removed with her left hand the close-cemented bushes,
clasped with her right the infant Haldan, and thus followed the sound, which
still seemed nearer and nearer.

Suddenly she stood before a small hut, which, overshadowed by thick interwoven
branches, bade defiance to every storm.

"I shall find some one here," said she to herself, "whose compassion I shall
excite by the artless account of my distresses. But if not, be my last resource
-- this dagger."

Thus prepared for all, Ildegerte boldly knocked at the door of the little hut.
But who can describe her astonishment, when a female voice called from within
--

"Hail, Queen of Denmark and Norway! Enter! Enter! Come to my sire, thou,
Prince Haldan, and the faithful Helga."

At once the door flew from its hinges, and our heroine beheld sitting, at a
blazing fire, a decrepit old woman, who, with palsied head, tottered toward
her, seized her hand, and conducted her to a kind of couch, made of soft moss
and twisted sedge. With benevolent solicitude she took the little Prince from
her arms, laid him near the fire upon a bed of roses and sweet-scented herbs,
went to milk her goats, and appeased his hunger. She then brought fruits and
bread, with a cordial drink made by herself of honey and berries; at the same
time she encouraged her guests by friendly conversation, pressing them to
partake of her homely cheer, and not to despise her poverty, for she gave them
what her little garden and cellar would allow.

"When you," said she, "are recovered from the hardships you have encountered
in the night, I will conduct you, by the nearest road, to the seashore. To be
sure it is long since I forsook my hut, for age and infirmity are sisters; but
today, by the assistance of my stick, I will contrive to hobble along, for I
think it well worth my trouble to sacrifice the remnant of my strength in the
assistance of so good a Queen. Fear not; you will not be pursued; the ship lies
unobserved within a secret bay, the wind is fair, and ere the sun has
half-fulfilled his course, the coast of Denmark will have vanished from your
view."

The good Queen stared at her with astonishment, not knowing how to solve the
mystery. The old woman seemed as well acquainted with her every secret as if
she had been the companion of her youth, and never left her side.

"Who art thou, unaccountable?" stammered Ildegerte in a tone of suspicion;
"who art thou, before whose eye the book of Fate lies open?"

"I am," replied she, "Suanhilda, the sorceress, whose name perhaps has reached
your ears."

A sacred reverential impulse seized the Queen. She had often heard at her
husband's Court of this miraculous woman, of her wondrous skill in magic and
divination. But an instant before she had been convinced that Fame had not
exaggerated it. It would have been folly to conceal her secret from such a
favorite of the Gods: she therefore wisely determined to reveal to the old
woman what the latter long had known, and implore her assistance.

Suanhilda promised, and fulfilled her promise; for as soon as the wanderers
had dried their clothes, healed their wounds, and satisfied their hunger, she
grasped her staff, and led her guests (as quick as the weight of a hundred
years, which she bore upon her back, would allow) by a smooth path, known only
to herself, to the seashore, where the crew joyfully hailed their freight, and
a brisk breeze swelled the canvass. The sun, no longer hid by clouds, now
sparkled in the rippling waves. Suanhilda embraced Ildegerte.

"Farewell," said she, with an awful solemnity, while she gazed full in the
horoine's face, and a more than mortal inspiration overspread her features;
"farewell, till thou and thy thousands are borne upon the ocean back to the
coast of Denmark, where the desolated fields imbibe the grateful dew of Heaven,
mingled with floods of gore, where the wretched peasant groans to thee for help
and for deliverance, where Treason spreads its sooty pinions over the Palace.
-- Welcome, Oh heroine, amid the shouts of multitudes! Triumph and conquer,
thrice blessed mother of Kings! Thy name shall be named in distant ages, and
behold! thy children's children pass before me, clad in purple, bearing the
scepter of Norway, which is decorated with the ever-blooming trophies, earned
by Ildegerte."

The old woman, from a hillock near the shore, still continued her prophetic
blessings, when a large space separated Ildegerte from that land, which, by her
banishment, plunged itself into destruction.

The voyage was prosperous, the weather favorable. In a few days the heroine
reached her native shores, and fled to the castle in the woods, which had
before heard her lamentations for the loss of Thora, and concealed her anguish
for the death of Swend.

BACK to the palace of the poor deluded King, where (to borrow a simile from
Montesquieu) all is lifeless animation, and every one a walking statue!

Scarce had Theodoric awoke from a short slumber, which had rather wearied than
refreshed him, when he was informed that one of the Queen's attendants waited
in the antichamber, and desired admittance.

"Let her come," said he, affrighted, and foreboding something unusual. The
crimson flew into his face, he half-raised himself from his couch, and leaning
on his elbow, fixed his eye upon the door.

With downcast looks, Ingibert, (the sister of our Helga) entered the
apartment. -- She was clothed in mourning, and from her head flowed the long
crape to her feet. -- Her uneven pace, her mute affliction, more appalled the
King than if she had wrung her hands in agony, and torn her hair. She
approached him with reverence, and silently presented a letter. Theodoric
opened it with trembling hand, and read. Ingibert withdrew.

Ildegerte to Theodoric, King of Denmark and Norway.
"Your generosity (you termed it love) once forced me to accept a crown from
your hand, while my armor still was stained with Swedish gore. In martial
accoutrements I pleased you -- in the modest attire of a housewife I ceased to
please you. The blood of Canfried led me to the throne, the blood of Canfried
drives me from it; your enemies and mine may triumph, but far am I from
demeaning myself so far as to reproach their dastard souls. Take back the
diadem, which ambition never placed upon my brow; I lay it voluntarily at your
feet, to escape the insult which so undeservedly awaited me. The rank to which
you raised me, has not extinguished the recollection of that to which I shall
return. Let no lamentation follow me; my heart will feel no want but yours,
which I have lost. Live happy and content, if the situation in which I leave
you can afford content and happiness. I hasten to the woods of Norway, there to
seek that peace which I never felt upon your throne. If you now and then can
still bestow a thought upon me, without an interruption to the pleasures of
your new alliance, keep in mind that I never shall forget you are the father of
my child."


I leave it to your imagination, reader, to depict the impression which this
solemn adieu made upon his heart, stormed as it was on every side. You know he
was no villain, though his weakness, his too easy flexibility led him to commit
more crimes than Harold, with all his villainy, could perpetrate. At this moment
all his tenderness awoke; he again beheld in Ildegerte his amiable wife, the
mother of his son. -- He again reflected on her exalted virtues and unmerited
distresses; he resolved to act like a man, and wept like a child. He determined
boldly to surmount all the obstacles of policy, but, instead of instantly
executing what the angel of Virtue whispered, to make Harold first acquainted
with this alteration in his sentiments. The favorite was summoned.

"Read, Harold, read!" reaching with trembling hand the open letter. "Read!
give me thy advice, and calm, if possible, the tumult which rages in my heart."

Harold took the paper, and perused it. -- The flight of Ildegerte was to him a
thunderbolt, which blasted at one blow his brightest hopes. Yet could the eye
of one, endowed with a knowledge of mankind, read likewise in the generous
renunciation which these lines conveyed, the surest method to regain
Theodoric's wavering heart. This must be prevented; dissimulation was more
necessary now than ever. Harold with difficulty tried to force a smile, closed
the letter, thrust it in his bosom, and assuming an air of indifference,
demanded --

"What does the King intend to do?"

"What he must do," replied Theodoric, "if he will obey the dictates of his
heart; what he must do, if he will lay claim to a title far above that of King
-- the title of an upright man."

"But there is a wide difference," said the Prince, "between an upright King
and an upright individual. The latter can by no means be concerned in our
present deliberation; the former must not consult his heart, but the opinion of
the nation."

"And of his own accord linger all his life upon the rock of conscience?" cried
Theodoric.

"If he will suffer his imagination," answered Harold, "to bind him to the
rock, why, yes."

"Sorry I am, then," rejoined the King, "that I am a slave to mine. Spare your
words; send a small vessel instantly to Norway for her; send an ambassador
instantly to Sweden. I will not see the Princess, I will not hear her name
again."

"The hostile army," replied Harold, "will bellow it loudly enough in your
ears. What ambassador can I send? who of all your subjects will step forward to
be torn in pieces by just exasperation? Hermanfried would rave, Luitgardis with
tears inspire each arm. Every noble Swede would rather die a thousand deaths
than suffer such an insult to be unrevenged. Already do I see them burst upon
us like fragments of broken rocks; already do I see them desolate thy fertile
kingdom, butcher thy subjects, and enslave their children; already do I hear
thy faithful followers curse thy weakness, which drags them thus to slaughter
for a woman's sake. The welfare of the state is your first law; this Ildegerte
herself confesses by her voluntary resignation; you should be obliged to her
for having made the step more easy, which costs your heart, as I perceive, so
much."

"Alas!" exclaimed Theodoric, "what must become of her? Is she doomed, as a
reward for all her love and valor, only to hunt the bears in Norway's forests?"

"Not so," answered Harold. "You may, by a thousand little favors, alleviate
her lot. Let her retain, as heretofore, the title of Queen, that will flatter
her ambition. Let her have a considerable revenue, that will procure the
conveniences of life."

"But her heart --?" said the King.

"That," replied the Prince, "will be more open to a mother's joys, more
closely connected to her son, and will find its reward in the reflection of
having contributed to the happiness of a whole nation."

"And I --?" proceeded Theodoric, with a deep sigh.

"To that question," answered he, presenting a miniature, "let the original of
this reply."

"What is it?" cried the King, eagerly.

"The beauteous copy of a still more beauteous girl," said Harold.

"And the original?" demanded he.

"I dare not name," returned Harold; "you have forbidden it."

"Luitgardis?" asked he, impatiently.

"The same," said the Prince.

Theodoric riveted his eye upon the picture.

"She is handsome." -- A pause. -- "Beautiful!" -- Another pause --
"Enchanting!"

"And yet," rejoined Harold, "'it is thought the painter has but ill succeeded in
the expression of that gentle soul which animates these features. He was unable
to steal from her that smile, which she seems to have stolen from the goddess
Freya."

"Who brought it?" asked Theodoric.

"A messenger," returned the Prince, "who, at the same time, announces the near
approach of the Princess. He reports that, at his departure from the Court, she
purposed to remain but three days longer, and as he has been by accident
detained upon the road, he expects her to be close behind him."

"So soon?" cried Theodoric. "Before we are prepared for her reception?"

"Heed not that," said the villain; "only prepare your heart, and to your
faithful Harold leave the rest."

"Haste then!" exclaimed the King. -- "Let no decoration or magnificence be
wanting. Fame describes her Brother's Court as splendid; I should not wish her
to miss here what custom may have rendered requisite."

"Every costly ornament," said Harold, "which your royal treasure can procure,
she shall find in her apartments. Add to this," continued he, in a jocular
tone, "the value which such a present gains from your hand, and methinks
Luitgardis will be satisfied."

The Prince was now going, when Theodoric detained him, by asking for the
letter.

"It were better, kinsman," rejoined Harold, "not to read it a second time."

"It at least deserves an answer," observed the King.

"It does," returned Harold, "and I advise you to accompany it with presents.
Fail not also to call her Queen, and command the nobles who take it to bend the
knee, as is meet when they approach the consort of their King."

"And to convince her, by irresistible eloquence," proceeded Theodoric, fixing
his eye upon the picture, "of the sad necessity which obliges me, so contrary
to the wishes of my faithful heart -- "

"And so forth," interrupted Harold. -- "Yes, yes; but allow me to state
another doubt which has occurred to me. If I am wrong my zeal for your safety
must serve as my excuse. Would it not be conformable to the dictates of
caution, if you were to station a few troops on the confines of Norway?"

"Why so?" demanded he.

"How easily," said Harold -- "pardon me, it is but a supposition, yet it is
founded on a knowledge of the sex, which, when slighted, ever thirsts for
vengeance -- how if Ildegerte, who in her native land has powerful interest,
were to excite your subjects to revolt?"

"Peace!" cried the King. "Her noble soul cannot be capable of such a thought."

"Of what cannot the storm of passions make a woman capable?" answered he. --
"Who ever yet repented caution? And, why is it necessary that the purpose for
which your troops are sent thither should be known?"

"No," exclaimed the King, "it cannot be. I Will hear no more; not a single man
shall approach the borders, and those at present scattered in that district,
shall immediately return, that Ildegerte may not think me guilty of harboring
the least suspicion."

"As you please," concluded Harold, "I have but done my duty."

The hypocrite departed. His deluded friend, (who had so often sacrificed the
substance for the shadow) sought consolation in the picture of the Swedish
princess, and tried, by gazing at her lovely features, to drive from his
remembrance the tear which perhaps at that moment trickled down the cheek of
Ildegerte. He convinced himself that he had done every thing which love and
generosity demanded. Had he been but a subject, reasoned he, no power on earth
should have forced him to lose Ildegerte; he would have fled with her to a
desert; wild herbs would, at her side, have been luxuries, and water nectar.
But Fate had placed him in a station which we mortals are for ever painting the
most arduous and unenviable, which, however, not one in a thousand voluntarily
quits, and which none of us, who thus despise it, would refuse, if it were
offered. What remains to be done? He has but two alternatives; he must either
audaciously oppose the will of the Gods, and the entreaties of his subjects, or
cast away the purple, and retire to Norway's woods, there to die poor and
unknown, yet at the side of Ildegerte. The first no mortal dares to do, the
latter he must not; for to leave a flock without a shepherd would be cruelty,
and to rob his heirs of their paternal right would be madness.

Thus the sophist quietly submits to his destiny, writes a lukewarm letter
full of forced apologies to Ildegerte, tries to make amends by costly presents
for what the style may want in affection, and wonders when she sends the
presents back, nor deigns to write him a reply. He terms her conduct haughty,
thinks he has a right to talk of undeserved injuries, and feels a secret joy in
having found another cover for his perfidy.

Well is it for the villain, who can thus rock his conscience to repose. Even
Theodoric envies him, for he is not always able thus to impose upon himself by
sophistry.

A THOUSAND times has it been said, (and falsely said) that the path of
seduction is only strewed with roses. True it is, the further one advances, the
more easy seems the way, the more numerous these short-lived flowers. This,
however, is not at the beginning of the road, but where it deviates from the
path of Virtue. There has Virtue scattered many a thorn, which, from time to
time, benevolently tears the thoughtless wanderer's foot, to make him attentive
to the way which he is choosing.

Luitgardis came. On every side triumphal arches were erected. The streets were
adorned with branches, the windows decked with garlands, and each clad in his
best attire. A magnificent procession paraded in honor of the festive day, but
the countenances of the assembled multitude gave the lie to their garments; no
joyful shout saluted the young couple; all was silent as if a funeral were
passing, and Theodoric, at the side of Luitgardis, felt the bitterest
mortification. He commanded meat and bread, as well as intoxicating liquors, to
be given to the populace. All refused to taste them, and crowded to the temple
of Odin, where, since the last battle, Ildegerte had hung her lance and helmet,
which they bedewed with tears.

Theodoric heard it, and his heart bled.

All seemed to combine on this day to plant a thousand daggers in his heart.
Sir Siegwin, an old Swede, (the same who conveyed the body of Canfried from the
field of battle, and slew Swend's murderer) came in the suite of Luitgardis to
deliver the young Princess to the King: but scarce had he performed this
errand, ere he sprung upon his steed to return home.

"Whither so soon?" cried the astonished King. "Will you affront me so much as
to refuse the cup of joy upon the day of my nuptials?"

"Sir," said old Siegwin, "do you remember our interchange of friendship on the
field of battle? My King commanded me to accompany the Princess; I have
delivered her to you. My friendship I take back."

Without waiting a reply he spurred his steed, and vanished from the sight of
the abashed Theodoric, whose conscience loudly called to him --

'"Thou deservest not the friendship of so worthy a man."'

Thus did the viperous tooth of Conscience gnaw every morsel that he ate, taint
every drop he drank, and poison every kiss he imprinted on the lips of his
bride.

And Luitgardis? Oh! she was a good harmless being, ever gay and ever happy. --
She saw no further than it was wished she should see, and enjoyed the pleasures
of the present hour, regardless of the next.

And Harold? It Is time to return to him, whose well-concerted plan had been
defeated by the flight of Ildegerte, and whom you perhaps fancy contented with
the thought of having so completely revenged his slighted love, and resolved
calmly to enjoy the fruits of this revenge. Nothing less. Harold (like a
skilful chess-player, who always knows how to give another turn to his game,
when a movement of his adversary has defeated his first-plan) now aimed at the
throne of his forefathers (as he termed it), even without the help of Sweden.
He had not a moment's doubt but that his hand would be accepted, when he had it
in his power to make the offer from a throne. Notwithstanding all his craft and
knowledge of mankind, he sometimes fell into the same mistake as attaches to
the rest of us poor mortals. -- He attributed to each character unintentionally
some mixture of his own, by which mistake it came to pass, that as he laid down
false positions, false consequences ensued. He could as little fancy the
patient and submissive Ildegerte, as the Greeks a Juno, without jealousy.

"Let me but be a King," was his false argument, "and she will be ready enough
to snatch at any opportunity of convincing Theodoric that she can be a Queen in
spite of him."

ALMIGHTY Ruler of creation! Is it not enough that an audacious despot shall be
able to destroy that noble emulation, the axis upon which all republican states
turn, and substitute his mad ambition? Must even Love, that gentle child of
Heaven, formed only for the consolation of suffering humanity, afford him a
pretext?

Already was Harold, the favorite, possessed of a blind confidence, lord over
the revenues of the kingdom, lord over the strongest forts, lord over the army;
for he had ever contrived to remove from the throne the faithful and deserving
patriot, and to supply the place by a creature devoted to his will. And who can
deny that Theodoric assisted the traitor in his projects? Had he not lost the
love of his people by banishing their idol, Ildegerte? What had he been since
that time, but a mark for their derision and contempt? Alas! but too easy
access did Harold find to their hearts. He complained with the discontented,
plotted with the disaffected, and, in a short time, beheld himself at the head
of a powerful party, who eagerly awaited the signal for revolt. Nothing was
wanting but a favorable opportunity, and the demon of discord failed not to
provide it.

Theodoric, in the possession of a lovely wife, a double crown, an unmolested
peace, was wretched; for the joys of the bridal bed, the grandeur of the
diadem, the smile of peace stilled not the voice of his accuser, Conscience. He
avoided himself, and the whole world; he launched eagerly into every
dissipation; he endeavored to forget the past amid the noisy bustle of the
Court. In vain, in vain! An irksome disgust attended him, even to the arms of
the beauteous Luitgardis. The society of each contemptible court minion soon
became indispensible, because his shallow brain could daily hammer forth new
means of dissipation.

Harold availed himself of this state of mind, and, by one of his partisans,
caused the King to fall upon the idea of making a tour through his realms.

"Excellent! Excellent!" cried the cheated monarch. "We shall be daily amused
by new objects, we shall hear the petitions of the distant provinces. Quick!
make instant preparations, that the pleasant season may not pass."

His impatience was beyond all bounds; every delay intolerable; not a hand was
there in the palace unemployed. In a few days he left the metropolis, having
appointed Prince Harold the unlimited Regent during his absence.

This was the moment which the favorite had awaited. He daily received
messengers from the King, announcing the continuance of his journey; and scarce
did he know him far enough advanced toward the confines, when he at once threw
away the mask, assembled his creatures round him, took the young Queen into
custody, overpowered the few who were faithful to Theodoric, and was joyfully
hailed by the infatuated populace, King of Denmark.

He mounted the throne with affected modesty, heard and determined every cause
in person, repealed some taxes which were heavy on the people, doubled the
allowance of the army, sacrificed to the Gods, gifted the priests, amused the
vulgar by a few hired jugglers, published a plausible manifesto, indisputably
proving his right to the throne, and thus secured his booty without opposition.

Indissolubly, as he thought, was the knot of power now tied; and on the summit
of his grandeur he felt no other wish than the gratification of his lust. He
seized the pen, and wrote --

Harold, King of Denmark, to Queen Ildegerte.
"You are revenged, fair Ildegerte! Theodoric is punished -- Harold King. The
perfidious villain has released you from your oath; haste, Oh haste, to form
another union. Come and reign wherever Harold reigns."


A splendid embassy was dispatched to Norway to deliver this letter, and to
convey Ildegerte triumphant to the coast of Denmark.

Immovable, as if struck by Odin's thunderbolt, stood the weak Theodoric, on
hearing the dreadful tidings brought by a faithful fugitive. Long his tongue
refused its office, and the first exclamation that quivered on his lips, was --

"Oh Ildegerte, Ildegerte! This have I for thy sake merited. Can the wretch who
betrayed his own wife, complain of a friend's perfidy?"

Extend, good reader, your compassion to the miserable outcast, for, at this
moment, he ceases to deserve your hate; behold and pity his desperate
situation. See where the Court-sycophants steal away, to throw themselves in
the shadow of a more fruitful tree; for this, lopped of its leaves, stands
naked and defenseless. Forsaken by his friends and subjects, without an army,
without money, without counsel, husband of two wives, and unable to seek
comfort in the bosom of either -- this is the image of the wretch, who, torn by
a thousand agonies, extinguishes the indignation which his weakness had excited
in our hearts.

He wandered from city to city -- the gates were shut to him; he fled from
village to village -- scarce did some honest peasant share with him his morsel
of coarse bread.

Thus did he steal through a thousand dangers to the remotest province of his
kingdom, the only one still faithful to him. Here he collected a band of a few
thousands, headed them, and boldly marched against the robber of his crown; but
as he dared not hope for victory, he resolved in despair to rush upon the sword
of the foe, and finish his miserable being on the field of battle.

Harold laughed at his temerity, braced on his armor, assembled his
innumerable troops, headed them, and fiercely sallied forth to complete the
subjection of the kingdom, and chain his rival to the triumphal carriage, which
was to bear him and Ildegerte to the altar of Siofna. He daily expected the
return of the ambassadors from Norway, and was at a loss to account for their
long stay. But he consoled himself with the idea, that when all had submitted
to the victor, he might rest the more easy in the arms of love.

Meanwhile the two armies (if Theodoric's small band deserve the name of army)
had approached each other. Theodoric wished for battle, Harold avoided it; not
because he had the smallest doubt of a decisive victory, but he would take the
rebels (as he termed them) alive, surround them by superior force, and compel
them, by famine, to surrender their shadow of a King. Every thing seemed to
favor this project. In a barren valley, devoid of water, the inconsiderate
King had pitched his tents. Every avenue was possessed by the enemy. Bread
began to fall, and the burning thirst of the loyal troops was quenched only by
the dew of Heaven. A few excursions were hazarded; each time the little band
returned diminished. The people murmured, and considered themselves as sheep
led to slaughter. -- The impulse of self-preservation awoke, and easily
overpowered the enthusiastic idea of an unalterable allegiance to their
sovereign. Harold daily sent disguised impostors to the camp, who offered
pardon to all the wavering, if they would voluntarily surrender, and deliver
their King into his power.

"Why this delay?" said they. "Your brethren have yielded to the conqueror, and
are happy. The new King is gracious; he will be a father to you; but beware how
you provoke his wrath. Can you think, with a handful of men, to oppose hunger,
thirst, and an innumerable army? Harold could long since have annihilated your
poor band, had he not pitied you infatuation, and wished to spare the blood of
his subjects, (for as such he still considers you). Seize and kiss the hand
which a father offers, ere you too late repent your obstinacy."

These addresses naturally made a deep impression on the minds of those who
heard them. They combined, and determined to offer the sacrifice required, in
order to save themselves from inevitable ruin.

Thus helpless was the situation of poor Theodoric. The design of his followers
was not unknown to him, and each moment he expected to be dragged in chains
before the traitor, whom he had once loaded with kindnesses. This idea was to
him insupportable. Once more his courage awoke:

"Rather die than increase Harold's triumph." Thus spoke he to himself, and
prepared a cup of poison, which he was just about to swallow, when Escill
entered his tent. He announced a woman, who, with a basket of fruit, had stolen
through the enemy, and desired to speak with him. -- Scarce had he finished,
when the woman entered.

"Helga!" cried the King. "Art thou here? Is it possible?"

Helga silently greeted him, and delivered a letter.

Ildegerte to Theodoric, King of Denmark and Norway.
"This moment I have landed, on the coast of Denmark, six thousand Amazons and
eight thousand hardy Norwegians. I hasten to relieve you; I shall reach you in
a few days. When our warlike shouts announce our approach, burst from your
camp, rush boldly on the usurper's front, while I attack him on the rear. My
life and blood are yours."


"God of Heaven!" exclaimed Theodoric, while a flood of tears gushed down his
face, and not knowing what he did, he clasped the faithful Helga in his arms.
"Is it not a dream? So much generosity! So unmerited! How shall I dare to meet
the injured angel, whom I have so basely -- "

"Of that we must not now converse," said Helga. "Pardon me, Sir, you have too
often sacrificed the present to the future. Do you understand and approve of
Ildegerte's letter?"

"Perfectly," answered he, "and will follow her directions punctually."

"Then I have fulfilled my errand," rejoined Helga. "Farewell!"

"But another word," cried the King. -- "How happens this? How did my
distresses reach her ear!"

"Our enemy was so kind," returned she, "as to honor us with a confidence,
which we might have expected from you. But, to be brief, (for my time is short)
your worthy kinsman, Prince Harold, had for some time cast an eye of affection
upon Ildegerte, and having it in his power to add to the allurements of his
person, the allurements of a throne, (whether acquired by birth or usurpation
is to him alike) he ventured (unhappily for him rather too soon) to make a
formal offer of his hand by embassy. What followed is easily divined. The
worthy ambassadors were confined, that the usurper might remain in a state of
uncertainty; a small army was hastily collected; a favorable breeze wafted us
across the sea, and here we are with you to conquer or to die."

The good King could not check his tears, or bear this sudden change of fortune.

"Tell her," cried he, "that she has saved an ungrateful wretch from death and
infamy, that this cup of poison had already touched my lips."

He was still sobbing and moaning to Helga, long after she had left the tent.
-- She stole with her basket through the hostile camp, mounted the nimble steed
that awaited her among the thickets, and hastened to Ildegerte, who, in the
meantime, had advanced a day's march at the head of her Norwegians. The
re-animated King immediately convened the leaders of his little army, and
announced to them the joyful news, which quickly spread from tent to tent,
appeasing hunger and disaffection, inspiring every heart with courage, every
arm with strength, every breast with loyalty, and every eye with martial fire.
"Ildegerte!" was the general cry. A cheerful bustle pervaded the camp. Helmets
were polished, swords were sharpened, and hymns of victory sung by
anticipation. Upon the summit of the neighboring mountain a sentinel was
stationed, to strike his shield thrice as soon as he espied the approaching
army. Every one wished to relieve this guard, for every one was eager to
announce the happy tidings.

Harold heard with astonishment the shouts of joy in the valley, from whence
the air till now had wafted to him naught but groans. A spy came to acquaint
him with the threatened stroke. He was furious, and resolved at break of the
succeeding morning, to storm the narrow valley, and destroy the paltry band,
that when Ildegerte came, she might find the work already finished, and return
disappointed to the woods of Norway. He resolved -- but the Gods had otherwise
resolved.

The sun declined, and his first beams already kissed the ocean, when the guard
upon the mountain thrice struck his shield. Every one climbed to the summit,
and with silent rapture saw the numerous troops emerge from a cloud of dust,
spread in thick ranks across the plain, and pitch their tents at a small
distance from the tyrant's camp.

Harold foamed with rage, and vowed the death of the audacious woman. 'Twas not
fear that caused him thus to knit his brow, to fix his eye upon the earth, the
gnash his teeth, and clench his fist. What had Harold to fear? Ildegerte's
army, joined to Theodoric's weak exhausted band, equalled not half his force,
and half of Ildegerte's followers were women. Fear it was not, but his despised
affection, which converted his desire to detestation, drove his boiling blood
into his head, and forced from him an oath to exterminate the daring creature,
together with her beardless train.

With eyes that darted fire, he left his tent to prepare his troops for battle
on the ensuing morning. But alas! what a sudden change! Shallow blockhead!
Could thou think the name of Ildegerte was forgotten by the Danes?

"Who are they that approach?" said one to another. "Are they friends or foes?"

Soon was it proclaimed:

"'It Is Ildegerte, our Queen, the valiant noble being! Who dares to lift his
hand against her? If she defends Theodoric, Theodoric is right, and we are
rebels. -- Away to her feet! Let us appease the heroine's wrath by voluntary
submission."

And see! Here and there a troop forsook its leader. The deserters every moment
increased; every moment increased the shouts of

"Long live Queen Ildegerte!"

One dragged away another; hundreds followed without knowing why or whither.
They plucked green branches from the trees as a token of pacific disposition,
laid their arms at the feet of Ildegerte's guard (which at first attempted to
oppose them) crowded with acclamations to the camp, and demanded a sight of the
Queen.

Ildegerte issued from her tent with an air of majestic dignity. The multitude
fell upon their knees, blessed their Queen, and sued for pardon. The heroine
waved her hand. A death-like silence reigned throughout the assembly, and
anxious expectation sat upon every countenance.

"I thank you," said she, "for this mark of your attachment. My heart feels its
value, and, as a female, I may be allowed without restraint to shed the tear
which you see trembling in my eye. But I have nothing to forgive. It Is your
King whom you have injured; it is your King, at whose feet you must try by
supplication to avert the sword of Justice. All I can promise is, to join my
prayers to yours. Go, unite yourselves to my followers, and wait with
resignation the approaching morn. The rising sun will dispel the enchantment
which till now has bound your senses."

She ceased, and the still increasing multitude respectfully obeyed her words.
The camp was too small to contain all that arrived. They passed the night
beneath the starry heavens, anxiously sighing for the break of day.

The sun rose, and Ildegerte in vain looked for an enemy. Notwithstanding
Harold's furious menaces, notwithstanding the examples of a hundred, whom he
with his own hand slew, as they were flying, his mighty army every instant
lessened. When he turned to the left, the right wing fled, and while in pursuit
of this, the left forsook him. At last he remained alone and in despair. Too
dastardly to throw himself upon his sword, he escaped through the darkness of
night to the seashore, embarked on board a fisherman's skiff, fled to Germany,
and in some miserable hamlet hid his disgrace and remorse. No one pursued him.
In a few years, exhausted by the horrors of conscience, he descended to the
horrors of Niflheim.

Ildegerte mournfully returned thanks to the God of war for the victory
obtained without a blow, and was informed, as she departed from the altar, of
Theodoric's near approach, who, with his band of faithful followers, had
already left the valley, and was coming toward her through the enemy's
deserted camp. She hastened to receive him.

But what Divinity inspires me to describe this meeting? Theodoric sprung from
his charger, threw himself at Ildegerte's feet, and writhed in the dust. He was
bathed in tears, and his sobs choked his utterance. -- Ildegerte raised him,
and in a gentle voice besought him to forget the past, and to forgive the
rebels. She conducted him into her pavilion, to hide from the gazing multitude
the confusion of their Monarch.

What a triumph for the banished Queen, to replace a crown upon the head of her
ungrateful husband, to make him feel, in spite of his injustice, how great was
her influence in the hearts of his subjects!

Joyfully the army now approached the metropolis. All the gates were open to
receive them -- every heart beat friendly toward them. Luitgardis was
released, affectionately embraced by Ildegerte, and mortified by no reproach,
or scornful look. Easy it is to imagine the perplexity of poor Theodoric. He
loved Ildegerte more than ever. The army adored her; the heart of every Dane
was here is; the whole Court hung with reverence upon her looks: The idea of her
being mother to a guitless child, divested of his rights, added an affecting
portion of compassion to respect and love. -- No one doubted, after all she had
done for the nation, that she would demand, and receive the most honorable
restoration to the dignities of which she had unjustly been deprived. The King
was willing from his heart to make reparation for his crime, and Luitgardis,
(though she trembled at the thought) could not deny that Ildegerte was worthy
of the preference. In this surmise the nation was confirmed, when Ildegerte
summoned an assembly of all the estates, for the purpose of publicly addressing
them. The day was fixed for this solemnity, and awaited with anxious curiosity
by every Dane. During the intervening period, various were the opinions of the
points which were to be the subject of the Queen's harrangue.

If you wish to be a witness, reader, of this solemn scene, follow me. I will
conduct you to a hill, from whence you may survey the whole.

The morning dawned. The beams of the rising sun shed a cheerful luster on the
plain, which, decked with innumerable flowers, stretched to an immeasurable
distance.

Look! There, where the far horizon cheats the sight with a dark-blue shade,
there rises to the clouds a towering wood of firs. To the right, a rivulet
glides softly over the pebbles, in whose murmuring waves ten thousand diamonds
seem to sparkle. To the left rises a mountain awfully majestic, whose summit
often is crowned with clouds, and which often derides the thunder roaring at its
base. Today, however, it is clear, and bears the altar, from which the curling
smoke spires into the air. The priest, who, on his knees, with sacred hand is
nourishing the flame, seems at that height a dwarf.

But what thus glitters like the sun, in the center of the plain? What dazzling
mixture this, of gold and gorgeous colors?

It Is the King's throne, to which are five steps, covered with scarlet silk.
The hangings are of embroidered gold, which, drawn at the sides into festoons,
display the lofty ivory seat ingeniously worked. There lies upon a satin
cushion the resplendent crown, studded with precious stones; near it the golden
scepter. A hundred feathers, purple, white, and pearl-coloured, nod from the
canopy with gentle motion to the seat.

But what thus glitters like the moon on each side of the throne?

The thrones of the two Queens, to which are three steps covered with blue
silk. The seats are smaller, gilt, and carved in diverse places. The canopies
are of embroidered silver, upon which a plume of blue feathers here and there
is wafted by the zephyrs.

But, what these distant warlike sounds that strike the ear?

They are the drums and horns, the flutes, the cymbals, and the trumpets (which
with a solemn march precede the grand procession), mixed with the people's
shouts, who press round the King's triumphal carriage. At his right hand fits,
with burnished armor, and with open helm, the heroine Ildegerte. Upon her brow
reigns the consciousness of mighty deeds, and in her looks glows a majestic
dignity. At his left hand sits, in the snow-white robe of innocence, the gentle
Luitgardis, with dejected mien and prophetic dread of her future destiny. See
what innumerable multitudes rush through the gates! See how they spread along
the road, crowd to the carriage, cut the traces, and drag, with shouts of joy,
their much-loved burden.

The magnificent procession now approaches. First come, with drawn swords, six
thousand Amazons, headed by the faithful Helga, who nimbly separate, and
surround their Monarch's throne. They are followed by the triumphal
muscle-formed carriage, bearing the royal group, Literally the royal trefoil.
attended by trabants, men, women, and children. Now come the nobles of the
land, the estates of Denmark and of Norway, the Knights, the Leaders, and the
Senators. Each heads, according to his dignity or wealth, a larger or smaller
troop of warlike vassals, 'squires, armour-bearers, attendants. The train is
endless.

But see! The King has already mounted his throne. Ildegerte has taken the seat
on his right, and Luitgardis on his left. The different estates of the kingdom
occupy the steps of the thrones.

Four heralds blow the trumpet, and command respectful silence. Instantly all
is still as if a God had deprived a million of existence. No one dares to
breathe, or quit the place, where Chance has fixed him. Those who are behind,
rise on the tip-toe, staring with eager looks over the heads and shoulders of
the crowd before them.

Then arose Ildegerte from her seat with lofty dignity, and thus addressed the
assembly: --

"Mighty King of Denmark and Norway, my lord and husband -- ye nobles of the
realm and countless multitude, whose looks hang on my words with anxious
expectation, think not that, by my petition and Theodoric's command, you are
assembled here to witness any deed which will lessen the value of my heart. The
unmerited affliction which I have endured, has neither damped my spirit, nor
diminished the upright sensations of my soul. Far be it from Ildegerte,
therefore, to seek the restoration of her happiness in the misery of the
innocent. I come not to require that station, which the King's affection once
bestowed upon me. His will and yours have deemed it expedient, for the welfare
of the state, to unite the Northern kingdoms by this gentle tie, thereby to
avert bloodshed and division. I revere your wisdom, I wish not to cloud the
fountains of private peace and unanimity, whose waters fertilize these realms.
I acknowledge Luitgardis not to be my Queen, but yours. May she love Theodoric
as I loved, as I still love him! Ildegerte will be her sister, not her rival.
For myself therefore I have nothing to beg. Beg, did I say? Ildegerte never
begs; for what the most holy laws of heaven and earth allot to her, she
demands. I demand of you, ye estates of both the kingdoms, that you restore to
the child what your King has wrested from the mother, that my son never may
have cause to recollect my banishment. Acknowledge loudly and openly -- Prince
Haldan is Theodoric's eldest son."

"He is! he is!" resounded from all sides.

"Speak then!" continued she; "Where is he to look for his inheritance*"

"He is heir to both the kingdoms," cried the people.

"I thank you," said Ildegerte. "And you, Theodoric," proceeded she, sinking on
one knee, "do you sanction what your estates so loudly decree?"

The good King, (who, today, was literally but the shadow of a King, and who,
tossing on his ivory throne from side to side, read in the looks of his
subjects that they thought him but a man, who knew not the difference between
gold and silver) stooped blushing to the heroine, and raised her in his arms.

"Am I not obliged to you," said he, "for this my crown, this my scepter, and
the happiest hours of my existence? Is not your son also mine? Do you ask a
sinner this only to confuse him?"

"Enough!" cried Ildegerte. "Now modest Luitgardis, your consent alone is
wanting."

The gentle being, from whose mild blue eyes the tears had long been falling on
her throbbing bosom, rose, and threw herself at Ildegerte's feet.

"Oh inimitable woman! allow me to attempt a copy of your virtues. Take back
the place from which I innocently drove you -- it belongs to you alone. Let me
in retirement merit but the title of your friend."

"Not so," rejoined the heroine. "You are the Queen, you are and shall remain
so. As a wife, I have renounced every claim; I have only spoken as a mother,
that my son, by being interwoven in my destiny, might not curse my weakness. I
stand here to open the gates of honor, which have been shut to him by my
disgrace. Declare!"

Luitgardis turned to the crowd.

"Listen to me, Oh ye people! Let my weak voice reach your ears. And thou,
all-seeing Vara, goddess of pure vows, avenger of perjury, thee do I call to
witness, that I here acknowledge Prince Haldan to be the only lawful heir to
both the Northern crowns; and should Siofna bless my bed, cursed be the child
who wantonly dares to break his mother's oath!"

A murmur of applause pervaded the multitude.

"Have you," demanded Ildegerte, "well considered the nature of this oath? Do
you know the force of maternal love? What will you leave your children?"

"A grateful heart," said she. "Will they not even be obliged to you for their
existence?"

"Good woman," cried the heroine, "you deserve more than it is in my power to
give. To rob your children of both crowns, in order to place them on the head
of mine, were no longer maternal love, but rather an unbridled lust of power.
Heaven grant my son strength to bear but one, as may become an upright Monarch!
It Is the diadem of Norway I demand for him; let Denmark's scepter remain in the
hands of your children."

This contest between two virtuous souls drew tears from a million eyes.
Ildegerte and Luitgardis were alternate objects of love and admiration. Every
one wished to give all to both, for both deserved more than all that could be
given. But as Ildegerte insisted on the generous renunciation of the Danish
crown, the estates of both kingdoms unanimously resolved that Prince Haldan be
established and henceforth considered King of Norway, and in case of the royal
issue being extinct in either of the kingdoms, that the crown devolve upon the
neighboring Monarch.

Ildegerte had required nothing for herself; but every heart leaned toward
her, and wished to extinguish in her bosom the remembrance of her undeserved
afflictions. -- Ildegerte (thus decreed the estates) shall bear, during her
life, the title of Queen of Norway, and deliverer of Denmark. She shall take
her station upon festivals at the King's right hand. She shall reign in Norway,
during the minority of her son, as she reigns in the hearts of its inhabitants,
and a monument of brass shall record her deeds to posterity.

In the heroine's eye quivered a tear of bliss. She bowed to the multitude, and
a thousand voices raised her name with joyful shouts to the habitation of the
Gods.

Loud sounded the trumpets, cymbals, drums, and horns, but louder the glad cry
of

"Long live Queen Ildegerte!"

A happy banquet followed the solemnities. In a thousand decorated tents the
teeming horn went round. The gay couples winded through the mazy dance, and the
rising sun beheld the intoxicated slumberers stretched upon the dewy grass.

But already does maternal love hurry Ildegerte to the strand; already does the
ship unmoor which is to bear the heroine to her native shores. But another
embrace, another parting tear, another sad adieu, and -- the rowers dash
through the foaming waves, the pendants wanton in the air, a fresh breeze
swells the canvass, and already is the coast hidden in the mist. All is now
lost, except the loud blessings of the affected multitude, which are borne upon
the wings of the wind to Ildegerte's ear.

NO more has my feeble pen to relate of this illustrious heroine. She was a
Thora, and tried to make her son a Swend. But that she was not immortal, and
that, weary of life, she too at last slept in the arms of Hela, is betrayed by
the cypress, which hangs on the lyre of her Scald.

NOTES. VOL. II.
(1) FREDERIC the Second, King of Denmark, when sometimes tired of
court-formality, used to say -- "The King's from home."

In a moment every one gave way to uncontrolled amusements; but as soon as
Frederic exclaimed -- "The King's returned."

The whole Court was at once reinstated within the bounds of etiquette.

(2) For the attempt to explain this absurd doctrine, see Meiner's fantastic
publication, entitled, "Vermischte Philosophische Schriften."

(3) and (4) Golden shields of Odin and Asgard. See note 22.

(5) Trabant, the name given to the yeomen of the guard in the Northern Courts.

(6) Literally the royal trefoil.

FINIS.
BOOKS PRINTED FOR R. CAMPBELL, PHILADELPHIA.
1. HUME's History of England, continued by Smollet and others, from the
invasion of Julius Caesar to the end of the American war, and peace at
Versailles in 1783. Illustrated with elegant engravings. 12 Volumes, 8vo. Price
27 dollars, neatly bound.

2. Staunton's Embassy to China, with plates. Neatly bound in one large volume,
8vo. Price 3 dollars.

3. Love's Pilgrimage. -- A story founded on facts. Compiled from the journal
of a deceased friend. Price 87 cents.

N. B. The following character of Love's Pilgrimage, is taken from the British
Critic, Vol. viii. Page 179.

A most interesting and well-told Story. The language polished and easy; the
morality pure and clear. We could expatiate on its Merits, we could collect
many striking parts, but we trust that a strong commendation will be as useful
as a prolix one. If objection be made to the morality of the leading Incident,
it must be allowed also, that all possible care is taken to solve and reconcile
it by the nobleness of mind, purity and constancy of the persons concerned, and
the delicate manner in which their adventure is developed, and their happiness
secured. It is with real pleasure that we peruse and recommend a Novel of this
stamp; but it happens, like other good things, very rarely.

4. Fool of Quality; or the History of Henry, Earl of Moreland. By Mr. Brook.
3 Vols. Price 2 dollars and 40 cents.

5. The Royal Captives. A Fragment of Secret History, copied from an old
Manuscript. By Ann Yearsley. 2 Vols. Price 1 dollar and 75 cents.

6. The Children of the Abbey. 2 Vols. Price 2 dollars. etc. etc.

R. CAMPBELL has always for sale, a very large and general collection of Books
in every department of Literature and Amusement; also, a general assortment of
Stationary, to be sold by wholesale or retail, on the lowest terms.


