THE INTERESTING HISTORY OF THE BARON DE LOVZINSKI.

Written by himself.

WITH A RELATION OF THE MOST REMARKABLE OCCURRENCES IN THE LIFE OF THE
CELEBRATED COUNT PULASKI, WELL KNOWN AS THE CHAMPION OF AMERICAN LIBERTY, AND
WHO BRAVELY FELL IN ITS DEFENSE BEFORE SAVANNAH, 1779.

Interspersed with Anecdotes of the late unfortunate KING OF POLAND.

HARTFORD: PRINTED BY J. BABCOCK. 1800.

INTERESTING HISTORY OF THE Baron de LOVZINSKI.
MY history presents a frightful example of the instability of fortune. It is
indeed very flattering, but it is also sometimes very dangerous, to have an
ancient title to sustain, and a large estate to preserve. The sole descendant
of an illustrious family, whose origin is lost in the darkness of remote ages,
I have a right to aspire to, and to occupy the first employments in the
republic which gave me birth, and yet I behold myself condemned to languish in
a foregin country, amidst an indolent and inglorious obscurity.

The name of Lovzinski is honorably mentioned in the annals of Poland, and that
name is about to perish with myself? I know that an austere philosophy either
rejects or despises vain titles and corrupting riches; and perhaps I should
consol^ myself if I had lost only these; but, ^ weep for an adored spouse, I
search after a beloved daughter, and I shall never more revisit my native land.
Wha^ courage is capable of opposing griefs like mine?

My father, the Baron de Lovzinski still more distinguished by his virtue^ than
his rank, enjoyed that consideration at court, which the favor of the prince
always confers, and which personal meri^ sometimes obtains. He bestowed all the
attention of a tender parent on the education of my two sisters; and in regard
to mine, he occupied himself with the zea^ of a man of family, jealous of the
honor of his house, of which I was the sol^ hope, and with the activity of a
good citizen, who desires nothing so ardently a^ to leave to the state a
successor worthy o^ him.

While I was pursuing my studies a^ Warsaw, the young P -- dist^nguished
himself among the rest of my companion by his amiable qualities. To the charm^
of a person at once noble and engaging* he joined the graces of a cultivated
under^tanding. The uncommon address which ^e displayed among us young warriors,
that rare modesty with which he seemed desirous to conceal his own merit from
himself, on purpose to exalt the abilities of his less fortunate rivals who
were generally vanquished by him in all our exerci^es; the urbanity of his
manners, and the ^weetness of his disposition, fixed the attention, commanded
the esteem, and rendered him the darling of that illustrious ^and of young
nobility, who partook of our studies and our pleasures.

To say that it was the resemblance of our characters, and the sympathy of our
dispositions, that occasioned my attachment to M. de P --, would be to pay
myself too flattering a compliment; however that may be, we both lived together
in the most intimate familiarity.

How happy, but how fleeting is that time of life, when one is unacquainted
with ambition, which sacrifices every thing to the desire of fortune and the
glory that follows in her train, and with love, the supreme power of which
absorbs and concentres all our faculties upon one sole object! that age of
innocent pleasures, and of confident credulity, when the heart, as yet a
novice, follows the impulse of youthful sensibility, and bestows itself
unreservedly, upon the object of disinterested affection! Then, surely,
friendship is not a vain name!

The confident of all the secrets of M. de P --, I myself undertook nothing
without first intrusting him with my designs; his counsels regulated my
conduct, mine determined his resolution; our youth had no pleasures which were
not shared, no misfortunes which were not solaced by our mutual attachment.

With what chagrin did I not perceive that fatal moment arrive, when my friend,
obliged by the commands of a father to depart from Warsaw, prepared to take
leave of me! We promised to preserve for ever that lively affection which had
constituted the chief happiness of our youth, and I rashly swore that the
passions of a more advanced age should never alter it.

What an immense void did the absence of M. de P -- leave in my heart! At first
it appeared that nothing could compensate for his loss; the tenderness of a
father* the caresses of my sisters, affected n^ but feebly. I thought that no
other m^thod remained for me to dissipate the ir^ someness of my situation,
than to occu^ my leisure moments with some useful pursuit. I therefore
cultivated the French language, already esteemed throughout all Europe; I read
with delight those famous works, the eternal monuments of genius, which it had
produced; and I wondered, that notwithstanding such an ungrateful idiom, so
many celebrated poets, so many excellent philosophers and historians, justly
immortalized, had been able to distinguish themselves by its means.

I also applied myself seriously to the study of geometry; I formed my mind in
a particular manner to the pursuit of that noble profession which makes a hero
at the expense of one hundred thousand unfortunates, and which men less human
than valiant have called the grand art of war! Several years were employed in
these pursuits, which are equally difficult and laborious; in short, they
solely occupied my thoughts. M. de P --, who often wrote to me, no longer
received any but short replies, and our correspondence began to languish by
neglect, when at length love finished the triumph over friendship.

My father had been for a long time intimately connected with Count Pulaski.
Celebrated for the austerity of his manners, famous on account of the
inflexibility of his virtues, which were truly republican, Pulaski, at once a
great captain and a brave soldier, had on more than one occasion signalized his
fiery courage, and his ardent patriotism.

Instructed in ancient literature, he had been taught by history the great
lessons of a noble disinterestedness, an immovable constancy, an absolute
devotion to glory. Like those heroes to whom idolatrous but grateful Rome
elevated altars, Pulaski would have sacrificed all property to the prosperity
of his country; he would have spilled the last drop of his blood for its
defense; he would even have immolated his only, his beloved daughter, Lodoiska.

Lodoiska! how beautiful! how lovely! her dear name is always on my lips, her
adored remembrance will live for ever in my heart!

From the first moment that I saw this fair maid, I lived only for her; I
abandoned my studies; friendship was entirely forgotten. I consecrated all my
moments to Lodoiska. My father and hers could not be long ignorant of my
attachment; they did not chide me for it; they must have approved it then? This
idea appeared to me to be so well founded, that I delivered myself up without
suspicion, to the sweet passion that enchanted me; and I took my measures so
well, that I beheld Lodoiska almost daily, either at home, or in company with
my sisters, who loved her tenderly: -- two sweet years flew away in this manner.

At length Pulaski took me one day aside, and addressed, me thus: "Your father
and myself have formed great hopes of you, which your conduct has hitherto
justified; I have long beheld you employing your youth in studies equally
useful and honorable. Today -- (He here perceived that I was about to
interrupt him) What would you say? Do you think to tell me any thing I am
unacquainted with? Do you think that I have occasion to be hourly witness of
your transports, to learn how much my Lodoiska merits to be beloved? Is it
because I know as well as you the value of my daughter, that you never shall
obtain but by meriting her? Young man, learn that it is not sufficient that
your foibles should be legitimate, to be excusable; those of a good citizen
ought to be turned entirely to the profit of his country; love, even love
itself, like the basest of the passions, is either despicable or dangerous, if
it does not offer to generous hearts an additional motive to excite them
toward honor.

"Hear me: Our monarch for a long time in a sickly habit of body, seems at
length to approach toward his end. His life, become every day more precarious,
has awakened the ambition of our neighbors. They doubtless prepare to sow
divisions among us; and they think that by over-awing our suffrages, they will
be enabled to force upon us a king of their own choosing. Foreign troops have
already dared to appear on the frontiers of Poland; already two thousand Polish
gentlemen have assembled, on purpose to punish their audacious insolence. Go
and join yourself with those brave youths; go, and at the end of the campaign
return covered with the blood of our enemies, and show to Pulaski a son-in-law
worthy of him!"

I did not hesitate a single moment; my father approved of my resolutions, but
being unable to consent without pain to my precipitate departure, he pressed me
for a long lime against his bosom, while a tender solicitude was depicted in
all his looks; his adieus seemed to be i^ ^spicious; the trouble that agitated
(...) ^eart seized upon my own; our tears were mingled on his venerable cheeks.
Pulaski, who was present at this moving scene, stoically reproached us for what
he termed a weakness. Dry up your tears, said he to me, o^ preserve them for
Lodoiska; it belongs only to childish lovers who separate themselves from each
other for five or six months, to weep in this manner! He instructed his
daughter in my presence, both of my departure, and of the motives which
determined me to it. Lodoiska grew pale, sighed, looked at her father with a
face suffused with blushes, and then assured me in a trembling voice, that her
vows should be offered up for my safe return, and that her happiness depended
on the safety of Lovzinski.

Encouraged in this manner, what dangers had I to fear? I departed accordingly,
but in the course of that campaign, there happened nothing worthy of narration;
the enemy, equally careful with ourselves to avoid any action which might
produce an open war between the two nations, contented themselves with
fatiguing us by means of frequent marches: we, on the other hand, bounded our
views to following and observing them; and they only seemed to oppose
themselves to us, in those parts where the open country afforded them an
opportunity of making good their retreat.

At the end of the campaign they prepared to retire on purpose to take up their
winter quarters in their own country; and our little army composed almost
wholly of gentlemen, separated soon after.

I returned to Warsaw full of joy and impatience; I thought that Love and Hymen
were about to bestow Lodoiska on me. Alas! I no longer had a father. I learned,
on entering the capital, that Lovzinski died of an apoplexy on the night before
my arrival. Thus I was deprived, of even the sad consolation of receiving the
last sighs of the most tender of parents; I could only offer up my sorrows at
his tomb, which I bathed with my tears!

-- "It is not," says Pulaski to me* who was but little moved with my profound
sorrow -- "it is not by barren tears that you can do honor to a father such as
thine. Poland in him regrets a Citizen -- a hero, who would have been of
immense service during the critical moment which now approaches. Worn out with
a tedious malady, our monarch has not a fortnight to live, and on the choice of
his successor depends the happiness or misery of our fellow-citizens.

"Of all the rights which the death of your father transmits to you, the most
noble is undoubtedly that of assisting at the Diet, in which you are to
represent him; it is there, where he will revive in you* it is there, where you
ought to exhibit a courage infinitely more difficult to be sustained than that
which consists only in braving death in the field of battle!

"The valor of a soldier is nothing more than a common virtue; but they are
not ordinary men who on awful emergencies, preserving a tranquil courage, and
displaying an active penetration, discover the projects of the powerful who
cabal, disconcert the enterprises of the intriguing, and confront the designs
of the factious; who, always firm, incorruptible, and just, give not their
suffrages but to those whom they think most worthy of them; whom neither gold
nor promises can seduce, whom prayers cannot bend, whom menaces cannot terrify.

"These were the virtues which distinguished your father; this is the precious
inheritance which you ought to be desirous of sustaining. -- The day on which
the states assemble for the election of a king, will be the epoch on which the
pretentions of many of our fellow-citizens, more occupied with their private
interests than jealous of the prosperity of their country, will be manifested,
as well as the pernicious designs of the neighboring powers, whose cruel
policy it is, to destroy our strength by dividing it.

"I am deceived, my friend, if the fatal moment is not fast approaching, which
will forever fix the destinies of our country -- its enemies have conspired its
ruin; they have secretly prepared for a revolution, but they shall not
consummate their purposes while my arm can sustain a sword! May that God, who
is the protector of the republic, prevent all the horrors of a civil war! But
that extremity, however frightful it appears, may perhaps become necessary, I
s^er myself that it will be but a short, although perhaps a violent crisis,
after which the regenerated state will assume its ancient splendor.

"You shall second my efforts, Lovzinski; the feeble interests of love ought to
disappear before more sacred claims. I cannot present my daughter to you during
this awful moment of suspense, when our common country is in danger; but I
promise to you, that the first days of peace shall be marked by your union with
Lodoiska.

Pulaski did not speak in vain. I felt that I had now more essential duties to
fulfill than those of love; but the cares with which my mind was occupied, were
hardly able to alleviate my grief. I will even avow to you, without blushing,
that the sorrow of my sisters, their tender friendship, and the caresses more
reserved but no less pleasing of my mistress, made a stronger impression on my
heart than the patriotic counsels of Pulaski. I beheld Lodoiska tenderly
affected with my irreparable loss, and as much afflicted as myself at the cruel
events which forced us to defer our union; my chagrin, by being thus divided
with that lovely woman, seemed insensibly to diminish.

In the mean time the king dies, and the Diet is convoked. On the day that it
was to open, at the very instant when I was about to repair to the assembly, a
stranger presented himself, and desired to speak to me in private. As soon as
my attendants were retired, he enters my apartment with precipitation, throws
himself into my arms, and tenderly embraces me. It was M. de P --! Ten years,
which had elapsed since our separation, had not so much changed his features as
to prevent me from recognizing him, and testifying my joy and surprise at his
unexpected return.

"You will be more astonished," says he to me, "when you know the case. I have
arrived this instant, and am about to repair to the meeting of the Diet; would
it be presuming too much on your friendship to reckon on your vote?"

"On my vote! and for whom?"

"For myself," continues he with vivacity; "it is not now time to recount to
you the happy revolution that has taken place in my fortune, and which at
present permits me to entertain such exalted hopes: it is sufficient to
observe, that my ambition is at least justified by a majority of suffrages, and
that it is in vain that two feeble rivals would attempt to dispute with me the
crown which I pretend.

"Lovzinski," adds he, embracing me again, "if you were not my friend, and I
esteemed you less, perhaps I should endeavor to dazzle you by means of
promises: perhaps I should recount to you the savours which I intend to heap
upon you, the honorable distinctions that are reserved for you, and the noble
and glorious career that is about to offer itself to your ambition; but I have
not any need of sedusing, and I only wish to persuade you.

"I behold it with grief, and you know it as well as myself, that for several
years past our Poland, become enfeebled, owes its safety to nothing else than
the distrust of the three great powers Russia, Prussia, and the House of
Austria.
which surround it, and the desire to enrich themselves with our spoils, may in
one moment reunite our divided enemies.

"Let us prevent, if we can, this inauspicious triumvirate from dismembering
the republic. Undoubtedly, in more fortunate times, our ancestors were able to
maintain the freedom of their elections; it is necessary however that we should
yield to that necessity, which is become inevitable.

"Russia will necessarily protect a king, whom she herself has elevated; in
receiving the sovereign of her choice, you will defeat the views of that triple
alliance which will render our perdition certain, and we shall acquire a
powerful ally, who will oppose herself with success to the two enemies that
remain to us.

"These are the reasons which have determined my conduct; I do not abandon part
of our rights, but to preserve the most precious of them. I wish not to ascend
a fickle throne, but with the intention, by the means of a sage policy, to give
it stability; I consent not to alter the constitution of the commonwealth, but
to preserve the kingdom entire."

We repaired to the Diet together; I voted for M. de P --. He in effect
obtained the majority of the suffrages; but Pulaski, Zuremba, and some others,
declared themselves in favor of Prince C --. Nothing was decided amidst the
tumult of this first meeting.

When the assembly broke up M. de P -- invited me to accompany him to the
place, which his secret emissaries had already prepared for him in the capital.
The Diet for the election of the kings of Poland is held half a league from
Warsaw, in the open air, on the other side of the Vistula, near the village of
Vola.
We shut ourselves up together during several hours, and renewed the promises
of a friendship that should endure forever. I then too informed M. de P -- of
my intimate connection with Pulaski, and of my love for Lodoiska. He repaid my
confidence with more important communications; he informed me of the events
which had led to his approaching grandeur; he explained to me his secret
designs; and I left him, convinced that he was less occupied with a desire of
his own elevation, than with that of restoring Poland to its ancient prosperity.

Possessed with these ideas, I flew toward my future father-in-law, burning
with the desire of adding him to the party of my friend. Pulaski was walking at
a great pace up and down the chamber of his daughter, who appeared equally
agitated with himself.

"Behold," said he to Lodoiska, the moment that he saw me enter, "behold that
man whom I esteem and whom you love! He has sacrificed us both to his blind
friendship." I was desirous to reply but he went on -- "You have been connected
from your childhood with M. de P --. A powerful faction is about to place him
on the throne; you know you are acquainted with his designs; this very morning
at the Diet, you voted for him; you have deceived me: -- but do you think that
you shall deceive me with impunity?"

I besought him to hear me, and he constrained himself so far as to preserve a
stern silence: I then informed him that M. de P --, whom I had for a long time
neglected, had agreeably surprised me by his unexpected return.

Lodoiska appeared charmed to hear me commence my justification. -- "You shall
not deceive me in the same manner as if I were a credulous woman," says
Pulaski. -- "But it signifies not -- proceed.

I then recounted to him the particulars of the short conversations that I had
with M. de P -- before I repaired to the assembly of the states.

"And these are your projects!" exclaims he. "M. de P -- sees no other remedy
for the misfortune of his fellow-citizens than their slavery! He proposes this,
one of the name of Lovzinski, approves of it; and they despise me so much as to
tempt me to enter into this infamous plot! Shall I behold the Russians
commanding in our provinces in the name of a Pole?"

"The Russians, say I with fury; the Russians reign in my country!" On this
Pulaski, advancing toward me with the greatest impetuosity, cries out:
"Perfidious youth! you have deceived me, and you would betray the state! Leave
my house this very moment, or know that I shall order you to be dragged out of
it!"

I frankly acknowledge that an affront so cruel, and so little merited,
disarmed me of my prudence: in the first transports of my fury, I placed my
hand upon my sword; and quicker than lightning Pulaski brandished his in the
air.

His daughter, his distracted daughter, rushed forward, and precipitated
herself upon me, crying out: "Lovzinski, what are you about to do?" On hearing
the accents of a voice so dear to me, I recalled my wandering reason; but I
perceived that a single instant was about forever to bereave me of my Lodoiska!
She had left me to throw herself into the arms of her father. He, cruel man,
beheld my grief, and strove to augment it: "Go, traitor!" says he, "be gone --
you behold Lodoiska for the last time!"

I returned home in a state of desperation. The odious names which Pulaski had
lavished on me, returned unceasingly to my reflection. The interests of Poland,
and those of M. de P --, appeared to be so intimately connected together, that
I did not perceive in what manner I could betray my fellow-citizens by serving
my friend; in the mean time I was obliged either to abandon him, or renounce
Lodoiska forever. What was I to resolve? what part should I take? I passed the
whole night in a state of the most cruel uncertainty: and when the day
appeared, I went toward Pulaski's house, without yet having come to any
determination.

The only domestic who remained there informed me, that his lord had departed
at the beginning of the night, with his daughter, after having first dismissed
all his people. Think of my despair on hearing this news. I asked to what part
Pulaski had retired. But my question was in vain, he informed me that he was
certainly ignorant of the place of his destination.

"All I can tell you," says he, "is that you had scarce gone away yesterday
evening, when he heard a great noise in the apartment of his daughter. Still
terrified at the scene which had taken place between you, I approached the
door, and listened. Lodoiska wept: her furious father overwhelmed her with
injuries, bestowed his malediction upon her, and I myself heard him exclaim:
"To love a traitor, is to be one! Ungrateful wretch! I shall conduct you to a
place of safety, where you shall henceforth be at a distance from seduction."

Could I any longer doubt the extent of my misery? I instantly called for
Boleslas, one of the most faithful of my domestics: I ordered him to place
trusty spies about the palace of Pulaski, who should bring an account of every
thing that passed there; and commanded that if the count returned to the
capital before me, he should follow him wherever he went. Having given these
instructions, and not yet despairing of still finding the family at one of
their seats in the neighborhood of the metropolis, I myself set out in pursuit
of my mistress.

I accordingly searched through all the domains of Pulaski, and asked
concerning Lodoiska of all the passengers whom I met, but without success.
After having spent eight days in fruitless enquiry, I resolved to return to
Warsaw, and I was not a little astonished, on my arrival, to find a Russian
army encamped on the banks of the Vistula, almost under the very walls of that
city.

It was night when I entered the capital: the palaces of the grandees were all
illuminated, an immense multitude filled the streets; I heard the songs of joy;
I beheld wine flowing in rivulets in the public squares: every thing announced
to me that Poland had a king.

Boleslas, who expected me with impatience, informed me that Pulaski had
returned alone on the second day after my departure; and that he had not
stirred from his own palace but to repair to the Diet, where, in spite of his
efforts, the ascendancy of Russia became every day more manifest. "During the
last assembly held this very morning," adds he, M. de P -- united almost all
the suffrages in his favor, and was about to be declared king, when Pulaski
pronounced the fatal Veto: at that instant twenty sabres were brandished in the
air. The fierce palatine of --, whom the count had insulted in the former
assembly, was the first to rush forwards, and gave him a terrible wound on the
head. Zaremba, co^ some others, drew to the defense of their friend: but all
their efforts would have been unable to have saved him, if M. de P -- had not
ranged himself on their side, exclaiming at the same time, that he would
sacrifice with his own hand, the first person who dared to approach him. On
this the assailants retired. In the mean time Pulaski, fainting with the loss
of blood, was carried off the field in a state of insensibility. Zaremba
departed also, swearing to avenge his friend. Having thus become master of the
deliberations, the numerous partisans of M. de P -- instantly proclaimed him
sovereign.

"Pulaski, who had been carried to his palace, was soon restored to life; and
the surgeons who attended him, declared that his wounds, although dangerous,
were not mortal. In that state, although languishing under the most cruel
torments, contrary to the advice of all his friends, he ordered himself to be
lifted into his carriage, and before noon he left Warsaw, accompanied by
Mazeppa and a few malcontents."

It was scarcely possible to have announced worse news to me. My friend was
upon the throne, but my reconciliation with Pulaski appeared henceforth
impossible, and in all appearance Lodoiska was lost forever. I knew her father
so well as to be under apprehensions lest he should proceed to extremities with
his daughter. I was affrightened at the present, I durst not look forward
toward the future; and my heart was so devoured with chagrin, that I did not
go out, even to felicitate the new king.

One of my people, whom Boleslas dispatched after Pulaski, returned at the end
of the fourth day: He had followed him fifteen leagues from the capital; when
about that distance, Zaremba, who perceived a stranger at a little distance
from the carriage, began to conceive suspicions. As they proceeded, four of his
followers, who had concealed themselves behind the ruins of an old house,
surprised my courier, and conducted him to Pulaski. He, with a pistol in his
hand, forced him to acknowledge to whom he belonged. "I shall send you back to
Lovzinski," said the fierce republican, "on purpose to announce from me, that
he shall not escape my just vengeance." At these words they blindfolded my
servant, who could not tell where they carried him. At the end of
four-and-twenty hours they returned, and tying a handkerchief once more about
his eyes they put him into a carriage, which having stopped at length, after a
journey of several hours, he was ordered to descend. Scarce had he put his foot
upon the ground but his guards departed at a full gallop: on which he removed
the bandage, and found himself precisely on the same spot as that on which he
had been first arrested.

This intelligence filled me with uneasiness; the menaces of Pulaski terrified
me, much less on my own account than on Lodoiska's, who remained in his power:
In the midst of his fury he might sacrifice her life! I resolved therefore to
expose myself to every species of danger, on purpose to discover the retreat of
the father, and the prison of his only child.

On the succeeding day, after informing my sisters of my design, I left the
capital: Boleslas alone accompanied me, and I passed for his brother. We
wandered over all Poland, and I then percieved that the fears of Pulaski were
but too well justified by the event. Under pretense of obliging the inhabitants
to take the oath of fidelity to the new king, the Russians scattered about in
the provinces, desolated the country, and committed a multitude of exactions in
the cities.

After having spent three months in vain enquiries, despairing of being able to
find Lodoiska, touched with the most lively grief for the fate of my country,
and weeping at one and the same time for her misfortunes and my own, I was
about to return to Warsaw, to inform the new king of the excesses committed by
those foreigners in his states, when an adventure that at first seemed to be
very inauspicious, forced me to a very different resolution.

The Turks having declared war against Russia, the Tartars of Budziac and the
Crimea made frequent incursions into Volhynia, where I then was. Four of those
robbers attacked us one afternoon, as we were leaving a wood near Ostropol. I
had imprudently neglected to load my pistols; but I made use of my sabre with
so much address and good luck, that in a short time, two of them fell covered
with wounds. Boleslas encountered the third: the fourth attacked me with great
fury; he gave me a slight cut upon the leg, but received a terrible stroke in
return, that dismounted him from his horse and felled him to the ground.
Boleslas at the same moment perceived himself disencumbered from his enemy, wh^
at the noise made by his comrade's fall took to flight. He whom I had just
vanquished, then addressed me in very bad Polish, and said, "a brave man like
you ought to be generous. I beg my life of you; instead of putting me to death,
succor me, relieve me, bind up my wounds and assist me to arise."

He demanded quarter with an air so noble, that I did not hesitate for a
moment. I accordingly descended from my horse, and Boleslas and myself having
helped him to arise, we dressed his wounds. "You behave well:" says the Tartar
to me; "you behave well!" As he spoke we beheld a cloud of dust, and in a
moment after, more than three hundred Tartars rushed upon us full speed. "Be
not afraid, dread nothing," says he whom I had spared; "I am the chief of this
troop." Accordingly, by means of a sign, he stops his followers, who were on
the point of massacring us; and speaking to them in their own language, which I
was unable to comprehend, they instantly opened their ranks on purpose to
permit us to pass.

"Brave man," exclaims their captain, addressing himself to me once more, "had
I not reason to say you behaved well? You left me my life, and I now save
yours: it is sometimes right to spare an enemy, and even a robber! Hear me, my
friend: in attacking you, I followed my profession, and you did your duty in
conquering me. I pardon you, you have already pardoned me; let us therefore
embrace. He then adds: "The day is wasting, and I would not advise you to
travel in these cantons during the present night. My people are about to repair
each to his respective post, and I cannot answer for their discretion. You
perceive a castle on a rising ground, toward the right: it belongs to a
certain Pole of the name of Dourlinski, for whom we have a high esteem, because
he is very rich. Go demand an asylum from him; tell him that you have wounded
Titsican, and that Titsican pursues you. He is acquainted with my name: I have
already made him pass many an uneasy night. As to the rest, you may rely on it,
that while you remain with him, his castle shall be s^cred; but be careful not
to come (...) ^unt before the end of (...) ^t to remain there long (...)!"

It was with un^ (...) ^ok leave of Titsican and (...) ^p^ons. The advice of
the Tartar was a command; I therefore said to Boleslas; "Let us immediately
make for the castle that he has now pointed out to us; I am well acquainted
with this same Dourlinski by name; Pulaski has sometimes spoken to to me
concerning him: he perhaps is not ignorant of the place to which the Count has
retired; and it is not impossible but that with a little address we may be able
to draw the secret from him. I shall say at all events that we are sent by
Pulaski, and this recommendation will be of more service to us than that of
Titsican; in the mean time, Boleslas, do not forget that I am your brother, and
be sure not to discover me.

We soon arrived at the ditch of the castle; the servants of Dourlinski
demanded who we were; I answered that we were come from Pulaski and wished to
speak to their lord, and that we had been attacked by robbers, who were still
in pursuit of us. The drawbridge was accordingly let d^* and having entered,
we were in^ that at present we could no^ see Dourlinski, but that on the next
day at ten o'clock he would give us audience. They then demanded our arms which
we delivered up without any difficulty, and Boleslas soon after took an
opportunity of looking at my wound, which was found to be but superficial.

In a short time ^ frugal repast was served up for us in the kitchen. We were
afterward conducted to a lower chamber, where two beds were prepared for us.
The domestics then left us without any light, and immediately locked the door
of the apartment.

I could not close my eyes during the whole of the night. Titsican had given me
but a slight wound, but that which my heart had received was very deep* At day
break, I became impatient in my prison, and wished to open the shutters, but
they were nailed up. I attacked them however, so vigorously, that the
fastenings gave way, and I beheld a very fine park. The window being low, I
cleared it at a leap, and in a single instant found myself in the garden of the
Polish chieftain.

After having walked about for a few minutes, I sat down on a stone bench,
which was placed at the foot of a tower, whose ancient architecture I had been
some time considering. I remained for a few seconds enveloped in reflection,
when a tile fell at my feet. I thought it had dropped from the roof of this old
building; and to avoid the effects of a similar accident, I went and placed
myself at the other end of the seat. A few moments after, a second tile fell by
my side. The circumstance appeared surprising: I arose with some degree of
inquietude, and attentively examined the tower. I perceived at about
twenty-five or thirty feet from the ground, a narrow opening. On this I picked
up the tiles which had been thrown at me, and on the first I discovered the
following words, written with a bit of plaster:

"LOVZINSKI, IS IT YOU! DO YOU STILL LIVE!"

And on the second these:

"DELIVER ME! SAVE LODOISKA."

It is impossible to conceive how many different sentiments occupied my mind at
one and the same time: my astonishment, my joy, my grief, my embarrassment,
cannot be expressed. I examined once more the prison of Lodoiska, and plotted
in my own mind how I could procure her liberty. She at length threw down
another tile, and I read as follows:

"At midnight, bring me paper, ink, and pens; and tomorrow an hour after
sunrise, come and receive a letter. -- Begone." --

Having returned toward my chamber, I called to Boleslas, who assisted me in
re-entering through the window. I then informed my faithful servant, of the
unexpected accident that had put an end to my wanderings and redoubled my
inquietude.

How could I penetrate into this tower? How could we procure arms? By what
means were we to deliver Lodoiska from captivity? How could we carry her off
under the eye of Dourlinski, in the midst of his people, from a fortified
castle? and supposing that so many obstacles were not unsurmountable, could I
attempt such an enterprise during the short delay prescribed by Titsican?

Did not the Tartar enjoin me to stay with Dourlinski three days, but not to
remain longer than eight?

Would it not be to expose ourselves to the attacks of the enemy, to leave this
castle before the third, or after the expiration of the eighth day? Should I
release my dear Lodoiska from a prison, on purpose to deliver her into the
hands of robbers, to be forever separated from her either by slavery or death?
This would be a horrible idea!

But wherefore was she confined in such a frightful prison? The letter which
she had promised would doubtless instruct me: It was therefore necessary to
procure paper, pen and ink. I accordingly charged Boleslas with this
employment, and began to prepare myself for acting the delicate part of an
emissary of Pulaski in the presence of Dourlinski.

It was broad day light when they came to set us at liberty, and informed us
that Dourlinski was at leisure and wished to see us. We accordingly presented
ourselves before him with great confidence; and we were introduced to a man of
about sixty years of age, whose reception was blunt, and whose manners were
repulsive. He demanded who we were. "My brother and myself," replied I, "belong
to Count Pulaski. My master has entrusted me with a secret commission to you.
My brother accompanies me on another account. Before I explain, I must be in
private, for I am charged not to speak but to you alone."

"It is very well," replies Dourlinski* "your brother may retire, and you
also," addressing himself to his servants; "begone! As to him (pointing to a
person who was his confident) he must remain, and you may speak any thing
before him."

"Pulaski has sent me," -- "I see very well that he has sent you," says the
Palatine, interrupting me -- "to demand of you -- " "What?" -- "news of his
daughter." "News of his daughter! Did Pulaski say so?" -- "Yes my lord, he said
that his daughter was here." -- I perceived that Dourlinski instantly grew
pale; he then looked toward his confident, and surveyed me for some time in
silence.

"You astonish me," rejoins he at length, "In confiding a secret of this
importance to you, it necessarily follows that your master must have been very
imprudent."

No more than you, my lord, for have not you also a confident: Grandees would
be much to be pitied if they could not rely upon any of their domestics.
Pulaski has charged me to inform you, that Lovzinski has already searched
through a great part of Poland, and that he will undoubtedly visit these
cantons."

"If he dares to come here," replies he with great vivacity, "I will provide a
lodging for him, which he shall inhabit for some time. Do you know this
Lovzinski?"

"I have seen him at my master's house in Warsaw."

"They say he is handsome?"

"He is well made, and about my size."

"His person?" -- "is prepossessing; it is -- "

"He is a wretch," adds he, interrupting me in a great passion -- "Oh that he
were but to fall into my hands!"

"My lord, they say he is brave -- ".

"He! I will lay any wager, any sum of money, that he is only calculated to
seduce women! O that he would but fall into my hands!" Then assuming a less
ferocious tone, he continues thus, "It is a long time since Pulaski wrote to me
-- where is he at present?"

"My lord I have precise orders not to answer that question: all that I dare to
say, is, that he has the strongest reasons for neither discovering the place of
his retreat, nor writing to any person, and that he will soon come and explain
them to you in person."

Dourlinski appeared exceedingly astonished at this information; I could
discover some symptoms of fear in his countenance. At length, looking at his
confident, who seemed equally embarrassed with himself, he proceeded: "You say
that Pulaski will come here soon:" "Yes, my lord, in about a fortnight, or a
little later." On this he again turned to his attendant; but in a short time
affecting as much calmness as he had before discovered embarrassment; "Return
to your master." added he; "I am sorry to have nothing but bad news to
communicate to him -- tell him that Lodoiska is no longer here." I myself
became surprised in my turn at this information. "What! my lord, Lodoiska -- "

"Is not longer here, I tell you! -- To oblige Pulaski, whom I esteem, I
undertook, although with great repugnance, the task of confining his daughter
in my castle: nobody but myself and he (pointing to his confident) knew that
she was here. It is about a month since we went, as useful, to carry her
provisions for the day, but there was nobody in the apartment. I am ignorant
how it happened; but what I know well is, that she has escaped, for I have
heard nothing of her since. -- She must undoubtedly have gone to join Lovzinski
at Warsaw, if perchance the Tartars have not intercepted her in her journey."

My astonishment on this became extreme. How could I reconcile that which I had
seen in the garden, with that which Dourlinski now told me? There was some
mystery in this business, which I became exceedingly impatient to be acquainted
with: I was however extremely careful not to exhibit any appearance of doubt.
"My lord, said I, "this is bad news for my master!" -- "Undoubtedly, but it is
not my fault."

"My lord, I have a favor to ask of you."

"Let me hear it." -- "The Tartars are ravaging the neighborhood of your
castle -- they attacked us -- we escaped as it were by a miracle. Will you
permit my brother and myself to remain here only for the space of two days?"

"For two days only I give my consent,"

"Where do they lodge?" says he to his attendant. "in an apartment below
ground," was the reply.

"Which overlooks my gardens?" rejoins Dourlinski, interrupting him with great
agitation.

"The shutters are well fastened," adds the other.

"No matter -- You must put them elsewhere." These words made me tremble.

"It is not impossible, but," -- continues the confident, and then whispered
the rest of the sentence in his ear.

"Right," says the Baron; "and let it be done instantly." Then, addressing
himself to me, know that your brother and you must depart the day after
tomorrow: before you go, you shall see me again, and I will give you a letter
for Pulaski."

I then went to rejoin Boleslas in the kitchen, where he was at breakfast, who
soon after presented me with a little bottle of ink, several pens, and some
sheets of paper, which he had procured without difficulty. I panted with desire
to write to Lodoiska; and the only difficulty that now remained, was to find a
commodious place where I might not be discovered by the curiosity of
Dourlinski's people.

They had already informed Boleslas that we could not again be admitted into
the apartment where we had spent the preceding night, until the time should
arrive when we were to retire to rest. I soon, however, bethought myself of a
stratagem which succeeded to admiration.

The servants were drinking with my pretended brother, and politely invited me
to help them to empty a few flasks.

I swallowed, with a good grace, several glasses of bad wine in succession: in
a few minutes my legs seemed to totter, my tongue faultered: I related a
hundred pleasant and improbable tales to the joyous company; in a word, I acted
the drunken man so well, that Boleslas himself became a dupe to my scheme, and
actually trembled lest, in a moment when I seemed disposed to communicate every
thing, my secret should escape.

"Gentlemen," said he, to the astonished Bacchanals, "my brother's head is not
very strong to day: it is perhaps in consequence of his wound; let us not
therefore either speak to or drink any more with him; for I am afraid of his
health, and indeed you would oblige me exceedingly if you would assist me to
carry him to his bed," -- "To his own bed?" says one of them: "that is
impossible! But I will most willingly lend him my chamber." They accordingly
laid hold of me, and conveyed me into a garret, of which a bed, a table, and a
chair formed the sole movables. Having shut me up in this paltry apartment,
they instantly left me. This was all I wanted, for the moment that I was alone,
I immediately sat down to write a long letter to Lodoiska.

I began by fully justifying myself from the crimes of which I had been accused
by Pulaski: I then recounted every thing that had occurred since the first
moment of our separation, until that when I had entered the castle of
Dourlinski: I detailed the particulars of my conversation with the Baron: I
concluded by assuring her of the most tender and the most respectful passion,
and swore to her, that the moment she gave me the necessary information
concerning her situation, I would expose myself to every danger, in order to
finish her horrid captivity.

As soon as my letter was sealed, I delivered myself up to a variety of
reflections, which threw me into a strange perplexity. Was it actually Lodoiska
who had thrown those tiles into the garden? Would Pulaski have had the
injustice to punish his daughter for an attachment which he himself had
approved? Would he have had the inhumanity to plunge her into a frightful
prison? And even if the hatred he had sworn to me had blinded him so much, how
was it possible that Dourlinski would thus have condescended to have become the
minister of his vengeance?

But, on the other hand, for these three last long months, on purpose to
disguise myself, I had only worn tattered clothes: the fatigues of a tedious
journey, and my chagrin, had altered me greatly; and who but a mistress could
have been able to discover Lovzinski in the gardens of Dourlinski? Besides, had
I not seen the name of Lodoiska traced upon the tile? Had not Dourlinski
himself acknowledged that Lodoiska had been a prisoner with him? It is true, he
had added that she had made her escape: but was not this incredible? And
wherefore that hatred which Dourlinski had avowed against me, without knowing
my person? What occasioned that look of inquietude, when it was told him, that
the emissaries of Pulaski occupied a chamber that looked into his garden? And
why above all that look of terror, when I announced to him the arrival of my
pretended master?

All these circumstances were well calculated to ^ow me into the greatest
agitation. I ^minated over this frightful and mysterious adventure, which it
was impossible for me to explain. For two hours, I un^^^asingly put new
questions to myself, to which I was exceedingly embarrassed to make any reply;
when at length Boleslas came to see if I had recovered from my debauch. I had
but little difficulty in convincing him that my inebriety was mere affectation;
after which we went down together to the kitchen, where we spent the rest of
the day. What a night! none in my whole life ever appeared so long, not even
that which followed.

At length the attendants conducted us to our chamber, where they shut us up,
as on the former occasion, without any light: it was yet two tedious hours
until midnight. At the first stroke of the clock, we gently opened the shutters
and the casement. I then prepared to jump into the garden; but my embarrassment
was equal to my despair, when I found myself obstructed by means of iron bars.
"Behold," said I to Boleslas, "what the cursed confident whispered in his ear!
behold what his odious master approved, when he said, let it be done instantly!
behold what they have been working at during the day! it was on this account
that they prevented us from entering the chamber."

"My lord, they have stood on the outside," replies Boleslas: "for they have
not perceived that the shutter has been forced."

"Alas! whether they have perceived it or not," exclaimed I with violence,
"what does it signify? This fatal grating destroys all my hopes: it insures the
slavery of Lodoiska -- it insures my death."

"Yes without doubt it insures thy death!" repeats a person, at the same time
opening the door: and immediately after, Dourlinski, preceded by several armed
men, and followed by others carrying flambeaux, enter our prison sabre in hand.
"Traitor!" exclaims he, while addressing himself to me with a look in which
fury was visibly depicted, "I have heard all -- I know who you are -- your
servant has discovered your name. Tremble! Of all the enemies of Lovzinski, I
am the most implacable!"

"Search them continues he, turning to his attendants: they accordingly rushed
in upon me; and as I was without arms, I made a useless resistance. They
accordingly robbed me of my papers, and of the letter I had just written to
Lodoiska. Dourlinski exhibited a thousand signs of impatience while reading it,
and was scarce able to contain himself.

"Lovzinski," says he to me, endeavoring to smother his rage, "I already
deserve all your hatred; I shall soon merit it still more: in the mean time you
must remain with your worthy confident in this chamber, to which you are so
partial."

After uttering these words, he left me; and having double-locked the door, he
placed a sentinel on the outside, and another in the garden, opposite to the
window.

Figure to yourself the horrible situation into which Boleslas and myself were
now plunged. My misfortunes were at their height; but those of Lodoiska
affected me more than my own! How great must be her uneasiness! She expects
Lovzinski, and Lovzinski abandons her! But no -- Lodoiska knows me too well;
she can never suspect me of such base perfidy. Lodoiska! she will judge of her
lover by herself; she will think Lovzinski partakes her lot, since he does not
succor her -- Alas! the very certainty of my misfortunes will augment her own!

On the next day, they gave us provisions through the grating of our window;
and by the quality of the viands which they furnished us with, Boleslas augured
the most sinister events. Being however less unhappy than myself, he supported
his fate much more courageously. He offered me my share of the mean repast
which he was about to make; I would not eat: he pressed me; but it was in vain!
for existence was become an insupportable burden to me.

"Ah! live!" said he at length, shedding a torrent of tears: live! and if not
for Boleslas, let it be for Lodoiska! These words made the most lively
impression on my mind; they even reanimated my courage: and hope having once
more re-entered my heart, I embraced my faithful servant. "O my friend!"
exclaimed I at the same time with transport, "my true friend! I have been the
occasion of thy ruin, and yet my misfortunes affect thee more than thine own!
Yes, Boleslas! yes! I will live for Lodoiska; I will live for thee: if just
heaven shall restore me to my fortune and rank, you shall see that your master
is not ungrateful!" We now embraced once more.

Ah! how much do misfortunes connect men together! how sweet it is, when one
suffers, to hear another unfortunate address a word of consolation to him!

We had groaned in this prison for no less than twelve days, when several
ruffians came to drag me forth on purpose to conduct (...) Dourlinski. Boleslas
wished to follow, but they repulsed him with violence: However they permitted
me to speak to him for a single moment. I then drew from a private pocket a
ring which I had worn for ten years, and said to Boleslas: "This ring was given
to me by M. de P. when we were at college together at Warsaw: take it, my
friend; and preserve it for my sake. If Dourlinski this day consummates his
treason by my assination, and if he should at length permit you to leave this
castle, go find your king, recall to his memory our ancient attachment, recount
my misfortunes to him: he will recompense you, and succor Lodoiska. Adieu my
friend!"

After this, I was conducted to the apartment of Dourlinski. As soon as the
door opened, I perceived a lady in a chair, who had just fainted away. I
approached her -- it was Lodoiska! Heavens! how much did I find her altered!
but she was still handsome! "Barbarian!" exclaimed I, addressing myself to
Dourlinski; and at the voice of her lover, Lodoiska recovered her senses.

"Ah, my dear Lovzinski," says she, looking wistfully at me, "do you know what
this infamous wretch has proposed? do you know at what price he has offered me
your liberty?"

"Yes," cries the furious chieftain, "yes, I am determined upon it: you see
that he is in my power; and if in three days I do not obtain my wishes, he
shall be no more!" I endeavored to throw myself on my knees at the feet of
Lodoiska; but my guards prevented me: "I behold you again, and all my ills are
forgotten, Lodoiska -- death has now no longer any thing terrifying in its
aspect."

"Wretch," added I, looking sternly at Dourlinski, "know that Pulaski will
avenge his daughter! know that the king will avenge his friend!"

"Let him be carried away!" was the only reply made by the ferocious Palatine.

"Ah!" exclaimed Lodoiska, "my love has been your ruin!" I was about to answer,
but the attendants dragged me out, and re-conducted me to prison.

Boleslas received me with inexpressible transports of joy; he avowed to me
that he thought me lost for ever, and I recounted to him that my death was but
deferred. The scene of which I had been a witness confirmed all my suspicions;
it was evident that Pulaski was ignorant of the unworthy treatment which his
daughter experienced; it was also evident that Dourlinski, old, amorous and
jealous, was determined, at any rate, to satisfy his passions.

In the mean time, two of the days allowed by Dourlinski for the determination
of Lodoiska, had already expired; we were now in the midst of the night which
preceded the fatal third; I could not sleep, and I was walking hastily about my
prison. All at once I heard the cry of "to arms! to arms!" The most frightful
howlings prevailed on the outside, and a great commotion took place within the
castle. The sentinel placed at our window, left his post. Boleslas and I were
able to distinguish the voice of Dourlinski, calling and encouraging his
followers; and we soon distinctly heard the clashing of swords, the cries of
the wounded, and the groans of the dying. The noise, which at first was very
great, seemed at length to die away. It recommenced soon after; it redoubled;
and at length we heard a shout of "Victory!"

To this frightful tumult, a still more frightful silence ensues. In a short
time, a low crackling sound is heard to approach us; the air seems to hiss with
violence; the night becomes less dark* the trees in the garden assume a red and
warm tint; we fly to the window: the flames are devouring the castle of
Dourlinski! they approach the chamber in which we were confined, from all
sides; and, to overwhelm me with new horror, the most piercing shrieks are
uttered from that tower in which I knew Lodoiska was imprisoned!

The fire becoming every moment more violent, was about to communicate to the
chamber in which we were shut up, and the flames already began to curl around
the base of the tower in which Lodoiska was immured!

Lodoiska uttered the most dreadful groans, to which I answered by cries of
fury. Boleslas rushed from one part of the prison to another, like a madman; he
sent forth the most terrible howlings; he attempted to burst open the door with
his hands and feet. As for myself, I remained at the window, and shook, amidst
my transports of fury, those massive iron bars which I was ^nable to bend.

All of a sudden, the domestics who had lately mounted the battlements, descend
with precipitation, and open the gates: we heard the voice of Dourlinski
himself, begging for quarter. The victors instantly precipitated themselves
amidst the flames; and being at length attracted by our cries, they force open
the door of our prison with their hatchets.

By their dress and their arms, I know them to be Tartars: their chief arrives
-- it is Titsican!

"Ah! ah!" exclaims he; "it is my brave friend!"

I instantly throw myself on his neck: -- "Titsican! -- Lodoiska! -- a lady! --
the fairest of women! -- in that tower! -- about to be burnt alive!"

These were the incoherent expressions by which I made my feelings known.

The Tartar instantly gives the word of command to his soldiers -- they fly to
the tower -- I fly along with them -- Boleslas follows us. They burst open the
the doors; and near to an old pillar we discover a narrow winding staircase,
filled with smoke.

The Tartars, affrighted at the danger, start back: I prepare to ascend.

"Alas! what are you about?" exclaims Boleslas.

"To live or die with Lodoiska!"

"And I will either live or die with my master!" was the reply of my generous
servant.

I rush on -- he follows me! At the risk of suffocation, we ascend about forty
steps; by the light of the flames we discover Lodoiska in a corner of her
prison; who feebly utters: "Who is it that approaches me?"

"It is Lovzinski! it is your lover!"

Joy insta^tly lends her new strength; she rises and flies into my arms: we
carry her away; we descend a few steps; but volumes of smoke now fill all the
staircase, and we are forced to re-ascend with precipitation. At that very
instant, too, a part of the tower gives way! -- Boleslas utters a dreadful
shriek, and Lodoiska falls into a swoon.

That which was on the point of destroying, saved us! The flames, formerly
smothered, began to extend with greater rapidity; but the smoke was dissipated.
Laden with our precious burden, Boleslas and I descend in haste -- I do not
exaggerate; every stop trembled under our feet! the walls were all on fire! At
length we arrived at the gate of the tower; Titsican, trembling for our safety,
was expecting us there; "Brave men!" exclaimed he, on seeing us appear again.
-- I placed Lodoiska at his feet, and fell down lifeless by her side!

I remained nearly an hour in this situation. They tremble for my life; and
Boleslas weeps aloud. I again recover my senses, on hearing the voice of
Lodoiska, who returning to herself, calls me her deliverer. The appearance of
every thing was altered; the tower was entirely in ruins. The Tartars, however,
had stopped the progress of the flames; they had destroyed one part of the
castle, on purpose to save the remainder; in fine, we had been carried into a
large saloon, where we were surrounded by Titsican and some of his soldiers.
Others of them were occupied in pillaging and in bringing away the gold,
silver, jewels, plate, and all the precious effects which the flames had spared.

Near to (...) Dourlinski, loaded with fetters, and ^ng repeated groans, beheld
this ^ches, of which, he was about to be d^p^ed. Rage, terror, despair, all the
passions which can tear the heart of a villain suffering under punishment, were
visibly depicted in his wild and wandering looks: He struck the earth with
fury, dashed his clenched hands against his forehead, and, uttering the most
horrible blasphemies, he reproached heaven for its just vengeance.

In the mean time, my lovely mistress holds my hand clasped in hers. "Alas,"
says she at length, with tears in her eyes, "alas! you have saved my life, and
your own is still in danger! Nay, even if we escape death, slavery awaits us!"

"No, no, Lodoiska, be comforted, Titsican is not my enemy; Titsican will put a
period to our misfortunes -- "

"Undoubtedly, if I am able," exclaims the Tartar, interrupting me: "you are in
the right, brave man! (adds he) I see that you are not dead, and I am happy:
you always say, and do good things; and you have there (turning to Boleslas)
you have there a friend who seconds you admirably."

On this I embrace Boleslas: -- "yes, Titsican, yes, I have a friend, who shall
always be dear to me! -- "

The Tartar again interrupts me: -- "What! were not you both confined in an
apartment below ground, and was not this lady in a tower? What was the reason
of that? I will lay any wager continues he with a smile, that you have taken
this female from that old wretch, (pointing to Dourlinski) and you are in the
right; for he is a dotard, and she is beautiful! Come -- inform me of every
thing."

I now discover my own name to Titsican, that of Lodoiska's father, and every
particular that had occurred to me until that moment. It belongs to Lodoiska, I
observe in conclusion, to make us acquainted with what she has been obliged to
suffer from the infamous Dourlinski, ever since she has been in his castle!

"You know," replies Lodoiska, "that my father obliged me to leave Warsaw, on
the day that the Diet was opened. He first conducted me to the territories of
the Palatine of --, at only twenty leagues distance from the capital, to which
he returned, on purpose to assist at the meeting of the states.

"On that very day when M. de P. -- was proclaimed king, Pulaski took me from
the castle of the Palatine, and conducted me here, thinking that I should be
better concealed. He charged Dourlinski to guard me with, extraordinary
strictness; and, above all things, to take especial care to prevent Lovzinski
from discovering the place of my retreat. He then left me, as he informed me,
on purpose to assemble and encourage the good citizens to defend his country,
and to punish traitors. Alas! these important avocations have made him forget
his daughter, for I have never seen him since.

"A few days after his departure, I began to perceive that the visits of
Dourlinski had become more frequent than usual; in a short time, he hardly ever
quitted the apartment assigned me for a prison. He deprived me, under some
trifling pretext, of the only female attendant whom my father had left me; and
to prevent any person (as he said) from knowing that I was in his castle, he
himself brought me the food necessary for my subsistence, and passed whole days
along with me. You cannot conceive, my dear Lovzinski, how much I suffered from
the continual presence of a man, who was odious to me, and whose infamous
designs I was suspicious of: he even dared to explain himself to me one day:
but I assured him that my hate should always be the price of his tenderness,
and that his unworthy conduct had drawn upon him my sovereign contempt.

"He answered me coldly, that in time I should accustom myself to see him, and
to suffer his assiduities; nay, he did not in the least alter his usual
conduct, for he entered my chamber in the morning, and never retired until
night. Separated from all I loved, I had not even the feeble consolation of
being able to enjoy the sweet recollection of past happiness. A witness to my
misfortunes, Dourlinski took pleasure in augmenting them.

"'Pulaski,' says he to me, 'commands a body of Polish troops; Lovzinski
betraying his country, which he does not love, and a woman concerning whom he
is indifferent, serves in the Russian army, where he will be cut off during
some bloody engagement: besides, if he survives, it is evident that nothing can
ever reconcile your father to him.'

"A few days after, he came on purpose to announce to me, that Pulaski, during
the night, had attacked the Russians in their camp; and that, amidst the
confusion that ensued, my lover had fallen by the hand of my father. The cruel
Palatine even made me read a narrative of this event, drawn up with every
appearance of the truth, in a kind of public gazette, which doubtless he had
procured to be printed expressly for the purpose: besides, on perceiving the
barbarous joy which he affected on this occasion, I thought the news but too
true.

"Pitiless tyrant! cried I, you enjoy my tears and my despair; but cease to
persecute me, or you will soon see that the daughter of Pulaski is herself able
to avenge her own injuries!

"One evening that he had left me sooner than usual, after I had retired to
bed, I heard my door open very softly. By the light of a lamp, which I kept
always burning, I beheld my tyrant advancing toward my bed. As there was no
crime of which I did not believe him to be capable, I had foreseen this event;
and I had even taken measures to render it unsuccessful. I accordingly armed
myself with a long sharp knife, which I had the precaution to conceal beneath
my pillow; I overwhelmed the wretch with the reproaches which he so justly
merited; and I vowed, if he dared to advance, that I would poignard him with my
own hand.

"He retired, with surprise and affright visibly delineated on his countenance:
'I am tired,' said he as he went out, 'with experiencing nothing but scorn; and
if I were not afraid of being overheard, you should soon perceive what a
woman's arm could effect against mine! But I know a way of vanquishing your
pride! By and by you will think yourself but too happy in being able to
purchase your pardon, by the most humiliating submissions.'

"He now withdrew. A few moments after, his confident entered with a pistol in
his hand. I must however do him the justice to say, that he wept while he
announced to me the orders of his lord.

"'Dress yourself, madam; you must instantly follow me!' -- This was all he was
able to say to me.

"He then conducted me to that very tower, where, without you, I should this
morning have perished: he shut me up in that horrible prison; it was there that
I had l^nguished for more than a month, without fire, without the light of
heaven, and almost without clothes; with bread and water for my food; for my
bed a few trusses of straw: this was the deplorable state to which the only
daughter of a grandee of Poland was reduced!

"You shudder, brave stranger, and yet believe me, when I assure you, that I do
not recount to you any more than a small part of my sufferings. One thing
however, rendered my misery less insupportable: I no longer beheld my tyrant.
While he expected with tranquillity that I should solicit my pardon, I passed
whole days and nights in calling on the name of my father, and in bewailing my
lover! * * * * * * * * * * * * * O Lovzinski! with what astonishment was I
seized; with what joy was my soul penetrated, on that day when I once more
beheld you in the gardens of Dourlinski! * * * * * * * * * *

Titsican was listening to the story of our misfortunes, with which he appeared
to be deeply affected, when one of his sentinels approached, and sounded an
alarm. He immediately left us in great haste, on purpose to run to the
drawbridge. We heard a great tumult, and began to presage some inauspicious
event.

While we remained plunged in consternation, -- "Lovzinski, Lodoiska, cowardly
and perfidious pair!" exclaimed Dourlinski, unable to contain his joy, -- "you
have hoped to be able to elude my vengeance, and escape my chastisement.
Tremble! you are once more about to fall into my hands. At the the noise of my
captivity and misfortunes, the neighboring nobility are undoubtedly assembled,
and have now come to succor me."

" -- They can only revenge you, villain!" cries Boleslas, interrupting him in
the midst of his threats, and seizing at the same time an iron bar, with which
he prepared to knock him down; I, however, instantly interposed and prevented
him from executing this act of justice.

Titsican returned in a few minutes: "It is only a false alarm," said he to us;
"it is nothing more than a small detachment which I dispatched yesterday, on
purpose to scour the country -- they had orders to rejoin me here; and they
have brought me some prisoners: every thing is quiet, and the neighborhood
does not appear to be in the least commotion."

While Titsican yet spoke to me, a number of unfortunates, whose luckless fate
had delivered them into the hands of the enemy, were dragged before him. We
first beheld five, who b^ing ^ bound, walked by the side of their conquerors,
with a downcast and melancholy (...). The Tartars told us, that one of their
companions had been overcome with great difficulty, and that was the reason why
he was bound hand and foot!

The sixth now appeared: "O Heavens! it is my father!" exclaims Lodoiska,
running at the same time toward him -- I, too, threw myself at the feet of
Pulaski. "Are you Pulaski?" says the Tartar chieftain, "'it is well; the event is
lucky! Believe me, my friend, it is no more than an hour since I first heard of
you. I know however, that you are proud and hotheaded, but no matter! I esteem
you; you possess both courage and abilities; your daughter is beautiful, and
does not want for understanding; Lovzinski is brave -- b^aver than myself, as I
have already experienced. Attend to what I am about to say -- "

Pul^ski motionless with astonishment, scarcely heard the sound of the Tartar's
voice; and struck, at the same time, with the strange spectacle that offered
itself to his view, he began to conceive the most horrible susp^.

He repu^ed (...) with the most significa^t d^sgui^^ "Wretch!" exclaims he at
l^ngth, "(...) have be^rayed your co^^try, a woman who loved you, ^ man who
prided himself in calling you ^is son-in-law; it was only wanting to ^ill up
the measure of your crimes, that you should league with robbers!"

"With robbers!" cries Titsican -- "with robbers indeed, if it so please you to
call us: but you yourself must acknowledge that description of people to be
good for something; for without me, perhaps, your daughter, by tomorrow's sun,
would no longer have been a maiden! Be not alarmed," said he, addressing
himself to me: "but I know that he is proud, and I therefore am not angry."

We had by this time placed Pulaski in a chair; his daughter and myself bathed
his manacles with our tears; but he still continued to frown at and to
overwhelm me with reproaches.

"What can you wish for?" cries the Tartar, once more addressing his captive:
"I tell you that Lovzinski is a brave man, whom I intend to see married; and as
for your Dourlinski, he is a rogue, whom I am about to order to be hanged.

"I repeat to you once more, that you alone are more hotheaded than us three
put together. But hear me, and let us finish thi^ business, for it is necessary
that I should depart. You belong to me by the most incontestible ^^ght, that of
the sword. But if you promise me, upon your honor, that you will be sincerely
reconciled to Lovzinski, and give your daughter to him for a wife, I will
restore you to your liberty."

"He who can brave death," replies the haughty Pulaski, "can support slavery.
My daughter shall never be the wife of a traitor."

"Do you love better that she should be a Tartar's mistress? -- If you do not
promise to give her, within the space of eight days, to this brave man, I
myself shall espouse her this very night! When I am weary of you and of her, I
will sell you to the Turks. Your daughter is handsome enough to find admittance
into the haram of a bashaw: and you yourself may perhaps superintend the
kitchen of some janissary."

"My life is in your hands; do with it whatsoever you please. If Pulaski falls
beneath the sword of a Tartar, he will be lamented, and even his enemies will
agree that he merits a more glorious destiny: but if he were to consent: No!
no! I rather chose -- I prefer death!"

"I do not desire your death! I wish only that Lovzinski should espouse
Lodoiska. -- What! -- Shall my prisoner give the law to me? By my sabre! --
this dog of a Christian -- but I am in the wrong he is furious, and is
assuredly deprived of his reason."

I now beheld the Tartar's eyes sparkle with fury, and therefore recalled to
his memory the promise he had made me, that he would not give way to his
passion.

"Undoubtedly! but this man wearies out the patience of a favorite of our
prophet! I am but a robber! -- Yet Pulaski, I repeat it to you again, that it
is my command that Lovzinski espouse your daughter. By my sabre, he has fairly
gained her; but for him she had been burnt last night."

"But for him?"

"Yes! Behold those ruins; there stood a tower in that place; it was on fire,
and no person dared to ascend it: he, however, mounted the staircase, attended
by Boleslas -- and they saved your daughter."

"Was my daughter in that tower?"

"Yes! that hoary villian had confined her there; that hoary villian, who
attempted to violate her? -- Some of you must relate the whole to him; but make
haste, as it is necessary he should decide instantly; I have business
elsewhere, for I do not intend that your militia The troops stationed on
purpose to watch over the safety of the frontiers of Podolia and Volhuia, and
preserve them from the incursions of the Tartars, are called Quartuaires.
shall surprise me here: it is otherwise in the plains; there I should laugh at
them."

While Titsican ordered the rich booty which he had taken, to be stowed in
little covered wagons, Lodoiska informed her father of the crimes of
Dourlinski, and mingled the recital of our affection so artfully with the
history of her misfortunes, that nature and gratitude at one and the same time
began to besiege the heart of Pulaski.

Affected in the most lively manner with the misfortunes of his daughter, and
sensible of the important services which I had rendered her, he embraces
Lodoiska, and at length beholding me without resentment, he seemed to wait
impatiently for an opportunity to be reconciled to me.

"O Pulaski!" I exclaim, "you whom Heaven has left me, on purpose to console
me for the loss of the best of fathers; you for whom I have an equal friendship
and veneration; why have thou condemned thy children unheared? Why have thou
supposed a man who adores thy daughter, guilty of the most horrible treason?

"When my vows were offered up in favor of that prince who now fills the
throne, I swear to you Pulaski, by her whom I love so tenderly, that I looked
upon his elevation to be an event highly auspicious to the happiness, the
safety, and the prosperity of my country.

"The misfortunes which my youth did not foresee, thy experience had
anticipated: but because I have been wanting in prudence, ought you to accuse
me of perfidy? Ought you to have reproached me for loving my friend? Can you
now look upon it as a crime, that I still give him my esteem? For the three
last months, I have beheld the misfortunes of my country in the same point of
view as yourself: like you, I have mourned over them; but I am sure that the
king is still ignorant of their extent, and I shall go to Warsaw on purpose to
inform him of all that I have seen."

Pulaski here interrupts me: -- "It is not there that you ought to repair: you
tell me that M. de P*** is not informed of the wrong done to his native
country, and I believe you: but whether he is acquainted with, or whether he is
entirely ignorant of them is now but of little consequence. Insolent
foreigners, cantoned throughout our provinces, strive to maintain themselves in
the republic, even against the king, whom they have caused to be elected. It is
no longer in the power of an impotent or a mal-content king, to chase the
Russians from my country!

"Let us trust only to ourselves, Lovzinski; and let us either avenge our
country, or die in her defense. I have assembled 4000 noble Poles in the
palatine of Lublin, who wait for the return of their general, to march against
the Russians: follow me to my camp -- on this condition I am your friend and my
daughter shall be your wife!"

Pulaski, I am ready to obey you: I swear to follow your fortunes, and to
participate in your dangers. And think not that it is Lodoiska alone, who has
exacted from me this oath; I swear by her, and before you, that the enemies of
the republic have always been, and shall never cease to be mine; I swear that I
will spill the very last drop of my blood, to chase those foreigners out of
Poland, who reign there in the name of its king!"

"Embrace me Lovzinski! I now recognize you; I adopt you for my son-in-law --
My children, all our misfortunes are at an end!"

Polaski desired me to unite my hand to Lodoiska's, in token of our union; and
we were embracing the brave palantine at the very moment that Titsican
re-entered.

"Good! good!" exclaims the chieftain: this is what I wished; I am fond of
marriages, Father, I shall instantly order you to be unbound.

"By my sabre!" adds the Tartar, while his followers were cutting the cords
with which the hands and feet of Pulaski were tied; "by my sabre! I shall do a
noble action, but it will cost me a world of wealth! Two grandees of Poland! a
beautiful maiden! They would have produced me a ransom!"

"Titsican, such a thought is not worthy of you!" says Pulaski, interrupting
him.

"No! no!" rejoins the Tartar, "it is a mere reflection only -- it is one of
those ideas which a robber cannot prevent. My brave and unfortunate friends, I
demand nothing from you -- nay, more, you shall not retire on foot; I have some
charming horses, with which I intend to present you. -- And, for this lady, if
you please, I will give you a litter, on which I myself have been carried for
these last ten or twelve days. This young man here had given me such a wound,
that I could no longer sit on horseback. -- The litter is indeed a bad one,
clumsily constructed, by means of branches of trees; but I have nothing except
that or a little covered wagon, to offer you: choose which ever of them you
please."

In the mean time, Dourlinski, who had not as yet uttered a single word,
remained with his eyes fixed on the ground, while an air of consternation was
spread ever his countenance.

"Unworthy friend!" says Pulaski to him, "how could you so cruelly abuse the
confidence I reposed in you? Were you not afraid to expose yourself to my
resentment? What demon blinded you!"

"Love!" replies Dourlinski, "an outrageous love! You, perhaps, do not
comprehend to what excess the passions may hurry on a man, violent and jealous
by nature. This frightful example, however, ought to teach you, that a daughter
so charming as yours is a treasure which one ought not to entrust to any person.

"Pulaski, I have indeed, merited your hatred: but I am still worthy of your
pity. I have rendered myself exceedingly culpable; but you behold me cruelly
punished. I lose, in one single day, my rank, my riches, my honor, my liberty!
more than all this, I lose thy daughter!

"O, Lodoiska! lovely maiden, whom I have so much outraged, will you deign to
forget my persecutions, your danger, and your grief? Will you deign to grant me
a generous pardon?

"Ah! if there are no crimes which a sincere repentance cannot expiate,
Lodoiska, I am no longer criminal. I would I were able at the price of all my
blood, to redeem those tears which I have occasioned you to shed. Amidst the
horrible state to which Dourlinski is about to be reduced, shall he not be
permitted to carry with him the consoling recollection of having heard you tell
him that he is no longer odious to you?

"Too amiable, and until this present moment, too unfortunate maiden! however
great my wrongs may have been in regard to you, I have it in my power to repair
them all by means of a single word -- advance -- approach me -- I have a secret
which can only be entrusted to your private ear: it is exceedingly important
that it should be revealed to you!"

Lodoiska, without the least distrust, now leaves my side, and advances toward
him without suspicion.

At that very moment I beheld a poniard glittering in the hand of Dourlinski!

I precipitate myself upon him. -- It was too late; for I could only parry the
second thr^st; and the lovely Lodoiska, wound^d immediately above the left
breast, had already fallen senseless at the feet of Titsican!

Pulaski, furious at the horrid treason, drew his sabre quick as lightning, on
purpose to avenge his daughter's fate.

"No! no!" exclaims the Tartar, at the same time withholding his arm, "you are
about to make this wretch suffer too gentle a death!"

"It is well, "says the infamous assassin, addressing himself to me, and at the
same time contemplating his victim with a cruel joy. "Lovzinski you appeared
but now eager to be united with Lodoiska; why do you not follow her? Go, my too
happy rival, go and accompany your mistress to the tomb! Let them prepare my
punishment; it will appear pleasant to me; I leave you to torments no less
cruel, and infinitely longer than mine."

Dourlinski was not allowed to utter another sentence, for the Tartars rushed
in upon him and threw him into the midst of the burning ruins. * * * * * * * *

What a night! how many different cares, how many opposite sentiments, agitated
my unhappy mind during its continuance! How many times did I experience the
successive emotions of fear, hope, grief and joy! After so many dangers and
inquietudes, Lodoiska was at length presented to me by her father, and I was
intoxicated with the dear hope of possessing her: a barbarian had but now
assassinated her in my presence.

This was the most cruel and unfortunate moment of any during the whole course
of my life! -- But my happiness, eclipsed, as it were, in a single instant, was
not long in shining forth with all its former splendour.

Amidst the Tartars belonging to Titsican, was one somewhat conversant in
surgery. We sent for him; on his arrival he examines the wound, and assures us
that it is but a slight one. The ^famous Dourlinski, constrained by his chains,
and blinded by his despair, had happily been prevented from giving any other
than an ill directed blow.

As soon as Titsican was informed that the life of Lodoiska was not in any
danger, he prepared to take leave of us.

"I leave you," said he, "the five domestics who accompanied Pulaski;
provisions for several days, arms, six excellent horses, two covered wagons,
and the people belonging to Dourlinski in chains. Their base lord is no more:
Adieu! the day is about to appear; do not leave this place until tomorrow; I
shall then visit the other cantons. Adieu, brave Poles, tell to your countrymen
that Titsican is not so bad as he has been represented to them, and that he
sometimes restores with one hand what he takes with another. Adieu!"

At these words he lifts his hand to his head, and having saluted us gracefully
after the manner of his country, he gives the signal to depart: the Tartars
mount their fleet coursers in an instant, pass along the drawbridge, and make
for the neighboring plain at a full gallop.

They had been gone scarcely two hours, when several of the neighboring
nobility, supported by a detachment of militia, came on purpose to invest the
castle of Dourlinski.

Pulaski himself went out to receive them: he related the particulars of all
that had occurred; and some, gained over by his eloquence, promised to follow
us to the palatinate of Lublin.

They asked for only two days to prepare every thing necessary for the
expedition, and actually came and rejoined us at the appointed time, to the
number of sixty.

Lodoiska having assured us that she was now able to undergo the fatigues of a
journey, we placed her in a commodious carriage, which we had luckily been able
to procure for this purpose.

After having restored Dourlinski's people to liberty, we abandon the two
covered wagons to them, in which Titsican, acting with his usual generosity,
had left part of his immense booty: this we divided among them in equal
proportions.

We arrived, without meeting with any accident, at Polowisk, in the Palatinate
of Lublin, this being the place which Pulaski had appointed for the general
rendezvous. The news of his return having gone abroad, a crowd of mal-contents
in the space of less than a month, flocked to, and increased our little army to
such a degree, that we soon found it to amount to no less than 10,000 men.

Lodoiska entirely cured of her wound, and perfectly recovered from her
fatigues, had regained her usual spirits, and appeared in possession of all her
former beauty. Pulaski one day called me into his tent, and spoke as follows.
"Three thousand Russians have appeared, as you well know, upon the heights
above, and at no greater distance than half a league from us: take, in the
course of the ensuing night, three thousand chosen men, and go and chase the
enemy from the advantageous posts which they now occupy. Recollect that on the
success of a first attempt depends almost always that of the campaign;
recollect that you are about to avenge your country's wrongs; recollect too, my
friend, that tomorrow I shall learn thy victory, and that tomorrow also thou
shall espouse Lodoiska!"

I began my march about ten o'clock. At midnight we surprised our enemies in
their camp. Never was a defeat more complete: we killed seven hundred men; we
took nine hundred prisoners; we seized all their cannon, the military chest,
and the ammunition.

At break of day Pulaski marched out to join me with the remainder of the
troops: he brought Lodoiska along with him: we were married in Pulaski's tent.
All the camp resounded with songs of gladness: valor and beauty were
celebrated in joyous epithalamiums: it seemed to be the festival of Venus and
Mars; and it might be truly said, that every soldier appeared to be impressed
with the same sentiments as myself, and that they all partook of my happiness.

After I had given up the first days of so dear an union entirely to love, I
began to think of recompensing the heroic fidelity of Boleslas. My
father-in-law presented him with one of his castles, situated at some leagues
from the capital; and Lodoiska and myself added to this princely donation, a
considerable sum of ready money, on purpose to enable him to lead an
independent and tranquil life.

He first refused to leave us; but we commanded him to go and take possession
of his castle, and live peaceably in that honorable retreat which his services
had so amply merited. On the day of his departure I took him aside: "You must
go in my name," said I, "and wait upon our monarch at Warsaw: inform him that I
am united in the bonds of Hymen to the daughter of Pulaski: state to him that I
am armed on purpose to chase out of his kingdom those foreigners who are
ravaging it; and tell him, in particular, that Lovzinski, a foe to the
Russians, is not the enemy of his king."

The recital of our operations during eight succeeding years of bloody war
would be uninteresting. Sometimes vanquished; much oftener victorious; equally
great in the midst of a defeat, as formidable after a victory, and always
superior to events, Pulaski attracted and fixed the attention of all Europe,
whom he astonished by his long and vigorous resistance. Obliged to abandon one
province, he made incursions into, and performed new prodigies of valor in
another: and it was thus, that, in marching successively throughout all the
palatinates, he signalized in each of them, by some glorious exploit, that
eternal hatred which he had sworn against the enemies of Poland.

Wife of a warrior, daughter of a hero, accustomed to the tumult of a camp,
Lodoiska accompanied us every where. Of five children which she had borne me,
an only daughter remained to us, about eighteen months old. One day, after a
most obstinate engagement, the victorious Russians precipitated themselves
toward my tent, on purpose to plunder it. Pulaski and myself, followed by some
nobles, flew to the defense of Lodoiska, whom we saved with difficulty; my
daughter, however, had been carried off.

This lovely child, by a sage precaution which her mother had wisely made use
of in those times of intestine commotion, had the arms of our family impressed,
by means of a chemical preparation, under her left breast: but my search after
my daughter has hitherto been ineffectual. -- Alas! Dorliska, my dear Dorliska,
either exists in slavery, or exists no more!

This loss affected me with the most lively sorrow. Pulaski, however, appeared
almost insensible to my misfortunes; either because his mind was occupied at
this moment with the great project which he soon after communicated to me, or
because the miseries of his country alone could affect his stoic heart. He, as
usual, re-assembles the remains of his army, takes possession of an
advantageous post, employs several days in fortifying, and maintains himself in
it for three whole months, against all the efforts of the Russians.

It, however became at length necessary that he should abandon this situation,
as provisions were beginning to be scarce. Pulaski, on this occasion, came to
my tent; and having ordered every one to retire, when he alone remained, he
addressed me as follows:

"Lovzinski, I have just reason for complaining of your conduct. Formerly you
supported, along with me, the burden of command, and I was enabled to divide
with my son-in-law a part of my laborious avocations* but, for these two last
months, you do nothing but weep; you sigh like a woman! You hate abandoned me
in a critical moment, when your assistance was become the most necessary! You
see how I am attacked on all sides; I fear not for myself; I am not unhappy for
my own life: but if we perish, the state has no longer any defenders.

"Awake, Lovzinski! how nobly you once participated in my cares! Do not now
remain the useless witness of them. We are indeed bathed in Russian blood: our
fellow citizens are avenged; but they are not saved: nay, even in a short time
we may be able no longer to defend them."

"You astonish me, Pulaski! Whence these sinister auguries?"

"I am not alarmed without reason. Consider our present position: I am forced
to awaken in every heart the love of its country; I have found no where but
degenerate men born for slavery, or weak ones, who, although penetrated with a
sense of their misfortunes, have bounded all their views to barren complaints.

"Some true citizens are indeed, ranged under my standards; but eight long and
bloody campaigns have lessened their number, and almost extinguished them. I
become enfeebled by my very victories; our enemies appear more numerous after
their defeats."

"I repeat to you, Pulaski, once more, that you astonish me! In circumstances
no less disastrous, no less unhappy, than the present, I have beheld you
sustain yourself by your courage. * * *

"Do you think that it now abandons me? True valor does not consist in being
blind to danger, but in brav^ng it after it has been foreseen. Our enemies
prepare for my defeat; however if you choose, Lovzinski, the very day which
they point out for their triumph shall perhaps be destined to record their
ruin, and achieve the safety of our fellow-citizens!"

"If I choose! Can you doubt my sentiments? Speak! what would you have done?"

"To strike the boldest stroke that I ever meditated! Forty chosen men are
assembled at Czenstachow along with Kaluvski, whose bravery is well known; they
want a chief, able, firm, intrepid -- It is you whom I have chosen."

"Pulaski, I am ready."

"I will not dissemble to you the danger of the enterprise; the event is
doubtful, and if you do not succeed, your ruin is inevitable."

"I tell you that I am ready, therefore explain yourself."

"You are not ignorant, that scarce four thousand men now fight under my
command: with these undoubtedly I have still an opportunity of tormenting our
enemies; but with such feeble means I dare not hope to be ever able to force
them to leave our provinces. All the nobility would flock beneath our banners,
if the king were in my camp."

"What do you say? Can you hope that the king would ever consent to repair
hither?"

"No: but he must be forced to do so."

"Forced!"

"Yes! I know that an ancient friendship connects you with M. de P --: but
since you have supported, along with Pulaski, the cause of liberty, you know
also that you ought to sacrifice every thing to the good of your country; that
an interest so sacred -- "

"I know my duty, and I am ready to fulfill it; but what is it that you now
propose to me? The king never leaves Warsaw."

"True; and it is, therefore, at Warsaw that you must go and find him: it is
from the heart of the capital that he must be forced."

"What preparations have you made for so great an enterprise?"

"You behold you Russian army, three times as strong as mine, and which has
been encamped three months in sight of us: its General, tranquil at present
within his entrenchments, impatiently waits until, forced by famine, I shall
surrender myself at discretion.

"Behind my camp are marshes which he thinks impracticable* the moment it is
night, we shall traverse them. I have disposed of every thing in such a manner
that the enemy will be deceived, and not perceive my retreat until it is too
late. I hope therefore to be able to steal more than an hour's march upon them,
and if fortune seconds me, perhaps a whole day. I shall advance straight
forward to Warsaw by the great road that leads to the capital, notwithstanding
the efforts of the little Russian bands who hover continually in its
neighborhood. I shall either encounter and conquer these separately, or, if
they form a junction on purpose to stop my progress, I shall at least be able
to occupy their attention in such a manner that they will not be able to impede
your operations.

"In the mean time, Lovzinski, you will have preceded me. Your forty followers
disguised, and armed only with sabres, poniards and pistols concealed under
their clothes, shall have arrived at Warsaw by different roads. You must wait
there until the king has left his palace; you are then to carry him off, and to
bring him to my camp. The enterprise is bold -- rash if, you please so to term
it: the march to Warsaw is difficult; the stay in it dangerous; the return from
it extremely perilous. If you are vanquished, if you are taken prisoner, you
will perish, Lovzinski, but you will perish a martyr to liberty! and Pulaski,
jealous of so glorious an end, sighing at being obliged to survive you, shall
send Russians, thousands of Russians to accompany you to the tomb!

"But on the contrary, if an all-powerful Deity; if a God, the protector of
Poland, has inspired me with this hardy project to terminate her evils; if thy
good fortune shall procure a success equal to thy courage, what a glorious
prosperity will be achieved by means of this noble daring!

"M. de P -- will not see in my camp, other than citizen-soldiers, the foes of
foreigners, but still faithful to their king: under my patriotic tents, he will
^^spire the air of liberty, and the love of his country: the enemies of the
state shall become his; our brave nobility, ashamed of their indolence, will
readily combat under the royal banners, for the common cause; the Russians
shall either be cut in pieces, or be obliged to pass the frontiers -- my
friend, in thee thy country shall behold her savior!" * * * * * * * * * * * *
* * * * *

Pulaski kept his word. That very night he accomplished his retreat, with equal
skill and success, by traversing the marshes in profound silence. -- "My
friend," said my father-in-law to me, as soon as we were out of the reach of
the enemy, "it is now time that you should leave us. I know well that my
daughter has more courage than another woman; but she is a tender wife, and an
unfortunate mother. Her tears will affect you, and you will lose in her
embraces that strength of mind, that dignity of soul, which now becomes more
necessary to you than ever: I advise you, therefore, to be gone, without
bidding her farewell."

Pulaski pressed me, but in vain, for I was unable to consent. As soon as
Lodoiska knew that I should depart alone, and perceived that we were resolved
not to inform her whither, she shed torrents of tears, and strove to detain me.
I began to hesitate.

Lovzinski, cries my father-in-law at this critical moment, Lovzinski, depart*
Wife, children, relations, all ought to be sacrificed, when it is necessary for
the salvation of your country.

I instantly mount my horse, and make such haste, that I arrive by the middle
of next day at Czenstachow. I here found forty brave men waiting for me, and
determined for the most hazardous enterprise.

"Gentlemen," said I to them, "we are now met on purpose to carry a king out of
the midst of his own capital. -- Those capable of attempting such an
enterprise, are alone capable of effecting it: either success or death awaits
on us!"

After this short harrangue we prepare to depart. Kaluvski, forewarned of our
design, had already procured twelve wagons, loaded with hay and straw, each of
which was drawn by four good horses.

We instantly disguise ourselves as peasants; we hide our clothes, our sabres,
out pistols, and the saddles of our horses, in the hay with which our wagons
were partly filled; we agree upon certain signs, and I give them a watchword,
to be used according to circumstances. Twelve of the conspirators, commanded by
Kaluvski, enter into Warsaw, accompanied by as many wagons, which they
themselves conduct. I divide the rest of my little troop into several brigades,
on purpose to avoid suspicion: each is ordered to march at some distance from
the other, and to gain the capital by different gates.

We depart, and on Saturday the 2d of November, 1771, arrive at Warsaw, and
lodge together at a convent belonging to the Dominicans.

On the next day, which was Sunday, and which will for ever form a memorable
epoch in the annals of Poland, one of my people of the name of Stravinski,
being covered with rags, places himself near the collegiate church, and soon
after proceeds demanding charity even at tho gates of the royal palace, where
he observes every thing that passed. Several of the conspirators walked up and
down the fix narrow streets, in the neighborhood of the great square, where
Kaluvski and myself were posted. We remain in ambuscade during the whole day,
and part of the afternoon.

At six o'clock at night the king leaves the palace; he is followed, and is
seen to enter the hotel of his uncle, the grand chancellor of Lithunia.

All our followers receive notice of this event, and assemble instantly: they
throw off their miserable clothes, saddle their horses, and prepare their arms,
in the large square belonging to the convent, where their movements are
entirely concealed. They then sally forth, one after the other, under favor of
the night. Too well known in Warsaw to hazard appearing there, without
disguising myself, I still wear my peasant's dress, and I mount an excellent
horse, caparisoned, however, after the common manner.

I then point out my followers the different posts in the suburbs, which I had
assigned them before our departure from the convent, and they were dispersed in
such a manner, that all the avenues to the palace of the grand chancellor were
carefully and strictly guarded.

Between nine and ten o'clock at night, the king comes forth on purpose to
return home; and we remark, with joy, that his attendants were far from being
numerous.

The carriage was preceded by two men, who carried flambeaux, some officers of
his suit, two gentlemen and an esquire followed. I know not what was the name
of the grandee in the coach along with the king. There were two pages, one to
each door, two hay dukes running by the side of the equipage, and three
footmen, in the royal livery behind.

The king proceeds slowly: part of my people assemble at some distance; twelve
of the most determined spring forward: I put myself at their head, and we
advance at a good pace.

As there was a Russian garrison at that very moment in Warsaw, we effect to
speak the language of those foreigners, so that our petty troop might be
mistaken for one of their patroles.

We overtake the carriage at about a hundred and fifty paces from the grand
chancellor's palace, and exactly between those of the bishop of Cracow and of
the late grand general of Poland.

All of a sudden we pass the heads of the foremost horses, so that those who
preceded, found themselves separated from those who surrounded the royal
equipage.

I instantly give the signal agreed upon. Kaluvski gallops up, with the
remainder of the conspirators: I present a pistol to the postilion, who
instantly stops; the coachmen is fired upon, and preci^itated beneath the
wheels. Of the two hay-dukes who endeavored to defend their prince, one drops,
pierced with two balls; the other is overturned by means of a backhanded stroke
from a sabre, which he receives on the head; the steed belonging to the esquire
falls down covered with wounds; one of the pages is dismounted, and his horse
taken; pistol-balls fly about in all directions -- in short, the attack was so
hot, and the fire so violent* that I trembled for the king's life.

He himself, however, preserving the utmost coolness in the midst of the
danger, had now descended from his carriage, and was striving to regain his
uncle's palace on foot. Kaluvski arrests and seizes him by the hair; seven or
eight of the conspirators surround, disarm, overpower him, and, pressing him
between their horses, make off at a full gallop toward the end of the street.

During this moment, I confess that I thought Pulaski had basely deceived me;
that the death of the monarch was resolved upon, and that a plot had been
formed to assassinate him.

All of a sudden I form my resolves; I clap spurs to my horse, overtake the
little band, cry out to them to stop, and threaten to kill the first person who
should dare to disobey me.

That God who is the protector of good kings, watched over the safety of M. de
P --! Kaluvski and his followers stop at the sound of my well known voice. We
mount the king on horseback, make off at full speed, and regain the ditch that
surrounded the city, which the monarch is constrained to leap, in company with
us.

At that moment a panic terror takes possession of my troop; at fifty paces
distant from the ramparts, there were no more than seven who surrounded the
person of the king.

The night was dark and rainy, and it was necessary to dismount every instant,
on purpose to sound the morass with which we were surrounded.

The horse on which the monarch rode fell twice, and broke his leg at the
second fall; during these violent movement, his majesty lost his pelisse, and
the shoe belonging to his left foot.

"If you wish that I should follow you, (says he to us) you must furnish me
with another horse and a pair of boots."

We remount him once more, and, on purpose to gain the road by which Pulaski
had promised me to advance, we resolve to pass through a village called
Burakow; but the king exclaims, "Do not go that way; there are Russians there!"

I immediately change our route; but in proportion as we advance through the
wood of Beliany, our number continues to diminish. In a short time, I perceive
nobody around me but Kaluvski and Stravinski: a few minutes after, we are
challenged by a Russian sentinel on horsehack, at whose voice we instantly
stop, greatly alarmed for our safety.

"Let us kill him!" cries the ferocious Kaluvski, pointing to the ^n^. I
instantly avow to him, without disguise, the horror which such a proposition
inspired me with. "Very well, you may then take upon you the task of conducting
him," adds this cruel hearted man who immediately after precipitates himself
into the woods. Stravinski follows him, and I alone remain with the king.

"Lovzinsk^," says he, addressing himself to me, as soon as they were out of
sight; "it is you, I can no longer doubt it; it is you, for I well remember
your voice!" I utter not a single word in reply. He then mildly adds, "It is
certainly you Lovzinski! Who would have thought this ten years ago?"

We find ourselves at that moment near to the convent of Beliany, distant no
more than a single league from Warsaw.

"Lovzinski," continues the king, "permit me to enter this convent, and save
yourself."

"You must follow me," was my only answer.

"It is in vain," rejoins the monarch, "that you are disguised; it is in vain
that you endeavor to assume a feigned voice: I know you well, I am fully
assured that you are Lovzinski: ah, who would have said so ten years since? You
would then have lost your life, on condition of preserving that of your friend."

His majesty now ceases to speak; we advance some time, in profound silence,
which he again breaking, exclaims. "I am overcome with fatigue -- if you wish
to carry me alive, permit me to repose myself for a single moment."

I assist him to descend from his horse; he sits down upon the grass, and
making me sit down by his side, he takes one of my hands and presses it between
his own:

"Lovzinski, you whom I have so much loved, you who know better than any one
the purity of my intentions, how comes it obout that you have taken up arms
against me? Ungrateful Lovzinski! shall I never find you but amongst my most
bitter enemies? Do you return but on purpose to sacrifice me?"

He then, in the most affecting language, recapitulates the pleasure, of our
early youth; our more intimate connection at an age approaching to manhood, the
tender friendship which we had sworn to each other, and the regard which he had
ever treated me with since that period. He spoke to me of the honors with
which he would have loaded me during his reign, if I had been ambitious to
merit them: he reproached me more particularly respecting the unworthy
enterprise of which I appeared to be the leader, but of which, he said, he was
well assured that I was no more than the instrument.

He threw all the horror of the plot upon Pulaski, representing to me, at the
same time, that the author of such an attempt was not the sole culpable person;
that I could not charge myself with its execution without committing a crime;
and that this odious complaisance, so highly treasonable in a subject, was
infinitely more in a friend. He concluded by pressing me to restore him to his
liberty: "Fly," said he to me; and be assured, if I encounter any of the
Russian patroles, I shall tell them that you have pursued an opposite road from
that which you have taken."

The king continued to press me with the most earnest entreaties: his natural
eloquence, augmented by the danger of his situation, carried persuasion to my
heart, and awakened the most tender sentiments there.

I confess that I staggered; I balanced the circumstance for some time in my
own mind, but Pulaski at length triumphed.

I thought that I still heard the fierce republican reproaching me with my
pusillanimity. The love of one's country has perhaps its fanaticism and its
superstitions: but if I was then culpable, I am still so; I am more than ever
persuaded that in obliging the king to remount his horse again, I performed an
action that reflected honor on my patriotism.

"Is it thus," says he to me, in a melancholy accent, "that you reject the
prayer addressed to you by a friend? that you refuse the pardon offered to you
by your king? Well then, let us be gone. I deliver myself up to my unhappy
fate, or rather I abandon you to yours."

We now re-commence our journey once more; but the entreaties of the monarch,
his arguments, his reproaches, his very menaces, the struggles which I felt
within myself, effected me in such a manner, that I no longer could discern my
way. Wandering up and down the country, I kept no one certain road: after half
an hour's fatigue we found ourselves at Marimont, and I was greatly alarmed at
seeing us thus return toward Warsaw, instead of leaving it at a distance.

At about a quarter of league beyond this, we unfortunately fell in with a
party of Russians. The king immediately discovers himself to the commanding
officer, and then instantly adds. "In the course of the preceding afternoon, I
happened to bewilder myself during the chase; this good peasant, whom you see
here, insisted on my partaking a frugal repast in his cottage; but as I thought
that I perceived some of the soldiers of Pulaski roaming in the neighborhood,
I was desirous of returning to Warsaw immediately, and you will oblige me much
by instantly accompanying me thither.

"As to you, my friend," continues he, turning at the same time toward me, "I
am not at all sorry that you have given yourself this useless trouble, for I am
as much pleased at returning to my capital attended by these gentlemen
(pointing at the same time to the escort) as in accompanying you any farther.
-- However, it would be improper that I should leave you without any
recompense; what are you desirous of? Speak -- I will grant you any favor
which you may demand of me!"

It will be easy to conceive how much I was alarmed, for I was still doubtful
of the king's intentions. I endeavored to discover the true meaning of his
equivocal discourse, which must be either full of a bitter irony, or
magnanimous address. M. de P -- left me for some time in this cruel
uncertainty: "I behold you greatly embarrassed," continues he at length, with a
gracious air; "you know not what to choose! Come then, my friend, embrace me:
there is indeed more honor than profit in embracing a king (adds he with a
smile;) however, it must be allowed, that in my place, many monarchs would not
be at this moment so generous as myself!" On uttering these words, he instantly
departs, leaving me penetrated with gratitude, and confounded with so much true
greatness.

However, the danger which the king had so generously relieved me from, it
began every moment to assail me again. It was more than probable a great number
of couriers expedited from Warsaw, had spread about on all sides the
astonishing news of the king's having been carried off. Already, without doubt,
the ravishers were warmly pursued. My remarkable dress might betray me in my
flight, and if I once more fell into the hands of any of the Russians, better
informed of the circumstance, all the efforts of the king would not be able to
save me. Supposing Pulaski had obtained all the success which he expected, he
must still be at a great distance: a journey of ten more leagues at least
remained for me to perform, and my horse was entirely spent with fatigue: I
endeavored however to spur him on, but he had not got five hundred paces
before he fell under me.

A cavalier, well mounted, happened to pass along the road by the side of me,
at this very moment; he perceiving the poor animal tumble down, and thinking to
amuse himself at the expense of an unfortunate peasant, he began to banter me
about my situation. Piqued at his buffoonery, I resolved to punish him for his
raillery, and secure my own flight at one and the same time: I, therefore,
instantly present one of my pistols to his breast, and oblige him to surrender
his own horse to me: nay, I acknowledge to you, that forced by the peculiarity
of my situation, I despoiled him even of his cloak, which being very large, hid
all my rags beneath it, which otherwise might have discovered me. I then cast
my purse full of gold at the feet of the astonished traveller, and sprang
forward as fast as my new horse would carry me.

Luckily for me, he was fresh and vigorous. I dart forward twelve leagues, with
all the swiftness of an arrow: at length I think I hear the firing of cannon,
and I instantly conjecture that my father-in-law was at hand, and was employed
in fighting the Russians.

I was not deceived -- I arrive on the field of battle at the very moment when
one of our regiments had given way. I instantly discover myself to the
fugitives, and having rallied them beneath a neighbou^ing hill, I attack the
enemies in flank, while Pulaski charged them in front with the remainder of his
troops. Our maneuvers were so well concerted, and so admirably executed, that
the Russians were entirely routed, after experiencing a terrible carnage.

Pulaski deigned to attribute to me the honor of their defeat: "Ah!" cries he,
embracing me, after hearing the particulars of my expedition -- "ah! if your
forty followers had but equalled you in courage, the king would have been at
this very moment in my camp! But the Deity does not will it. I am grateful,
however, that you have been preserved to us; and I return you thanks for the
important service which you have rendered me: but for you, Kaluvski would have
assinated the monarch, and my name would have been covered with an eternal
opprobrium!

"I might have been able," added he, "to have advanced two miles farther: but I
rather chose to take possession of this respectable post, on account of the
security of my camp. Yesterday, in the course of my march, I surprised and cut
to pieces a party of Russians; this morning I beat two more of their
detachments -- but another considerable corpse having collected the remainder of
the vanquished, took advantage of the night, on purpose to attack me. My
soldiers, fatigued with the toil of a long march, and three succeeding
engagements, began to fly; but victory returned to my camp at your approach.
Let us entrench ourselves here; we will wait for the Russian army, and fight
while we yet have a drop of blood remaining!"

In the mean time, the camp resounded with the cries of gladness, and our
victorious soldiers mingled my praises with those of Pulaski. At the noise of
my name, repeated by a thousand tongues, Lodoiska ran to her father's tent. She
convinced me of the excess of her tenderness, by the excess of her joy at our
meeting; and I was obliged once more to commence the recital of the dangers
from which I had escaped. She could not hear of the singular generosity of the
monarch, when I was in the power of the Russians, without shedding tears: "How
magnanimous he is!" exclaims she, amidst a transport of joy: "how worthy of
being a king, he who so generously pardoned you! How many sighs has he spared a
wife whom you forsake! how many tears the loving wife whom you are not afraid
of sacrificing! Cruel Lovzinski, are not the dangers to which you daily expose
yourself sufficient -- "

Pulaski here interrupts his daughter with a certain degree of harshness:
"Indiscreet and weak woman!" exclaims he, "is it before me that you dare hold
such a discourse as this?"

"Alas!" replies she in a mild accent; "alas! must I forever tremble for the
life of a father and a husband?" Lodoiska also made the most affecting
complaints to me, and sighed after a more happy futurity, while fortune was
preparing for us the most cruel reverse.

Our Cossacks, placed at the out-posts, now came in from all parts, and
informed us that the Russian army was approaching. Pulaski reckoned on being
attacked at the break of day: but he was not: however, about the middle of the
following night I was informed that the enemy were preparing to force our
entrenchments.

Pulaski always ready, always active, was actually defending them: during the
course of this fatal night, he achieved every thing that might have been
expected from his valor and experience.

We repel the assailants no less than five different times, but they return
unceasingly to the charge, pour in fresh troops at every new attack, and,
during the last one, penetrate into the very heart of our camp by three
different avenues, at one and the same time.

Zaremba was killed by my side; a crowd of nobles fell in this bloody action;
the enemy refused to give any quarter. -- Furious at seeing all my friends
perish before my eyes, I resolved to precipitate myself into the midst of the
Russian battalions.

"Heedless man!" exclaims Pulaski, "what blind fury urges you toward your
destruction! My army is completely routed -- destroyed -- but my courage still
remains! Why should we perish uselessly here? Let us be gone! I will conduct
you into climes where we may raise up new enemies against the Russian name. Let
us live, since we can still serve our country! Let us save ourselves, let us
save Lodoiska."

"Lodoiska! am I capable of abandoning her?"

We instantly run to her tent -- we are scarce in time: we carry her off,
precipitate ourselves into the neighboring woods, and on the next morning we
venture to sally forth, and present ourselves before the gate of a castle that
was not altogether unknown to us.

It indeed belonged to a noble Pole, who had served during some time in our
army. Micislas instantly comes forth, and offers an asylum, which he advises
us, however, to make use of for a few hours only. He informs us, that a very
astonishing piece of news had spread abroad on the former evening, and began to
be confirmed, according to which the king himself had been carried away out of
Warsaw, that the Russians had pursued the conspirators, and brought back the
monarch to his capital; and that, in fine, it was talked of putting a price
upon the head of Pulaski, who was suspected of being the author of this treason.

"Believe me," says he, "when I assure you, whether you have been engaged or
not in this bold plot, that you ought to fly; leave your uniforms here, which
will assuredly betray you: I will instantly supply you with clothes which are
less remarkable: and as to Lodoiska, I myself will conduct her to the place
which you have chosen or your retreat."

Lodoiska now interrupts Micislas: -- "The place of my retreat shall be that of
their flight, for I will accompany them every where."

Pulaski represents to his daughter, that she is not able to sustain the
fatigue incident to such a long journey, and besides we should be liable to
continual dangers.

"The greater the peril is," replies she, "the more I ought to partake it with
you. You have repeated to me a hundred times, that the daughter of Pulaski
ought not to be an ordinary woman. For the last eight years I have constantly
lived in the midst of alarms; I have seen nothing but scenes of carnage and
horror. Death has environed me on all sides, and menaced me at every moment:
will you not permit me to brave it now by your side? Is not the life of
Lodoiska connected with that of her father? Lovzinski, will not the stroke that
fells you to the ground send you wife to the grave: and am I no longer worthy
-- "

I now interrupt Lodoiska, and join with her father, in stating reasons which
determined us to leave her in Poland. She hears me with impatience: "Ungrateful
man," exclaims she at length, "will you fly without me?" "You shall remain,"
replies Pulaski, with Lovzinski's sisters, and I prohibit you -- "

His daughter, now frantic with grief, would not permit him to finish the
sentence.

"I know your rights, my father! I respect them; they shall always appear
sacred to me: but you do not possess that of separating a wife from her husband.

"Ah, pardon me! I see that I offend you -- my reason no longer maintains its
empire --

"But pity my grief --

"Excuse my despair --

"My father! Lovzinski! hear me, both of you; I am determined to accompany you
every where!

"Yes, I will follow you every where, cruel men! I will follow you in spite of
yourselves!

Lovzinski, if your wife has lost all the rights she had over your heart,
recollect at least her who was once mistress of your affections.

"Recall to your remembrance that frightful night, when I was about to perish in
the flames; that terrible moment when you ascended the burning tower, crying
out, let me live or die with Lodoiska!

"That which you felt at that terrible moment, I now experience! I know no
greater evil that of being separated from you; and I now exclaim in my turn,
let me either live or die with my father and my husband!

"Unfortunate wretch! what will become of me, if you should forsake me. Reduced
to the cruel situation of bewailing you both, where shall I find a solace for
my miseries? Will my children console me? Alas! in two years death has
snatched four away from me; and the Russians, equally pitiless as death itself,
have bereaved me of the last! I have only you remaining in the world, and even
you wish to abandon me! my father! my husband! Will such dear connections as
these be insensible to my sufferings! Have compassion, take pity on your own
Lodoiska."

* * * * * * * * * * * * * *

Her tears now intercepted her speech. Micislas wept; my heart was torn with
anguish. "You are resolved to accompany us, my daughter -- be it so; I
consent," says Pulaski, "but I wish that heaven may not punish me for my
complaisance!"

Lodoiska now embraces us both with as much joy as if all our ills had been at
an end. I leave two letters with Micislas, which he undertook to transmit
according to the direction: the one was addressed to my sisters, and the other
to Boleslas. I bade them adieu, and I recommended to them, to neglect no means
to endeavor to recover my dear Dorliska!

It was necessary that I should disguise my wife -- she assumes a masculine
dress; we change our own, and we employ all the means in our power to disfigure
ourselves in such a manner as to elude research, and prevent discovery.

Thus altered in our appearance, armed with our sabres and our pistols,
provided with a considerable sum in gold, with some trinkets, and all the
jewels of Lodoiska, we take leave of Micislas, and make haste to regain the
woods.

Pulaski now communicates to us the design which he had formed of taking refuge
in Turkey. He hoped to be employed in a situation equal to his rank and his
abilities, in the armies of the grand signior, who had for the two last years
with some difficulty sustained a disastrous war against the Russians.

Lodoiska did not appear in the least affrighted at the long journey which we
had to make; and as she could neither be known nor sought after, she insisted
upon going out to reconnoitre the adjacent country, and at the same time
charged herself with the fatiguing but important task of bringing us the
provisions which we stood in need of.

As soon as the day appeared, we retired into the wood: hid either in the
trunks of trees, or in thick groves of pines, we waited impatiently for the
return of night, on purpose to continue our march. It was thus that, during
several weeks, we were enabled to escape from the search of a multitude of
different bodies of Russian troops, who were sent out on purpose to discover
us, and who pursued us like so many blood hounds, animated with the passions of
hatred and revenge.

One day as Lodoiska, still disguised as a peasant, returned from a
neighboring hamlet, where she had gone on purpose to purchase the provisions
which she was now conveying to us, two Russian marauders attacked her at the
entry of the forest in which we were concealed.

After having robbed, they prepared to strip her. At the shrieks which she
uttered we hasten from our retreat, and the two ruffians immediately betake
themselves to flight upon our appearance -- but we were greatly alarmed lest
they should recount this adventure to their companions, whose suspicions
aroused by this singular rencounter, might induce them to come and drag us from
our asylum.

After a most fatiguing journey, we enter Polesia. Polesia is a name given to
the palatinate of Breast in Lithuania; Breast, Briescia, or Bressici, is
situated upon the river Bog. T.
Pulaski wept at leaving his native country.

"At least," exclaims he with a mournful accent -- "at least I have faithfully
served you, and I now only go into exile that I may be enabled to serve you
again."

So many fatigues had exhausted the strength of Lodoiska. Arrived at Novogorod,
There are several towns af this name in Russia. This seems to have been
Novogorod Welicki, or Great Novogorod, the capital of a duchy of the same name.
T.
we resolve to stop there on purpose to give her time to recover her strength.
It was our design to remain some days, but some of the country people whom we
questioned, frankly informed us, that a number of troops were in motion in that
neighborhood, on purpose to arrest a certain person of the name of Pulaski,
who had occasioned the king of Poland to be taken prisoner, and carried off
from the midst of his own capital.

Justly alarmed at this intelligence, we remain but a few hours in this town,
where we, however found means to purchase some horses without being discovered.

We then pass the Desna above Czernicove; Czernicove, or Czernikou, is a
considerable town and is the capital of the duchy of the same name. I^ is
situate on the river Desna, 75 miles north-east of Kiow. T.
and following the banks of the Sula, we cross that river at Perevoloczna,
where we learn that Pulaski, who had been traced to Novogorod, had escaped as
it were by miracle, and that the Russian soldiers, indefatigable in their
pursuit, were still searching after him, and were in hopes of making him
prisoner.

It was now again become necessary to fly once more, and once more to change
our route; we therefore instantly made for the immense forests which cover the
face of the country between the Sula and the Zem, in the dark retreats of which
we hoped to find shelter from our foes.

We at length discover a cavern, in which we were reduced to the necessity of
taking up our abode. A she-bear disputes with us the entrance into this asylum
equally solitary and frightful; we assail, we kill her, and devour her young.

Pulaski was wounded in this encounter: Lodoiska, worn out with fatigue and
distress, was scarcely able to support her existence: the winter was
approaching, and the cold was already excessive.

Pursued by the Russians in the inhabited parts; menaced by wild and ferocious
animals in this vast desert; destitute of any arms but our swords; reduced in a
short time to eat our very horses; what was to become of us?

The danger of the situation to which my father-in-law and my wife were
reduced, had become so pressing, that no other fear any longer alarmed me. My
personal safety, hitherto so dear to me, did not now suggest itself once to my
mind: I felt only for theirs. I resolved, therefore, to procure to them at any
rate those succors which their situation required, which was still more
deplorable than my own; and leaving them both with the promise of rejoining
them in a short time, I take a few of the diamonds belonging to Lodoiska, and
follow the stream of the Warsklo.

It is well known that a traveller, bewildered amidst those vast countries, and
reduced to the necessity of wandering about without a compass, and without a
guide, is obliged to follow the course of a river, because it is upon its banks
that the habitations of mankind are most commonly to be met with.

It was necessary that I should gain, as soon as possible, some considerable
town in which a few merchants resided: I therefore journeyed along the bank, of
the Warsklo, and traveling day and night, found myself at Pultava Pultoway,
Pultowa, or Pultava, is a fortified town in the Ukraine, famous for a battle
fought in its neighborhood between Charles XII. of Sweden and Peter the great
of Russia. It is 100 miles south-west of Bielgorod from which Lovzinski
pretended to have come on purpose to purchase merchandise, etc.
at the end of four days. During my residence in this place, I pass for a
trader belonging to Bielgorod. I there learn that the Russian troops were still
roaming about in pursuit of Pulaski, and that the empress had sent and exact
description of his person every where, with orders to seize him either dead or
alive, wherever he might be found.

I make haste to sell my diamonds, to purchase powder, arms, and provisions of
all kinds, different utensils, and some coarse and necessary furniture; every
thing, in fine, which I judged most proper to relieve our misery, and soften
our misfortunes. -- With these I load a wagon, drawn by four good horses, of
which I was the only conductor.

My return was equally tedious and difficult; no less than eight whole days
expired before I arrived at the entrance of the forest.

It was there that, terminating my disagreeable and dangerous journey, I was
about to succor my father-in-law and my wife; that I was about to revisit all
that was most dear to me in the world; and yet I felt none of those transports
of joy which such an event seemed likely to inspire.

Philosophers have no belief in forbodeings.

Certain it is, however, that I experienced an involuntary uneasiness: my mind
became dispirited, dismayed, and something, I know not what, seemed to whisper
to me, that the most unhappy moment of my whole life was fast approaching.

On my departure, I had placed several flintstones at certain distances, on
purpose to enable me to retrace my road; but I could not now discover them. I
had also cut off with my sabre large pieces of the bark of several trees, which
I could not now perceive. I enter the forest, however: I hollow with all my
strength: I discharge my gun from time to time, but nobody answers me. I dared
not trust myself among the trees and shrubs for fear of losing my way back
again; neither could I wander too far from my wagon, which was stored with
provisions so necessary to Pulaski, his daughter, and myself.

The night, which now approached, obliged me to give over my search, and I pass
it in the same manner as the former. Rolled up in my cloak, I lay down beneath
my wagon, which I had carefully surrounded with my larger movables, and which
thus served me as a rampart against the wild beasts.

I could not sleep; the cold was extremely intense; the snow fell in great
abundance; at break of day I looked around, and found all the ground covered
with it. From that moment I formed the most horrible and the most sinister
presages: the stones which might have pointed out the path I was to have taken,
were all buried, and it appeared impossible I should ever be able to discover
my father-in-law and my wife.

Had the horse, which I had left with them at my departure, afforded them
sufficient sustenance ever since? Had not hunger, cruel hunger, obliged them to
fly from their retreat? Were they still concealed in those frightful deserts?
If they were not there, where should I be able to find them? Where, without
them, should I drag out my miserable existence?

* * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * *

But could I believe that Pulaski had abandoned his son-in-law? that Lodoiska
had consented to separate herself from her husband? No -- undoubtedly not. --
They were still confined within the circle of this frightful solitude; and if I
abandoned them, they must die with famine and cold! * * * * * * * * * * * * * *
* * * *

These desperate reflections at length determined my conduct, and I no longer
examined whether or not, in removing at a distance from my wagon, I was in
danger of never finding it again. To carry some provisions to my father-in-law
and wife, to succor Pulaski and Lodoiska -- these were now the only sentiments
that occupied my mind.

I accordingly seize my fowling piece, take some powder and shot, and load one
of my horses with necessaries: I pierce into the woods much farther than during
the former evening; I again hollow with all my strength; I again make frequent
discharges with my gun. The most melancholy silence reigned around me.

I now find myself in a part of the forest where the trees were so extremely
thick, that there was no longer any passage for my horse: I, therefore, tie him
to a tree, and my despair getting the better of every other consideration, I
still continue to advance with my gun, and part of my provisions. I had now
wandered about for two hours more, my inquietude forcing me every moment to
redouble my pace, when at length I perceive human footsteps imprinted on the
snow.

Hope gives me new strength, and I therefore instantly follow the traces which
are still fresh. Soon after I discover Pulaski almost naked, emaciated with
hunger, and so changed as scarce to be known even by me!

He makes all the efforts in his power to drag his limbs toward me, and to
reply to my enquiries. The moment that I had rejoined him, he seizes, with
avidity, on the victuals that I present to him, and devours them in an instant.
I then demand of him where Lodoiska is.

"Alas!" says he, "you will see her there!" The tone of voice in which he
pronounced these words made me tremble. I run to, I arrive at the cavern, but
too well prepared for the melancholy spectacle that awaited me. Lodoiska,
wrapped up in her own clothes, and covered with those of her father, was
extended upon a bed of half rotten leaves!

She raises with some difficulty, her weary head, and refusin^ ^e aliments
which I now offer her, ^esses me as follows: -- "I am not hungry! The death of
my children; the loss of Dorliska; our journeys, so long, so laborious, so
difficult; your dangers, which seemed to increase daily -- these have killed
me! I was unable to resist fatigue and sorrow. My friend, I am dying -- I heard
thy voice, and my soul was stopped in its flight -- We shall meet again!
Lodoiska ought to die in the arms of a husband whom she adores! -- Assist my
father! May he live? Live both of you -- console yourselves, and forget me! * *
* * * -- Search every where for my dear * * * * * *

"She was unable to pronounce the name of her daughter, and instantly expired!
* * * * * * * * * * * * * *

Her father digs a grave for her at a little distance from the cavern; and I
beheld the earth enclose all that I loved in this world!

* * * * * * * * * * * * * *

What a trying moment! Pulaski alone prevented me from becoming the victim of
despair: he forces me to survive Lodoiska!

* * * * * * * * *

Pulaski, whose courage never abandoned him, and whose strength was by this
time restored, obliges me to occupy myself jointly with him, in the business of
procuring our subsistence.

By following along the snow, the prints of my footsteps we arrive at length at
the place where I had left my wagon, which we immediately unload, and burn
soon after, on purpose to withheld from our enemies the most distant suspicion
of the place of our retreat.

By the aid of our horses, for which we procure a passage, by making a
circuitous journey, instead of attempting to bring them strait to the place of
our retreat, we were at length able to transport those provisions and movables
to our cavern, which it was so necessary for us to procure, and to husband, if
we resolved to remain much longer in this solitude. We soon after killed our
horses, which we were unable to supply with food. We lived upon their flesh,
which the rigor of the season preserved for a considerable time; it corrupted,
however, at length; and our firearms being unable to procure us any other than
a scanty supply of game, we were obliged to have recourse to our provisions;
which at the end of three months, were entirely consumed.

Some gold, and the greater part of Lodoiska's diamonds still remained. Should
I make a second voyage to Pultava? Or should we both run the hazard of such an
undertaking and quit our retreat in company? We had already suffered so much
and so cruelly in this forest that we resolved to embrace the latter resolution.

We accordingly sally forth; we pass the Sem near Rylks; we purchase a boat
there, and disguising ourselves in the dress of fishermen, we descend that
river, and enter the Desna.

Our boat was visited at Czernicove, but misery had so disfigured Pulaski, that
it was impossible any longer to recognize him. We then enter the Dnieper; we
cross from Kiof Kiof, or Kiow, is a palatinate, in which is situated a town of
the same name, which is reckoned the capital of the Ukraine. It is built on the
banks of the river Nieper, or Dnieper, as it is sometimes called. T.
to Krylow. There we were obliged to receive into our boat, and carry to the
other side, several Russian soldiers who were on their march to join a small
army employed against Pugatchew.

At Zaporiskaia we heard of the capture of Bender and Oczakow, the conquest of
the Crimed, and the defeat and subsequent death of the Vizir Oglou.

Pulaski, reduced to a state of desperation, was anxious to traverse the vast
deserts that separated him from Pugatchew, on purpose to join himself to that
enemy of the Russians; but the excess of our fatigues obliged us to remain at
Zaporiskaia.

The peace, which was soon after concluded between Russia and the Port, at
length afforded us the means of entering Turkey.

On foot, and still disguised, we crossed the Boudziac, part of Moldavia and
Wallachia, and after a thousand unforeseen and unexpected difficulties and
fatigues, we at length arrive at Adrianople.

Having remained for some time at this place, on purpose to repair our
exhausted forces, we prepare to depart: but we are arrested, and, being carried
before the Cadi, are accused of having sold several diamonds in the course of
our journey, which we had apparently stolen. The miserable clothes with which
we were covered, had given rise to this suspicion.

Pulaski discovers himself to the mussulman judge, and he sends us immediately
to Constantinople.

We are admitted shortly after to an audience of the grand signior. He orders
apartments to be prepared for us, and assigns us a liberal pension upon his
treasury.

I then write to my sisters, and to Bo^eslas we learn, by their answers, that
all the property of Pulaski had been confiscated, that he was degraded from his
rank, and condemned to lose his head.

My father-in-law is in the utmost consternatian on receiving this
intelligence: he is filled with indignation at being accused as a regicide: he
writes home in his own justification.

Constantly animated, and devoured as it were with the love of his country,
continually influenced by the mortal hatred which he had sworn against its
enemies, he never ceased, during the whole four years that we remained in
Turkey, to endeavor by his intrigues, to oblige the Port to declare war
against Russia.

In 1774, amidst a transport of rage, he receives intelligence of the triple
invasion, The dismemberment of Poland, by the Empress of Russia, the Emperor of
Germany, and the king of Prussia. This event which took place by the agreement
of three royal robbers, is one of the most disgraceful actions that ever
stained the page of humanity. T.
which bereaved the republic of one third of its possessions.

It was in the spring of 1776, that the patriots of America, fearful of the
tyranny of an island which once boasted of its own liberties, resolved to
redeem their violated rights by force of arms. My country has lost her
freedom, says Pulaski to me one day: but, ah, let us still fight for that of a
new people!

We pass into Spain, we embark on board a vessel bound for the Havanna, from
whence we r^pair to Philadelphia. The congress instantly presents us with
commissions, and employs us in the army of General Washington.

Pulaski, consumed with a black melancholy, exposes his life like a man to whom
life had become insupportable, is always to be found at the most dangerous
posts, and toward the end of the fourth campaign, is mortally wounded by my
side. Being carried to his tent, I instantly repair thither to console him.

"I find my end approaches," says he, addressing himself to me. "Ah! it is but
too true, that I shall never see my native country again!

"Cruel, fantastical destiny! Pulaski falls a martyr to American liberty, and
the Poles still continue slaves!

* * * * * * * *

My friend, my death would be indeed horrible, if a ray of hope did not remain
to cheer me! Ah! I hope I do not deceive myself -- No, I am not mistaken," adds
he in a firmer accent.

"A consoling Deity discloses in my last thoughts a futurity, a happier
futurity which approaches!

"I beheld one of the first nations in the world awakening from a long and deep
slumber, and re-demanding of its proud oppressors its violated honors, and its
ancient rights; its sacred, imprescriptible rights, the rights of humanity.

"I behold in an immense capitol, long dishonored by every species of
servility, a crowd of soldiers discovering themselves to be citizens, and
millions of citizens becoming soldiers.

"Beneath their redoubled blows, the Bastile shall be overturned; the signal is
already given from one extremity of the empire to another; -- the reign of
tyrants is no more!

"A neighboring people, sometimes an enemy, but always generous, always worthy
of deciding upon great actions, shall applaud those unexpected efforts, crowned
with such a speedy success!

"Ah, may a reciprocal esteem commence and strengthen between these two nations
an unalterable friendship! May that horrible science of trick, imposture, and
treason, which courts denominate politics, hold out no obstacle to prevent this
fraternal reunion!

"Noble rivals in talents and philosophy, Frenchmen! Englishmen! suspend at
length, and suspend for ever, those bloody discords, the fury of which has but
too often extended over the two hemispheres; -- no longer decide between you
the empire of the universe, but by the force of your example, and the
ascendency of your genius. Instead of the cruel advantage of affrighting and
subduing the nations around you, dispute between yourselves the more solid
glory of enlightening their ignorance, and breaking their chains.

"Approach," adds Pulaski, "behold at a little distance from, and in the midst
of the carnage that surrounds us, among such a crowd of famous warriors, a
warrior celebrated even in the midst of them, by his masculine courage, his
early talents, and his virtues truly republican. He is the heir of a name long
illustrious; but he had no occasion for the glory of his ancestors, to render
himself celebrated.

"It is young FAYETTE, already an honor to France, and a scourge to tyrants:
but he has scarce begun his mortal labors!

"Envy his fate, Lovzinski; endeavor to imitate his virtues, and follow as
near as possible the steps of so great a man. He, the worthy pupil of a
Washington, shall soon be the Washington of his own country. It is almost at
the same time, my friend, it is at that memorable epoch of the regeneration of
nations, that the eternal justice shall also present to our fellow-citizens,
the days of vengeance and of liberty.

"Then Lovzinski, in whatever place thou may be, let thy hate re-kindle!
Again combat gloriously on the side of Poland.

"Let the remembrance of your injuries, and of our successes, call forth thy
courage! May thy sword, so many times empurpled with the blood of our enemies,
be still turned against those oppressors. May they tremble while thinking on
thy exploits! May they tremble in recalling the name of Pulaski!

"They have ravished from us our property; they have assassinated thy wife;
they have robbed thee of thy daughter; they have dishonored my memory!

"The barbarians! They have dismembered our provinces! Lovzinski, these are
injuries which you ought never to forget.

"When our persecutors are those also of our country, vengeance becomes at once
sacred and indispensible.

"You owe to the Russians an eternal hatred! You owe to Poland the last drop of
your blood!"

Saying this he expires. Pulaski was killed at the siege of Savannah, in 1779.


Death, in snatching him from me, bereaved me of my last consolation.

I fought for the United States of America, until the happy peace which ensured
their independence. M. de C --, who had served along with me, and who was
attached to the corpse commanded by the Marquis de la Fayette. M. de C --, gave
me letters of recommendation, to his friends in Paris, and this capital I have
chosen for my retreat in the meridian of life, from the bustle of politics, and
the clangor of arms.

Having informed my sisters of the place of my residence, they collected the
small remains of my fortune, formerly immense, and hastened to solace me after
the distressing scenes I had unfortunately witnessed.



The affecting history of the Baron de Lovzinski, which he relates to a friend,
breaks off, without giving any account of Dorliska, his darling daughter, whom
the Russians carried off, in one of their engagements with Pulaski. It appears
from more recent accounts, given by an acquaintance of the Baron's, that she
fell into the hands of Count Gorlitz, a German nobleman, who placed her in a
suitable seminary, and was by accident restored to her father, and united to a
branch of a very distinguished family.

FINIS:
THE STORY OF Alcander and Septimius. Taken from a Byzantine Historian.
ATHENS, long after the decline of the Roman empire, still continued the seat
of learning, politeness, and wisdom. Theodoric, the Ostrogoth* repaired the
schools which barbarity was suffering to fall into decay, and continued those
pensions to men of learning, which avaricious governors had monopolized.

In this city, and about this period, Alcander and Septimius were fellow
students together; the one, the most subtle reasoner of all the Lyceum; the
other the most eloquent speaker in the academic grove. Mutual admiration soon
beg^t friendship. Their fortunes were nearly equal, and they were natives of
the two most celebrated cities in the world; for Alcander was of Athens,
Septimius came from Rome.

In this state of harmony they lived for some time together, when Alcander,
after passing the first part of his youth in the indolence of philosophy,
thought at length of entering into the busy world; and, as a step previous to
this, placed his affections on Hypatia, a lady of exquisite beauty. The day of
their intended nuptials was fixed; the previous ceremonies were performed; and
nothing now remained but her being conducted in triumph to the apartment of the
intended bridegroom.

Alcander's exultation in his own happiness, or being unable to enjoy any
satisfaction without making his friend Septimius a partner, prevailed upon him
to introduce Hypatia to his fellow-student; which he did with all the gaiety of
a man who found himself equally happy in friendship and love. But this was an
interview fatal to the future peace of both; for Septimius no sooner saw her,
but he was smitten with an involuntary passion; and though he used every effort
to suppress desires at once so imprudent and unjust, the emotions of his mind
in a short time became so strong, that they brought on a fever, which the
physicians judged incurable.

During this illness, Alcander watched him with all the anxiety of fondness,
and brought his mistress to join in those amiable offices of friendship. The
sagacity of the physicians, by these means, soon discovered that the cause of
their patient's disorder was love; and Alcander being apprised of their
discovery, at length extorted a confession from the reluctant dying lover.

It would but delay the narrative to describe the conflict between love and
friendship in the breast of Alcander on this occasion; it is enough to say,
that the Athenians were at this time arrived at such refinement in morals, that
every virtue was carried to excess. In short, forgetful of his own felicity, he
gave up his intended bride, in all her charms, to the young Roman. They were
married privately by his connivance, and this unlooked for change of fortune
wrought as unexpected a change in the constitution of the now happy Septimius.
In a few days he was perfectly recovered, and set out with his fair partner for
Rome. Here, by an exertion of those talents which he was so eminently possessed
of, Septimius, in a few years, arrived at the highest dignities of the state,
and was constituted the city judge or praetor.

In the mean time, Alcander not only felt the pain of being separated from his
friend and his mistress, but a prosecution was also commenced against him, by
the relations of Hypatia, for having basely given up his bride, as was
suggested, for money. His innocence of the crime laid to his charge, and even
his eloquence in his own defense, were not able to withstand the influence of a
powerful party. He was cast and condemned to pay an enormous fine. However,
being unable to raise so large a sum at the time appointed, his possessions
were confiscated, he himself was stripped of the habit of freedom, exposed as a
slave in the marketplace, and sold to the highest bidder.

A merchant of Thrace becoming his purchaser, Alcander, with some other
companions of distress, was carried into that region of desolation and
sterility. -- His stated employment was to follow the herds of an imperious
master, and his success in hunting was all that was allowed him to supply his
precarious subsistence. Every morning waked him to a renewal of famine or toil,
and every change of season served but to aggravate his unsheltered distress.
After some years of bondage, however, an opportunity of escaping offered; he
embraced it with ardour; so that, traveling by night, and lodging in caverns
by day, to shorten a long story, he at last arrived in Rome. The same day on
which Alcander arrived, Septimius sat administering justice in the forum,
whither our wanderer came, expecting to be instantly known, and publicly
acknowledged, by his former friend. Here he stood the whole day amongst the
crowd, watching the eyes of the judge, and expecting to be taken notice of; but
he was so much altered by a long succession of hardships, that he continued
unnoticed among the rest; and, in the evening, when he was going up to the
praetors chair, he was brutally repulsed by the attending lictors. The
attention of the poor is generally driven from one ungrateful object to
another: for night coming on, he now found himself under the necessity of
seeking a place to lie in and yet knew not where to apply. All emaciated and in
rags, as he was, n^ of the citizens would harbor so much wretchedness; and
sleeping in the streets might be attended with interruption or danger: in
short, he was obliged to take up his lodging in one of the tombs without the
city, the usual retreat of guilt, poverty, and despair. In this mansion of
horror, laying his head upon an inverted urn, he forgot his miseries for a
while in sleep; and found, on his flinty couch, more ease than beds of down can
supply to the guilty.

As he continued here, about midnight, two robbers came to make this their
retreat; but, happening to disagree about the division of their plunder, one of
them stabbed the other to the heart, and left him weltering in blood at the
entrance. In these circumstances he was found next morning, dead, at the mouth
of the vault. This naturally inducing a further enquiry, an alarm was spread;
the cave was examined, and Alcander being found, was immediately apprehended,
and accused of robbery and murder. The circumstances against him were strong,
and the wretchedness of his appearance confirmed suspicion. Misfortune and he
were now so long acquainted, that he at last became regardless of life. He
detested a world where he had found only ingratitude, falsehood, and cruelty;
he was determined to make no defense; and thus, lowering with resolution, he
was dragged, bound with cords, before the tribunal of Septimius. As the proofs
were positive against him, and he offered nothing in his own vindication, the
judge was proceeding to doom him to a most cruel and ignominious death, when
the attention of the multitude was soon divided by another object. The robber,
who had been really guilty, was apprehended selling his plunder, and, struck
with a panic, had confessed his crime. He was bro't bound to the same tribunal,
and acquitted every other person of any partnership in his guilt. Alcander's
innocence therefore appeared, but the sullen rashness of his conduct remained a
wonder to the surrounding multitude; but their astonishment was still further
increased, when they saw their judge start from his tribunal to embrace the
supposed criminal. Septimius recollected his friend and former benefactor, and
hung upon his neck with tears of pity and of joy. Need the sequel be related?
Alcander was acquitted; shared the friendship and honors of the principal
citizens of Rome; lived afterward in happiness and ease; and left it to be
engraved on his tomb, That no circumstances are so desperate, which Providence
may not relieve.

THE Romantic Shepherdess. A TALE.
WE frequently find that when the mind has been long employed on one object, a
slight derangement of the reasoning faculty is the consequence, which is often
better remedied by gentle soothing treatment, than by more violent methods.

Lucy Belgrove was the daughter of a gentleman of considerable property, in the
west of England. She was a young lady of a tender and delicate frame of body,
and a lively and susceptible imagination. The perusal of romances, and
especially those of a pastoral kind, was her principal amusement, which at
length had so powerful an effect on her fancy, that she sighed for nothing so
much as (...) pleasure of lo^ding the life of an Arcadian nymph, and attending
her innocent sheep to the grass-clad hill, or the murmuring rivulet. She would
wander from morning to night about the fields, furnished by fancy with ^ewes
and lambs, with a crook in her hand, and all the appurtenances of the pastoral
life, supremely happy in her visionary occupation.

As, notwithstanding this innocent phrenzy, she was of a truly beautiful
person, a delicate and amiable disposition, and heiress to a large fortune, she
had numerous admirers and suitors; but none of these were so much as permitted
to tell their tender tales of love; the heart and the imagination of the lady
were entirely engrossed by another object: she turned a deaf ear to all their
amorous complaints, and sought the woods and shady groves.

At length, a young gentleman in the neighborhood, who had long admired her
beauty and amiable qualities, while he pitied the peculiar derangement of her
mind, determined to try the effect of humouring her in her pastoral phrenzy. He
assumed the habit of an Arcadian swain, followed her into the fields with his
crook and his pipe, and playing on the latter, soothed her with pastoral airs.
Approaching her with modest diffidence he wooed her as a shepherd enamoured of
a shepherdess. In this character she listened to him. Day after day they
wandered together over the plains and through the woods; till at length love
entering her heart, by degrees banished the visionary ideas that had hitherto
occupied her mind. Her swain gradually drew her attention from the romantic
scenes she had been so fondly addicted to; she no longer sought the woods and
groves, but preferred the company of her lover to attending her imaginary
flocks. They were soon after married, and live in that happiness which real
love can alone bestow.

THE END.
Child's Spelling Book. RECOMMENDATIONS. Extracts from sundry letters to the
compiler.
(From the Rev. Mr. WILLIAMS.)
EAST-HARTFORD, March 4, 1799.
"INABILITY, by reason of sickness, has till now, prevented my acknowledging
the receipt of your favor of the "Child's Spelling Book" some time since; I
have perused it with pleasure; and esteem it a very valuable performance, and
well adapted and calculated for the use and benefit of schools; and shall, as I
have opportunity, recommend it accordingly.

ELIPH. WILLIAMS."

(From the Rev. Mr. WILLARD.)
"STAFFORD, April 25, 1800.
"TWO copies of the "Child's Spelling Book," viz. one of the first, and the
other of the second edition, presented by you, came to hand some time since: I
thank you, sir, for them. Various things, needless to mention, have
preprevented my writing till now.

"By your desire, I have examined, with care, the material parts of the book,
and think it well adapted to answer the design of its publication. I view it as
a useful introduction to the larger Spelling Books; and have freely recommended
it. It begins to be introduced into our schools; and probably in a short time,
will generally be purchased by parents for their younger child^en. The moderate
price is a secondary recommendation to persons in indigent circumstances.

In the second impression you have made a very valuable addition; particularly,
by inserting the young child's Catechism, sundry excellent Hymns, and a copious
collection of Rules for the behavior of children, calculated to form them
betimes, not only to morality but to a polished behavior in the various places
which they fill in society, and relations which they stand to mankind around
them.

JOHN WILLARD."

(From the Rev. Mr. WITTER.)
WILBRAHAM, January 29, 1799.
"I AM free to say, the "Child's Spelling Book" meets my approbation. I deem it
the best adapted to the capacities of small children, of any thing of the kind
I have seen.

E. WITTER."

(From the Rev. Mr. SELDOM.)
CHATHAM, December 18, 1798.
"HAVING perused the "Child's Spelling Book," I esteem it well calculated for
the improvement of young children in the first rudiments of literature, good
manners and morality.

D. SELDOM,"

(From an experienced Schoolmaster.)
BOLTON, December 12, 1798.
"THE "Child's Spelling Book" was gratefully received, and perused with
pleasure; the work is, in my opinion, well executed, and very well calculated
to answer the design for which it was intended. I have exhibited and
recommended the book to my school, which consists of about seventy. I think the
errata, (if any) ^w and trifling*

AARON BUEL."


