AN ORATION COMMEMORATIVE OF THE VIRTUES AND GREATNESS OF GENERAL WASHINGTON;
PRONOUNCED IN THE GERMAN LUTHERAN CHURCH, PHILADELPHIA: BEFORE THE Grand Lodge
of Pennsylvania, ON THE TWENTY-SECOND DAY OF FEBRUARY, EIGHTEEN HUNDRED

BY SAMUEL MAGAW, D. D.

Published at the Request of the Grand Lodge.

Philadelphia: PRINTED BY J. ORMROD, No. 41, CHESNUT-STREET. 1800.

GRAND LODGE OF PENNSYLVANIA. GRAND QUARTERLY COMMUNICATION. Philadelphia,
Monday, 3 d March, Anno Lucis, 5800.
ON motion made and seconded, Resolved Unanimously, That the Committee of
Arrangement, on the occasion of the late Procession in honor of the memory of
our late illustrious Brother, GENERAL GEORGE WASHINGTON, wait on the Reverend
Samuel Magaw, D. D. and present to him the thanks of this Grand Lodge, for the
elegant oration by him delivered on the said occasion; and request that he may
be pleased to favor the Grand Lodge with a copy thereof for publication.

Extract from the Minutes, GEORGE A. BAKER, Grand Secretary.

GENTLEMEN,
Fortunate would I have deemed myself, to have met the late occasion with
abilities and preparation worthy of its importance and sublimity. The most I
could presume to look for, was merely indulgence.

I gratefully acknowledge the politeness of the Grand Lodge; and with profound
deference receive the expression of their will, conveyed by "The Committee of
Arrangement."

The sole difficulty with me, lies in a consciousness of the imperfection of so
hurried a performance as mine, and the impropriety there would be now, in
attempting to improve it.

SAMUEL MAGAW.
TO THE COMMITTEE OF ARRANGEMENT, etc.
AN ORATION, etc.
WHEN Britain stretched out her arm beyond the bounds of law, America arose
indignant, at the attempt; resisted and repelled the invasion of her rights;
and by virtue, patriotism and valor, founded her liberty and independence. To
guard these most effectually -- "To form a more perfect union, establish
justice, insure domestic tranquillity, provide for the common defense, promote
the general welfare, and secure happiness to us and our posterity;" she raised
on the broad basis of reason and the rights of man, a superstructure supported
by pillars of the first order; finished and adorned in the most approved
architecture; the apartments beautifully arranged, well proportioned, elegant
and accommodating; -- the residence of liberty -- the admiration of enlightened
nations -- the protection and glory of this western world.

The grand master builder, who principally prepared the ground, and carried up
the edifice; who defended it from foreign assaults and domestic confusion; He,
whose splendid orb so long illumined it -- has retired, and, alas! is gone
forever --

Hence an awful silence -- hence the pensive melancholy, which shadows every
countenance -- the solemn gloom which reigns throughout the mansion: Hence, in
compliance with the high, well-timed recommendation to the people of the United
States, to assemble on this day for the purpose of expressing their gratitude
for incalcula^^e services, and testifying their affliction for an irretrievable
loss -- the Grand Lodge of Pennsylvania have entered this sacred Temple Zion
Church.
. Their special relation to "the great Light departed," enhances the dignity of
the recommendation, and marks this as a day pre-eminently to be regarded.

Much I wished, gentlemen, to have declined the appointment you were pleased to
honor me with; from the extreme shortness of the notice; but especially from a
consideration that has been well expressed by a celebrated Athenian Pericles.
. "Difficult indeed it is," says he, "to speak on a subject, where the hearer
enlightened by a long acquaintance, and warm in his affections, may quickly
pronounce every thing to be unfavourably expressed, in respect to what he
wishes, and what he knows to be the truth."

With that diffidence which the observation as well as the subject itself
naturally creates, and without pretensions to those talents which the occasion
requires, I rise, -- not expecting to describe in the glow of dignified
eloquence, those actions which excited admiration -- those accomplishments,
qualities and virtues, which made their possessor so much beloved; but merely
as your instrument to carry on one part of the solemnities of this day designed
to do honor to The first of Heroes, Statesmen, best of men,
Whose like we never shall look upon again.


To render respect to characters illustrious for their public services, is
becoming in every point of view. It results from a fair and just conception of
things. It is a debt of gratitude, which it is favorable to the best interests
of society, to pay. It renders virtue prominent, visible, lovely and beloved.
It creates a pure, unblameable emulation. It diffuses public spirit. To great
abilities it proves an incentive, to bring them into action: to the good and
useful, whatever their degree, it intimates and yields encouragement. The most
renowned nations have at all times been sensible of this Hence has the
festive, and the funeral day been fixed; -- the breathing ode, and eulogy
pronounced; -- the monument, -- "the statue, -- the devoted pile," erected --

Singularly expressive in this behalf, was the custom of the Egyptians, a
people extremely improved, as well as ancient: for, besides "celebrating the
names and actions of their departed worthies, they embalmed their bodies, that
they might long be kept in public view, as examples of virtue, and, although
dead, yet speaking."

It is well known what attention the Master States of the world, Greece and
Rome, in their most splendid periods, employed in celebrating distinguished
actions and characters. It is in this way, we have become acquainted with a
Solon, Aristides, Epaminondas, Phocian; -- a Numa, Fabricius, Cincinnatus,
Camillus, -- and all those worthies who shine in the rolls of honest fame; the
patrons of liberty, the conservators of justice, the friends of virtue,
government and laws.

No less attentive will America be, in giving celebrity to, and sounding wide,
the greatness of her favorite sons. Already in her recording page, we find
described -- and the description shall brighten as it is handed down, -- a
Warren, Montgomery, Mercer, Green, Franklin; with an host of her heroes,
statesmen, and sages; at whose names, every thing great, good, and amiable,
rises to our view; -- men, who successfully co-operated in achieving, rearing,
and protecting, all that we deem excellent and worthy of our possessing; --
before whose merit, the splendor of antiquity fades on our remembrance, and
who have exalted claims on our gratitude and attention.

Placed in her brightest page, and in the annals of the world the brightest
ornament, -- placed pre-eminent by the enraptured voice of grateful America,
with the consenting plaudits of an admiring world, is he who will give renown
to these United States, till time shall be no more, THE IMMORTAL WASHINGTON.

"First in war -- first in peace -- and first in the hearts of his countrymen,"
has our whole nation announced him -- afflicted and mourning for his decease!

Responsive to this high annunciation, shall millions speak; and all the chief
occurrences, and noted places through the land, make record, to the end of time.

Yes, "first in war" -- shall his achievments great, through seven eventful
years, fix and perpetuate his name --

Ye rivers majestic! Hudson -- Delaware -- Chesapeak -- as long as ye continue
to flow -- and render your tributary waters to the vast Atlantic, bear witness
ye shall to the exploits he has accomplished in your view!

Ye heights, and vales, and plains -- whether of Cambridge, Morristown,
Brunswick, Trenton, Philadelphia, Monmouth, -- continual remembrancers shall ye
be of his renown!

Conqueror of India, Earl Cornwallis.
one half thy laurels shall deck our warrior's tomb!

Him -- First in peace, -- these happy States, their spreading canvas -- rising
cities -- advancing population, and all their prosperity declare.

Ye unhappy States of the world too, divided by faction, corrupted by foreign
influence, destroyed by foreign force; -- your ruin, the contrast to our
felicity, appreciates the merit of his name.

And what else do those looks of affliction, those sable, shrouded places,
show; those tears -- that general mourning throughout this land, -- but that he
was first in the veneration and affections of his countrymen?

If ever there was a person, to whom gratitude was due for his services, and
veneration to be paid to his memory, -- it is He, who is the subject of our
present attention, in whom is seen from first to last, a character sublime.

In earliest youth he gave uncommon presages of rising excellence, and future
fame. He was even then possessed of extraordinary accomplishments both of body
and mind: A combination and a form indeed,
Where every virtue seemed to set its seal,
To give the world assurance of a Patriot.


His person was graceful and majestic; his air and manner, engaging and
impressive. His countenance portrayed the dignity of his soul. Before he
arrived at age, he was entrusted with high national concerns. Just passing from
that period, -- see the young Hero discharging a veteran part; conducting
exploits of military prowess with intrepidity and success; encountering a
savage foe, with enterprise most skilful; disclosing vast recollection, and
powers of genius, in a dismal trying hour; -- even bearing away laurels from
Monongahela's crimsoned banks, and Braddock's field of slaughter.

When darkness had spread over our horizon, and the imperious hand of that
nation we till then revered, through a misguided policy, grasped at our rights;
on the call of his country he prepares for, and hastens to the battle. With
raw, undisciplined troops, he withstands the British veterans: Hovering over
the mountains, he descends upon them, -- carrying along destruction, with
amaze: and by actions which produced confidence in his ^^ops -- dejection and
astonishment in his enemies, -- admiration throughout the world The exalted
opinion entertained of him by Frederic the great, of Prussia, -- this laconic
address evinced, affixed to some memorial of personal esteem, transmitted by
the king, to the American general: "From the oldest general in Europe, to the
greatest general in the world.
; he achieved, in concurrence with a potent, generous ally, the independence of
this great, flourishing, wide-extended empire.

Arrived at the pinnacle of military glory, no foul ambition marks his grand
career; no Caesar's spirit trampling on the laws; no "Cromwell's guilty of his
country's blood;" no usurpation of the public rights, under pretense of public
good; But shuning absolute power, which apparently was in his reach, and
courted his embrace; he bade an affectionate adieu to the partners of his toil;
and rendering back to the authority from whence he received it, that commission
which he had so successfully executed, -- with accumulated honors he returned
to his plough.

Possessing talents no less distinguished for their variety, than greatness;
prepared to meet the different situations his country might be placed in, as
well as all the hazards it was exposed to; he was not permitted, in the course
of Providence, to continue long in his retreat. The connection formed in the
hour of danger, which carried us through the revolutionary war, held together
by the pressure of external force, began to relax; while symptoms of disunion
gave dreadful note of the destruction of these States.

To avert the impending danger, America disclosed a scene, the parallel to
which, in like distinguished circumstances, no age before had witnessed -- the
people of independent sovereignties forming a bond of union -- selecting men to
meet together for that purpose, in Convention; men of the first talents,
virtue, and public confidence -- a WASHINGTON amongst them. Suddenly the
long-gathering clouds retired, and the glorious constellation of America, the
Federal form of government appeared, -- in theory, the most elegant; in
operation, coming very near perfection; answering its end more completely than
any other -- the happiness of a great people.

To realize the hopes of its expanding salutary influence, the voice of the
people -- now indeed the voice of God -- unanimously fixed on this illustrious
citizen, to conduct its operations.

Scarce had he taken his important seat, and our government began to move,
when, in a distant country, whose people and whose interests had before been
favorites of this, a furious revolution bursted forth; and hideous, misshapen
faction rose -- covering her horrid form with the name of liberty. She drew
nations to her embrace; and crushed them. Setting aside the laws of nature,
nations, and of God, she stalked in ruin, perfidy, and blood; -- convulsed
Europe, and convulsed a world!

WASHINGTON withstood the shock: and while the most ancient governments were
tottering to their foundation; yours he supported. While every republic was
prostrated; yours ^e established. In a field environed with difficulties --
where scarcely before, a foot had trod, he avoided the quicksands of
destruction, and the wild blasts of the tempest.

When internal commotion threatened, he suppressed it. "Intrigue," says one of
his elegant eulogists Judge MINCT, of Bo^ton.
, "attempted to entangle him in her poisonous web, but he bursted it with
gigantic strength, and crushed her labors. Anarchy looked out from her cavern,
and was dashed in oblivion. Insurrection was so struck that it fled from the
weight of his arm. The nations of Europe saw the wisdom of our laws, the vigor
of our measures; the justice of our policy; the firmness of our government; and
acquiesced in our neutrality."

Having shunned the storm which with tremendous violence has ravaged Europe,
and extended to the limits of the world -- which has destroyed, and is still
destroying, some of the finest portions of this globe; -- having preserved you
from danger, from whatever source approaching; having, under God, given
prosperity, wealth, happiness and glory to his country, and established her
Constitution on a rock, against which, the waves of faction mingling with every
storm, may rage, -- but if his advice and example are followed -- shall rage
and dash in vain; the venerable father of his country now seeks ^etirement and
repose.

The abilities which this illustrious character disclosed in the different
orbits in which he moved, were such as would have rendered him conspicuous in
any age, country, or station: They were competent to the different situations
his country was placed in, and to the warding off every danger to which she was
exposed: They gave her happiness in peace; security in war; and appeared
equally pre-eminent in his conduct and management in both. He was endowed by
nature with a musculine understanding, which he greatly embellished; but more
particularly attended to the strengthening and enlarging of it. He was
possessed of an uncommon share of common sense: But what chiefly strikes us,
was his wonderful prudence. Born with strong passions, the usual concomitants
of genius, but which frequently impair and sully its luster; he had acquired a
perfect command and ascendency over them. On great occasions, he consulted the
opinions and judgment of others; but took not a single step, without the
sanction of his own. He deliberated with a cautious and profound attention; he
took his resolutions with a decisive and immovable firmness. It appears not
that he was covetous of fame; yet in his performance of illustrious deeds, fame
followed him. If he had what some might denominate ambition, that ambition was
no other, than devotion to his country: superior to personal or private
considerations, -- when its interests were in question, he willingly hazarded
every thing in their defense.

In his military character, he will always stand high among the highest upon
earth. There was an uncommon depth and dignity in his undertakings; there were
exerted uncommon powers in the execution of them. He suffered not an advantage
to be taken of him, through a want of skill, or precaution: and never failed to
take advantage of the unwary situation and mistakes of his enemy. He knew when
to conquer by dispatch, and how to conquer by delay. With eagle eye he saw the
critical point of opportunity; with eagle eye he seized upon it. In action he
was as brave, as in council provident.

As a Statesman, he was no less illustrious, than as a General. He thoroughly
understood the principles and nature of government; its modifications
appropriate to the diversity of times, nations, and circumstances; the measures
to be pursued at home; the conduct to be maintained toward connections abroad.
He had the clearest conceptions of the public good, and a discernment that
seemed intuitive in his selection of measures, and of men, to promote it.

These patriotic virtues and abilities produced no less affection, than his
former services and brilliant exploits excited admiration. All combined to give
a respect for his person, superior to whatever had been entertained for any
other, of whom the annals of history make mention. This respect was not
confined to the limits of his own country; it extended wide and far. He was
beloved, he was admired, by those whom war only had made his enemies. He was
celebrated in all the glow of poetry, and the fire of Demosthenian eloquence;
held in the highest veneration by princes, heroes, statesmen, sages, writers,
historians, and people of Europe; -- and not of Europe alone; but of the whole
world.

Nor was it in public life only that he appeared to advantage. His character is
not like many portraits, -- to be seen best at a distance, or in particular
positions with respect to the light; it may be examined near, with strictest
scrutiny: and in every light, constitutes the sublime and beautiful.

Nor is it a character in which, this virtue merely, or the other, is
prominent; but, where the whole system of virtues has taken place, and the most
arduous amongst them has been practiced.

And, no less in the retired scenes of life, than in the apparently more
splendid, was he the truly Great Man. Temperate, sincere, industrious, strictly
oeconomical in the use and distribution of time, -- sociable, humane,
religious, liberal, and just, he was. -- Really, the whole desire of his heart,
the whole object of his endeavors, was private, as well as public good. The
amiable character was seen in him, no less than the illustrious.

Impressively and long will this be remembered by those who were honored with
his near acquaintance. Especially do ye bear witness to this, ye mourners
around MOUNT VERNON! ye good people of ALEXANDRIA! whether ye be persons of
cultivated understandings, relishing "the feast of reason, and the flow of
soul;" -- or whether ye be plain farmers; your WASHINGTON was dear to you as
the Man of your bosoms! No wonder, ye are afflicted, and do sorrow that ye
shall see his face no more!

He was your friend! the adviser -- the comforter in your difficulties when
disclosed to him; and the sharer in your joy, when he saw your affairs prosper.
He was the venerable neighbor, whose wisdom, hospitality, courteous and
obliging nature, were the charm of every one of you. How goodly and delightful
was it to each, and any of you, in one place, or another, to meet and talk with
him! -- Friend to the poor! for sure that God-like attribute was his; he
comforted and blessed them at all seasons, by his private liberality: and, it
is sufficient to say -- his public largesses, living and dying were worthy of
himself.

On the ground of steadfast moral principle grafted on religion, his whole
demeanor and proceedings appear to have taken their course -- and hence, that
moral excellency, which was the life and soul of his most amiable qualities, as
well as splendid achievments: hence too those maxims of discretion and
integrity, to which he so inflexibly adhered.

The mentioning of this moral principle, and those maxims of conduct which
result therefrom, brings us to the eminence, the vantage ground, from which the
great personage whom we are now speaking of, may most happily be viewed.

Brilliancy of talents, and magnificence of action would weigh light in the
scale of merit, without personal, inherent goodness. It is mind chiefly that
makes the man; and it is goodness which constitutes the value of mind. When the
excellency of moral qualities is there seated, other great gifts and deeds have
their consummate influence, and all their praise.

A good man is always a fine character. In framing an idea of such, you must at
least select and combine amiable qualities. When these associate with splendid
ones, that man is great. Still, here there are various degrees, the high, and
the yet higher. "There is one glory of the sun, and another glory of the moon;
and another glory of the stars: for one star, and one sun, differs from
another, in glory." --

I conceive of it as an illustrious circumstance, -- attaching to your masonic
order, gentlemen, a respectability unimpeachable henceforth, and in no instance
surpassed before, that WASHINGTON was a Brother. If your system were not a true
one, never would you have had an opportunity of recognizing him in any such
relation: never would he so unequivocally have declared, as he has done, his
meeting your communications in the perfect sensibility of fraternal attachment,
and with sentiments of the highest consideration. His own words are so
energetic and honorable to this effect, that I cannot but select, and in this
place recite, one of his answers to you. The following he gave on an
interesting occasion:

Fellow-citizens, and Brothers of the Grand Lodge of Pennsylvania, -- I have
received your address with all the feelings of brotherly affection, mingled
with those sentiments for the Society, which it was calculated to excite --

To have been, in any degree, an instrument in the hands of providence, to
promote order and union, and erect upon a solid foundation, the true principles
of government, is only to have shared with many others, in a labor, the result
of which, let us hope, will prove, through all ages, a sanctuary for Brothers,
and a Lodge for the virtues. Permit me to reciprocate your prayers for my
temporal happiness, and to supplicate, that we may all meet hereafter, in that
Eternal Temple, whose Builder is the Great Architect of the Universe. GENERAL
WASHINGTON's answer to the address of the Grand Lodge of Pennsylvania,
delivered on the 27th of December, 1796.


As far as "your light shines before men," and one is justified in speaking of
it, -- might I glance a moment on the Profession of the Lodge, -- dropping a
word of the profoundest veneration, appropriate to your illustrious Brother's
late relation to it!

The Lodge, I have heard from the beginning, is the association of good and true
men -- faithful, congenial souls, pledged to each other, to maintain unity, and
to do all possible kind offices. Its bounds and extent -- though for convenience
it has its lesser districts -- are as large as the world. Peace is its element;
Benevolence its law; Beneficence its work. Inviolable regard for ths glorious
builder of the worlds, -- a filial obedience to his blessed communications, --
with that spirit of sublime charity, which is the bond of perfectness, -- this,
in a word, is that testimony laid up in your most sacred archives, which no
rude, contaminated hand shall touch.

This comports, as you discern, with the beautiful mandate of the master,
Jesus: "Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy
soul, and with all thy mind: and thou shall love thy neighbor as thyself."

Yes; those plans must be sublime, -- that system durable, proceeding from such
orders, -- copied from that temple, which we are told, is "built upon the
foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the chief
cornerstone;" where all the parts "fitly framed together," have risen in
completest beauty, strength, and proportion: within the dimensions of which,
all that is great, and good, and happy, is to be found, and is clearly shown;
-- where each virtue and duty is seen and recommended by its own peculiar
luster; and all the virtues and duties combine, and mix their salutary
influences. O were this regarded as it might be, we should presently behold
even a celestial Lodge upon earth!

You have seen the illustrious man whom you loved, squaring every action of his
life by the plan and rule delineated as above. He gave you in his personal
example, -- he left you in the records of his advice, the plainest
demonstration of this. A noble disinterestedness, a diligence indefatigable, --
a zeal enlightened and unabating -- an heroic firmness -- these, with their
associate masonic attributes, claimed him all their own.

Having briefly touched on those points which the illustrious historians,
moralists, and sages will detail at large, and posterity read with rapture; --
we look around the magnificent temple of fame, for some great character,
between whom and our present subject, we might draw a comparison; but are at a
loss to find one, that will bear the test. Although some are splendid in the
field: they lose their luster in the cabinet: or although they shine equally in
both, -- they have not the correspondent moral excellencies; neither did they
create such wonderful attachment and affection, as centred in the model before
us; They constituted not the same great WHOLE.

The character which bears the most resemblance, and which above all other, I
would compare with WASHINGTON's, is that of Alfred the great, as delineated by
the masterly hand of a profound historian Hume.
. "The merit of this prince," says he, "both in private and public life, may
with advantage be set in opposition to that of any monarch or citizen, which
the annals of any age or any nation, can present to us. He seems indeed to be
the complete model of that perfect character, which, under the denomination of
a sage, or wise man, the philosophers have been fond of delineating, rather as
a fiction of their imagination, than in hopes of ever seeing it reduced to
practice: So happily were all his virtues tempered together; so justly were
they blended; and so powerfully did each prevent the other f^^m exceeding its
proper bounds! He knew how to conciliate the boldest enterprise with the
coolest moderation; the most obstinate perseverance with the easiest
flexibility; the most severe justice with the greatest lenity; the most
rigorous command with the greatest affability of deportment; the highest
capacity and inclination for science, with the most shining talents for action;
while he led the way to his people in the pursuits of literature. His civil and
his military virtues are almost equally the objects of our admiration;
excepting only, that the former, being more rare among princes, as well as more
useful, seem chiefly to challenge our applause. Nature also, as if desirous
that so bright a production of skill should be set in the fairest light, had
bestowed on him all bodily accomplishments, vigor of limbs, dignity of shape
and air, and a pleasing, engaging countenance."

Such was the character of Alfred; such will all pronounce to be the character
of WASHINGTON. -- The former lived in an age so dark, that both his virtues and
defects were clouded in a degree, by the general surrounding ignorance: of
course, might not his virtues seem heightened, from the very circumstance of
contrast? Not so, with the renowned personage of our day. In an age by
brilliant characters illumined and distinguished, he is illustrious by being
the greatest among the great. In the most enlightened period of mankind, would
the sublime virtues of a WASHINGTON be conspicuous.

The last scene of this unrivalled character was not less great than all the
past. After having retired from his labors, devoted for near half a century to
his country; while the pleasing recollection of his foregoing life, with the
grateful respect of his admiring fellow-citizens, spread the mild sunshine of
happiness around him; the outrages and insults of a nation, on whom we had a
claim for better things, impelled America to assume the posture of defense; and
called him to her assistance. The hero resumes once more his place, pre-eminent
in war. To ensure her safety, he arose a bulwark, bidding defiance to her
enemies.

But alas! while his very name was as an Host, and his existence sure defense
-- whilst all eyes were fixed upon him -- all hopes, under the shadow of the
Almighty, placed in him; -- dark night spreads her pavilion around -- the king
of horrors, proprietor of all things human, waited on him -- He was "not afraid
to die." In perfect possession of his mental powers -- serene as he was in
council -- magnanimous as he was in action -- dignified as he was in all other
parts of his life -- WASHINGTON heard the summons. The Hero, the Statesman, the
Patriarch of America, the Father of his country, closing his eyes, departed
without a groan! Death -- what was thy victory! Humanity, thy bereavement! my
country, thy loss! --

Ah! there is a consideration peculiar, which cannot but impress every bosom
with increased concern, and deepest sympathy! It has impressed mine! Shall I
speak of it? It is too affecting for me! Only can I say, It is impossible, on
such a review, not tenderly to think of, -- and weep for, thee, most excellent
Woman! whose affliction --

But Almighty God is thy comforter; and heaven will be thy reward; as it is
already thy Husband's. --

Meanwhile, there is a special circumstance, which, while it does honor to
this country, affords to her a precious consolation. It is expressed in that
Lady's own words: "While I feel with the keenest anguish the late dispensation
of Divine providence; I cannot be insensible to the mournful tributes of
respect and veneration, which are paid to the memory of my dear deceased
Husband; and as his best services, and most anxious wishes were always directed
to the welfare and happiness of his country, to know that they were truly
appreciated, and gratefully remembered, affords no inconsiderable consolation."

-- Yes, excellent Lady, that thy dear Husband's services are appreciated and
gratefully remembered, must afford thee great consolation; and that they shall
never be forgotten, still greater. -- Besides; of his exploits the Hero shall
tell. The young warrior shall be ambitious of emulating them. The sage shall
speak of his counsels; the statesman shall follow them. All shall rehearse his
virtues, to teach the rising generation to imitate them. Millions yet unborn
shall speak his praise, and over his sacred urn pay the free tribute of
gratitude and tears: and when the shining brass, and polished marble shall
moulder into dust, -- amidst decaying nature, WASHINGTON shall live. With you,
my countrymen, WASHINGTON can never die. He is too strongly engraven on your
hearts: He lives in your liberty, independence, and happy constitution: He
lives in that national prosperity which he obtained for you, and has secured to
generations yet to come: He lives in his great example, which has shown you
how to preserve, what his wisdom and valor had so admirably won.

By all his inestimable services, and splendid actions, -- by the perfect
veneration in which you hold his character -- by the wisdom of his counsels,
and the dignity of his example; appreciate, I beseech you, your conceptions of
his memory, by loving your country, as he loved it, and honoring your God, as
he honored him.

May the powers of heaven endue his successors both civil and military, with
virtues and prosperity resembling his; that they also may be immortal in the
affections of an happy people!

Citizens, Friends! -- particularly, Brethren of the Lodge! on this solemn day,
thus assembled, -- and thus impressed with the weight of various mingled
concerns; -- let us not part, without availing ourselves, (for well we may,) of
a peculiar consolation issuing from the system of Divine Revelation, -- to
which, the masonic plans avow an attachment -- the consolation is, That your
venerable Chief is not to be considered as mouldering in dust, and gone for
ever -- but, gone a little before, assuredly invested with a life unperishable.

Yes; the event of his departure you may henceforth reconcile to your feelings,
by such an easy, pleasurable mode of conceiving of it, as the sage FRANKLIN
expressed, on a valuable friend's decease, -- comparing it to some delightful
pre-concerted excursion; -- "His carriage was first ready, and he is gone
before us. We could not all conveniently start together; and why should you and
I be grieved at this, since we are soon to follow, and we know where to find
him."

-- He has gone before you! He has ascended like Elijah, in his triumphal
car, and bids us follow. He has left, meanwhile, an exalted portion of his
spirit, and his mantle, to an ADAMS.

In fine; -- There is an immortal energy in virtue. It is what the builder of
all worlds, and the Lord of the soul, delights in: "Whatever he delights in,
must be happy." It is what your WASHINGTON pursued, and it conducted him to
glory.

With every sublime assurance, that the upright will receive strength and power
to do good; that no labor of love, -- no compassionate or generous actions, --
no efforts to promote either general, or particular felicity, -- not even a cup
of cold water, given in the name and for the sake of a Brother, (and in the
expansive acceptance, all are Brothers,) -- not a wish pure and kind, flowing
from man's soul, -- shall ever be underrated by the all-knowing God, or lose
its reward; -- confident of this, and of the copious inferences and bliss which
may be drawn therefrom, -- be ye sublimely watchful and industrious: Rise;
shine; for your light abides inextinguishable for ever. -- And know ye, that,
"when your earthly house of this tabernacle shall be dissolved, you have a
building of God, an house not made with hands, eternal in the heavens."

To the same God, -- be attributed and ascribed all strength, beauty, and
wisdom, for ever and ever!

FINIS


GRAND LODGE OF PENNSYLVANIA. GRAND QUARTERLY COMMUNICATION. Philadelphia,
Monday, 3d March, Anno Lucis, 5800.
The Commitiee of Arrangement on the occasion of the late procession in honor
of the memory of our late illustrious brother, GENERAL GEORGE WASHINGTON,
deceased, made their report which was read and is in the words following, to
wit:

To the Right Worshipful the Grand Lodge of Pennsylvania.

The Committee appointed at an Extra Grand Communication of the said R. W.
Grand Lodge, held on the 3d February last, to make the necessary and proper
arrangements for a procession then resolved to be held on the 22d of the same
month, in the city of Philadelphia, in honor of the memory of their late
illustrious brother, GENERAL GEORGE WASHINGTON deceased, beg leave to Report,

That in compliance with the resolutions of the R. W. Grand Lodge, your
Committee made such arrangements in the premises as to them appeared proper for
carrying the said Resolutions into effect. That having so made the necessary
arrangements they notified the Brethren desirous of joining in procession to
meet at the Grand Lodge room, on the 22d February, being Saturday, at 11
o'clock, A. M.

That accordingly the Grand Lodge and Brethren met in the Grand Lodge room, in
the State-house, in the city of Phiadelphia, at 11 o'clock, A. M. of the said
day, and the brethren formed by Lodges in the following manner, to wit: Tyler
with drawn sword, hilt in mourning, Entered apprentices, two and two, Fellow
crafts, two and two, Master masons, two and two, Deacons with their wands tipped
with silver, the tops in mourning, S^^retary and Treasurer, War^^^^. Past
masters, two and two, Master,


The brethren having crape on their left arm and the emblems and insignia
covered with black, agreeably to a resolution of the Grand Lodge of St. John's
day last, to continue in force until St. John's day next.

The several Lodges being thus formed and the Grand Lodge organized in ample
form, the procession moved from the Grand Lodge room, at 1 o'clock, in the
following order, viz. 1. Trumpeter, with trumpet in mourning, 2. The French
Lodge L'Amenite, No. 73, Brother Joseph E. G. M. de la Grange, Esquire. W. Master.
3. Philadelphia Lodge, No. 72, Brother Christian Sheetz Esquire. W. Master. 4.
Orange Lodge, No. 71, Brother William Nelson, W. Master. 5. Concordia Lodge,
No. 67, Brother Henry Voigt, Esquire. W. Master, pro tempore. 6. Washington Lodge,
No. 59, Brother Robert Jackson W. Master, pro tempore, (the W. Master, Brother
John M'Elwee. filling his office, that of R. W. Grand treasurer, in the Grand
Lodge.)


This Lodge, named after the deceased Brother, had prepared for the occasion,
and carried in the procession by four members of the Lodge on a bier covered
with black cloth, AN ELEGANT URN about 4 feet high, gilt in Burnished gold,
placed on a white marble base of 3 steps, inscribed on the plenith, "WASHINGTON
LODGE, No. 59," having on the top an Eagle drooping, gilt in the like manner.
From his beak was suspended a shield gilt, with the following inscription.

WASHINGTON LODGE.

Honored by the name, let us emulate his virtues, whose loss we deplore.

7. Harmony Lodge, No. 52, Brother George Springer, W. Master. 8. Lodge, No.
19, Brother Captain John Coil, W. Master. 9. Lodge, No. 9, Brother Captain
Andrew Nelson, W. Master. 10. Lodge, No. 3, Brother Colonel John Barker, W.
Master, pro tempore, (the W. Master, Brother Israel Israel, Esquire. filling his
office in the Grand Lodge, that of R. W. Deputy Grand Master. "11. Lodge, No.
2, Brother John Phillips, W. Master. "12. Band of music, instruments in
mourning. 13. The Grand Lodge then followed in the following order, viz.
Grand Tyler, with drawn sword, hilt in mourning, Twelve past masters, two and
two, bearing wands tipped with silver, the tops in mourning. Grand sword bearer
with drawn sword, hilt in mourning Grand Secretary, with Scroll in mourning,
and Grand Treasurer. Grand Wardens, bearing their Columns, in mourning. Three
Lights, extinguished, borne by three Past-Masters, Holy Bible, Square, and
Compass, in mourning, borne by a Past-Master, and supported by two
Past-Masters, The Reverend Doctor Magaw, supported by two Past-Masters, The R.
W. Grand Master, and R. W. Deputy Grand Master, Grand Pursuivant, with drawn
sword, hilt in mourning, Four Deacors of the Grand Lodge, two and two, bearing
wands tipped with gold, the tops in mourning,
In the above order the procession consisting of between 300 and 400 Brethren,
moved along Chesnut-street to Third-street, along Third-street to Mulberry or
Arch-street, along Arch-street to Fourth-street, and along Fourth-street to
Zion Church, one of the Churches of the German Lutheran congregation, the
Corporation whereof had, upon application to them, very obligingly granted the
use of the said Church for the occasion.

The front of the Procession having reached the Church, the Brethren opened
their ranks and faced inwards, the Grand Lodge, with the Urn in front, moved
forward through the ranks, the Brethren closed from the rear, and followed the
Grand Lodge into the Church, where a pathetic and elegant Oration was delivered
by the Reverend Doctr. Magaw, -- -- in the intervals of service, solemn funeral
odes in the German Language, composed for the occasion by the Reverend Doctr.
Helmuth, and set to music by Messrs. Enrich and Weizsaecker, were sung by the
Singing Society of the aforesaid Congregation, accompanied by a full orchestre
under the direction of Messrs. Emrich and Weizsaecker.

The business of the day being finished; the Procession, with the Urn in front,
returned in inverse order to the Grand Lodge Room.

The whole was arranged and conducted with that order, simplicity and dignity,
which was suitable to the impressive occasion, and which the Masons of
Pennsylvania have always endeavored to cultivate.

Several Brethren from the neighboring Lodges came to the City to attend the
Procession, and many others were detained from coming, as they were engaged in
rendering similar tokens of regard in their respective Lodges.

Philadelphia, 3 d. March, A. L. 5800. ISRAEL ISRAEL, Chairman.
ATTEST, GEORGE A. BAKER, Secretary. Which Report was accepted. Extract from
the Minutes, GEORGE A. BAKER, Grand Secretary.



FINIS.

