AN ACCOUNT OF THE CONVINCEMENT AND CALL TO THE MINISTRY OF MARGARET LUCAS,
LATE OF LEEK, IN STAFFORDSHIRE.

I will bring the blind by a way which they knew not. Is. xlii. 16.
PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED BY B. and J. JOHNSON, NO. 147 HIGH STREET.

1800.

INTRODUCTION.
The following pages being the substance of a letter from the author to a
relation; her family, with the concurrence of several friends, apprehended they
contained much instruction and encouragement to the Christian Traveller, who
may have "put his, or her hand to the plough;" that, bowing under the earliest
impressions of the overshadowing power of the Most High, they may become
attentive to the shepherd's voice, and all within them be humbled in submission
to his requirings -- and, like the writer of these memoirs, having purchased an
inheritance in righteousness, be so watchful, as not to let go their hold; but
attend to the injunction of the wise man, "Buy the truth -- and sell it not."
As also -- that those who have been favored with a birthright in our society,
may prize their privilege; seeing the instance before us is a proof, among the
many, of the difficulties and trials those have to pass through, who are called
out of the world to be faithful laborers in the heavenly vineyard.

From the following lively specimen, it is to be regretted, that no further
documents are to be found of the religious progress of this our dear departed
Friend, who lived and died, respected and beloved.

THE TESTIMONY of the FRIENDS OF THE QUARTERLY MEETING OF STAFFORDSHIRE, Held
by adjournment, at Leek, the third of the fifth month, 1770.
MARGARET LUCAS, of Leek, was educated in the national worship; and, being
religiously inclined in her youth, strictly conformed to the external rites and
ceremonies thereof; which, finding unavailing to obtain that peace of soul she
sought after, was engaged to frequent our meetings; in which she persevered,
amidst the opposition and cruel treatment of her relations.

For several years she appeared, at times, in a few words, to the satisfaction
of friends; and, whilst of ability, was a diligent attender of our meetings;
and sometimes under much weakness and infirmity of body; and exemplary in
observing the time appointed. With becoming composure and resignation of mind,
she submitted to the severity of a long and painful disorder; and calmly
departed this life the 24th, and was interred in friends' burying-ground at
Leek, the 26th of 6th month, 1769, aged near 68 years.

AN ACCOUNT OF THE CONVINCEMENT, etc. OF MARGARET LUCAS.
I WAS born in the year 1701, in Fleet Street, London; my father's name was
James Brindley, who kept a china shop at the corner of Fetter-lane. I was the
youngest of fourteen children, and my mother died when I was one year and a
half old; after which my father removed to Lambeth, to the house called
Vauxhall, where he erected a pot-house; there my father married a second wife,
who, dying before him, left two children; my father himself died when I was
about seven years old, leaving six orphans, two of them younger than myself,
having no other relation that we knew of, except my aunt, who was my father's
sister, and married my present uncle, the person hereafter mentioned. My father
dying without a will, left things in disorder, and Elias Turner, who was one of
the three directors of the South Sea Company, proving himself my father's
greatest creditor, sent for my uncle to London, from Leek, and advised him to
stand guardian for us. Three of us, at my father's death, were under the care
of his housekeeper, then wife to one of his clerks. She was very careful over
us, and brought us up strictly in the protestant religion; my eldest sister,
being weakly, lived much with my aunt in the country, except in the time of her
education; and my little brother and sister were brought down by my aunt, on
her return from visiting us children, after my father's death; but the little
boy did not live long. My uncle had a mind, at this this time to have had me
down also, saying that, upon seeing my innocent amusements, he had a particular
respect for me; but Elias Turner would not consent to it, and I, with my
brother and sister, was continued under the care of the housekeeper some years
longer. My uncle at times repeating his desire to have us with him, and it
being left to my choice, in the year 1713 I came down.

I had conceived the country a more delightful place than I at first thought
it, and expressed to the maid, that accompanied me, my dissatisfaction and
disappointment. She staid with me till the return of the coach, and left me a
little sad: yet was my uncle and aunt full of love toward me, and I was
careful of my expressions on the different situation I was in; but what added
at this juncture to my grief, was the behavior of my eldest sister, who,
before my coming down, I did not remember to have seen. She gave my uncle so
much uneasiness, that he sent her out of town, and, though he strove to prevent
it, she married his apprentice, and never was readmitted to his house while I
lived there. On occasion of this, and the irksomeness of my situation, my uncle
thought proper to board me at school, though not altogether on account of my
learning, for I was then thought dextrous at my needle beyond most of my years;
and indeed I have observed in myself, that from a child there was a flexibility
in my temper, which, as the softened wax, seemed fit for impression and
improvement. My uncle concluded I might meet with something there to improve on
and divert my mind, though I concealed my sorrow to the best of my power: he
took me to Governess Hide's, in order to board me there; yet it thus fell out:
there lived in Smythy Door, Manchester, a widow whose husband died some pounds
in my father's books, and my uncle calling for the money, and telling her whose
daughter I was, she said, if he pleased, she would board me, and I might go to
school as a day scholar. My uncle enquired into her character, and advised with
one Nichols, a yarn merchant, in the Deansgate, who advised my uncle to accept
the proffer, telling me, his house, if I did not like the other, should be my
home; and here to be sure I always met with a kind reception.

My uncle staid with me a few days, and then left me with the widow and her
daughter, the only child she had. I liked my place very well, being much more
agreeable to me than Leek. This widow and her daughter were Presbyterians, but
my uncle ordered me my liberty, and that I should go to church, which she never
forbid, though she was very strict in her own way of worship, and kept good
orders in the house, with family prayer night and morning, which I never
absented myself from, and I still remember the pleasure which the books I read,
the repetition of my catechism, and those forms of prayer adapted to my years,
then gave me; always esteeming those I believed to be religious.

I staid at Manchester till the latter end of the year, and spent the winter
agreeably both to my uncle and myself. In the spring he took a journey to
London, and as my yonnger sister had been brought from thence young, he thought
fit to take her with him for her improvement, and there she staid four years.
Though I was left at my uncle's as by myself, I did not regret the loss of
these two sisters, who were indeed but as strangers to me, and amends were
fully made by my uncle at his return, in bringing my other sister, with whom I
had lived under the care of our housekeeper, down to see me. This gave me, as
it were, new life again, for the month that she staid with us; but her
departure went very hard with me; and my uncle, who ever sought (before I went
to meeting) to make me happy according to his notion, proposed to take me to
Manchester again. This was pleasing to me, and the widow received me kindly.
She never asked me to go to chapel, yet I many times went at pleasure, and have
since found occasion to remember what I met with there. I staid with her till
the town was in confusion about tory and whig; and as she was afraid of the
consequence, she desired my uncle to fetch me home.

I was now past thirteen, and quite reconciled to my station, growing in my
uncle and aunt's favor, and in love toward them. They punctually fulfilled
their promise, that I should want for nothing that was fit for me to have, and
there coming a dancing master, though I had learned that performance at London,
my uncle sent me to him with others, it being a diversion which (as I was very
agile) they said I was fit for, and indeed it was an amusement I was very fond
of.

When I had past fourteen, my brother came down to see me, and my uncle, still
studying my improvement, sent me to learn writing, to the pastry, and (on the
return of my said master) to the dancing school again. This gave me a large
acquaintance, and as I had acquired, from the teachings of my London master, a
different air, as they term it, I generally went off with applause; and this
seemed not less pleasing to my uncle and aunt, than to myself. He often showed
his fondness for me at my return, taking me to his knee, asking if there was
any thing wanting in my dress, which my acquaintance had, and I had a mind to
have, saying he would buy it for me; but his love prevented my much asking, for
no sooner did he see a new mode than he mentioned it; nor do I know that I ever
asked him for any thing by which he was so far displeased as to deny it me.

I was now past fifteen, and there coming two singing masters, who taught to
sing psalms by notes, my uncle sent me to them. I went with many more, having
great delight therein, as also in the worship of God, as I had been taught.

Here I cannot but observe, how many different inventions there are, to divert
the minds of youth from opportunities of seeking after the one thing needful;
yet it was in the midst of these hurries that I began to make reflections in
myself concerning the clergy, and to account them worthy of double honor;
esteeming them most happy, as their employment led them in their devotion
toward God; and therefore concluded they had a peculiar advantage in the
mysteries of divine things, and a more thorough knowledge of the Lord, and his
ways to man; often saying to myself, and others, if I had been a boy I would
have been of their cloth, (and brought up, as my brother was designed by my
father to have been, at the University.)

About this time some particular persons sought my company, by way of
courtship; but it would by no means take with me, I keeping myself much
reserved on that account, and going on in a most earnest pursuit of my duties,
as I had been taught, it proved a comfort to my uncle and aunt.

When about sixteen, my uncle made me an assistant in the family, and on the
first days, I not only read and gave out the psalms, but also the family
prayers, when my uncle was from home, or any way indisposed, so that now I
stood high in their favor, both with respect to their religious and temporal
enjoyments; and indeed, I have many times since thought of my distressed uncle
as similar to Micah, who, we read, thought himself blessed when he had
consecrated the Levite for his priest; but, alas! how soon did the priest not
only leave Micah, but take away his image: so, though I stole not my uncle's
god, yet I broke his peace, and left him to contemplate the uncertainty of that
delight we fix on transient objects.

My uncle now intending my advancement, as he said, would leave his own little,
though convenient, house, to take a larger, for the better accommodation of me
and my acquaintance, of which I had a great number; he little suspecting this
removal destined to overthrow his purposed happiness; but so it was. This house
stood opposite the leach gates of the church, so called, where I was frequently
reminded of the mortality of the body, and was thereby struck with many serious
reflections on the state of eternity, and the immortality of the soul.

As I lived so near, I often waited upon the corpse to the grave, musing in
myself how it must be with the deceased in the hour of death; for, though I had
often heard that sentence pronounced, by the priest, in which it is said, "we
commit the body to the ground, (note) in sure and certain hope of the
resurrection to eternal life;" yet, upon the strictest review, I could not find
I had any evidence of that hope abiding in me; and though my reasonings would
have led me to conclude it was an immediate gift of God to the soul at the time
of departure, yet my esteem for the clergy led me to believe, that it was an
assurance given to them, and that the people must build their hope thereon. But
still my uneasiness was not to be so allayed, for that foundation was so
shaken, that my faith could not stand thereon, and I still grew uneasy; but
although it was such a mystery to my natural conceivings, that I could not
fathom it; yet did I believe it was a matter necessary for a Christian to find,
while in health, the better to support his illness, and help him to submit
himself to the will of God in his death; and surely my soul was at this time
under a weighty pressure, and although I was then ignorant what it was, I have
since believed it was no less than the drawings of the Father's love: yet as
the natural man discerns not the things that be of God, so he knows not
where to seek them. I was now encreasingly fervent in my prayers, thinking I
wanted that zeal which I saw in others, I made new additions to my private, and
waited with attention on my public devotions; and sometimes went on with vigor
in the repetition of those exercises.

About the seventeenth year of my age there came a bishop to the town, in order
for a confirmation, which I thought was a singular good for me, for from that I
conceived a steadier hope and faith in Christ would seize upon my soul,
entertaining thoughts that there was a peculiar power given to this high and
holy function, from which I was to reap that which was divine; and surely I may
say, I doubt not but the Invisible Being looked with compassion on the fervent
desire of my soul, and viewed the reverential awe in which my mind, as well as
my body, kneeled to receive the earnest of my wish; and I know that my
behavior, both before, at, and after that time, was taken notice of by my
relations and intimates.

A little while after, my uncle asked what I thought of receiving the
sacrament. I told him I did not believe it was proper for so young persons to
adventure; for, as it is said, "those who receive it unworthily, do procure to
themselves damnation;" I durst not receive it. He told me of some that were as
young as myself, and whom he thought as unfit: I told him I knew it, but they
seemed to exalt themselves amongst their companions on account of that, which I
durst not in the greatest humility, partake of; neither did I find, that my
faith was sufficiently ripe to comprehend the mystery betwixt the outward bread
and wine, and the body and blood of Christ.

Here I began to flag in my hopes of my having received any benefit by the
laying on of the bishop's hand, and what if I say, I staggered not only at one
thing or two, but at all that I had done on a religious account. Did I now
believe there was no God? Oh no! but to my inexpressible grief, I could not
find how to worship him, so as to prove my own acceptance, or the assurance
that I longed for, nor could my soul rest without it.

Here had I labored in my inventions, spent all my hopes, and as a person
quite fatigued, sitting down, was made to bear such a mortification as I had
never before known; to see myself dwindling away from that, which I thought was
most expedient for me to be exercised in, and that my performances were no more
than so many fleeting comforts continually wasting in their fruition.

At last so heavily went I on, that I began to be weary of them, and willing to
leave the burden I had contracted in my own will. I found enough to do to go on
with them in their course, for I sound I had got them only by tradition. This
was a close time, wherein I was far from exaltation of any kind, for it was to
me hard drawing on without faith, which I now concluded was the immediate gift
of God. Under this belief I had to cry like the poor publican, "Lord have mercy
on me;" and my soul was more justified from these breathings, than it had ever
been in all the wearisome labors I had engaged in. But the enemy, who is ever
near to damp the good in us, troubled me with many of his suggestions, that it
could never be the way to attain to happiness, to discharge myself of the
worship due to God for his favors; yet the more I gave way to the thoughts of
flinging myself on the mercy of God, the more also I found a hope to spring
within my soul, that the Lord would point out a way for me. This drew me still
farther from all ceremonies, and gave my mind such a turn from those diversions
I once took delight in, that my uncle and aunt took notice of it, and called it
melancholy. But it was, to be sure, a deep solidity of thought, as not knowing
in what manner or path I should be directed, how I should recover a proper
sense of my afflictions, or obtain a satisfactory assurance. This pensiveness
my uncle and aunt used their endeavors to prevent, and asked my acquaintance
to visit me oftener; but their company so frequent, suited not my taste; those
nights, that were spent in what I had once thought innocent amusements, were
now made to procure dull mornings, and my desire of being alone, with the
fatigue of so much hurry, put me on thoughts of shunning the occasions. I
therefore desired my uncle to let me go out as a waiting-maid; but they would
not hear of parting with me.

I being then past eighteen, we heard that S. Tailor was about selling off her
shop, and going to live at Stafford. I desired my uncle to buy it for me,
thinking that such an employment might abate the perplexities I was in. I was
then a stranger to her, and my uncle, who liked this proposal better than the
first, being ever ready to please me, sent for her, and in a little time after,
agreed that I should have the goods, and be with her at times for my better
information of the business and customers. This gave that family and me our
first acquaintance, though I had not the least thought at that time that ever I
should have changed my name in respect to religion. Hence, however, many
imagined my persuasion arose, of which I shall touch upon in its more proper
place. I went at my own convenience, according to our agreement, still keeping
my exercise to myself; nor did I remark any thing particular in my new
acquaintance, their more private exercises lying hid, as well as my own.

When the time came that I was to enter the shop, my uncle had so good an
opinion of the Quakers, that he left the appraising of the goods entirely to
her. I still boarded with him, and made it a constant rule to go directly home
at night, when I shut the shop, and thus shunned my former associates: the day
I spent in business, and part of the nights in much thought, the desire of my
soul increasing after that revival of hope, which, as my little faith in what
is called the service of God, still diminished, I found at times drawing me
nearer to a reliance on him, and a patient waiting for what might follow.

Being about nineteen, we received an account of the death of my sister Lydia,
for whom our family went into mourning, and I not only mourned in clothes, but
in heart, for I loved her more dearly than any sister I had, and may truly say,
her death added to the weight of my exercise, as well as to my belief, that it
was requisite for me to know my own election to be sure; and, oh! the distress
that I here was in! when I looked upon myself and others, to see them posting
on with cheerfulness in the respective duties of their religion, and myself not
only barren in my desires thereof, but my soul so oppressed in the performance,
that I could neither assist my uncle, nor myself that way. Those that have
known the activity of nature, can best judge of my state here, when my uncle,
who used to show me a deal of indulgence, signified how joyed he was in my so
good behavior; saying, he could scarcely go into any sort of company, but they
were speaking in my commendation. It was, indeed, a thing very pleasing to my
kind uncle, who told me a little after, he would have me be prudent, for, says
he, there are those eyes upon you that you are not aware of; and I believe he
was then, in his own thoughts, near having his ambition concerning me
gratified, which was, to see me happily settled in the world, and I conclude,
that at this time, the parents of my associates had generally a respect for me;
for, although I was of a brisk and lively disposition, yet was I, through the
goodness of God, preserved from that which was immodest or profane, and kept
within the bounds of what is termed innocent behavior and good breeding. This
engaged many, that had daughters, to encourage my company. But how soon did I
see a turn in these affairs* for that which surely ought to have raised me
higher in their esteem, now seemed to prove my overthrow therein. So true it
is, that the greater like, once turned, proves the greater dislike. But to go
on; I could no longer remain under the cloud of insensibility; for the day
spring from on high visited me, and the veil was so far rent, that I saw the
work of God was in the secret of my heart, and that a spiritual worship must
have place there.

I now remembered I had heard the Quakers recommend people to mind that of God
in themselves, and to follow the teachings of the Spirit. This I thought looked
something suitable to my condition; and indeed my mind seemed pressed to look
at their doctrine again. In order to this, as I was not willing to be taken
notice of, I went out between the times of service, as though I would walk.
This was an exercise that was allowed by the most strict, to take off any
drowsiness that might hang on the mind, and unfit it for the support of their
evening devotions. Though this was not what I had a real necessity for, being
one of good spirits, and before I knew the want of faith in my way of worship,
was in my devotions zealous, in my diversions lively* and in my work
industrious; yet here did I take this freedom, because the meeting lay in my
way, where I had a mind to inform myself, and as I passed by the gate, would
make a stop; but if I heard no voice, I soon went off; but if any one was
speaking, I usually stepped within the door, the little end being, as I then
thought, a good shelter to me from the eyes of those who sat in the body of the
meeting. I used to make these visits as often as I could, and surely I have to
say, the Lord was very condescending, and gave me a more clear understanding
than ever I had found within myself at the other meetings I had been at, and
which, from our house being so near, I had oportunities of. My intentions were
good in respect to these freedoms, and I used to stay as long as I durst for
time, then take a turn down the next field, and so to my worship again; whereby
to be sure I proved the effect which the different doctrines had on me, the
former answering to the hope of that justification I have before spoken of, and
the latter fruitless and dull; yet so far did I proceed in the repeating of
these trials, that I plainly saw it was with me like those that are hard to
believe the things they would not have to be true; but so close did the truth
and mercy of God follow me, that I found judgment in myself from the hand of
the Almighty, for persisting in that which gave me not the least satisfaction.
Here, how willingly would I have retained this old profession, that I had been
brought up in from my childhood; and was as dear to my natural desires as
Ishmael was to Abraham. But I saw it must not remain, and therefore I made a
stop, and refused to go to church, so called, which my aunt would know the
meaning of.

I had signified something of my uneasiness to my sister, who was coming down
from London again, and she had told my aunt that I favored the Quakers, and
did not intend to go to church. This greatly incensed her, and she left me,
saying, she would fetch out the parson and people to carry me in. But so far
had truth wrought with me, that I found I must not only venture that, but also
struggle against the oppositions which I felt within myself.

The following night was spent in more confusion than common, and the next day
my uncle and aunt went to the parson's, and sometime after sent for me. He
looked on me with surprise, signifying his great mistake in one whom he had
thought so religious and so good an example to others; for I was, indeed, a
constant attender upon those called Saint's days, as well as other times set
apart for worship. He asked me how long I had been uneasy. I told him a great
while, and could not find that, in any thing I could do, I had any real
satisfaction. He signified that a perseverance in those duties I had been
instructed in, was the only way, and would, no doubt, bring on that
satisfaction I spoke of. But, says he, your uncle is afraid you are going to be
a Quaker. I answered, I believe not, though I have met with that satisfaction
from their preaching, which I never met with elsewhere. He said, that was no
more than a delusion of the grand enemy of our souls, and then set forth how
dangerous a thing it was for young persons either to go to hear them, or read
their books; saying theirs were seducing, erroneous principles, and he would
have me promise, never to hear them any more.

Many heavy things he said of them, and asked me particularly about the family
of the Tailors; these I could justly clear, and said, that neither they, nor
any other person had ever endeavored to insinuate their principles, or turn me
from one profession to another. He then said, if I would desist from hearing
them, or reading their books, I might do well, and through the continuance of
my duties, and good company, might overcome my uneasiness (...), he said so
much against (...) of the Quakers, that, (...) with the respect I had for the
clergy, and the indifference I found in myself to the formalities, as I then
termed the customs of the said people, I seemed resolved never to go to hear
them again; saying, and that very truly, I would never be a Quaker, if I could
help it: nor was I one till the desire of my soul after peace could be no other
way satisfied; and no one could wrestle more to escape it than I did, as the
following account will show:

Such now were my childish conceivings, that though I had witnessed the work of
God to be among them, yet I thought, could I but come to a possession of that
which they preached, and which I found a ^avour of in my heart, it would not
then matter whether I attended on any form of worship or not. My uncle then
said, Mr. Leay, who was the parson, would board me, and they th^^^ht very well
of it. I understood hi^ (...) and thanked him, but said, that would only give
the town to believe there had been a difference amongst us, and on condition
they would be easy, I would see what I could do in going to church again. But I
well remember, what a heavy trial it was; I went with so much indifferency,
that it gave my uncle and aunt great uneasiness, and myself no less.

Not long after, parson Bennet sent for me to the widow Brueton's: he also
expressed himself surprised at his being so mistaken in me, saying, had it
happened so with many others he should not have wondered half so much. We being
more equal and intimate, I could be more free with him; he asked me if I was
for being a Quaker; I said, I do not know, yet I believe not. Why, said he,
they deny the Scriptures! I said, if they do, I promise you I will never own
them, but I know they do not. Why then, said he, they wrest them to their own
destruction, and they deny baptism. I said they do of water, but they preach a
baptism. Yes, said he, and a strange one too; put your finger into that fire, a
fire being in the room, and see how you can bear that baptism. This filled my
mind with indignation, and I said, no, I scorn it; for I believe they no more
mean elementary fire, than the baptism of elementary water. At this time I may
conclude that neither he nor I knew that mysterious baptism, which my soul has
at times since experienced. He went fluently on respecting the principles of
the Quakers, setting some of them forth as quite ridiculous, and told me, if I
could not believe him, he would lend me some of their own writings. I thanked
him, saying, I was not in a disposition to read the sentiments of any one
profession; and to be sure I was not, for even the scriptures themselves, in
which I had been so conversant, and took delight, seemed now to me of little
moment; and so great was my separation from all duties, that I found nothing
left to trust in, but God alone. But to return, I said, I cannot judge them by
their writings, but I was assured they were so far in the right that, as God
was a spirit, he must be worshipped in spirit and in truth. He said but little
after, only, if you have got a notion of the spirit, you are past hopes.

The uneasiness of our family was now no longer a secret, my intimates, one
after another. would accost me by the name of flat-cap, friend; or deridingly
ask, does the spirit move thee? with which, and such other mockeries, I must
say my natural inclination was much buffetted, and now the storm began to be
more boisterous, both within and without; my acquaintance abroad and my
relations at home; but above these, the enemies of my own house, who were
always ready, at each difficulty I met with, to turn the balance against my
small hope, and by insinuating the necessity of my being cautious, and
deliberate in my proceedings, had run me such a length in trying to go on in
the way that I was trained in, that the righteous judgments of the Almighty
seized my soul again, and in so weighty a manner, that it made that heart,
which used to spring with joy at the chiming of the bells, now to fear; that
soul, which used to approach the consecrated house with reverence, now
trembling at the entrance; and those steps, that used to advance toward the
pew with pleasure, lost their former activity, and nothing but horror and
darkness ensued, in the room of the once delightful scenes of prayer and
praises unto God.

Oh! surely I have enough to remind myself of here, without particularizing the
afflictions, which the anxious desire of my kind uncle and aunt, for my eternal
welfare, produced. Such, I believed it was, and therefore endeavored to bear
them with submission and resignation, as proceeding from a principle of love;
indeed, I did all in my power to allay their trouble: the loss of their rest
and appetite, and the continual disquiet of their minds, being a cause of real
grief to me, under which, the little comfort that I could find within myself
was, that I was not accessory to it any farther than by studying to find the
answer of a good conscience toward God, and an assurance of that which might
go with me beyond the grave: but this I could not find, in the present
distressed situation of my mind, notwithstanding which, I secretly longed to
^ear the Quakers once ^^^e, and must account it a peculiar favor, that there
came a young woman from Newcastle to visit us, as my uncle kept a strict eye
over me, that I might have no opportunity of gratifying my desire; she was a
stranger to our uneasiness, and my mind being still pressed to hear as above, I
took her out, as though for a walk, and when we were near the meeting, asked
her if she had a mind to hear the Quakers; she answered me willingly, yes; for,
said she there is no meeting of that people at our town. I am sure, had she
known the least of our family's uneasiness, she might have read my confusion in
my looks when I asked her the question, and much more when I entered in at the
door, and heard set forth the disadvantage those lay under, who halted between
two opinions; proving, from the apostle's expressions, "that a double-minded
man is unstable in all his ways;" and proceeding in that doctrine, it surely
reached my hope and faith, that the Lord would still be gracious unto me. I had
before known the witness of God that is placed in the heart, spoken to by
several Friends, yet this unexpected testimony was so adapted to my present
circumstance, and answerable to the ardent desire of my mind, of being directed
to that path which wo^ld lead me to the favor of God, that by this, and our
non-acquaintance, all prejudice was removed, and a clench given to the nail of
my new profession; for, though I did not immediately join the society, yet as I
could not but assemble with some community, I found it must be with those whose
doctrines my soul now sucked in, with a resolution, and good intention, not to
persist any longer in a way that I had no faith in, but to submit myself to the
will of the Almighty, and to follow that which weaned my soul from a dependence
on formal worship.

We returned home, she satisfied with her curiosity, and I no less with the
hand of Providence in this thing; both filled with admiration, she at the
whimsies of the Quakers, and I at their doctrine. We well resembled the two
women at the mill, the one taken with the truth and the other left. I could
have concealed where we had been, but she could not; my uncle was informed of
it, yet did not take any notice while she staid, but when she was gone, he
engaged himself in liquor, as I have reason to believe he did one night before,
in order to give a fuller vent to his passion, otherwise he would hardly have
carried it so far above his own reason, as to use me as he did, that according
to his own words, he had watched occasion to have chastised me as a child, yet
could find no fault with me, which he thought could give him sufficient excuse
for so doing; but now surely he thought nothing was so cruel as to suffer me to
run on to my ruin, both of body and soul.

About this time I had put by a young man whom my uncle thought was likely to
make me happy; he had proposed to settle on me a sufficient jointure, and my
uncle had offered, out of his own generosity, to advance a hundred pounds in
addition to what I had of my own; but here how different were our views, my
uncle thought of the advancement of my body, and I was no less anxious for the
welfare of my soul, for I could think of no delight but the immediate favor of
God, and this, (as I apprehended it stood opposed to my new proposals) I must
prepare to suffer for.

My uncle, as I have observed, being much in drink, was violent in his
behavior, though I could well cover all, as to his intentions, one rash
expression excepted, which escaped him in the conclusion of that night's
disorder; and which I mention, to show the reason of my departure from them,
and to give an idea how it fared with me. He said, if I ever went to the
meeting again, he would bereave me of my life. I stood trembling, yet received
the threat in a tender state of mind, and I could perceive he suffered for it
the next moment. My life was not much in my notice, neither could I believe my
uncle would execute his vow; but oh this separation overwhelmed m^ mind with
sorrow; for I found, at that moment that I durst not flinch from the truth with
which my mind had been impressed, nor could I think of leaving my nearest
relations thus.

Many thoughts revolved within me, and many tears flowed, under the
consideration of my unhappy circumstance, as I then termed it. The enemy of my
soul here manifested his malice, by suggesting to me, how unlikely I was to
obtain any conquest over either myself or my relations; and that my rash
proceedings might bring on a massacre. But here has my soul to commemorate the
condescension of Divine Goodness, which, in this very low state, inspired my
mind with some encouragement; and a desire prevailed, though I sought it not,
to re-establish my little faith, by again hearing the most penetrating word;
and I concluded it would be best, to moderate my uncle and aunt's passion by
returning directly back from meeting to my own apartment, which was furnished
with a bed and some few necessaries, bought at my entrance upon the shop; I had
hopes they would look upon my so doing with a favorable eye, and when their
hurry was a little over, send for me home.

They did not miss me till I came from that meeting, and thought fit to let me
stay where I was till the next. They then sent a person to see if I was there;
but I did not find an engagement in myself to go, either at that time, or for
some weeks after; nor was I so much taken with this new fangle, as my uncle
called it, as to force my inclination in the least degree; for, could I have
indulged myself in the persuasion, that one might serve God acceptably, without
going to any public worship, I could, with ease, have remained separate from
all. This deliberation, however, gave encouragement, as well as opportunity,
for my old acquaintance to visit me by turns; the youngest sort to show their
wit, by railing at what they called the principles of the Quakers; and the more
grave to set forth, according to their notion, the diabolical tenets of that
people; whilst, as one struck dumb, I had but little to say in reply; only, at
times, would signify that their doctrine bespoke better things; but as I had
not yet obtained knowledge, by a perusal of their writings, I durst not
attempt, nor did I desire, to be busy in making any defense for them. My mind,
indeed, had not hitherto inclined to consult either men or books, lest thereby
I should be seduced to believe what was not of God; for I plainly saw, that
nothing short of what was so, would satisfy my soul; and I may say, in
thankfulness to that Eternal Power, which still preserved me, their arguments
did not abate my travail of soul after the Divine favor; and, though I hope I
never was one wise in my own conceit, yet so far did the truth of God in the
secret of my soul exalt itself, that I proved its influences to be more wise
than all my teachers, who, at best, were but as the hammer to the nail, in
fastening in my soul the impressions which I had received.

In this situation, my uncle also visited me, and the sternness of his
countenance was altered. He kindly signified to me, how hard our separation was
to them. and if I would but bind myself by a promise, that I would never be a
Quaker, he would give me a deed of gift, that at his and my aunt's decease, I
should have all they were worth. I answered him, if I could make such a
promise, I wanted no farther encouragement than the continuance of their love;
but, oh! I could not do it. We both sat and wept our passion out. My uncle
mentioned my leaving them so abruptly, but, instead of inviting me home, he
signified he could now take no pleasure in seeing me, without an alteration.

In a little time I found the balm of Eternal Goodness, which healed the wound
my mind had been made to endure on truth's account.

There came a young man to visit me that had been a student, and had received
Orders with a Benefice, not one of the most thoughtful, as will appear. After
the compliment of, Madam, how do you do? and I had thanked him, he said, why I
hear you are turning a Quaker. I answered, we sometimes hear that which is not
altogether true; but I suppose what you have to say. Why then, said he, there
must be a great change in you; and a deal of sobbing and sighing, and thouing
and theeing. And pray, said I, what have you against that language? Why, said
he, it is not within the line of morality, or common civility; but what is used
betwixt men and their beasts, and more fit to be used to brutes than men. I
replied, I am very sorry you should think I have already forgotten myself; but
I remember, and know, it is that language which we, in all our prayers, and in
the Litany, put up our petitions (...) therefore, take heed what you say, for
by your saying it is sit to be used only to brutes and beasts, of what do you
make your God? O, says he, I perceive you side with the Quakers: yes, so far,
said I, as to believe that language good enough for man, which is used in
honoring of God.

He went off, nor was it long before my uncle made me his second visit. As I
now seemed to him at a stand, dubious with whom to join, he laid before me the
profession of the Presbyterians, saying, he would freely give me leave to join
with them. But from the knowledge I had of those people, whilst twice at
Manchester, I knew they dwelt much upon the same things I was in the practice
of before; therefore was not likely to find with them the satisfaction I was in
pursuit of. My uncle further proposed, to take the shop and bear the loss he
might sustain in the selling it off, if I would choose a place agreeable to
board at, in any other town; for he thought the removing me out of the way of
shame and disgrace, as he called it, might be a means to alter my resolution.
But the idea I had conceived of spiritual worship, was so fixed in my breast,
that it seemed to me, had I been removed to to uttermost corner of the earth, I
must have carried it with me. I signified this to him, and he, much wondering
at my foolishness, left me with saying, I was certainly bewitched. Indeed, I
myself could not, at times, but wonder what it was poised my soul against the
many hard things I met with from others, and the secret temptations that daily
presented themselves to my own mind, which so filled it, that, in the little
sleep I got, I frequently dreamed of something relative to my exercises.

In one of my dreams, a man was presented to me, coming up to my door with a
sieve in his hand, and a bag. He sat down, and opening the bag, put out some
wheat into the sieve. I asked him what he was going to do; he said, to separate
the chaff from the wheat. Here the enemy shot his empoisened dart against that
fear which lodged in me, and, through his insinuations, made me believe myself
the chaff, blown from my former quietness, by aspiring after the knowledge of
things too high for me; and oh! the consternation that my soul was in from
these assaults of this enemy, who now ripped up every miscarriage of my life,
and all my foolish actions, as so many witnesses against me, whilst I
endeavored to withstand him by repentance, and purposes of amendment, pleading
with myself the just ground of my present proceeding. But as I had not the
evidence of my hope at my own command, I was obliged to suffer, till I was
again revived by the mercies of a God, who would not break the bruised reed,
nor quench the smoking flax.

In this interval, my uncle came with parson Leay again, and still with hopes,
from my staying at home, that they might gain me; but they found their mistake:
for, though I said but little, I was as resolute in myself, to prove the truth
as ever. We sat down, and the parson offered to take, in writing, any scruples
I had to make, promising either to answer them himself, or get them answered by
the bishop. I acknowledged his kindness; saying, I did not see how any one
could be serviceable to me, for it was faith I wanted in the whole, He
signified, it was not for the unlearned to pry into the matter of faith, but to
believe according to the canons of the church; going on largely in commendation
of the wisdom and great care there had been amongst the learned fathers, that
there might be no default or error in the articles of our faith; from thence
inferring, that it was requisite we should believe them. I signified I could
not place my trust in man, but had received a better faith already; and that I
did believe, I ought to seek God for myself. He said, you are obstinate, and if
you do not take care, you will renounce your vow of baptism. I answered, I do
not find that troubles me; for I hold it as a matter of indifference, which
will neither do me good nor hurt. He said, you are hardened; and if you persist
on, you will be damned. This struck us silent; and as soon as I could take my
looks off him, I cast them on my dear uncle, whose eyes plainly bespoke his
grief. The parson got up, and said, you have need of the prayers of the
congregation; I said, I know I have need of the prayers of all good people, and
desire to have them. As they passed the shop, I heard him say something of my
being quite lost, and my uncle shook his head, and left me in abundance of
sorrow.

This was a double and treble trial to me, for the enemy aimed his dart again
to give the fatal blow* by insinuating into my mind, the doctrine of election
and reprobation; which strengthened those doubtings my late conversation had
raised. What had I here to do? no person in the world to flee to, with whom I
could entrust my soul! no book to try my cause by! the Bible itself being still
to me as if written in an unknown tongue! no God or Savior at hand, nor even
any comfortable desire that I was sensible of! Read, in these expressions, the
deep afflictions of my soul, thus lying under the tramplings of a most
desperate fiend! Could I have found just reasons for his upbraiding me with my
lightness, it would at this time have certainly appeared; or could I have
believed that God was unjust, and would inflict eternal punishment on the
innocent, or on a sinner that was willing to turn from every evil way; I say,
could I have reconciled this to his attributes of mercy and goodness, I must
assuredly have fallen by these suggestions of the cruel deceiver, who now
appeared to me in the most surprising manner; producing that exercise which, to
this present time, gives me astonishment: for, one night, as I lay in bed, on a
sudden, a voice, as I thought, audible and like my own, cursed the Lord, and
defied Heaven; saying now an^ I damned, for I have sinned against the Holy
Ghost, which will never be forgiven. When the words were passed I found myself
in a maze, and immediately flung myself upon my face, crying out, Oh, Lord!
forgive me! but it is not me, yet, oh, Lord! forgive me. Thus, in confusion,
went I on, sometimes begging for forgiveness, and denying the fact; and when I
did so far recover myself, as to know how I was, I found myself, from the agony
that I had been in, all over in a sweat; and the bed, whereon I lay, for some
time after, shook with the strong trembling of my body; and it was a
considerable time ere I could compose myself; yet when I could, I found my
great God did not accuse me; but encouraged the sincerity of my desire to look
up to him, as God, who mercifully saves those that trust in his providence;
and is willing to remit the past transgressions of the truly penitent. And here
did I prove my hop^ renewed, and my faith established; yet, even here did I
stumble at the honor I had been taught to give to those divine oracles, as I
esteemed the clergy; and thought I must surely be mistaken, in supposing there
was (...) more in them than other men; nor yet could I well step over the
stream of their learning. and set the illiterate, as I had been taught to call
them, on an equal footing of wisdom, with the high title of right reverend. Yet
here did my God help me; thus, one evening as I sat, low in mind, musing by
myself, the Everlasting Truth seized upon me, in an exposition of that
remarkable thanksgiving of our Savior, when he said, "I thank thee, O Father,
Lord of heaven and earth, that thou have hid these things from the wise and
prudent, and have revealed them unto babes." This immediate favor, from the
loving kindness of the Lord, had a vast influence over me; I arose from my
chair, and fell upon my knees to receive the overshadowings of his power; and
such was its effect, that by its assistance, I did let out from my soul, a few
words of supplication to the Lord, begging a farther manifestation of his will,
and his preservation therein. This, I apprehend, was the most lively prayer I
ever had then made.

When I had waited for a time on my knees, I remembered that I had read the
passage, yet desired to look at it again. I had no Bible of my own, my aunt
having taken it from me, telling me I should have no use for it, as indeed I
had not much till this time; yet, being provided with one, I looked for the
text, and casting my eye upon it, found a great alteration in myself, and cause
to say, surely the Lamb of God is found worthy to take the book, and to open
the seals thereof; and from this time I knew it was not in my power to read the
scriptures in their right signification, but only as I had the key of
interpretation lent me, which I did now often receive, to my great profit and
consolation. Thus became I again familiar with my book, and prized that good
companion more justly than ever I had done in all my life; desiring to be kept
in the way I was to go; and have bread to eat, and raiment to put on, and to be
returned to my Father's house, in peace; concluding that the Lord should be my
God.

Whilst I resigned myself to his holy will, it pleased the Almighty to show me,
it was not right that I should thus believe, and yet live alone, without
assembling myself with those that I was satisfied were believers in the same
Divine Prinoiple, neither do I now think it would have been good or right; for,
as sure as the Lord thought proper, in his wisdom, to provide helpmates for the
body, so surely does he condescend to qualify many of his faithful servants, to
be helpful in a spiritual sense, to each other. I therefore believed it was
right for me to attend meetings, in order to retain my favor with him.

In this my aunt did not interrupt me till I had been a few times: this I might
readily excuse, for, indeed, I had enough to do within myself; the tears I shed
at my entrance at the door, and presenting myself before the Invisible Being,
were so many renunciations of my own will. I used to sit down at the first or
the nearest seat I came to; yet so well did it answer, that what I sowed in
tears, at my getting there, I reaped with joy at my coming away.

As I went with a soul desirous of improvement, I was often highly favored,
and had to remember S. Radford's recommendation to me, to buy the truth and
sell it not, as also to be convinced of the justice of the Almighty; and, that
man's destruction is of himself. I think it was about, or a little after this
time, that I heard my now uncle, Joshua Toft, give in his testimony for the
truth, and remember it was as one having authority, pressing friends to come
out of Babylon: and exhorting them, not to partake with her, of her sins, lest
they should also be partakers of her plagues; and though I was but very young
in the truth, yet the Lord was pleased so to enlighten my understanding, that I
read him spiritually, and was made a partaker of that life from which the power
came. Nor do I forget the encouragement which I received from another friend,
when, like a shower of the former and latter rain, he watered the plantation of
the Lord, by setting forth the blessedness with which he will reward those who
forsake all for his name's sake, etc. But, though I could take delight, yet I
was not to build a tabernacle here, my troubles were not quite over; for,
though my aunt let me go free, a few times, yet she proposed to perplex me in
my new design, by aggravating the passions she found in herself, and by giving
way to the foolish excitations of others.

The first time she met me, in my going to meeting, was with a whip, and the
next with a black hood and green apron; but I shall endeavor to be as quick
here as I can, for I cannot well, nor do I desire to remember the foolish pains
she took to mortify me; yet do I find myself engaged, gratefully to
acknowledge, that I was preserved above all the ridicule I met with; though, to
many I was a subject of entertainment and diversion. Some, however, seemed to
have compassion for me, though I cannot say that I knew, at that time above
three or four. Amongst these there was one that frequently expressed a concern
for my preservation, and offering to assist me in having my aunt bound over to
her good behavior; but I found myself more desirous to be preserved in a
proper decorum toward her.

There was another of my well-wishers, who advised me to leave the town;
pro^fering me a room in their house, and liberty to sell my goods with them.
This, I must ever acknowledge, was a kind part; but, though they pressed my
compliance, I could not find an inclination thereto; for I conceived, that
quitting the town would look as though I had done some bad thing; and I knew no
one could, justly, say any worse thing of me, than that I was a Quaker.
Therefore, though I could willingly have been out of the noise that my change
had occasioned, yet I rather chose to commit myself to that hand, which I now
believed could preserve me, and submit to the confusion of this time, till my
God should say, it is enough; not doubting, but these things were permitted for
the trial of my faith: yet, so far did their kindness prevail, that I inclined
to ask farther advice upon it; and, as S. Leay had been a few times to ask me
how I did, I told him my desire, and requested him to procure me an opportunity
of speaking with one of the friends, Toft; he asked me which; I said, either of
the three brothers, that I could most conveniently go to, without my uncle or
aunt's getting intelligence of it; for I was much more troubled at their abuse
of others, than of myself. He told me the next day, that he had spoken to
Samuel Toft, who was willing to give me the hearing that night.

Accordingly I went in the dusk of the evening, Nicodemus like; though not so
much for the shame of the thing, which I now was so used to, as for fear that
my aunt should get knowledge of it; and did not know, by the name of Samuel,
which was to receive me; but, knocking at the door, he let me in, to whom I
paid my compliments; and, after sitting down, introduced our discourse, by
signifying, I supposed he was no stranger to the hurry of the town, and the
angry mood my uncle and aunt were in concerning me; I signified I could not
help it, but that, notwithstanding this, I found myself engaged to join the
society: I farther told him, of the kind proffer made me, but as doubting in my
mind what would be for the best, I had a desire to ask advice. He told me that
going was the likeliest way to rid myself of those troubles; but asked if I had
no hopes of my relations being better humoured. I told him, no; but was rather
afraid they would be worse, for they said they could never rest while I was a
Quaker. He then said, it was a nice point to give advice in, for who can tell
what thy relations may do in their anger, or how thou thyself can bear it;
perhaps the surest way to be quiet from them is, to accept the proposals of thy
friends.

This however, was not what I expected, nor, indeed, what I desired; and to
bring him more over to my views, I said, Do you think, Sir, there is room to
believe I shouldbe presumptuous, if I should stay, and receive an injury from
them? He said, he thought not, so long as I gave them no just occasion; and
added, Young woman, what do thou think is best thyself? I answered, that I
would not, willingly, run myself into danger, neither act any way purposely to
provoke them; nor yet do I see how I can, at this time fly from their anger,
and leave the town, without giving myself secret uneasiness. To this he
replied, that, to be sure, we ought to mind; for we might go out of one trouble
into another, and perhaps a worse. He further asked me, how I thought I could
bear the trial; saying, I had already known something of an exercise of this
kind. I said, Yes, I have; and, the truth I have sound so much on my side, that
I have been hitherto supported through it, and now do not doubt, but if I
should lose my life, in the way of my relations' anger, my soul would still be
happy. He signified, if such was my belief and my resolution, he could say
nothing better to me than, Go on and prosper.

I then, wishing him the compliment of the night, returned, desiring to remain
steadfast to what, I apprehended, was my duty; but when at home, I could not
forbear reflecting on the small assurance I had given my friend; and more so,
on what an odd appearance, for a Quaker, I had made; for, besides my speech, I
went in my full trim. I had on my hoop, rings on my fingers, and earrings in
my ears; my clothes, indeed, were black and white crape mourning, which I wore
for my beloved sister, and therefore my linen was without lace; neither was I
thoughtful, at this time, about my outward dress, my work lay more within;
neither did my friend regard my appearance so much, as to make him overlook the
intentions of my heart, for Samuel Leay told me, the next time he saw me, that
S. Toft said, he was satisfied there was that within me, that would prevail on
me to lay my compliments aside; nor was it long ere I found it my place so to
do, which I must leave to mention; a probable reason why I was not allowed to
give my friend a fuller assurance; and which may also show how blind I was to
my own state, and how much need I had to crave the illuminating ray of Divine
light? to steer my course by; for, though I seemed, to myself, to be quite
fixed in my purpose, yet I soon found, by experience, how weak I was.

I received a letter from my dear brother, who kindly gave us a visit on the
death of my sister. The letter gave me an account, that he had heard, from my
uncle, the melancholy affair that was amongst us; describing the fanatical and
fantastical deportment of those I was about joining with; the utter mistake
they lay under, in respect to the doctrines of Christ, and giving me a kind
invitation to come to him, with a promise to take care of me and my fortune. He
affectionately mentioned an opportunity he had of placing me with a near
relation of his wife's, who was a millener in the city, if I liked that
business; and concluded, in much brotherly love, and with desires for my
welfare every way.

This so sensibly touched the natural affection I had for him, that had I not
been favored, from the Most High, with a sight of the snare which my enemy had
laid for me, I should certainly have accepted of this offer, from my only
brother, the consideration of whose love, in this instance, and of the grief I
had given my other near and dear relations, caused me to turn my exercises
round and round again; and to introspect the cause thereof. In this affecting
survey, many were my secret supplications to the Lord, for his preservation and
assistance, that thereby the enemy might be defeated in all his stratagems.
Thus was I attacked on my weakest side, for this tender treatment, from my
brother, and my uncle's three last visits gave me more affectionate concern,
than all their abuses. But now I was to answer the letter, and I did it so
thoroughly, according to that wisdom, which my Heavenly Father was pleased to
favor me with, that I never heard any more from my brother on that subject;
but, whenever afterward he wrote to me, it was in great love and respect.

I had, through the condescensions of the inexpressible love of my God,
surmounted many difficulties and doubtings in my own mind; yet had I diverse
trials still to wade through, as now will appear.

The alteration of my speech was in this manner: one morning, as I lay in bed,
a weighty exercise came closely over my mind; and as I waited to know the
cause, it came before my view, that I must use the plain language. I had this
at times under my notice before, and now had hardly time to reconsider the
thing, and prove it was the truth, ere my aunt knocked. I knew her step, which
made me to tremble, and therefore made no great haste to dress; but as I knew I
must submit, I went toward the door, saying, Who is there? What do thou
want? she said, Let me in, and I will tell thee. I did not in the least
question that; and she quickly let me know it, by many threatenings of what she
would do, if ever I thou would her again. I could not but think it was a very hard
allotment to me, that I must begin this required alteration with my aunt; yet,
from the satisfaction which I felt in my own breast, I was encouraged in the
truth, and from that time I did not shrink from that part of my testimony,
except to my aunt, who I did no ways delight to vex, and therefore, as much as
possible, evaded the singular language; and yet, rather than use the plural,
would many times break the thread of our discourse; till I plainly saw it would
not do, and that I must either break my peace, or commit myself to my aunt's
fury. This I soon experienced, from using the word thee to her; it so inflamed
her, that, as there stood a fire-shovel in her way, she took it up, and struck
at me. My sister being in the little room, catched hold of it, or she would
probably have done as she had threatened, for the room, or closet, behind the
shop was so narrow, that I had no room to draw back. Thus was I once more
preserved; but had reason to fear I should yet be the cause of bringing my aunt
to much disgrace, as she often declared, she believed it was no more sin to
kill me, than a dog.

I found she had heard of my being advised to leave the town; and, I believe, I
suffered much for that kindness of my friends. My aunts hopes seemed now, that
either they would draw me, or she should drive me out of the town, saying, if I
would be a Quaker, I should not be one in her sight. And now, again, I had the
former kind proffer renewed; P. Meller sent me an invitation to come to
Whitehaugh, for a quarter of a year, till my aunt should be better reconciled.
This was indeed a kind invitation from one that I had never spoken to: and I
might have gone for any business or school that I then had; for my aunt's
behavior had so frighted the scholars, that their parents thought fit to keep
them at home; and, had it not been for the sake of seeing one called a Quaker,
I should hardly have sold so many trifles as I did; but there seemed a general
curiosity to see me.

Standing, thus, as an object of disdain and derision, I could willingly have
accepted the kind invitation of my friends; yet, when I cast my eye toward the
Captain of my Salvation, I found I had not liberty to move; and, therefore,
with an acknowledgement of their kindness, passed it by.

Another proof of my aunt's unguarded passion soon after occurred, which was
this: we were sitting together in the little room, as we very often did, and it
was drawing toward the middle of the night; when, in the course of our
conversation, she obliged me to use that language which she could not bear, and
a brass candlestick standing betwixt us, she flung it at me with such force,
that it dinged against the wall; I had just time to see her intention, and, by
bowing my body, escaped the blow. Thus did David's God again preserve me, for
the sake of the stem of Jesse, that now began to bud within my breast; and
although I stood here in jeopardy of body, yet was I mercifully preserved in
stability of soul, and in a supporting belief that I was in the way of my duty,
and favored with hope as an anchor in this assurance, that if it pleased the
Lord to permit the death of the mortal part, he would be pleased to let his
mercy light on my immortal soul, and I should die as a martyr to my says in
Christ; yet, a fear for my aunt prevailed over me, and though I had concealed
her carriage toward me as much as possible, yet this I durst not conceal,
least I should be chargeable with the consequence. I therefore desired my
sister to tell my uncle of this violent action, and my fears. He returned for
answer, that whatever treatment I met with, was good enough for me; and as to
my aunt, it was impossible to keep her at home.

The grief that I passed under, for fear of my aunt's going quite distracted,
was great, and the bowings-down of soul and body were frequent, with earnest
supplication to the Almighty for the preservation of us both: she in her
senses, and me in the way of my duty toward him, and in a justifiable
behavior to my uncle and aunt. I believe my uncle had, at that time, more
compassion for me than he would suffer to be seen: he had my aunt talked to,
and would not suffer her to come at such unseasonable hours again; for she had
several times before spent most of the night with me alone, and what I then
received from her, the Almighty knows, and, indeed, did make it up to me in her
reconciliation afterward. Her nightly visits here ended, but they had been so
long continued, late and early, that I had habituated myself to spend the
nights, (as I used to keep a fire) in the little closet. I sat much there, and
when it was bedtime, (if my aunt was absent) would put my candle out, and sit
as still as I could, lest I should be suspected of keeping disorderly hours.

I had here no intimate to converse with, or encourage me, and was left as a
person quite alone; but the immediate visitations of divine favor, at times,
did most graciously establish my faith; and when almost overwhelmed, would, in
the condescendings of his compassion, direct my mind to some passage in the
Scriptures for my consolation; and I seldom read, or contemplated on them
without tears; yet how quickly did I lose the sight and effect of these
favors; whilst, like a traveller, driven away from the haven of his happiness
by contrary winds, I was forced by grief into a confusion of thoughts, and have
frequently sat under the violent suggestions of the enemy till two, three,
four, or five in the morning; and was sometimes no sooner in bed, than my aunt
would call me up. It is hardly credible how little sleep I went with: but,
surely, I sympathized with my uncle and aunt in the affliction I gave them. My
meat was to me as trifling as my sleep, wherein I proved on what a little
nature will subsist; my meals were no ways constant, a bit of bread and cheese,
with a little water; or a little milk and bread and butter, with a dish of tea,
were my only food for months! nor had I any desire after any thing else, till
necessity obliged me to alter my course.

My aunt, though under some restraint, used to tell me, she would make me
suffer yet; saying, no one had any business with what she did to me. One
marketday, she followed me as I went behind the counter, and kept me there for
some hours; though I desired her to let me go, yet she would not; nor did I
choose to put her away, she saying, she would hear my language to day: I was,
indeed, under some exercise, and desirous to do my duty in the sight of the
Divine Being, though I was apprehensive I must suffer for it. When any one came
into the shop, she told them, I was the new-made Quaker; and filled those who
were strangers to her with admiration of us both; and I may say, I blushed as
much for her as for myself. Each time she thus exposed me, she held me by the
left arm, which was next to her; and when I used the plain language she pinched
me very bad; and so often renewed her pinche^, that it was very hard for me to
bear them; yet I saw no way to help it without using her as I never had done,
and bringing guilt on myself; I therefore endeavored to hold out a little
longer; and have since wondered how I bore it without the least complaint. She
had, indeed, inured me to suffer; and, from my behavior at the first, would
often say, the Quakers had taught me; and if she smote me on one cheek, I must
turn the other. She tried me so, that I many times desired her to forbear. I
had no hopes that she would regard my petition, but as my arm and hand were
very visibly swelled, I wished them to plead for me; and, by often looking at
them, brought them under her notice: when she tauntingly said, I doubt I have
hurt thy arm; and in a little time went off. When she was gone, I tried to
unbutton my sleeve, but my arm being so prodigiously swelled, I could not.

Doctor Gravesnor's daughter, knowing my aunt had been with me a long time, and
seeing her go out, stepped in, and helped me to unbutton my sleeve, and, seeing
the condition I was in, went for her father. When my wristband was loose, my
hand and arm swelled to such a degree, that, before the Doctor came, I could
scarcely shut my fingers. When he saw my arm, he said it was a very bad bruise;
it seemed, for the compass of the palm of my hand, to be like a jelly, and
exceeding black toward the shoulder. The Doctor seemed surprised, and said, he
was afraid it would mortify; then went home, and quickly returned with a
medicine. He was one who always had shown me great respect; and his daughters
were my scholars, till my aunt thought proper to break up my school. I believe
it was both from his respect and fear for me, that he took the freedom (after
he had dressed my arm) to scold and blame me for my foolish, childish
sufferance; saying, my case was dangerous, and I might lose my arm, if not my
life; yet continued saying, he would do all in his power to prevent it. I told
him I was satisfied with his kindness and judgment; and surely, was more
willing, at that time, to give up my life than my arm: yet did I struggle in
the secret of my mind to submit to the will of God; and the Doctor, seeing my
tears fall, said, Nay, indeed, you have enough to bear, without being chid; and
so I found; for, besides my inward exercise, his application was very sharp: He
often signifying, he was afraid of the bone; and saying, it was such a piece of
cruelty, as sure no person in their senses could be guilty of. He staid with me
a good while, repeating the dressings often, which still renewed my pain. My
fingers were swelled, stiff, and useless, for I could neither close nor stir
them. The Doctor asked me, who I had to be with me, since I left my uncle's;
and said, that now I could not do without assistance; and charged his daughter
not to leave me, till I had got somebody. When he left me, he directly sent for
my uncle, and told him how unchristian-like my aunt had used me: saying, she
was more ^it to be bound, than go loose: and that he ought not to suffer her to
come to me. My uncle promised she should not: yet this did not move his pity,
so as to induce him to come and see me, which was what I greatly desired.

It was a month after this, before I could turn my arm behind me, to dress
myself. My sister was sent to school at Manchester before this, for fear, as I
have thought, of her catching the infection of a Quaker; nor did I much repine
at the loss of her company, for I had found out, that she had carried very
treacherously betwixt us. I had but few in this illness that came to see me;
yet I heard that many were displeased at my aunt. Among those few that came, my
present aunt, S. Whitehead, was one; and her visit was very acceptable, though
I had then no acquaintance with her. She spoke to my encouragement, and invited
me, when I was better, to come to see her; which I could willingly have done,
but thought proper to delay some time, for fear my aunt should know it, who
spared no one, that she heard did but in a friendly way speak to me.

S. Tailor, at this time, lived with John Winter, at Stafford; and, long before
this, (seeing my uncle and aunt's groundless dislike to that family) I had
desired they would not visit me often; they saw my motive, excused the freedom
I took with them, and, when I went to them, behaved to me in a loving and free
manner.

Here I ought not, and hope I never shall forget the best of visitors, the
Invisible Comforter; who, in a good degree, made my af^ictions easy, and
consolated my spirit, under a belief that I still was persevering in the way of
my duty.

From the encouragement that I thus met within myself, was I excited, as soon
as proper, to endeavor to go to meeting again; and when I was so far recovered
that I could dress myself, I thought, from the weakly state I was in, it would
be better for me to board in a family, that I might be in the way of getting
such provision as my constitution required, which never was very strong, and
was now much impaired by excess of trouble, and the different course of living
which I had of late been in.

As there was a door that went out of the chamber of my apartment into the
other part of the house, I thought it convenient that I should board with
Thomas Turnock, who lived there, and was well satisfied therein.

I had now some hopes, from my aunt's absence during the last month, that she
would no more interrupt me in my going to meeting; but soon found them
frustrated, whether by accident or information, I know not; for, one day, when
I came to the corner, near my uncle's house, I saw her coming toward me: the
thoughts of the Doctor and my arm quickly occured; and I concluded, should I
suffer it to be hurt again, the consequences would be very bad. As I was at
liberty, it seemed right to keep so, and make the best of my way; yet, so
fettered did I find myself, that, before I had gone many yards I faultered in
my purpose, and my aunt got up with me, before I was half way to the meeting.

I now saw my mistake, and that it would have been better if my aunt had
overtaken me sooner; for the place looked dangerous, and the want of room to
shake and push me about in, gave me many apprehensions that she would throw me
headlong down the precipice. It was about the time that friends were going into
the meeting, and this vexed her the more; for I have reason to believe she
could not endure the sight of a friend, on my account. She did not spare to
tell me of hurting my arm, nor to shake me by it; but as it had some folds of
flannels round it, it was preserved. My endeavoring to out-walk her was not
suddenly forgot; she, many times after, making mention of it, and would signify
that God was above the wicked spirit still.

Thus, with many admonitions and exhortations, as she called them, she kept me
till such time as she might expect the meeting would break up, and then left me.

As I was at liberty, I went toward the meeting, and, as it was not over,
stepped within, that my aunt might know that my intention was resolute. This
seemed to be as a renewal of our acquaintance, for she soon returned her visits
as usual, though not at the former unseasonable hours.

I have, many times, seriously reflected how it was with me in these straights,
and may acknowledge, my composure of soul was owing to a divine power, which
stayed my mind on God, and kept down those passions of nature, which otherwise
might have exceeded their bounds. But, oh! the calmness and tranquillity that
did in these times of trial possess my heart, whilst innocence prevailed over
shame; and I found, by submission to these lessons of mortification, that I
grew in patience and resignation, in the desire after the Lord's favor, and
the manifestation of his will, who had wrought my heart into so good a degree
of submission, that I was willing to undergo, or be termed any thing, rather
than lose the enjoyment of that in which I had now got a small possession.

It was about this time that I knew an extacy of joy at the freely giving up my
name to that, which I once thought the most despicable. There came a London
harberdasher to my shop, with whom I dealt in my way of business: he approached
me in his accustomary manner; and I, not answering his compliment, as usual, he
looked full at me, and said, Are you a Quaker? My soul was struck by this home
question; I solemnly answered, yes; and immediately a spring of joy seized my
heart, accompanied with this desire, viz. Not only a Quaker, Lord; but grant me
to be an Israeli^e indeed.

From this time I found my desires were strengthened, and the ambition of being
an Israelite, run in the current of my exercise. But here, I cannot but remark,
how like a fool I appeared in my own eyes; for there seemed as great an
alteration in me as could possibly happen from such a change. I could not now
be fluent in compliments, and saw it best to keep out of the extravagancy of
words, and such a latitude in discourse as I formerly indulged myself in. So
many cross words and knotty queries lay in the way of all I seemed to have to
do, that nature was abashed, almost beyond the hope of recovery; yet I often
contemplated the benefit that accrued to Zaccheus from that most heavenly call,
Make haste, and come down: and how willingly would I have made my situation
similar to his; believing there was something in that call alluding to the
glories of eternity; which now appeared in brighter luster to my eye, than all
the glittering objects of a transitory life. Surely, the time would glide
sweetly on in reciting those refreshing prospects which then attended my
intervals of grief; but the sequel of my story calls on me to cross my
inclination.

It was about this time John Toft gave me an expectation of a visit; but that
evening I was threatened with a disappointment; for, my aunt came in high
displeasure, and by her upbraidings, raised a crowd about the door, which was
the occasion of his passing by. When she had wrought herself into a disposition
to be more quiet, she shut the door and sat down. I turned out of my mind the
thoughts of her unkind behavior, yet could not help feeling regret at the loss
of the friend's company, being desirous to see him, as he had been instrumental
for my good. Whilst I was musing on these things, a messenger came and told me,
that although my aunt was there, if I thought it convenient, he would come to
see me. I hesitated a little, to prove what would be best. I knew my aunt's
weakness, that she would not spare me, or mind, in her passion, what she
expressed; yet hoped, as it was his desire to come, he would excuse what might
fall upon himself, and see through the falsities she might cast on me.

In this conclusion I desired his company, and my aunt being present, said she
would stay to see this friend. On his knocking, I let him in, with a degree of
fear, and watched to hear the salutation she gave him; which was, "Thou
deceiver! thou antichrist! thou have seduced this silly wretch." Had she known
what my heart could have told her, she might have thought differently; for, on
the appearance of the friend, I was made very sensible of that power by which I
had been drawn into the truth.

He endeavored to show her the unreasonableness of her charge, by assuring
her, he had never had any conversation with me, nor had visited me before. She
answered, If thou have not, thy brethren have, and was running on with violence
against the Quakers; he still tried to engage her attention, by reminding her
that his mother and she used, as neighbors, to be acquainted. She signified
that was true and if ever there was a good Quaker in the world, his mother was
one.

She kept walking between the shop and the closet, laying many heavy things to
my charge, which I had learned with silence to bear, till she touched my
modesty, and told the friend the freedom which, she said, I gave to young men;
then I desired her to keep to the truth; and she said, If I spoke another word,
she would knock my head to the wall, which, I well knew, a word or two more
would have aggravated her to have done. Upon his asking how long I had been so
bad, she said, ever since I had been deluded; for I was well enough before I
was bewitched.

Thus she went on, as long, I believe, as she had power; for, going out she
said, I will go, but I will come again: but she came no more till next day,
when she laid on me with blows, saying that I sent for the friend on purpose to
vex her. She showed so much of her passion, as to make the friend signify to
me, that he could think no other than that she was out of her senses; and that
he could not see, if I had not truth for my foundation, how it was possible for
me to stand. I told him that I had no other view of coming amongst friends,
than to procure the truth and peace of God unto my soul; and that I had still
hopes I should be preserved. I remember, he observed to me, the emptiness of a
barren profession; and advised me to wait on God in the secret of my heart, to
rely on his wisdom, and to trust in his power, signifying a desire that I might
be preserved; and adding, he had come to see me sooner, but found himself
engaged to take the apostle's advice, to "lay hands suddenly on no one;" and,
after kindly inviting me to his house, took leave. This visit I returned in
about a month.

When he was gone, I considered what had passed, and was thankful to the Great
Disposer of all things. I thought there was somewhat extraordinary in my aunt's
leaving us, for she had never left me with any person before, and was glad I
had an opportunity of gaining such instruction, the like of which I never had
before received in conversation; nor could I less admire the friend's prudent
care, in observing the apostle's advice, which I had before time thought
alluded only to the laying on of the bishop's hands, at the time of the young
student's admission into holy orders, and the confirmation of the youth; but
now I knew, by experience, that, for want of prudence in particulars, I had
been a sufferer; and, as an instance, shall mention one of the most uneasy
meetings I ever was at, which was occasioned by a friend's overcare, who had
often pressed me to come up higher in the m^^ting than where I frequently sat.
I signified to that friend, that the highest place in the meeting would be as
little regarded by my aunt as the lowest, should she be inclined to make a
disturbance there; yet, by frequent importunity, being willing to show some
respect to my friend's advice, I was prevailed with to advance a form or two;
but when the friend came and saw I had not thoroughly taken her advice, she
plucked me by the arm; and although I signified my desire of sitting still, as
far as civility would bear, yet she compelled me to rise, and, notwithstanding
I showed a desire of turning in at the next, and the next seat I came to, yet
she would not let me rest, till she had placed me by herself. Then, oh! the
hurries that my mind was in; for surely, had my aunt herself been there, she
could not have confused my thoughts half so much; for though, at this time,
when at meetings, I had a desire to draw nigh to fri^^ds in spirit, yet it went
much against my inclination to sit so near the place which, my aunt used to
tell me, must be my seat; saying, all proselytes must be made preachers, and
tell to the brethren the abominations of the wicked. Often would she tease me
with such things; well knowing, I had in my nature a great aversion to woman's
preaching.

Here I sat, in a restless condition, several times purposing to go out; yet
the kindness I had for my friend prevailed on me to stay. Glad, however, was I
when the meeting broke up; and when it was over, the friend gave me her hand;
which I answered with my own, in token of my forgiving her too forward, though
loving, fault; yet not without telling her, when at home, the trouble she had
given me, and desiring her never to use me so hardly again.

Shall I here say, that good came out of evil; no sure, but sweet came out of
bitter; for, by my friend's freedom of giving me her hand, several that were in
the meeting did the same; and though this did not prove a time of confirmation
to my faith, but rather otherwise; yet it seemed like a sign of union, no one
having done so before, and was pleasant.

But I lost, for a time, the deep impression, which the friend's apprehension
of my aunt's being distracted, had made on my mind; but thought, afterward,
if, from the little he saw, he could not but entertain apprehensions of that
kind, what had I to fear, who had seen her so many times, a great deal worse;
yet, what could I do, or what was there to be done; I could not renounce my
salvation in order to appease my aunt.

These reflections caused distress in my countenance, which occasioned my aunt
to say, she read the very Quaker in my face.

It seemed hardly possible I could ever know any sorrow like that I then felt;
and my aunt, either by information, or her own observation, became acquainted
with it; and by many frantic gestures, wrought in me a belief, that she was
really as I imagined. My soul now fled to the Almighty for refuge, and I sat
before her a witness of her frenzical behavior, with more solidity and
composure than she expected. At last, she came up to me, and said, I am mad;
thou, thou have driven me mad! and I am mad! I was surprised to hear her say
so, and thought there was some hopes for me, as she had yet so much reason left
as to tell me of the thing she knew I was so afraid of.

Upon my showing so much indifference about it, she dropped that scheme, and in a
little time after, as one fainting in her hopes of victory, declined
interrupting me in the street; yet, being willing to obstruct my desire of
going to meeting, she would come to my room before the hour appointed; telling
me, we would have a silent meeting. I would gladly have had her kept to it, but
it seemed an impossibility, on her part.

When I saw it was her intention, by this means, to keep me at home; in order
to prevent it, I set out so much the sooner; and she, on the other hand, came
earlier still, till she saw, without she rose sooner in the morning, my
resolutions would outgo her.

Many were the paces which I was forced to take in the fields on this account;
but I may say my labor was not in vain, for my aunt then left me to my
liberty, and many precious meetings I enjoyed.

As I had nothing of tradition, when there, to trust to, my earnest desire was
to seek the Lord, and he was found of my soul, to my inexpressible consolation.

In respect to silent meetings, my spiritual exercises at home had taught me
how to improve by them: my heart inclined rather to sit in fear and reverence,
and to watch against the tumult of unnecessary thoughts, than to be busy, as
formerly, in the florid appearances of lip-worship. But, yet, I would not have
it supposed, that I knew no difficulty in my exercises; for surely, I often
felt the throng of natural cogitations to press so hard upon me, that I have
^ound cause to implore the divine aid, often breathing forth this ejaculation;
Lord, if thou keep not the city, the watchman waketh but in vain!

But though I was freed from my aunt's molestations, I found it was only as the
changing of a scene, and that the subtilty of the serpent was now more
dangerous to me than it had been in the form of the lion.

My freedom of attending meeting, which I had hitherto been much restrained
from, and the Lord's mercifully subduing those spirits which were a hinderance
to me, in the way of my soul's serenity, I could not but gratefully
acknowledge, with desires that I might answer the obligation. But I was yet
inexperienced in the craft of the enemy and deceiver of men, and needed the
assistance of some prudent confident, whose counsel might have set right bounds
to my zeal.

This subtle one, taking advantage of my earnestness cunningly twined a thread
of his own into that work which I was endeavoring to render acceptable to my
God. I had, till this time, been taken up in seeking after an increase and
establishment in the knowledge of the truth, and in keeping up a strict
circumspection in my behavior, that thereby I might not give my relations and
acquaintance just occasion of trouble, or a pretense for villifying the way of
truth.

I had not as yet made any great observations on dress, but thought to make a
stand, and judge what was best to be done; and, doubtless so far I was in the
right, whilst I made some alterations.

But now I found the prowling adversary, what he ever was, a malicious,
deceitful, twining serpent, who, if he can but get in his head at the least
place of our inadvertency, will soon draw in his body, under an appearance of
sanctity, to effect, if possible, the utter destruction of the soul. He saw
that his aim of drawing me into any gross, obvious evil, was defeated; and as I
had seen less of his stratagems in the angelical form, he now insinuated
himself into my desires of being zealous for the honor of God, and elevated me
above my proper height, so that I fell to judging, cutting, and trimming off
every superfluous scrap from my dress; and, not content with this, I went from
my apparel to my shop.

In less than one week, I made several sacrifices of value; and so hurried was
I in this blind zeal, that I seemed impatient for more fuel. And having gone
through, as I thought, at home; I next let out the busy eye on others. There
were but sew who could escape my judgment, forgetting that tender advice, vi.
Luke, 37, "Judge not, and ye shall not be judged; condemn not, and ye shall not
be condemned." I noticed each point of behavior and apparel: till, so great a
critic was I got, that I seemed all speculation on the more minute things; and
neglecting the weightier matters, as faith, mercy, and the love of God, which,
surely, I ought to have regarded, though not to have left the other wholly
undone.

To what extravagancy I had gone in this line, the most penetrating eye best
saw, and was pleased to look in compassion on the mistake of my intentions, and
most graciously to illumine my understanding; giving me plainly to see, I was
quite out of that charity, without which, the apostle says, all our works
profit nothing.

So tenaciously did I adhere to this thing, that I saw not the deceiver, till I
discovered such passions predominant in me, as I had never observed before. My
temper became uncharitable, and unmerciful, looking with an evil eye on the
innocent; and being incapable of either pleasing myself or being pleased with
others; but, according to the greatness of my error herein, so was my
abasement, when I was brought down so low, (...) to be capable of hearing the
small voice of Wisdom, saying, Who has required this at thy hand?

Now was I filled with shame; the serpent had beguiled me, and by his cunning
he had given me more uneasiness than by all his roaring. I acknowledged my
fault, I begged forgiveness and future protection of the Almighty, who in his
great condescension, made up the breach and restored the path to walk in. Yet
had I given the vaunting one room to sport with my indiscretion, and he would
often bring the loss I had sustained, by his poisonous insinuations, into my
thoughts, even when no more of the remembrance of it remained than was
necessary to guard me against the same devices in future.

This exercise was scarcely abated, before another trial occurred.

My relations being still displeased that I should stay in town, thoug^ (...)
another stratagem against me, which greatly surprised me, and added to the
trouble which the destuction of my substance, as above related, had given me.

My uncle having been at London, about our affairs; reported on his return,
that on account of a large debt of my father's, who had been dead thirteen
years, a suit in chancery was commenced against him. This report ran current;
and my uncle gave out, that as I was under age, he would take again those
effects he had put into my hands, though I had not received one quarter of my
equivalent.

The unwelcome news was brought to me by many. I say unwelcome, because I had
contracted some debts in the way of business, which, my uncle said, he could,
and would, refuse to pay. And, again, as my aunt had broken up my (...), and my
former acquaintance had withdrawn their custom, my trade seemed at a stand, and
had been so above a year, except for some few trifles, as before mentioned;
besides which, I now was sensible, that the things I had destroyed were not my
own. But, having some acquaintance with Counselor Hollingshead, I laid before
him my straights, and he civilly told me, I might be quite easy on account of
the debt; saying, if there had been any truth in it, he should have heard of it
from my uncle, who used to take his advice; and, besides, he knew my father's
creditors had met with due honor. In respect to my uncle's taking back the
effects he had entrusted me with, it was at his pleasure, and he might refuse
to pay the debts contracted if the bills were made in my name, unless he had
given his promise to pay them. The Counselor desired me, if I had any further
trouble, to let him know it, and he would speak to my uncle for me.

Thus was I fully satisfied concerning my father's debt; and, in a little time
after, was comfortably astonished with the breathings in of the love of God, in
these few comprehensive words; Fear not, I have overcome the world. Had my
trouble been even redoubled, like Job's, surely I should in this season of
favor have forgotten them; yet, when it subsided, I found there remained two
occasions for sorrowful reflection. The one was, paying of my creditors; which
I soon got over, as I had cash enough to balance all but one, from whom I had
received a parcel, which, through the smallness of business, was nearly entire;
and this I sent back, with money to answer any deficiency or damage. It was
kindly received, and I was very easy respecting it. But as to the other affair,
by destroying the articles, I had put it out of my power to restore them; and
this dwelt longer with me; yet, as I lived to come to age, I took the debt upon
myself, and became reconciled to bear it; though not without a belief, that if
I had had a friend to have given me advice, it would have been otherwise.

Here I bemoaned myself, before the Almighty, that I had lost my parents,
disobliged my relations, and now had no friend to take more notice of me than
what is common amongst the generality of professors; and, indeed, how could I
expect, that any one would busy themselves to take the care of me, in any
degree upon them, without my desire?

I became more and more sensible of the danger to which my years, as well as
other circumstances, might expose me; and I preferred many strong desires to
the Most High, that, in his wisdom he would appoint for me a faithful friend,
who would check my errors, as well as encourage me in virtue; one that was
capable of instructing me by their own experience. These desires were often
accompanied with a promissory hope, and belief that I could subject myself to
the counsel, and bear the reproof of such an one; but where to find such a
friend I knew not; I was afraid to trust my own judgment, and often supplicated
the Invisible Being to direct me in the choice.

Accordingly, in a space of time it thus happened: J. Toft was visited with
sickness, and brought so low, that several friends, who met, did not know but
it must be to take their final adieu. I had also the favor to be in the
chamber, and heard many things worthy of regard; but that which struck me
deepest was, an earnest desire for my preservation in the truth, and kind
recommendation of me, as a young person, to these friends then present, that
they would have me under their notice. I was truly touched with this sense of
paternal care, and secretly desired his life, and the restoration of his
health; which, as it pleased the Almighty to grant it, I was myself no longer
at a loss for a friend, conceiving that one, whose kindness toward me was
manifested under such circumstances, I might reasonably hope to find such an
one as I desired. And from that time I looked on him with a just regard, and
with a resolution that, whenever I found occasion for advice, I would apply to
him for it. Nor was it long before my exigency seemed to require it.

The beloved of my soul, who, in my tender state, had so graciously replenished
my heart, now hid his face from me; and I was not indulged with those times of
solace, which I before had so plenteously enjoyed; I waited, and waited, the
return of the dearest object of my soul, often querying, Why stays my beloved
so long? or, What have I done since his last embraces, to occasion his thus
hiding himself from me? Impatient, I sought him in my chamber, the meetings,
and the fields; places where I had used to receive his favor; but these seemed
now to have lost their luster, as well as my beloved his benevolence toward
me. I sought him, but I found him not: like the spouse, in the Canticles, I was
ready to ask, Did you see my beloved? I was disconsolate days and nights, and,
I may say, I mourned as one wanting her mate. Still I thought my tears moved
not his pity, and his ear seemed deaf to all my cries,; whilst the imperious
watchman wounded me, and the cruel enemy upbraided me with all I had gone
through for my beloved's sake, telling me, I had better have staid in Egypt,
than thus to languish in the wilderness. Great indeed were the conflicts I here
met with, not knowing why it should be thus; and ^earing I was dying to all
that was spiritual, I at length resolved to make application to my friend.

I went to his house; and remember, while I waited a suitable opportunity to
speak to him, the tears trickled down my cheeks; yet, when I had unbosomed my
complaint, I received great satisfaction; for, from his kind enquiry of my past
conduct, I found my opinion of his friendship confirmed. From his tender advice
my soul was encouraged to hope a little longer: and to my inexpressible joy, in
some days after, I felt the influence of Divine Love suggesting to my mind,
Follow on to know the Lord; Joseph, the spiritual Joseph, is yet alive. Oh!
sure here I found again that inestimable jewel, the pearl of my best affection,
and the life of my hope, with such revivings as Jacob experienced, when he saw
the assurance of the welfare of his son. And my soul bowed under an humble
sense of gratitude; saying, It is enough, I will go down and see him ere I die.

It was a time of true humility, tenderness, and love. My covenant was renewed,
and it remained for some time as a summer season; or, "as the time when the
voice of the turtle is heard." Yet, at intervals, I could not but reflect on
former days, and conclude, the smallest degree of my uncle's and aunt's
reconciliation, would add to my happiness. And, as these thoughts increased, so
did my desire of making a trial; and, one evening, I went to their house, and
knocked at the door, stranger-like, as indeed I was, not having been there for
above two years.

Their maid let me in; and, I suppose I much surprised them. They were sitting
alone by the fire. I just said. How do you do? and stood within the house, a
little distant from the door. My uncle looked very sorrowful, and if he spoke
at that time, he only said, I have no pleasure in seeing thee. My aunt said
enough, and called me many impudencies for coming. I stood about half an hour,
and then bidding them farewell, my aunt came with me part of the way back,
scolding me as we went.

I thought this was but poor encouragement, yet was truly glad I had seen them.

In about six weeks, I had a desire to go again. I went in the former manner,
knocked, and stood as before; and, after a little while, my uncle said, Thou
may sit down. My aunt then fetched some books, which, I believe, were the
same that Bennet would have lent me, and read several absurd passages; to which
I only said, I hope you do not think any sect can be so ridiculous as to
believe and practice those things. I staid a little longer than before, during
which my uncle sat very solitary, and my aunt let me come home quietly.

Thus I went several times to see them, eyeing my permission; as believing,
that to go without it, might expose me to danger; but, in my fourth or fifth
visit, my uncle said to the maid; Set her something to eat. I could truly have
said his love was sufficient; for I was so satisfied, with this little return
of his love, and my aunt's increased quietness, that my heart was ready to
overflow. I thought proper to go to the table, and, before I ate, there was a
contrite thansgiving arose in my soul to God.

After this, I took the liberty to go at sundry times to see them, and had
frequent opportunities to remark, I still had a place in their affection; which
answered my desire; nor could I hope for more, as there always was, and is, a
contrariety betwixt the spiritual and natural dispositions. They were so kind
as to return my visits, till I was married, [to S. L. the husband's name] which
was a little past the twenty-fourth year of my age, with the approbation of my
friends.

My uncle would not come to the meeting, but came to our dinner; and my aunt
visited us the next day. They both behaved loving and affectionate to my
husband; and, afterward, were very tender of our children, my aunt exceedingly
so; and, indeed, it yields me satisfaction, as often as I remember the public
testimonies she gave, before her death, of my behavior toward her in the time
of my convincement; though, I believe, she continued to think it was right in
her to restrain me from going on in a way so different from her own judgment,
and what she thought was right; yet acknowledged she was angry, and did exceed;
and that she never saw me behave unbecoming, or heard me give her an unhandsome
word. She was, again, as civil to friends as before I went to meetings; and at
times asked several friends of my acquaintance to her house, and entertained
them freely.

I may now conclude my ^^rrative thus far, with truly saying, how blessed in my
situation was I; having a loving, kind and tender husband; our lawful
endeavors made prosperous; the affections of my relations restored; and, above
all, the blessing of the Almighty sanctifying these enjoyments to my soul, to
the praise and adoration of his love. Here was I permitted to dwell as under
the pavilion of the goodness of God, yet not without something to combat with
in my secret exercises.

I thus persevered on comfortably for two years after my marriage, when the
best Physician, whose penetrating eye saw the malady of my soul, prepared a
bitter cup for the purging out a venom that lurked there, which I had sucked in
from the malicious adversary of truth; before, and even after, my going to
meeting, and which remained to this time. Hence issued a fiery trial, by which
my professions of love and affection were to be proved.

This may well be as a second part of my history, and is the most trying, as it
went very near to my spiritual, as well as temporal, life. This war was not
with flesh and blood, but with the Majesty on high; under the prince of the
power of the air, who rules in the children of disobedience.

I have before observed, that to be an Israelite indeed, had attracted my
desires; but little did I suspect what I had to undergo, before my heart was
cleansed from guile, and delivered from that wrath which the enemy had been
heaping up in me against the day of wrath.

To introduce this heavy relation, I must go back to my childhood, and say,
that the first time I ever heard a woman preach, from a prejudice imbibed from
my companions, and, probably, an aversion in my own nature, I thought it very
ridiculous; and the oftener I had opportunities to see it, the more I secretly
despised it. At the time that I joined with friends, this was one of my
strongest objections to them; but I endeavored to silence it, by concluding,
that others might do as they pleased, and so would I.

My aunt, as I have hinted, gave me many remembrances thereof, as she knew my
dislike to it, from my former confession; and, I have no doubt, the serpent, by
means of this prejudice, injected his venom the deeper; for since I have found
out his workings, I have remembered a secret fear, which I had at times on this
account, and which this cunning enemy had allayed, by reminding me of my many
protestations against it. The apprehension, however, continued, that I should
certainly come to be a preacher; which greatly distressed me: the allowance of
women's preaching being the only dislike I had to the discipline and order of
the church; yet still I satisfied myself with many inconsiderate resolves
against it.

But here I may remark a good opportunity allotted me for the shaking off those
shackles which the fiend was fastening on me; but which I lost, and have
remembered it many times with sorrow.

Being in discourse with a friend, he frankly asked me, if I had any scruples?
or whether I was satisfied with the principles of friends? I stopped short in my
mind apprehending, if I should mention women's preaching, he would think I
spoke with regard to myself. Thus was I baffled; and I answered, that I was
satisfied in the principle itself. At that time my idea of preaching was, that
it was an act of love and friendship, separate from obedience; and glad could I
have been, like Moses, if all the Lord's people had been so inclined; women
excepted.

I continued thus for some years, till I became such a slave to my fears, that
I could not say, "Thy will, O Lord, be done." But like Naaman, the captain of
Syria, would fain be excused from this thing. I now began to believe that such
exposures were something more than voluntary offerings, and was convinced, from
many proofs, that my state had been as clearly spoken to by my own sex, as by
the other; yet, such was my perverseness, that, one day, (...) had much ado to
stay the meeting, though I could not help acknowledging within myself, that it
would have been an acceptable testimony, had it came from a man. So great was
my prejudice; but greater, yes, may I say, infinitely greater, were the
condescentions of God; for I was still favored in my waitings with a sense of
his living presence. The mysteries of true divinity were opened to my
understanding, and through the influences of divine love has my cup overflowed
with such acknowledgments as these; "Oh, my beloved! if thou dealest so
bountifully with me, my breast will be too narrow to contain thy love; oh!
withhold thy hand, or I shall certainly speak of thy goodness to others." And,
I really believe, had I embraced that opportunity, and joined with the Lord in
his workings on my mind, I should have been delivered from my fears, and
escaped those cross occurrences I have since waded through: but here my poor
soul shrunk from the cross of Christ, whose yoke, to the passive mind, becomes
easy, and his burden light. Yet such was my weakness, that, through
shortsightedness, and the false suggestions of the enemy, I started aside; and
may truly say, the longer I carried my burden, the heavier it proved; and I now
have, with regret, to look back and confess, that instead of closing with the
visitations of love; I joined with my inveterate enemy, and resolved not to
wait for, or encourage any farther discoveries. Thus did I harden myself,
wretched creature that I was; and when I have felt the power of the Almighty
moving with love upon my mind, I have no less than said; I will have no more
understanding; and sundry times shut mine eyes upon the book that has been, as
it were, put into my hand, when the best of interpreters has been near, and so
withstood that tender love which followed me; and I have risen from my chair,
to fix my thoughts on other objects.

My soul is really affected with the goodness of God, in the continuation of
his mercies toward me; and under a sense of the horrible state I was then in,
whilst the worst of enemies had full rule; and He, who shed for me his most
precious blood, was rejected, at the hazard of the salvation of my soul;
sitting down far short of a true Israelite.

Thus went I on, stifling conviction; till I was lulled into a spiritual
lethargy, where I lay, till the compassionate God, who wills not the death of a
sinner, was pleased to arouse me to a consideration of what I had been doing;
and I found enough to do, to keep from sinking under the bitter reflections I
had brought upon myself, by my rebellious proceedings; and yet, through the
unutterable goodness of God, I was again revived by his favors.

Having got a little recovery from this state of deep affliction, I was visited
with weakness of body; so that both myself and others thought I was nigh unto
death; but it pleased the Lord, in an unexpected hour, to give me this
assurance, "Thou shall not die, but live to declare what I have done for thee."
This was still so contrary to my desires, that I could not rejoice at all at
the lengthening of my days; for now I did believe I should certainly be tried.
Oh! the days and nights of conflict that followed this intimation. My
countenance changed, my health seemed daily impaired; the solitary places were
made witnesses of my grief; and, as the years increased, so did my exercise,
till I had another visitation of sickness, and was, to all appearance, past
recovery. Most willingly would I have yielded unto death; choosing rather to
die, than live to be any more disobedient; and it pleased the Lord to prove me
again and again in the secret of my soul, whether I would live to be obedient
to his requirings, or die; and my choice was, rather to die, than live to be a
preacher. Yet it pleased him in his wisdom to raise me again, contrary to the
expectation of those that beheld me; none of whom, at this time knew any thing
of the exercise of my mind, which increased to such a degree as cannot well be
expressed. My body would tremble as a thing shaken: and my groans were like
those of a dying man. But now I had learned, by dear experience, to cleave unto
the Lord; and when I have felt the power; what, if I say, of his might; I
sought out places most proper to receive it, and bowed in prostration. From the
weight whereof I have passionately or affectionately burst forth in this
language, "Lord, what would thou have me to do?" And as I believed it was a
preparation for a further exercise, I often begged he would be pleased to make
me able to bear whatever he should think meet in his wisdom to lay upon me;
and, indeed, sweet was his love and merciful his dealings, many times renewing
his covenant with my soul. Yet here I was not to continue, but led again to the
test of my fidelity.

Being in meeting, in a comfortable frame of spirit, I found a motion in my
soul, moving me to worship God in vocal prayer; and, although I had known the
same power in my own chamber, and with pleasure submitted to it there, yet here
not yielding to the impulse, my heart, and all that was within me, became
confused; the whole fabric was shaken; and this was taken notice of by a friend
that sat behind me, who, as soon as meeting was over, asked me how I did;
saying, she was sure I had been ill. I answered, I was but indifferent; as well
I might. This seemed a good caution to me, as I desired to keep my exercise to
myself.

Not many more meetings passed before I was tried again; when I fixed my body
as firm as I could, but found it impossible to still my mind. I knew too well
how it was with me; though the whisperer would persuade me it was all
imagination.

In this way did I trifle so long, that the displeasure of the Almighty seemed
hot against me, and life and death were set before me. I was all in confusion,
both at home and abroad, wishing myself any other creature; and here I moiled
and turmoiled, till I could bear it no longer; and, at length, concluded it
best to break it to a friend; when he signified it had been for some time in
the secret of his thoughts, that something of that sort lay upon me; and,
though I here proved, that it was not in man, by the force of argument and
tender advice, to subject my stubborn will; yet I received some advantage from
it, and acknowledged the truth of that advice, which I did not closely follow,
but became in myself as a piece of contradiction. Sometimes I would follow the
Lord, and then resolve otherwise. I went to meetings as a slave to his labor.
At home, I durst not sit down in solitude, being sure to meet with judgment,
and into company I could not go, without wounding myself, by pretending to be
what I was not; lest I should be suspected grave; concluding, every one that
looked on me earnestly, knew how it was with me.

Thus was I harrassed, as betwixt the upper and the nether millstone, often
wishing for death, and that I never had been born: so great was my straight, I
could not go back again, because I was not able to shake off the principle of
truth; and had thoughts of flinging myself into the jaws of death. Yet, for
ever praised be the name of the Lord, his mercy withheld the devourer, and
preserved me; giving me to see into his false insinuations, and to believe that
the life, which was in his power to take at his pleasure, would not be a
sufficient atonement for those rebellions I had been guilty of; and I was
brought to an abhorrence of those thoughts which I had been made to conceive.
And herein did the goodness of the Lord appear so evident, that I resolved to
keep close to meetings. But, alas! when there, instead of keeping close to my
exercise, I, through fear kept myself from it, and sat, as it appeared to me,
empty, void, and waste: empty of those desires I used to possess; void of all
that was good* and waste, as being laid aside by the Almighty; and all through
a slavish fear that I could not draw nigh to God. I sat as though I had nothing
to do, but to see with a wishful eye others partake of that food, which my soul
stood in need of; yet my state was different from those who are at ease in
Zion; for when I have looked at those who, I thought, were in a right frame of
mind, they seemed to be feeding at the Lord's table, whilst my hungry soul
stood in a state of estrangement from him, without courage enough too seek the
scattered crumbs.

Thus it was with me many days; till in one meeting, growing faint, a state of
drowsiness overtook me, a thing which I was not naturally given to; yet so far
did it prevail, that I was forced to pinch myself, to keep awake. Now I thought
myself worse than ever I was in my life; for, in my childhood, I had the form,
which I left to posses the power; yet here I found not so easy an access as I
had expected; and though I sought, and sought; instead of meeting with my true
friend, I met with my enemy, dressed in the doctrine of election and
reprobation. This I had been led into some years before, and now had much ado,
through the sense of my own unworthiness, to shake it off; laboring hard
against the temptation of destroying myself and foolishly wishing some accident
would do that office. But here the riches of God's grace again appeared. I was
brought to see and acknowledge, that, if my soul perished eternally, the Lord
was but just in his dealings with me; and these considerations had some effect:
I desired to be brought back to my former state, that I might have access to
his power, be a witness of his love, and tried once more. My pen surely would
fail, ere I could fully set forth the condescensions and long-sufferings of the
goodness of my Creator toward me. I here knew my pardon sealed; but my peace
lasted not long; for I was quickly tried again and again; and still I did not
give up. I was sensible that I flinched from that power which was ready as a
hand to help me; and therefore worse and worse, said I to my soul. It will
never be better with thee, suggested the enemy. I knew not which way to turn; I
was weary of my own obstinacy. I would now see what I could gain by
self-mortification; and as I could not work, I would eat but little. I studied
several ways to afflict myself; and have thought, glad should I be, if I had no
tongue. Here again I had cause to know the old prompter to be near to augment
my distress; which, with my own disobedience, made the whole creation appear to
be against me. Oh! I was in such perplexity, that I said, Now shall I fall by
the hand of my enemy. I fretted, and chafed at myself, and every thing about
me, and could not come at submission.

At one time, as I was seriously reflecting on my situation, these thoughts
passed my mind, and surprised me; "if thou be a God of power, make me willing."
This was no sooner past, but they were followed as quick, in comparison, as
lightning, by, "Soul, detest thou this presumption; for though he is a God of
power, it is in his time he will redeem." I was astonished, and said, "Lord,
what is it?" and it came thus before me, "there is war in heaven, Michael and
the Dragon." When the flutter was over, I remembered the passage where it is
said; "in the day of my power, my people shall be a willing people;" and I was
consolated by it. There also fell out another singular occurrence about this
time, which I cannot well omit. I was fully persuaded in myself, that if I went
on in this obstinacy, my house would be laid waste; and, within a month
afterward, we had in the view of many spectators, a wonderful deliverance from
fire: during which, whilst others were busy, in considering how it should
happen, I was as busy in reflecting on myself as the cause; and it weighed me
down in humble acknowledgments unto God, for his merciful preservation. The
world, in a comparative way of speaking, seemed now to be near an end with me;
and, as if a total eclipse was drawing on; every scene and object looked
gloomy; and which ever way I turned my eye, an angry God appeared. There was no
shelter for me; nothing now to defend myself with, or way of escaping; and
nature must yield. In a little time the trial came again; and, in that moment,
the enemy of my soul suggested, that if I got up, I should not be able to
stand; but, thanks to the Almighty, I was strengthened to try, and found him a
liar. The expression of a few words produced a blessed change. There seemed now
a new heaven and a new earth; old things passed away, and all things belonging
to my state, became new; no more guilt for past disobedience remained; but new
embraces and new covenants filled up that joyful day. Yet I looked forward with
anxiety to another meeting day; and thought I formerly thought meetings did not
come fast enough, yet now they seemed to come too soon. In two or three of
them, I sat under a degree of slavish fear; yet truly desired to keep my
integrity and obedience. At length, a second trial came; I was moved to kneel
down, and, while I viewed the place, my soul secretly breathed thus before the
Lord, "Here is the place of my execution;" and seeing the boss, "This is the
block whereon I must yield up the pride of nature, for a testimony of my
obedience; remember me, oh Lord! and the conflicts that I undergo to serve
thee. Accept, O Lord, the sacrifice." I then kneeled down; and when I arose,
this came into my mind; "the life that I must now live, must be by faith in
Jesus Christ."

Thus persevered I in obedience, which wrought unspeakable satisfaction, and
brought my soul, by degrees, out of the place of thraldom and bondage; and
thus, by the goodness of God, were the strong holds of sin and satan brought
down, and the joy of my salvation restored. Meeting-times and days were
pleasant again, whilst my soul worshipped the living God, as in the house of
prayer; and whilst I stand as on the bank of deliverance, resounding hosanna in
the highest; having the harp of thanksgiving put into my hands, my song shall
be of mercies and of judgments, through which my soul has been so far redeemed;
and of the victory of the Lamb; by whose right hand and everlasting arm, my
soul's enemies have been driven back, scattered, and put to flight.

Now, what have I to render to my God for this most glorious work, the
salvation of my soul, but the humble acknowledgments of the most unworthy and
vilest of sinners: who, by his most gracious condescendings, is enabled and
encouraged to ascribe honor, adoration, dominion and renown, with praises and
thanksgiving, as due to his eternal love, for ever more.

Upon perusal of the same,
My soul's enlivened with a flame
Of holy zeal, that I may know
The hand of God in all I do.
Oh, that I may therein confide,
And by the righteous Judge be tried:
This is of my desire the scope,
That of my love, my faith, and hope,
I may not be ashamed; and have
An heritance beyond the grave;
Which to enjoy, Lord, grant that I
In fear may live, and favor die;
And that my soul may on the wing
Of hallelujah meet our King.
FINIS.
BOOKS LATELY PUBLISHED BY B. and J. JOHNSON.
Fothergill's Sermons. This Edition contains four sermons, never before
published in America. English Reader, by Lindley Murray. English Grammar, by
ditto. John Woolman's Works. Memoirs of Catherine Phillips. No cross, no crown,
by William Penn. Silent waiting, by Mary Brook. Convincement of John Spalding.
Sufferings of John Smith and Richard Seller, for their christian peaceable
testimony.
They are now publishing in weekly numbers, (price 4 cents) the CHEAP
REPOSITORY; An Entertaining, Moral, and Religious Work.


