A LETTER TO THE CITIZENS OF PENNSYLVANIA, ON THE NECESSITY OF PROMOTING
Agriculture, Manufactures, and the useful Arts.

BY GEORGE LOGAN, M. D.

LANCASTER, Printed by W. and R. DICKSON, north Queenstreet. MARCH 14, 1800.

A LETTER, etc. TO THE CITIZENS OF PENNSYLVANIA.
Fellow citizens,
THE following plan of an association, intended to promote Agriculture,
Manufactures, and the useful Arts, has been adopted by a large number of
respectable Citizens at the Seat of Government. Should it meet with your
approbation; your countenance and support to establish similar Societies,
within the several Counties of this Commonwealth, will undoubtedly contribute
to the Happiness and Prosperity of our common Country.

It is more than twenty years since Pennsylvania has taken her station among
the Nations of the Earth, as a free, sovereign, and independent Republic. Our
political existence commenced in a manner that reflected on us the greatest
glory; and the first dawnings of the American Empire seemed to presage its
future greatness. Our Country possessed every thing necessary to constitute a
truly independent and happy People. No Country ever enjoyed these requisites in
a higher degree. Such were our prospects; but we have tarnished the rising
glory of our Country, and involved it in difficulties and distress. We have
wantonly sported with the fair portion allotted to us by Heaven. We have
departed from those plain and simple manners, and that frugal mode of living,
which are absolutely necessary in the infant state of our Country, and best
suited to our Republican form of Government.

A vast work remains to be done, that requires all the Virtues and Abilities of
every individual Citizen to accomplish. The World expects measures to evince,
that our contest with Great Britain was for a noble opportunity of promoting
the general good of our Country; and not for the poor purpose of gratifying
inferior designs. Guided by these laudable views, you will generously disdain
any other conduct, than that of diffusing benefits to your Fellow-citizens.
Your enlightened minds will readily determine, that he is an Enemy to the
State, who treats his Fellow-citizens with neglect.

In a State of civil Society, man must be considered as a Member of a great
political Family. He is connected with his Fellow-citizens, by ties of interest
and benevolent attachment; and his social affections must extend to the whole
Community of which he is a Member. He should feel the Safety, and the common
Welfare, intimately connected with his own; and he should think nothing
unimportant to himself, which concerns the welfare of his Country. This it is
that constitutes what is called Patriotism, a principle that excites and
cherishes every generous sentiment we possess. Since then, it is equally our
interest as duty to promote the Welfare and Honor of our Country, we should
make every possible exertion to establish and maintain both. The public Good
and our own, are, with respect to their ultimate effects, closely united; for
which reason it is incumbent on us to do every thing in our power to enrich our
Courtry, and to prevent its disgrace.

Upon the Citizens of Pennsylvania is turned the attention of Europe,
observing, whether we know how to use, as well as how to acquire, Empire;
whether we are to be admired, or despised; in fine, whether, left as we are to
ourselves, upon this fair and solemn trial, before the Nations of the Earth,
the cause of Republican Liberty shall be justified by its effects, or shall be
condemned as the introducer of more Calamities than it removes. With you is the
sacred Trust of realizing the Blessing of Freedom, and of improving, to the
best advantage, the signal favors which our Country now enjoys. But, solid
advantages can never be attained in a Commonweatlth, unless the Members of the
Community are impressed with an affectionate regard for each other. Every
individual should constantly remember that he is a Citizen; that Heaven itself
has formed the Relationship, with all its obligations, by endowing man with
Reason, and framing his nature for civil Society: That, of course, he ought to
love his Companions, and be as anxious and active for their combined Happiness
and Honor, as for his own Welfare; and he should firmly believe that this is
his true Interest, as well as his inviolable Duty.

It was by thinking and acting in this manner, that the Citizens of Greece and
Rome, in their better days, elevated those Republics to the eminent rank in
Fame, which, even at this distant period of time, engages the universal
applause of Mankind. Nor should it be forgot, that it was ceasing thus to think
and act, that their degenerate Posterity resigned themselves to feuds and
discords; and, with mutual malice, undermined that strength, which all their
foreign Foes could not conquer. At length they sunk together into irrecoverable
confusion and utter destruction. More recent, and equally mournful, examples of
this political Truth, might be adduced.

The same vices produce, (...) different regions and ages, the same
consequences; and the factions and Divisions among Citizens, are still found to
change the enraged Adversaries, blindly intent only on the success of their own
ignoble quarrels, into the humble Slaves of a Tyrant.

Let us not, with presumptuous rashness, suppose that we can imitate their
Faults, without experiencing their Fate. Their Misfortunes, and the causes of
them, have been providentially transmitted to us, as faithful Warnings. All the
succeeding improvements of the human mind, are presented to us for our use,
inviting to an observance of them by the most sublime considerations. To offend
against such knowledge, thus munificently offered to our use, is despitefully
to reprobate the best Gifts of the bountiful Creator, and impiously to renounce
that kind and social temper, which his immutable Law makes the foundation of
all private Happiness. May the People of Pennsylvania be governed by better
Principles, so that, whilst every Citizen is steadfastly seeking to promote the
best interests of his Country, the collected force of the whole may be
uniformly exerted to supply that common fund of Prosperirity, from which every
individual must draw his share. May no contention remain among us, but who
shall best serve his Country.

Let Pennsylvania not only exhibit flourishing Enclosures and Harvests, but the
comfortable Houses of industrious Artists and Manufacturers. It is impossible
to contemplate the progress which we have already made, without inspiring a
desire to progress in every useful Occupation. The certainty of its being
possible, affords sufficient encouragement to persevere with Ardor and
Enthusiasm.

In an age, also, when Philosophical Inquiries have universally pervaded the
civilized World, and when human researches have been directed to the attainment
of useful knowledge; the Arts and Sciences have arrived to a degree of
improvement, that justly distinguishes the present Century, as the era of
refined Genius and Learning; Objects of Science are, however, continually
acquiring new Lights, and the Arts are still advancing toward he highest
perfection, of which they are susceptible; Perseverance in the investigation of
the nature, properties, and the uses of things must necessarily lead to further
seize in useful knowledge.

For your encouragement in this patriotic undertaking, it may be observed, that
the greatest part of the establishments which have taken place in the World,
calculated to promote the useful Arts, have been brought about by the exertions
of private Citizens: Yet, notwithstanding a degree of presumptuous confidence,
which always accompanies grand and useful undertakings; we must not disguise
the Opposition and Difficulties you will meet with, from interested Foreigners,
who have been too long in the habit of furnishing our Country with those
articles, which we now desire to have supplied by the Ingenuity and Industry of
our own Citizens. It is high time, that the influx of foreign Manufactures and
the adoption of foreign Fashions, should not destroy our National Character, or
impede our progress to a situation truly independent.

Proud of the Advantages which our own Country will afford, and which our own
Labor will procure; let us disdain to be the servile Imitators of other
Nations, or to adopt foreign manners inconsistent with our Republican form of
Government. The smallness of your numbers, in any particular District, should
not discourage you from establishing patriotic Societies: In small Societies,
men are encouraged to communicate their sentiments freely; and there is
scarcely any man whose Communications will not, on some occasions, be of use.
Nor should slight difficulties in the undertaking be any obstacle to your
perseverance. Make but a sincere beginning, and the immediate Advantages, that
will result from your Associations, will stimulate to a laudable perseverance.

The breast of every Republican Citizen will glow with the importance of the
cause in which he is engaged. No man deserves Confidence, who is shaken by
every wind, or who can endure no Adversities in the cause in which he may be
engaged.

THE CONSTITUTION OF The Lancaster County Society, For promoting of
Agriculture, Manufactures, and the useful Arts.
PREAMBLE.
INDEPENDENT Communities do not owe their Characters to the Soil which they
occupy; but to their Progress in the useful Arts. To those Causes are to be
attributed, not only the difference in the Characters and the Manners of
Nations, but their Prosperity, Strength, and Happiness. On this account,
Political Justice requires, that every Individual, in becoming a Member of a
particular Society, should adopt a mode of conduct consistent with his relative
situation to such Society. Men would never have associated together, if they
had not expected, that, in consequence of such Association, they would mutually
conduce to the Advantage and Happiness of each other. This is the real Purpose,
the genuine Foundation of civil Society; and, as far as this Purpose is
answered, so far does civil Society answer the end of its institution.

Upon the Emancipation of our Country from the Political Yoke of Great Britain,
we deemed and called ourselves a free and independent Commonwealth: But there
are means of inferior and indirect Subjugation, from which our Country is not
yet emancipated.

The Citizens of Pennsylvania are yet beholden to the British, for the
determinations of her Courts, for her Maxims of Commercial Policy, and for many
Political Prejudices.

We are dependent on Great Britain for almost every Article of Clothing we
wear, for a great part of the Furniture of our Houses, for the Instruments of
our amusements, and for the means of our Defense.

Nor is it only for Articles of immediate import from that Country, that we are
dependent on Great Britain. The dangerous preeminence of her Navy: A Navy that
Domineers, with impunity, on the Ocean; that incessantly threatens the Peace of
the Earth; that carries the devastations of War, upon every pretended insult,
from the Shores of that Island, to the remotest parts of the Globe; that
imperiously forces every Maritime Country to take part in, or suffer by her
quarrels; and prohibits, at pleasure, the Commercial Intercourse of the World.
From the dangerous preeminence of this Navy we, also, are perpetually liable to
be interdicted from those Articles of Consumption, which Expedience or
Necessity have induced us to seek for from other Countries: And yet our
Clothing, imported from Great Britain, is made tributary to support this very
Navy; which is daily committing the most wanton Depredations on our Commerce.
Nor is it an Evil of trifling magnitude, that the Credit, almost forced upon
our Merchants by the cupidity of the British Traders, has overwhelmed our
Country with British Merchandise, far beyond the real Wants of the Consumer. It
has excited our Farmers to needless Expense, and involved them in Difficulties,
for Articles of mere Luxury: It has rendered the plain, but comfortable,
Manufactures, which employed the leisure hours of their Wives and Daughters,
disreputable, because unfashionable. It has made the Farmer tributary to the
Storekeeper; the Storekeeper, to the Merchant of Philadelphia; the Merchant of
Philadelphia, to the Merchant of Great Britain. The Credit thus given, can, at
any time, be withdrawn; the Debts thus contracted, can, at any time, be
demanded; and the Peace and Comfort of a numerous Body of American Citizens are
now, and have long been, at the Mercy of British Merchants, and of the British
Court. Hence are our Commercial Towns filled with British Subjects, who conduct
our Trade; with British Agents, who drain our Wealth; with British Politics,
British Interests, and British Influence. To lessen, in part, these enormous
Evils; to render our Citizens, in their private as well as in their public
Capacities, really as they ought to be, independent of Foreign Countries, for
Articles which the Necessities, or the Comforts, of Life require; and to
suppress the Temptations to improvident Expense; We propose a general
encouragement to Agriculture, Manufactures, and the useful Arts. An
encouragement that shall make the use of our own Productions and Manufactures
the fashionable Articles of Consumption; at least in every Circle of American
Republicans.

Not that it is our Desire to make this, in the common acceptance of the Word,
a Manufacturing Country: Nor do we contemplate any Manufactured Article for an
export Trade; nor any Manufacture among ourselves, which the natural Resources
of our Country may not make profitable.

Still less are we desirous of introducing in this happy Country, that baneful
system of European Management which dooms the human Faculties to be smothered,
and Man to be converted into a Machine. We want not that unfeeling plan of
Manufacturing Policy, which has debilitated the Bodies, and debased the Minds,
of so large a Class of People as the Manufacturers of Europe.

Nor are we ambitious to see a Manufacturing Capitalist, as in the great
Manufacturing Towns of Europe, enjoy his Luxuries, or fill his Coffers, by
paring down the hard-earned Wages of the laborious Artists he employs.

But the Object of our Association is, to procure, from the fertile Soil of
Pennsyvania, every Production it is capable of affording; and, from the Labor
and ingenuity of independent Citizens, every Article of Manufacture and of the
useful Arts, necessary to render our Country happy, prosperous, and truly
independent.

ARTICLE I.
The Society shall be called The Lancaster County Society, for promoting
Agriculture, Manufactures, and the useful Arts.

ART. II.
The Society shall hold monthly Meetings on the first Wednesday of every Month.

ART. III.
The first Wednesday in September, in every Year, shall be the Annual Meeting
of the Society; at which Meeting a President, a Vice President, Secretary,
Treasurer, and a Committee of Correspondence shall be elected, by Ballot.

ART. IV.
The President shall preside at all the Meetings of the Society, regulate the
Debates, determine Questions of Order; and, in case of an equality of Voices in
any Business, he shall have a casting Vote. He shall subscribe all Acts of the
Society; and may call Special Meetings.

ART. V.
The Vice President, in absence of the President, shall have all the Powers and
Authorities of the President. If the President and Vice-presiden be absent at
any Meeting of the Society, a Chairman may be elected, pro tem. by a majority
of the Members present.

ART. VI.
The Secretary shall keep fair and regular Entries of the proceedings of the
Society at their several Meetings, register the names of Members, and give
Public Notice of the Time and Place of the Meetings of the Society.

ART. VII.
The Committee of Correspondence shall consist of twelve Members, who shall be
Agents of Information; four for Agriculture, four for Manufacture, and four for
the useful Arts; and whose Duty it shall be, jointly or severally, to
correspond with similar Institutions, or with Individuals on the several
Objects of the Society: And they shall, at every monthly Meeting of the
Society, communicate such Information as they may have received or acquired,
tending to improve the Agriculture, Manufactures, and useful Arts.

ART. VIII.
As the most unequivocal manner of giving Encouragement to American
Manufactures, consists in making use of them, and by that mean creating a
demand for them; it is expected, that every Member of the Society shall be
clothed, at their Annual Meeting, in the Manufactures of his Country.

ART. IX.
Every Member of similar Societies shall be regarded as an honorary Member of
this Society.

ART. X.
The Society shall engage a Storekeeper to receive and sell, on Commission, any
Thread, Woollen, Linen, or any other domestic Manufacture brought to him; by
which means every Member of this Society may have a safe Deposit for the
Produce of his Industry and Ingenuity; and persons, wishing to be supplied with
American Manufactures, may know where to apply.

ART. XI.
Every Member of the Society shall subscribe this Constitution; at which time
he shall pay to the Treasurer, not less than one Dollar; and he shall also pay
a monthly contribution of one-eighth of a Dollar, toward supporting the Funds
of the Society.

ART. XII.
The Funds of the Society shall be distributed to the Citizens of Lancaster
County, in Premiums, in such Manner and on such Occasions as a Majority of the
Society may direct.

ART. XIII.
The Treasurer shall be responsible for all Moneys he may receive on account of
the Society: And he shall pay no money, belonging to the Society, except by an
Order of the President, signed by the Secretary.

The following Bill was read in the House of Representatives of this States a
few Days previous to their Adjournment; and is now submitted to the
Consideration of the Public.
An Act for the Promotion of Agriculture, Manufactures, and the useful Arts.
Sect. 1. Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania in General Assembly met, and it is hereby enacted
by the authority of the same, That so soon as fifty Freeholders, or more, in
the city of Philadelphia, or any county of this State, shall associate
themselves together, under the name of the Society for promoting Agriculture,
Manufactures, and the useful Arts, in and for the city or such county; and
shall sign a paper, promising to pay to the Treasurer of the said Society, the
sum of one dollar, each, or more, annually, for the purposes herein after
mentioned; and shall cause such paper to be filed in the Office of the
Prothonotary; every such Society shall be, and by force of this Act become, one
body politic and corporate, in deed and in law, with perpetual succession, and
all the rights, liberties, privileges, and franchises incident to a
Corporation, for all and every the purposes of this Act; and to admit new
Members upon the terms aforesaid, as often as they please: And thereupon the
said Society shall or may meet at the county Town on the Wednesday of the next
Court of Common Pleas after the said subscription-paper shall be filed, and
choose, by a majority of votes, out of their number, one President, one
Vice President, one Secretary, one Treasurer, and Committee of Correspondence
and Information; who shall be willing to contribute their services, and attend
to the duties of their Offices, without fee or reward, and who shall be such
Officers of the said Society for the year thence next following: And other such
Officers shall be chosen at a stated meeting, to be held on the Wednesday of
the same term, annually, forever thereafter. And the said Society shall meet on
the Wednesday of every term of the County Courts, and at other times when the
President and a majority of the Members present shall think proper to summon
them, in such manner as shall be by them prescribed, for the purpose of making
Bye-laws, and transacting the business to them committed: And they may adjourn
from time to time, as they shall see cause.

Sect. 2. And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, That, at the
next assessment of the city and county Rates, after any such Society shall be
established or organized, in the city or any county within this State, the
county Commissioners shall, and they are hereby enjoined and required to lay
and assess, and cause to be levied and collected, in the same manner and by the
same persons, as the city and county taxes are laid, assessed, levied, and
collected, an additional sum of fifty dollars for every Member which the city
or such county is entitled to elect and send to the House of Representatives,
in and for this Commonwealth, and to cause the same to be paid to the Treasurer
of the said Society; to be expended, together with their annual subscriptions
for the uses herein after mentioned.

Sect. 3. And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, That every such
Society, at some general meeting thereof, shall fix and determine upon such
articles of Agricultural Production, or improvement in Manufactures or the
useful Arts, as, in their judgment, are entitled to encouragement by Rewards;
and shall fix, ascertain, and publish, in such manner as shall be directed by
their Bye-laws, such Rewards, and the conditions whereupon the same shall
become due and payable to the person or persons who shall, by his, her, or
their skill or industry, according to such Conditions, become entitled to the
same, as they shall think will be beneficial to the county: And the said
Society shall, at their stated meetings, or at such time and places as shall be
prescribed by the Bye-laws of such Society, meet at the County Town, for the
purpose of hearing the Parties applying for such Rewards, and of examining
their proofs or specimens; and shall have full power and authority to
determine, whether any or either of the Applicants is entitled to the Rewards
so advertised, according to the terms and conditions thereto annexed; and to
draw Orders, to be signed by the President, on the Treasurer, for the amount of
such Rewards, in favor of the person to whom the same shall be adjudged; which
Orders the Treasurer shall pay out of the moneys in his hands, arising from the
said taxes and subscriptions.

Sect. 4. And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, That every
Society established by virtue of this Act shall, once in every Year, exhibit to
the City and County Courts, an account of the sums by them received from the
produce of the said Taxes and subscriptions; and how and in what manner, to
what person, and for what Rewards the same has been paid and expended: And the
City and County Courts shall give the said Accounts in charge to the Grand Jury
of the City and County, who shall examine the same, and report to the Court
their approbation or disapprobation thereof, or of any part thereof; and no
Premium or Reward disapproved or reported by the Grand Jury at one Exhibition
of the said Accounts, to be improper or not allowable, shall be allowed by the
said Society, in the following year, for similar Productions, Manufactures, or
Improvements.

Sect. 5. And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, That each and
every Treasurer of any such Society shall give Bond, with one or more Surety or
Sureties, and in such penalty as shall be required by the Society, conditioned
for the faithful performance of the trust in (...) reposed, and for the payment
of all Money which shall come into his hands belonging to such Society, from
the taxes, or subscriptions aforesaid, to such person or persons as the Society
shall order.

Sect. 6. And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, That Rewards
for promoting or increasing the Culture of the White or Italian Mulberry-tree;
the raising of Silk; the making of Sugar from the Maple-tree; the extraction of
Salt from the Ashes of vegitables; the introduction of any new Grass, Grain, or
Root into Cultivation; the Invention of any new and useful Instrument in
Husbandry; the raising and Manufactoring of Wool, Hemp, or Flax in greater
quantities, or improving the value thereof; the making of Butter and Cheese in
any given quantities, and of the best qualities; or any improvement in all and
every the articles aforesaid, or any other improvement in Manufactures or the
useful Arts; shall always be considered by the said Society, and by the Grand
Jury of the City and of every County as objects of the Rewards contemplated by
this Act: And Rewards allowed in consequence thereof (...) be always allowed by
Grand Juries, in the accounts of such Society; and shall not be censured, if
they use moderation in granting the same.


