Mr. MILLER'S SERMON ON THE DEATH OF GENERAL WASHINGTON.

A SERMON, Delivered December 29, 1799; OCCASIONED BY THE DEATH OF GENERAL
GEORGE WASHINGTON, LATE PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES, AND COMMANDER IN CHIEF
OF THE AMERICAN ARMIES.

By SAMUEL MILLER, A. M. One of the Ministers of the United Presbyterian
Churches in the City of New York.

Published by Request.

NEW YORK: Printed by T. and J. SWORDS, No. 99 Pearl-street. 1800.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THE Author has been informed, by a friend, (...) a sermon, published by the
Rev. Dr. ERSKINE, of Edinburgh, preached on occasion of the death of the late
Dr. WILLIAM ROBERTSON, and on the same text, has some coincidence in its plan
with the following discourse. He mentions this coincidence not with the view of
suggesting a comparison between any performance of that venerable and
distinguished Divine and a small hasty production of his own, which only became
an object of attention from its subject; but merely to give himself an
opportunity of obviating suspicion, by declaring, which he does most
explicitly, that he had never seen Dr. ERSKINE'S discourse, nor heard a
syllable of its plan or contents, until after the following was delivered, and
the larger part of it transcribed and sent to the Printer.

A SERMON, etc.
1 CHRONICLES xxix. 12. -- And in thine hand it is to make great.
GREATNESS is a relative term. It is used in different senses, according to the
object to which it is applied. When applied to material objects, it is intended
to express large extent, or magnitude. When used with reference to the human
character, or in any intellectual or moral sense, it has a figurative meaning,
and implies distinguished power, dignity, or excellence. In comparison with the
infinite and eternal God, no created being can be called great. In his glorious
presence the highest angels vail their faces, and are chargeable with
comparative folly. Much less, with reference to him, can any appellation of
this kind be applied to man -- a being lower than the angelic hosts -- a worm
of the dust, who, before Jehovah, must confess himself to be nothing, and less
than nothing, and vanity. But comparing one race of creatures with another; or,
more particularly, comparing individuals of mankind with their fellow men, we
may, without impropriety, speak of them as great or good, when, of the limited
portion of excellence of which their nature admits, they possess an uncommon
share. For this use of terms we have the example of many passages of scripture,
and especially of that which is now under consideration.

David, the servant of God, was equally distinguished as a monarch and a saint.
His zeal for the worship of God led him to conceive the plan of erecting a
splendid temple to his name: and, although he was not permitted to execute this
plan himself, nor to see it accomplished in his day; yet, in conformity to the
divine direction, he made large preparation for it before his death, and placed
the business in such a train as rendered the execution of it a more easy task
for his son and successor. In making this preparation, the king contributed
largely of his own property; and, after having done so, to the extent of his
ability, he called upon the great men and princes of the land to do the same.
They complied with his request, with a degree of promptitude, willingness, and
liberality, which evinced that they possessed a large portion of the same
spirit which animated their master. It was on receiving this liberal
contribution from the princes of the land, that David offered up to God the
humble and grateful acknowledgments of which our text is a part. Thine, O Lord,
says he, is the greatness, and the power, and the glory, and the victory, and
the majesty. Both riches and honors come of thee; and in thine hand is power
and might; and in thine hand it is to make great, and to give strength unto all.

It would be easy to show, in the spirit of our text, that every species of
greatness, whether in the natural, moral, or political world, comes from God.
But instead of entering on this wide field, I shall confine myself to the
consideration of that greatness which is sometimes bestowed on man. It shall,
therefore, be my object, in the present discourse, to show, THAT WHEN ANY OF
THE CHILDREN OF MEN BECOME GREAT, IT IS GOD WHO MAKES THEM SO; and then to
apply the subject to that ILLUSTRIOUS CHARACTER, for the loss of whom our
country mourns.

The general truth of the proposition contained in our text will not, I
presume, be disputed by any who are now present. To a christian audience it
cannot be necessary to prove, that God is the source of all existence, the
giver of every faculty, and the author of all promotion. He made us, and not we
ourselves, and the inspiration of the Almighty gave us understanding. He does
his will and pleasure in the armies of heaven, and among the inhabitants of the
earth. Promotion comes neither from the east, nor from the west, nor from the
south; but God is the Judge; he puts down one, and sets up another.
Instead, therefore, of dwelling on these plain and elementary principles of
religion -- instead of going about formally to prove, that God is the source of
all human greatness, which an assembly of believers can never, for a moment,
doubt; I shall rather request your attention, while I endeavor to point out
some of the various methods in which he makes men great, and the means by which
he ordinarily accomplishes their exaltation.

As human greatness is of different kinds, and appears under a variety of
aspects; so the means which infinite Wisdom uses to raise men to it are also
different. Sometimes his path, with respect to them, is in the deep waters, and
his footsteps are not known. At other times his manner of conducting their
advancement is more perceptible and plain. Let us humbly attempt to take such a
view of some of these methods, as may lead us more diligently to study, and
more devoutly to admire the ways of Providence.

I. God sometimes makes men great, by conferring upon them the advantage of
distinguished and honorable birth. This we are particularly led to notice by
our context. For we there learn, that the liberality which the royal Psalmist
acknowledges in the passage before us, was displayed by the Chiefs of the
Fathers, and by the Princes of the tribes of Israel. Those distinctions of
birth which are founded upon an hereditary nobility, and upon the system of
privileged orders, in general, are happily unknown in our land. I say happily,
because whatever advantages such distinctions may be supposed by some to
produce, they are generally acknowledged to be also productive of multiplied
curses, wherever they exist. To be descended from the truly great, and the
really virtuous, is, indeed, an honor; but to be able to claim a descent from
those whose elevation is merely artificial and titular, is an honor only in
the estimation of frivolous minds. In fact, such nominal exaltation, when
considered alone, is so far from shedding a real glory around the character to
which it belongs, that it rather serves to render littleness more contemptible,
and frailty or vice more odious. Still, however, God has been pleased to
permit, in the arrangements of human society, that birth should be the
foundation of one species of eminence. And where this eminence is wisely
improved, like every other dispensation of Providence, it may be made an
instrument of accomplishing much good, both to the possessor and to the world.

When, therefore, the Creator brings men into existence with this distinction,
and under these advantages, he may be said to make them great, because he
places them in a conspicuous and responsible situation. He gives them a weight
in society, in addition to that arising from their personal dignity, which they
are bound to use for his glory and the general happiness. In proportion as they
are raised above their fellow men, their means of usefulness become more
numerous and extended; their virtues become more precious, from the force of
elevated example; their vices more poisonous, from the alluring form in which
they are exhibited; and their whole character more important and operative in
its relations, by means of the artificial power with which it is invested.

It is scarcely necessary to add, that this is the lowest kind of greatness
with which human beings can be endowed; not only because it is merely nominal;
but also, and chiefly, because it may, in general, be said to be less connected
than any other with personal excellence. It is an elevation of which the wise
and the foolish, the righteous and the wicked are equally made to partake; and,
therefore, is of such a nature, as that, while it lays those who possess it
under peculiar and solemn obligations, it takes away all pretext of glorying in
themselves.

II. God sometimes makes men great, by giving them a large portion of this
world's goods. It is an old, and a just maxim, that "wealth is power." It gives
those who possess it an importance in society, and a capacity for usefulness,
which, when properly improved, are inestimably precious. When God makes men
rich, he places them in a high station. He gives them an influence over their
fellow men. He furnishes them with the means of promoting happiness on an
extensive scale. It was doubtless this, among other species of greatness, which
the Psalmist had in view in uttering the words of our text. The chiefs of the
fathers, and the princes of the tribes of Israel, were great by reason of their
riches as well as their honors. It was on account of this distinction that
their pious monarch called upon them to honor the Lord with their substance;
and it was, probably, with reference to them, that he acknowledged the hand of
God in making great, and in giving strength unto men.

When, therefore, the Supreme Disposer of all things bestows on any of our race
a large share of this world's goods, he may be said to make them great,
provided he also bestow upon them an heart to use his gifts with a noble
generosity. For, let it be remembered, that mere wealth, without a disposition
to make that use of it which its Giver designed, does not constitute greatness
in the estimation of the wise and the good. On the contrary, the rich miser is,
of all characters upon earth, and in the view both of God and man, among the
most despicable and mean. There is a littleness in his character to which the
most impoverished savage is incapable of sinking. It is only to those who have
joined to wealth, a benevolent and generous spirit, that the true elevation
resulting from property belongs. There seems to be an allusion to this
principle in the prayer of David before us. It is probable, that in calling the
princes and chief men of the land great, he had a respect, not only to the
extent of their possessions, but also to that noble elevation of mind which had
prompted them to dedicate a large portion of their wealth to the worship and
glory of their Almighty Benefactor.

III. God makes men great, in a still higher sense, by bestowing upon them
distinguished intellectual talents. By his powers of intelligence and reason,
man is raised above the brutal tribes. By his capacity of comparing,
distinguishing, and combining ideas, and of knowing, serving, and enjoying God,
he is placed a little lower than the angels, and crowned with glory and honor.
The smallest portion of this intellectual power has a degree of dignity and
greatness annexed to it, which far exceed all the splendours of material
magnificence. When we compare mind with body, or mental activity with mere
inert matter, the former claims a superiority of the highest and most important
kind.

But, as our Creator has formed different orders of intelligent beings, so he
has made beings of the same order to differ among themselves. To some he has
given small talents; to others greater and more powerful. On those whom he
designs to employ in conspicuous stations, and to make the instruments of
extensive good to the world, he usually confers talents of a peculiar and
distinguished kind. He causes them to possess, in an eminent degree, acuteness,
of perception, ingenuity of combination, force of reasoning, and accuracy and
soundness of judgment. These exalted minds receive and deserve the name of
great, because their powers and their activity are extended. They have enlarged
and comprehensive views. They are capable of great undertakings. They are
qualified to atchieve sublime enterprises. To them, in general, belong the deep
investigations, the splendid discoveries, and the wise improvements, which
adorn and elevate the character of man. And to them pertains the high
prerogative of being studied and admired by millions who never saw their faces
in the flesh; and of entertaining and enlightening, by the efforts of their
genius, distant nations and ages.

It ought, however, to be observed, and to be born in mind, that true greatness
does not consist so much in brilliancy of talents, as in solidity, strength,
and perseverance of intellectual character. It is not the rapid and noisy
stream, but the deep, majestic, and solemn, which carries all before it. It is
not the dazzling meteor, which astonishes by the velocity of its movements, and
affrights by the glare and the sound of its coruscations; but it is the steady,
serene, and regularly revolving luminary, that enlightens the world. Who that
reads the memoirs of a Sully will not pronounce him to have been a far greater
man than Servin, that prodigy, and even monster of talents, whose character he
has recorded. The powers of the latter, indeed, were splendid to a degree
little short of miraculous; but they were perverted, prostituted, and useless
to the world. But the genius of the former, sublime in its views, practical in
its tendency, and persevering in its exertions, was continually planning and
executing the noblest enterprises; and thus was made the instrument of
dispensing countless blessings to his country, and to mankind.

IV. God makes men great, by producing occasions, and disposing events in such
a manner as to call forth and display their talents. It is an old and familiar
maxim, that "occasions make men." If by this maxim be meant, that a fortuitous
concourse of causes, without the interference of any designing agent, creates
and raises up distinguished characters, it is undoubtedly a sentiment replete
with impiety. But if it be understood to mean, that the Governor of the
universe makes use of great and interesting occasions, to rouse, to expand, and
to exhibit the faculties which he has bestowed, there is every reason to
suppose, both on the principles of philosophy and religion, that the maxim is
just.

It is certainly true, that in order to make a great figure on the political,
military, or scientific stage, there must be preparatory circumstances, happy
occasions, and a favorable coincidence of events. What would all the learning
and wisdom of the most profound civilian avail him or the world, if no
opportunity were afforded him of putting them in practice, or of bringing them,
by some means, into public view? How could the most splendid martial talents
raise the character of their possessor, if his lot were cast in a season of
tranquillity and peace? In such a case they must terminate in abortive wishes,
and useless designs. Great powers can only be displayed when great exigencies
present a field on which they can act. Now great exigencies can happen but
seldom; and, therefore, those qualities which are most worthy of being admired
and esteemed by mankind, often lie hidden, like the treasures of the
undiscovered mine. The foot passes over the golden cavern, as upon common
ground, until necessity or accident breaks it open, and discloses its precious
riches. Hence there can be little doubt, but that multitudes, whose lives have
glided away in an useless tenor of sloth and obscurity, might have been highly
distinguished, and eminently useful, if an opportunity had presented for the
exertion of their powers.

Full many a gem of purest ray serene,
The dark unfathomed caves of ocean bear;
Full many a flower is born to blush unseen,
And waste its sweetness on the desert air. GRAY.

When God, therefore, designs to raise up a great man, he disposes occasions
and incidents in a proper train for the purpose. He makes these incidents to
operate on the mind of the future hero; and the mind of the hero again, by a
kind of moral re-action, to give increasing greatness and interest to the
scenes in which he participates. Hence both may be said, at least in certain
stages of their progress, mutually to stand in the relation of cause and effect
to each other. Thus, the age in which men are brought into the world, the
circumstances of their education, the company into which they are thrown, and
the events which daily take place around them, may all contribute to form and
strengthen the mind. They may, and doubtless do, frequently operate as so many
causes to generate talents, to give the taste and views an elevated direction,
and to impart dignity and energy to the whole character.

Who that reads the history of Alexander, does not see that, humanly speaking,
he would have lived and died unknown, beyond the bounds of a small district,
had not the achievements of his father Philip, and the lessons of his
preceptor Aristotle, fired his ambition; and had not the divisions and the
weakness of Persia presented an easy road to conquest and glory? Who that
traces the career of the emperor Justinian, from the rank of a private soldier,
till he ascended the imperial throne, can refrain from admiring the mysterious
ways of Providence, or can doubt, for a moment, that promotion is affected by
the power of the Most High? Had God cast the lot of the illustrious Charles of
Germany in other times, or in a different sphere; had other princes sat upon
the neighboring thrones; or had the period of his reign been less distracted
and critical, would he not, in all probability, have fallen silently and
unnoticed down the stream of time? Nay, to mention a still more striking and
familiar instance, had the noble enthusiasm in favor of American Independence
burst forth but half a century earlier or later; or had our glorious
emancipation from Britain been accomplished without recurring to arms; is there
not every reason to believe, that the GREAT MAN, whose death we deplore, and
whose memory is embalmed in the hearts of a grateful people, would have been,
to the end of his life, nothing more than a respectable farmer in Virginia?

But God not only uses great and splendid occasions, as means of conducting men
to eminence. In his hands the smallest are sometimes made productive of similar
effects. Dispensations of Providence which, at first view, appear trifling,
often decide the pursuits in which men engage; and these pursuits are made, by
the same infinite wisdom, to disclose the latent energies of the soul; to
stimulate into action the languid powers; to awaken a genius, which, without
such events, might have slumbered for ever. If we trace the career of some of
the greatest men who have ever lived, we shall find, that they were raised by
unexpected means to eminence; and that events, apparently small, were made to
accomplish their exaltation. How often has an accidental interview, of which no
consequences were foreseen; -- a passing civility, by which nothing
extraordinary was intended; -- or a matrimonial alliance, from which no
material advantage was expected; -- how often have trivial events of this kind
led to the advancement of men, from private life, to the throne of empire, and
to the command of millions! -- Who that calculated on the principles of human
wisdom, could have foreseen, that a little domestic discord would prove the
first link in a chain of causes, to advance Joseph from obscure retirement to
the station of chief ruler over the land of Egypt? Who that followed the
stripling David, when sent by his father on a humble errand to the Israelitish
army, would have imagined, that this youthful shepherd was to be led, by such a
transient visit, to become the deliverer of his countrymen from the proud
Philistines, and afterward an ornament of the Jewish throne? And, to descend
to more modern times, how singular and unforeseen the means by which the great
William, whom Britain styles her deliverer, gained the sovereign power of that
kingdom! And how small, and apparently unimportant, the incidents by which the
Empress Catharine rose, from the lowest poverty, to wield the scepter of the
Russias! These, and a thousand similar instances of daily occurrence, prove,
that in the hands of God, not only weak things of the world can be made to
confound the mighty, and foolish things of the world to confound the wise, and
things that are not, to bring to naught things which are; but also, that
instruments the most feeble, and circumstances scarcely thought worthy of
notice, can be made to inspire with wisdom, to clothe with power, and to
conduct to the highest celebrity and honor.

V. God makes men great, by giving them the affections and the confidence of
their fellow men. A man may be endowed with great talents -- may be enriched
with large possessions -- and may be called to act a conspicuous part on the
stage of human life, and yet be considerably defective in some of the
attributes of greatness. If he cannot obtain the respect and attachment of
those around him, he fails in an important point. The perfection of glory, says
a great and admired heathen, CICERO.
consists in these three particulars, that the people love us, that they have
confidence in us, and that being affected with a certain admiration toward us,
they think we deserve to be honored. Though this sentiment proceeds upon
principles in some degree erroneous, and, therefore, cannot be adopted, in all
its extent, by a christian, yet it doubtless contains a mixture of truth. To
attain the veneration and love of our fellow men, is an important ingredient in
earthly greatness. It is true, indeed, that some of the greatest and best men
who have ever lived, were, almost wholly, destitute of it* but would they not,
probably, have been greater and more useful had they possessed this hold on
surrounding minds? Reputation, in a still higher sense than wealth, is power;
and a kind of power highly desirable, whether we have a respect to our own
happiness, or to the efficacy of our services to others. A good name, says
Solomon, is rather to be chosen than great riches, and loving favor rather
than silver or gold.

Accordingly, when it is the will of God to make a man great, or an instrument
of doing extensive good to the world, he usually gives him the hearts and the
confidence of those around him. He so orders events, that his actions shall
appear in a wise and dignified point of light, and so controuls the affections
of men, that they shall view all his conduct through a favorable medium. This
popularity, when duly improved, has the best effects. It is useful to those who
possess it. It is, at once, a guard to virtue, and an excitement to duty. A
consciousness that the eyes of the world were diected toward them, and the
confidence of the world reposed in them, has animated the patriot -- has fired
the hero -- and has given rise to some of the most splendid and useful
enterprises that were ever achieved. But public confidence, while it
frequently produces happy effects on those who possess it, is still more
important with reference to their usefulness in the world. The sphere of their
influence is enlarged, in proportion to the degree in which they enjoy the good
opinion of the community in which they reside. Men listen with a willing ear,
and with favorable prepossessions, to a teacher whom they honor. Their
affectionate attachment adds weight to his example, and gives authority to his
counsel. Hence his exertions to do them good are more effectual than those of
others, because they enter with readiness into the spirit of his plans, and
cheerfully cooperate with him in his benevolent labors. -- Seldom has any
people seen a more illustrious instance than we have witnessed, of the
influence of a BELOVED NAME on the public mind. We have seen it unite the
affections and the counsels of those who would, in all probability, have been
otherwise divided. We have seen it, more efficacious than the exertions of
official power, repress the murmurings, calm the fears, and conciliate the
confidence of the discordant and desponding in the most trying times.

VI. Lastly, God makes men great, by adorning their hearts with virtue and
holiness. This is the topstone of the edifice of human promotion, without which
the whole structure is imperfect. Let a man possess all the talents, the
wealth, and the honors which a human being can enjoy, or which a grateful
people can bestow; yet if his bosom do not expand with benevolence, and his
heart do not reflect the moral image of his Creator, Tekel must be written upon
all his greatness. What the light and the genial warmth of the sun are to the
natural world, the beauty of holiness is to the soul. It sheds a glory over all
the faculties of man. It forms that divinity of nature which renders rational
beings like God; and which constitutes their fitness for the pure joys of his
presence.

It must be allowed, indeed, that many of those whom the world has called
great, and who, in some respects, deserved the name, have been destitute of
this most noble of all distinctions. Their ambition was wholly selfish. Their
views, though comprehensive, were terminated by the present state. Their
activity was rather a curse than a blessing to mankind. The characters of the
most mighty conquerors, when viewed through a proper medium, exhibit a degree
of moral debasement, from which humanity, to say nothing of religion, turns
away with abhorrence and shame. The utmost wish of that great heart, for which
the whole earth did not afford sufficient objects of conquest, was, after all,
to be praised by the Athenians. And the Caesar's and Pompeys of our race have
waded to glory through the tears and the blood of their fellow men.

But when the Supreme Disposer of all things designs to raise men to the
highest pinnacle of greatness, he adds to every other species of elevation that
sublimity of virtue which sanctifies talents; that disinterested benevolence
which gives a dignity to the character; and that transformation of the whole
man into the image of God, which raises the soul from earth to heaven. Man
never appears in so truly noble and honorable a point of view, as when his
faculties are directed to their proper objects, and all his powers consecrated
to the divine work of doing good. The hero in virtue is as much superior to the
hero in conquest as the heavens are higher than the earth, or as light
excels darkness. How little did a Darius, an Agrippa, and a Nero, appear in
comparison with a DANIEL and a PAUL, even when these holy men were standing in
bonds before them! How much does the character of an HOWARD rise above the most
powerful monarch, or the most renowned destroyer of his species, in all his
glory! To devise and execute plans for lessening the miseries, and promoting
the happiness of man, was his meat and his drink. For him no tears slowed but
the tears of gratitude and love. For him the lips of the widow, the fatherless,
and the prisoner, were opened in secret benediction. And future generations
shall rise up and call him blessed.

Such is the greatness of him whose understanding is enlightened with divine
knowledge, and whose heart is warmed with holy love. His talents are no longer
devoted to the narrow plans of selfishness, but move in a wider sphere, and
command a more extensive horizon. His ambition, lately confined to temporal
aggrandisement, now takes an higher aim. Instead of temporal wealth and
honors, he seeks heavenly treasures, the approbation of God, and the honor of
advancing his glory. Instead of thirsting after conquest and destruction, his
bosom is animated with the noble desire of promoting universal happiness. His
benevolence, no longer bounded by names or territory, embraces the whole family
of God. His hopes, instead of terminating in the pursuits of earth, rise to the
most noble, sublime, and excellent objects in the universe. And his enlarged
soul can now be satisfied with nothing, as his supreme good, but infinite
excellence, and an eternal weight of glory.

I have thus attempted, brethren, to lay before you a brief sketch of some of
the various means by which God raises men to distinction and greatness To fill
up the outline which has been given* by a more particular recurrence to details
and instances, must be left to your own meditations. In the mean time, I would
request your attention to a few of the numerous practical lessons which this
subject suggests to the serious mind. The following are obvious and important:

1. If the doctrine which has been delivered be just, then great men have no
reason to glory in themselves; nor are others at liberty to set them up as
idols. Who made them to differ from others? and what have they that they did
not receive? If, therefore, they have received all they possess, why should
they glory as if they had not received it? The truth is, the doctrine of our
total dependence on God, for our existence, and for every power and enjoyment
connected with it, removes, at one stroke, all ground of pride and
self-confidence in man. The most ingenious, honorable, and exalted, are
nothing more than JEHOVAH'S instruments: and, therefore, to HIM is ultimately
due all the honor of their great and good actions. In contemplating, then, the
virtues and services of distinguished men, it becomes us to adopt the language
of the inspired Psalmist: From thee, O Lord, both riches and honors come; and
in thine hand is power and might, and in thine hand it is to make great, and to
give strength unto all. Not unto us, not unto us, but unto thy name be the
glory!

2. Is it true that it belongs to God to make great? Then when those who have
been raised to high distinction, and made eminently useful in the world, are
taken away, we are taught, by this doctrine, not to indulge in anxiety or
despair. The same God who raised them up, who girded them with strength, who
inspired them with wisdom, and who fitted them for the sphere in which they
moved, still lives, and will forever live. He can qualify others, at his
pleasure, to take their places, and to act in the various exigencies which may
arise. For every crisis which occurs in human affairs, he has his infinitely
wise plan laid, and his instruments prepared, to do his will, in every part of
the scene. And from even stocks and stones he can raise up agents to accomplish
his purposes. Brethren, how consoling the thought that we live under the
government of such a God! What though the objects of our admiration and love be
taken away? What though instruments on which our hopes were placed, be
unexpectedly removed from the stage? The Lord reigns, let the earth rejoice,
let the multitude of the isles be glad thereof!

3. If the view which has been given of this subject be just, then how awfully
responsible is the situation of those whom God has made great! This inference,
though in the original copy, was omitted in delivering the discourse, as were
several preceding and subsequent paragraphs, for want of time.
Unto whomsoever much is given, of them will much be required; and to whom God
has committed much, of them will he ask the more. I speak to all such within my
hearing -- to the rich, the ingenious, the learned, and the honorable. Ye
great ones of the earth! your Creator has made you eminent among men. He has
put into your hands many talents. He has given you a weight in society, and an
influence over those around you, which enable you to do extensive good, and to
bring a large sum of glory to his name. And let me remind you, that for the use
which you make of all these advantages, he will bring you into judgment. What
improvement, then, are you making of your distinctions and your talents?
Dreadful, indeed, will be your reckoning, if you be found, either to have
buried them in sloth and inaction, or to have perverted them to the unhallowed
purposes of sin. In such a case, better had it been for you to creep through
life with the most obscure and mean of your species; or rather that you had
never been born. Be entreated, then, to consider the design for which you were
raised to eminence, and the obligations which it lays upon you. Study to be
great in virtue, in holiness, in zeal for the glory of God and the public good,
as well as in the objects of temporal pursuit. Thus will your elevation prove a
blessing to yourselves and to mankind. Thus will the transient honors of earth
be but introductory to higher honors -- to the sceptres and thrones of glory
reserved for the just, in a better country, that is, on heavenly.

4. This subject teaches us to honor those whom God makes the instruments of
great good to the world: When he honors them, it is our duty to do the same:
and if, in doing this, we act under the impression, and upon the principle,
that they are his instruments, we ultimately glorify him thereby.

And here permit me to apply the subject on which we have been meditating, to
the character of that ILLUSTRIOUS MAN, on account of whose death the emblem of
sorrow shrouds this sacred desk, and for the loss of whom we behold the
singular spectacle of a nation mourning.

It is not my intention, brethren, to subject you to the pain of hearing the
language of servility and adulation with respect to this venerable Personage.
To say nothing of other considerations, such language would be peculiarly
inconsistent and unseasonable after the doctrine which has been delivered. But
I trust it will be unnecessary to prove, before this audience, that we are
called, in duty, to take a particular notice of this solemn dispensation of
Providence. It is our happiness, and our boast, that we live under a government
in which the voice of the people is the supreme law; and, therefore, the
approbation and applause of this voice, should be offered as the reward of long
and faithful services to the people. Let it never be said that republicans are
ungrateful. Let us testify, by our conduct, that we perceive the difference
between the ostentatious pomp and mockery of grief, which attend the demise of
tyrants; and the ardent spontaneous affection with which a grateful people can
cherish and honor the memory of a patriot and benefactor.

You will not consider me, in the present discourse, as attempting to draw, at
full length, the character of this distinguished Man. This is a task which, as
it would be too arduous, is also, happily, unnecessary. The record of his
virtues and his services, is so deeply impressed on your hearts; his great
actions form so splendid an object in our history; and the blessings flowing
from them to his country are so numerous and extensive, that I am persuaded the
feelings of your hearts, this day, form his best eulogium. But you will indulge
me while I endeavor, in a few sentences, to recall to your view some of those
considerations, which demand a tribute of gratitude and respect to his memory
from the American people.

Our beloved and deplored WASHINGTON was, emphatically, A MAN WHOM GOD HAD MADE
GREAT. Without the tinsel ornament of titled nobility -- without the advantage
of what is called distinguished and honorable birth, he was raised by the
Governor of the world to a degree of greatness, of which the history of man has
furnished but few examples. He was not, indeed, endowed with those brilliant
and dazzling talents, which many erroneously imagine to be alone estimable. His
mind was of an higher order. Providence designed him to move in a sphere in
which a dignified prudence, soundness of judgment, firmness, self command, and
uniformity, were especially needful; and, therefore, these were the leading
features of his character. With these respectable powers he entered, at an
early period of life, on the career of military glory, against savage invaders;
and, even then, gave the most decisive and honorable presages of his future
greatness. In the year 1755 he sustained the rank of Colonel in the Virginia
forces, being then only twenty-three years of age. In this rank he accompanied
Genesis Braddock in the celebrated expedition in which that officer was defeated
and lost his life. On this occasion he was exposed to imminent danger, and
displayed great bravery and military skill. It is said to have been owing,
humanly speaking, to his advice not being followed, that the dreadful
catastrophe took place. And when the Commander in Chief had fallen, it was
chiefly by his address and good conduct that the broken remains of the army
were brought off the field.

A few weeks subsequent to the abovementioned event, the Rev Samuel Davies,
afterward President of the College of New Jersey, and then settled in
Virginia, was called upon to preach before an independent company of
volunteers, which had just been raised, and which was about to march against
the same foe. In the course of his sermon he took notice, with approbation, of
the martial ardour which his hearers discovered; and, afterward, when the
discourse was printed, he added, in a note, the following remarkable words: "As
an instance of this, I may point out to the public that heroic youth Col.
WASHINGTON, whom I cannot but hope Providence has hitherto preserved in so
signal a manner, for some important service to his country."




When the encroachments and oppressions of Britain prompted our countrymen to
throw off her yoke -- when a few infant colonies rose up to contend with a
gigantic, rapacious, and haughty parent, you saw him step forth, their
patriotic leader, in asserting their precious rights, and in braving all the
ills of a perilous and doubtful conflict. And* though little versed in the art
of war; though placed at the head of a raw and undisciplined army; though
contending with skilled, veteran, and more powerful foes, you saw his wisdom,
his perseverance, and his valor, rise superior to the most formidable
difficulties. You saw him lead on his fellow-citizens, from time to time, to
conquest and triumph; until the fair fabric of Independence was completely
reared over the tomb of tyranny.

To present an adequate view of the services which he rendered his country
during this arduous struggle, would be to give, in detail, a principal part of
the history of the revolution. His talents, as a military commander, were not
so much displayed by the number or the magnitude of the battles which he won,
nor by "marching over thousands and tens of thousands who had fallen by his
victorious sword;" as by his address, in making the most of the feeble force
which he led; by preventing the effusion of blood; by skilful diversions and
movements; by exhausting the strength of his foes; by wise delay, and avoiding
decisive actions, where they could only be hurtful; by concealing the weakness
of his army, not only from his opponents, but from his own soldiery themselves;
and, finally, by availing himself, with admirable discernment, of seasons and
opportunities to make an effectual impression on the enemy. The rash and
unthinking, who estimate the talents of a general only by the multitudes he has
destroyed, the cities he has sacked, and the extent of the devastation which he
has produced, may be ready to imagine that such a picture affords little
evidence of a high military character. But the sober and reflecting, who
consider his peculiar situation, the small extent of his resources, and the
formidable difficulties with which he had to contend, will, without hesitation,
pronounce the Leader of our revolutionary army one of the most respectable
commanders of ancient or modern times.

You will not understand me as intending to ascribe to this favorite Hero all
the honor of effecting our deliverance from a foreign yoke. Many illustrious
men, no doubt, shared largely with him in the burdens and the honors of those
trying But his pre-eminent services in accomplishing our glorious revolution,
have been universally acknowledged, and have long been the theme of wonder and
eulogium in both hemispheres. Who was it that, under God, encouraged our
suffering army, raised their drooping spirits, and cemented their affections
and their strength, in the most gloomy crises? Who was it that, by his prudence
and his fortitude, eluded the snares which were laid for his feeble bands, and
conducted them, by unexpected means, to victory and glory? Ye patriots of
seventy-six and seventy-seven! Ye who witnessed the hardships, the dangers, and
the disasters of that memorable period, do not your hearts, big with mighty
emotions, responsive say, It was HE? Yes; under the direction of the GOD OF
ARMIES, it was, indeed, HE. There was a majesty, and, I will add, if the
expression may be allowed, a magic in his presence, which dispelled fear, which
inspired confidence, and which commanded the veneration of enemies themselves.

When the independence of his country was established, you saw him, like
Cincinnatus, retiring to his farm, and, with a magnanimity even greater than he
had displayed in military achievements, exchanging the character of the
soldier for that of the citizen. When the voice of his fellow-citizens again
called him into public view, you saw him, obedient to their command, quitting,
a second time, his beloved retirement, and putting his splendid and untarnished
reputation to hazard on the field of political conflict. It is probable that,
on the day when he accepted the chair of President of the United States, no
mortal ever had the applause and the admiration of so large a portion of
mankind so unanimously enlisted in his favor.

With respect to the administration of our departed Friend and Father, as a
civil magistrate, it is, perhaps, impossible, at present, to make up an
impartial opinion. The tendencies and effects of some of his measures,
posterity only can fully appreciate. That there is less unanimity among his
countrymen with respect to these, than with respect to his military services,
you need not to be informed. It should always, however, be remembered, that he
was called to the helm of state only a short time before the gathering of a
storm in the political world, which has subverted the works of ages, which
still shakes Europe to its center, and of which no one can estimate the
consequences, or see the end. Many of the conjunctures in which it became his
duty to decide, and to act, were eminently critical, arduous, and embarrassing.
To explore the untried interests of an infant empire, and to select the safest
connexions abroad, when the civilized world had, almost universally, risen in
arms, was surely a task of magnitude, of peril, and of doubt. Nor is it
wonderful that, at such a period, the feelings and passions of his constituents
should be tremblingly alive to the impression of public measures; or that the
human mind, weak fallible, and variously modified as it is, should rush to
opposite conclusions. Recollections of this kind cannot fail to soften the
asperities of party, and to suggest an apology, both for the mistakes which
have been imputed to the illustrious Deceased, and for the warmth of many who
differed from him in opinion. And it is pleasing, and, in a high degree,
honorable to his memory, to observe, that, amidst all the diversity of
sentiment, and the collision of parties; amidst all the mutual accusations of
foreign influence and domestic corruption, which have, unhappily, agitated our
country, his integrity has remained unimpeached and unsuspected. Even those who
believe his political errors to have been most numerous, have yet acknowledged,
that they were the errors of a mind actuated by the purest motives, and
pursuing, with undeviating rectitude of intention, the public good.

Many of those great men who have dazzled the world with the splendor of their
actions, and who commenced their course with professions of unbounded
attachment to liberty, have seized the first opportunity to usurp power, and
have proved the worst of tyrants. The history of a Cromwell is the history of
many deceivers and false patriots. But the MAN whose memory we delight to
honor was never liable to this charge. You never saw him thrust himself
forward unsolicited to public view, nor court an admission to places of trust
and authority. On the contrary, he was always brought forward by the unanimous
and importunate voice of a grateful people. He availed himself of no
opportunity that was presented to gratify ambition, or to promote his personal
aggrandizement. He seemed to hold the commissions of his country for no other
end than to do it good; and instantly surrendered them, when the object for
which they were conferred was accomplished.

Singular success, and extended fame, have been too often found to make even
strong minds self-confident and vainglorious. A successful general of
antiquity, in recounting his numerous victories, when he came to speak of one
distinguished above all the rest, boasted, "In this, Fortune" (the imaginary
deity to whom he had conceded some agency in the former instances) "had no
share." The Hero of America furnished an example so remarkably of an opposite
kind, that his magnanimity was not less displayed in his manner of bearing
prosperity, and receiving applause, than in accomplishing the most important
enterprises of his public life. Neither the success of his great undertakings,
nor the voice of universal praise, were found to diminish his dignified,
retiring modesty, or to seduce him from the remembrance of human weakness. On
the Providence of God he took every opportunity of expressing a firm reliance;
and to Divine goodness and aid he never failed of ascribing the glory of every
favorable event.

Of the various kinds of greatness to which human beings aspire, you have heard
that moral heroism is the most worthy of our ambition. The laurels which virtue
bestows are more precious than crowns and sceptres. He that is slow to anger,
says the wise man, is better than the mighty, and he that rules his spirit,
than he that takes a city. But how seldom have the proud favorites of fame
appeared to recognize or regard this truth! How often, perhaps it may be said,
how generally, have the splendid and commanding talents of great men been
joined with degrading passions, and the meanest vices! The ties of justice, of
benevolence, and of gratitude have been violated, for the sake of accomplishing
their magnificent but selfish plans. A decided exception to this general
character is a rare phenomenon in history. You have, doubtless, gone before me
in making an application of these remarks. The patriotic citizen, to whose
memory we are paying this tribute of respect, furnished such an exception. His
private deportment corresponded with the splendor of his public reputation.
Amidst the din of arms, and the weighty cares of office, he was not unmindful
of the virtues which became him as a man. His ear was ever open to the voice of
humanity; and his attention to the various duties of social and relative life
was dignified and exemplary.

It is not uncommon for the most distinguished heroes to end their lives in
neglect and obscurity, after a high career of celebrity and honor. To the long
and humiliating catalogue of the evils attendant on old age, which moral and
satirical writers have given, we may generally add the diminution, if not the
total loss of fame. In life's last scene what prodigies surprise,
Fears of the brave, and follies of the wise!
From Marlb'rough's eyes the streams of dotage flow,
And Swift expires a driv'ler and a show.
JOHNSON.
But from this general law our beloved and admired Hero was in a great measure
exempted. He retained the affections of his countrymen, and the admiration of
the world, to the end of life. He descended to the grave full of years, loaded
with honors, and covered with glory. And though his mortal part is consigned
to the tomb, yet we have every day fresh reason to believe that his reputation
will live, and his name be pronounced with enthusiastic ardour among distant
generations.

Such was the MAN whose death we this day deplore. Citizens of America! let his
memory be ever dear, and ever honored among you. Tell to your children, and to
your children's children, what great things God has accomplished, through him,
for your country. Tell them of his love of liberty. Tell them of his long,
faithful, and triumphant exertions to establish her standard in our land. Tell
them how he lived, and how he died; that, like him, should the voice of
national danger again call, they may be ready to step forth in support of their
rights, and prove themselves worthy of the descent which they boast.

And you, ye youths of America! behold the example which has been this day set
before you; and let a generous ambition fire your bosoms. It would be
extravagant encomium to hold up our departed CHIEF to your view as an example
absolutely perfect, or to represent him as concentrating all possible
excellence in his character. Such indiscriminate and excessive praise, when
applied to any mortal, however it may be intended, must have the effect of
satire in disguise. But he, undoubtedly, left an example, so unusually
illustrious, as to furnish a fit object for your aspiring imitation. Go then,
beloved youths! learn of him to consecrate your talents to the public good.
Learn of him to love freedom, the birthright of man, and to be always ready to
sacrifice your lives in defense of your country's rights. Learn of him to
maintain that self-command, dignity, and order of conduct, which are so
essential to social welfare. And, finally, learn of him to carry to the end of
life, that consistent and uniform attachment to principle, for which he was so
eminently distinguished.

And thou, ILLUSTRIOUS SHADE! father, friend, and benefactor, farewell! Ever
will we cherish and honor thy memory. Thy virtues and thy services shall be
remembered while gratitude has a place in our bosoms, and while this land
continues to be the abode of freemen, who know how to estimate the value of
that liberty, which has been purchased and sealed with blood. Over thy grave we
promise, in dependence on the aid of Him who alone can give strength, that we
will never forsake the principles for which thou have fought, and which
animated thee to thy latest hour. While we watch, with filial affection, around
thy sleeping dust, we will guard, with ever growing zeal, that fair political
inheritance which was thy glory and thy joy.

Finally, my brethren, we learn from this subject, and from the solemn
dispensation of Providence which we have been contemplating, what is the end of
all earthly greatness. The paths of glory lead but to the grave. GRAY.



The admired hero, and the beloved sage, notwithstanding all his greatness,
must, at length, lie down in the dust. There, according to the high decree of
heaven, the rich and the poor, the learned and the ignorant, the honored and
the despised, must become the common food of corruption and worms. Candidates
for immortality! so number your days, that you may apply your hearts unto
wisdom. What will it avail you to receive the applause of man, whose breath is
in his nostrils, and to be loaded with those honors which soon fade away, if,
after all, you have no inheritance secured beyond this little span of
existence? There is a kingdom which is not of this world, offered and secured
to all the faithful disciples of Jesus Christ. There is a glorious exaltation
tendered to them, without money, and without price; -- an exaltation in
comparison with which the objects of earthly ambition are insignificant
trifles. To this felicity and glory, then, let each of us aspire. Let us seek
after reconciliation with God, through the atonement of his dear Son; and a
conformity to his image, by the power of the Holy Spirit. Let it be our highest
ambition to be found of him at last in peace, without spot, and blameless: that
when He who is our life shall appear, we also may appear, and live and reign
with him in glory, forever and ever. AMEN!

FINIS

