MR. MCKEEN'S Election Sermon. DELIVERED MAY 28, 1800.

A SERMON, PREACHED BEFORE THE HONORABLE THE COUNCIL, AND THE HONORABLE THE
SENATE, AND HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES OF THE Commonwealth of Massachusetts, MAY
28, 1800, BEING THE DAY OF General Election.

BY JOSEPH MCKEEN, A. M. PASTOR OF THE FIRST CHURCH IN BEVERLY.

BOSTON: -- PRINTED BY YOUNG and MINNS, STATE PRINTERS. 1800.

COMMONWEALTH OF MASSACHUSETTS. In the HOUSE of REPRESENTATIVES, May 28, 1800.
ORDERED -- That Moses BROWN and JAMES BURNHAM, Esquires, and Mr. JOHN
STEPHENS, be a Committee to wait on the Rev. Mr. McKEEN, of Beverly, and in the
name of the House, to thank him for his Discourse this day delivered before the
Hon. Council and the two Branches of the Legislature, and to request a copy
thereof for the Press.

Extract from the Journals, ATTEST -- HENRY WARREN, Clerk.

AN Election Sermon.
MATTHEW 5 -- xiv -- Latter part of the Verse. A CITY THAT IS SET ON AN HILL,
CANNOT BE HID.
THE divine author of our holy religion addressing his immediate disciples,
suggested to them the distinguished part they should be called to act in
erecting his kingdom of righteousness and truth in the world.

He well knew that many would estimate the character and worth of his religion
by its visible influence on their conduct. If they imbibed its genuine spirit,
and exhibited in their deportment a just specimen of its purity, they would
recommend it to the consciences of men. But should they, on the contrary,
practically disregard its doctrines and precepts, they would incur the
suspicion of propagating a cunningly devised fable for selfish purposes,
unfriendly to the general interest and happiness of mankind.

THAT they might act their part with dignity and fidelity, with honor to
themselves, and advantage to their fellow men, it was necessary that their
minds should be impressed with a deep sense of importance of the work assigned
them, and of their high responsibility. Their every word and action would
acquire new importance from their office, and would invite the critical
attention of friends and foes. The former would be likely to defend and imitate
even their foibles, and the latter to exaggerate them into crimes of magnitude
to the disadvantage of them and their cause. It behoved them therefore to
remember that all eyes were upon them, and that, to guard their own reputation,
and, promote the best interest of mankind, their whole conduct should be
governed by wisdom and integrity. A City that is set on an hill cannot be hid.

THE same observations are in a degree applicable to all men, who fill
important offices in the Commonwealth.

MANY will always form their opinion of a government from what they know of the
characters of the men who administer it. They are better judges of the private
characters of men, with whom they are conversant, than they are of the
constitutionality, propriety, or tendency of their political measures. When a
government is administered by men of acknowledged wisdom and rectitude, it will
have the confidence, attachment and support of good men. When it is
administered by men, whose characters are vile or contemptible, it will be
abhorred or despised.

THAT rulers therefore may in the best manner answer the end of their
elevation, it is desirable that their private as well their official conduct
should command the respect of every beholder. To do this, brilliancy of talents
is by no means the most essential requisite. It is far from being necessary,
for instance, that every member of a deliberative assembly should be qualified
to shine as a public speaker. A sound judgment, and a general knowledge of the
public interest, are necessary to the discharge of the duties of their places
with reputation to themselves, and advantage to the community; but these
endowments and qualifications for usefulness will not ensure them the respect
and confidence of an enlightened and free people, unless they are reputed men
of virtue. The greater their abilities and knowledge are, if they are believed
to be destitute of moral principle, the more they will be objects of fear and
distrust. The servile and corrupt will seek their favor, and expect to gain it
by their readiness, to cooperate in the execution of base designs; but good
men, alarmed and discouraged, will retire into the shade, accounting in such a
state of things a private station the most honorable post. It is obviously,
then, of great importance that men in places of public trust, authority and
honor, should be not only truly virtuous, but unsuspected. It is conceived to
be more necessary in a free, than in a despotic government. In the latter,
force is the instrument that is principally relied on to preserve the public
tranquillity; but in the former, much is to be done by instruction, persuasion
and example. The influence of these will be felt by the well-disposed, who will
be gently drawn into a combination in favor of the order and happiness of
society, which will extend its benign influence over others less informed less
virtuous. In a design so laudable and patriotic, it may be reasonably expected
that virtuous rulers will lead the way. The happiness of society is an object,
which they will always keep in view. And it is believed that in many cases
their example will contribute not less efficaciously than their statutes to the
real respectability permanent prosperity of the State.

IT has pleased GOD in his gracious providence to grant us the singular
privilege of deliberately framing, and freely adopting, constitutions of
government, for the express purpose of securing our freedom, and promoting our
welfare. Their importance and excellence are, and ought to be, gratefully
acknowledged. But, if the real freedom of a country depends as much on the
character and habits of the people as on a written constitution, our civil
fathers will give us leave to solicit the weight of their example, authority
and influence in opposition to the mistaken notions and vices which threaten
our liberty, and in favor of the principles and virtues, which are
indispensable to our freedom and happiness.

IT is not thought necessary to attempt on this occasion a formal proof of the
power of example. It has been seen and felt and acknowledged in every age. It
is equally obvious that the example of men in places of authority and honor is
more influential, and more likely to be imitated than that of persons in the
lower walks of life, especially in an elective free republic, where there are
no hereditary distinctions of rank to prevent a free intercourse between the
people and their rulers. Their elevation renders them conspicuous, like a city
on a hill, and naturally attracts the public attention. Besides there is a
general disposition in people to imitate the conduct of their superiors: And,
unfortunately, they learn more easily to imitate their vices than their
virtues. For this reason men, who are clothed with power, or raised by their
wealth above their neighbors, ought to feel themselves in a degree responsible
for the behavior of those around them. The happy tendency of good example
deserves to be seriously considered by every virtuous ruler, and every real
friend of his country. Blessed be GOD, we have had a WASHINGTON, whose
unrivalled fame may silence the suggestions of a false shame, and dissipate the
fears of timid virtue, which dreads the charge of singularity in goodness.

GOOD example acts with the greater effect, because it reproves without
upbraiding, and teaches us to correct our faults without giving, us the
mortification of knowing that any but ourselves, have ever observed them. We
feel the force of counsel or persuasion much more sensibly, when we see that
one does what he advises or requires us to do. But the best counsel from one,
who obeys not his own precepts, nor practices upon the principles of his own
advice, will generally be little regarded. We do not believe a man to be in
earnest, who advises one thing, and does the contrary.

To resist the progress of irreligion, injustice, luxury, selfishness, and an
impatience of legal restraint, is a duty imposed by patriotism. And I hope my
much respected hearers feel their obligation to recommend by their own example
piety, justice, economy, public spirit, an attachment to our constitutions, and
a cheerful submission to the laws, as essential to our political happiness. The
influence of their example is the more necessary at the present day, because an
attachment to old opinions and old customs, which once exercised an almost
boundless sway over the human mind, has lost great part of its power, and has
given place to a passion for innovation, which rejects whatever is old
fashioned with as little reason and as little examination as prejudice formerly
retained it. This passion indulged would prostrate the religious, moral and
political principles, which are the bulwarks of our freedom.

IT has been thought by many, and still is by some, that government is the only
foe to liberty; that the people of any or every country might at once become
free and happy, if such a spirit of opposition to their oppressors could be
excited as would enable them to cast off their old chains. But experience is
correcting this error.

WHEN we cast off the British yoke, we generally apprehended the greatest
danger to our liberties from the power which must be delegated to our rulers.
Accordingly, our principal guards were placed on that side. Power was granted
with great caution. Barriers were erected against its abuse. Its duration was
made short. Its exercise has been watched with the eyes of jealousy, and the
right of censure exercised with great freedom. But is there not equal or
greater danger on the other side? The constitution of this Commonwealth has not
indeed left us unguarded against our vices; but the importance of these guards
has not in general been duly appreciated. We have been less afraid of our vices
than of our rulers.

THE love of liberty we inherit from our fathers; it is so "interwoven with the
ligaments of our hearts," that there can be little doubt of our enjoying it,
and little danger of its being wrested from us so long as we are capable and
worthy of it. But a capacity for enjoying it depends on a sound and healthful
state of the body politic.

THE more freedom we have, the more necessary is the aid of religious and moral
principles to the maintenance of order and tranquillity. When these we lost, or
very much relaxed, severe restraints, which cannot always admit of those legal
forms, that are essential to the security of liberty, become necessary; yet the
people may retain a love of liberty, or rather an impatience of restraint, as
the sensualist retains a passion for pleasure, after his constitution is so
much impaired by excess, that indulgence would be fatal to him. Liberty, like
the pleasures of sense, must be enjoyed with temperance and moderation, lest
degenerating into licentiousness it prove destructive. There are none, it may
be presumed, who will openly avow that political liberty is, or ought to be, a
license for every one to do what is right in his own eyes; yet where the love
of liberty is strong, and its nature not distinctly understood, there is too
often a disposition to look with an indulgent eye on licentiousness, as only
the extreme of a good thing, and therefore pardonable. But the difference
between them is greater than some imagine: They are indeed so different, as to
be incompatible in society. When one has an excess of liberty, he invades the
rights of his neighbor, who is thereby deprived of a portion of the liberty
which a free constitution promises him. Liberty in that case becomes
exclusively the possession of the strong, the unprincipled, the artful, who
makes a prey of the innocent, weak and unsuspicious. A state of things like
this is a real despotism, and of the worst kind. It is a poor consolation to
the plundered, abused sufferer to be told, that he must not complain; for his
oppressor is not an hereditary monarch, acting by a pretended divine right, but
only a fellow citizen, acting in the name of "liberty and equality."

HE might answer, "If I must be deprived of my liberty or property at the will
of another, let me have an hereditary master, who, secure in the possession of
his power, will oppress according to certain rules, which long usage has
sanctioned, and long experience has proved to be not incompatible with the
existence of the community. But deliver me from the tyrant of a day, who knows
no bounds to his rapacity: Deliver me from anarchy, which rages like a fire
that cannot be quenched. Established despotism, dreadful as it is, is
systematical, its operations are in some measure subjects of calculation; but
anarchy, like the hurricane, spreads horror and devastation, and seems to
rejoice in its triumph over every thing that wears the semblance of order or
utility."

To some, who do not distinguish between social and personal freedom, it may
still seem a paradox that restraint should be necessary to the being of
liberty. In their view a free government and a weak government mean the same
thing. But scarce any mathematical truth admits of a more conclusive
demonstration than this, that laws wisely framed, impartially interpreted, and
faithfully executed, are essential to the liberty of a community. Liberty
cannot be long enjoyed under a government that has not sufficient energy to be
a terror to evil doers. The law is not made for the righteous, it is not made
to restrain the honest, peaceable, sober and industrious members of society,
who are a law to themselves; but it is made for the lawless and disobedient,
murderers, men-stealers, liars, purjured persons, and others, who can be
restrained only by the strong arm of power. That love of liberty, therefore,
which prompts men to resist the laws, and to overturn or weaken the government
established for the common good, is a spurious passion, which every well
informed friend to real liberty will feel himself in duty bound to
discountenance. It is not less necessary that we should understand and practice
our duties, than that we should understand and assert our rights. The
prevalence of sound virtue therefore would afford the best security to our
liberty. It is admitted, I believe, by all political writers, that morality is
absolutely necessary to the happiness of a free State. And there is if I
mistake not a growing conviction in reflecting minds that religion is the only
sure support of morality. It is with peculiar pleasure, that we read in the
valedictory address of the late illustrious President of the United States, the
following sentiments, which can never be too deeply impressed on our minds. "Of
all the dispositions and habits, which lead to political prosperity, religion
and morality are indispensable supports. In vain would that man claim the
tribute of patriotism who would labor to subvert these great pillars of human
happiness, these firmest props of the duties of men and citizens. The mere
politician, equally with the pious man, ought to respect and cherish them. A
volume could not trace all their connections with private and public felicity.
Let it be simply asked, where is the security for property, for reputation, for
life, if the sense of religious obligation desert the oaths, which are the
instruments of investigation in courts of justice. And let us with caution
indulge the supposition that morality can be maintained without religion.
Whatever may be conceded of the influence of refined education on minds of
peculiar structure, reason and experience both forbid us to expect that
national morality can prevail in exclusion of religious principles."

THE constitution of this Commonwealth recognizes the same important principle,
and expressly declares that the happiness of a people, and the good order and
preservation of civil government, essentially depend upon piety, religion, and
morality. It requires that any person chosen Governor, Lieutenant Governor,
Counselor, Senator, or Representative, and accepting the trust, shall make a
declaration that he believes the christian religion, and has a firm persuasion
of its truth. Charity therefore forbids us to believe, without strong evidence
of the fact, that any of them will ever endeavor to destroy the foundation of
our happiness and best hopes, and thus incur the reproach which justly belongs
to the hypocrite. And the same charity teaches us to indulge the pleasing
expectation that our honored civil fathers will lend the influence of their
example to support the institutions of Christianity, and to attract a general
attention to "public instructions in piety, religion, and morality." The
excellence of Christianity, and the good effects of which it may be productive
to society, must be acknowledged by all who seriously impartially consider the
purity of its precepts, the tendency of its doctrines, and the power of its
motives. Yet no person, who is acquainted with the true genius of the gospel,
will be likely to suspect that it is merely a political institution, or that
its highest object is the preservation of civil order. Its great aim is to
assimilate us to the moral image of our Maker, and to make us happy in
eternity. But such is the constitution of things under the government of our
benevolent Creator, that the same temper and conduct which lead to happiness in
another world, have a tendency to make us happy in this. The spirit of genuine
Christianity universally, or even generally, imbibed, would meliorate the
condition of mankind in a higher degree, than can ever be expected from the
wisest and best institutions of a merely civil nature. Its chief energy is
levelled at the heart; its first aim is to purify the fountain of human
actions, that the stream may be pure also. By its influence on private
character it makes good rulers and good citizens, and disposes them to fulfill
the obligations, that result from the various relations, in which they
respectively stand. It is the vigorous root, which supports and nourishes all
those virtues, that constitute the dignity of human nature, and the strength
and glory of a state.

THE gospel of Jesus Christ has not prescribed any particular form of civil
government to be adopted by the nations of the world. And it is conceived that
one very good reason may be given why it has not, which is, that the kind of
government the most suitable for one, might be the most improper for another.
But as it forbids all injustice and oppression, as it inculcates every
personal, social, and divine virtue, and teaches us to respect the rights of
others, as well as to stand fast in our own liberty, it has certainly a
friendly aspect on the cause of freedom and of free governments. The nature of
the religion of Christ, therefore, and its tendency to promote the happiness of
society, and to make us meet for a heavenly inheritance, give it a just claim
to our most cordial affection. And a recommendation of it by the example of our
civil fathers will justly entitle them to double honor.

JUSTICE is a virtue enjoined by every government, human and divine: And, being
reputable in all countries and in all ages, every man would be thought to
practice it, yet to enforce the practice of it, and to prevent injustice, may
be considered as the chief end of government. It cannot confer rewards on all
its quiet and obedient subjects. Its business is to protect them against the
violence and injustice of others, that they may enjoy the fruits of their
industry in security and peace. This being the end for which civil government
was instituted, it is of vast importance that those, who administer it, should
act in strict conformity to the rules of justice, both in their public and
their private capacities. With how much dignity does a ruler appear, when he
can say with Job, "I put on righteousness, and it clothed me: My judgment was
as a robe and a diadem!" His character commands respect, overawes the wicked,
and makes him a terror to evil doers. It adds authority to his office, and
enables him to answer the end of his elevation much more effectually, than if
he were of a different character. Even good men may sometimes find it difficult
to pay due honor and respect to an office, when they must despise him who holds
it.

A scrupulous adherence to the principles of justice is necessary to procure
for a government that respect and confidence, without which it cannot in the
best manner effect the design of its institution. When a government defrauds
individuals, it may be naturally expected that they will retaliate when they
have opportunity: And they will do it with the less compunction or remorse,
because it may seem the only practicable mode of obtaining redress. The
government in this way contributes to the corruption of the public morals, and
strengthens a pernicious opinion entertained by too many, that there is a real
opposition between the interest of the government and that of the people.
Injustice on the part of government deprives it of its best support, the
confidence of good men. It provokes a spirit of hostility, which is followed by
a series of oppressions and frauds, producing and reproducing each other, that
too plainly indicate a disease in the body politic, which must terminate in
convulsion or dissolution.

THE constitution of this Commonwealth declares that "industry, temperance and
frugality, are absolutely necessary to preserve the advantages of liberty, and
to maintain a free government." The same doctrine is maintained by the most
judicious historians, philosophers and politicians. Patriotism enjoins it
therefore as a duty upon all men in public stations to make these virtues
reputable by their example, and to resist the progress of the opposite vices,
luxury, extravagance and an inordinate love of pleasure, which, as one justly
observes, "enervate the soul, make fools of the wise, and cowards of the brave."

THE rapid increase of wealth in our country for a number of years is a subject
of congratulation among the friends of our prosperity; but at the same time it
has excited some painful apprehensions. Its usual concomitant luxury has kept
pace with it.

Is there no reason to fear that our habits of patient industry and economy
will be impaired, and that we shall feel little disposition to return to them,
when they shall become as necessary, as they have been in any former period? It
cannot be expected that our career of prosperity will be perpetual. It may meet
a severe and sudden check. In any case the demands of luxury increase more
rapidly than the means of satisfying them. She is one of the daughters of the
horse-leech, which says not, It is enough. Luxury and extravagance have a
certain and direct tendency to subject individuals to embarrassments, which are
a dangerous snare to integrity, and a fruitful source of discontent and faction
in the State. They have a tendency also to produce a speculating, adventurous
spirit, which cannot contribute to the general prosperity. It is in the nature
of things impossible that every man should make a fortune by games of chance;
but it is possible that many by indulging such a spirit may involve themselves
and a multitude of innocent persons with them in want and wretchedness.

PATIENT industry and economy are the only certain sources of private and
public prosperity, and they are indispensable to the preservation of good
morals. They interest men in the support of order, law and government, without
which they have no security for the possession and enjoyment of the fruits of
their own labors. While the speaker solicits the example of men in public
stations to recommend every virtue that leads to political prosperity, he does
not presume to instruct them in their official duties. He would however in this
connection beg leave to express a wish that, when money is to be procured for
any useful purpose, recourse may be had as seldom as possible to lotteries.
They not only operate as a heavy tax upon the poorer class of people; but they
beget fantastic hopes and expectations, which cannot be realized, they foster a
rage for gaming which tends to the destruction of every virtuous and manly
principle, and they undermine the basis of private and public prosperity.

THE importance of economy in the public expenditures cannot have escaped the
notice of any one. It begets a confidence the government, it encourages the
people to submit to heavy burdens when they are necessary, and it enables the
State to meet the extraordinary demands, which providing for the public safety
may at any time occasion. It saves the government from much embarrassment in
case of war or invasion by means of its credit; and prevents a temptation to
have recourse to such expedients as are at once dishonorable and ruinous. It is
however a very different thing from parsimony. It shrinks from no burden, which
the independence, liberty, safety and honor of the community impose. It does
not estimate the value of these things by a pecuniary scale. It does not
require men to devote their time and talents to the public service without an
adequate compensation. It does not withhold the encouragement that is necessary
to the progress of science, and the improvement of useful arts. Parsimony, on
the contrary, produces many of the same evils as profusion. It begets no
confidence. It regards not the worth of objects, but inquires how much they
will cost. It holds out a constant temptation to fraud. It not unfrequently
defeats its own intentions, and by a solicitude to save trifles incurs the
necessity of making large sacrifices.

A generous public spirit is indispensable to the happiness of a free people.

WHEN a mercenary, selfish disposition pervades a community, the love of
country becomes a pretense; a regard to the general welfare is professed for
the purpose of deception, public employments are sought only as the means of
accumulating wealth, and a wide door is open for the practice of corruption,
which in process of time may become so general, and be so well understood, that
it shall cease to be offensive. When such is the character of a people, their
degradation is far advanced, and ruin by rapid strides is hastening on them. It
is important therefore that a generous regard to the public welfare be
assiduously cultivated. In this, as in every other view, the spirit of
Christianity is highly favorable to national respectability. This spirit
imbibed by a people disposes them to be just and benevolent, to do to others as
they would have others do to them, and to look not every man on his own things,
but every man also on the things of others. It prevents their entertaining a
mean wish that their representatives should so far forget the dignity of their
office, as to govern their public conduct by local attachments and interests,
or to act the part of mere attorneys for their respective districts, or to do
in their public capacity, what a man of probity and honor would blush to do in
private.

The same spirit actuating legislators gives a liberal complexion to their
conduct. They feel and act as guardians of the Commonwealth, and invariably aim
to do justice to all, and to promote the general welfare. They do not confine
their views to the short period of their political existence; but consider the
tendency of every public measure to promote the future prosperity of their
country.

WERE the Commonwealth a company or partnership to be dissolved with the
present legislative body, after which each individual, detached from every
other, were to shift for himself, patriotism would not impose such duties on
our rulers, as it now does. It would not require them to project or mature
plans for the benefit of posterity, nor even of this generation beyond the
present year. They might act on the maxim of the epicure, "Let us eat and
drink; for tomorrow we die." Agriculture, commerce, manufactures, public
credit, and institutions for the promotion of science, religion and morality,
would have no claim to their support or patronage. But as the social compact is
not formed for a year or an age, but to be of the same duration with humanity
itself, the public-spirited and virtuous guardians of the Commonwealth will
consult the interest of unborn generations. In this respect the wisdom, piety,
and patriotism of the first planters of New England can never be too much
admired. At a period, when an invincible fortitude was necessary to surmount
the difficulties attending a new settlement in a savage wilderness, and when
their dangers and hardships might have been thought a sufficient apology for
applying all their resources to the purpose of feeding, clothing, and
defending themselves, they established schools, provided for the religious
instruction of the people, and founded a college. Their aim was not merely to
people a country: their more noble and sublime object was to make it a seat of
piety, virtue and freedom. To their enlightened and patriotic exertions, under
God, the present generation is indebted for many of its most precious
blessings, and this Commonwealth for the very respectable rank she holds in the
union. May their example in this respect be long imitated, and their
descendants prove themselves worthy of such ancestors by cherishing their wise
institutions, and inquiring, as they did, into the remote, as well as
immediate, influence of public measures on the character and happiness of the
community. Again,

AN attachment to our constitutions of government in opposition to a spirit of
innovation, is necessary to the permanency of our political prosperity. Any
man, who will take the trouble to reflect, and every man in a public station
ought to reflect, because he has to think for others as well as himself, will
be convinced that innovation and reformation are not synonymous terms.

YOU will do the speaker the justice to believe that he is not the advocate of
unreasonable and groundless prejudice; but he frankly confesses that it appears
to him less dangerous than a blind, impetuous passion for changing. The evils
produced by the former are capable of being estimated: the deleterious
consequences of the latter bid defiance to calculation. It is justly remarked
by a learned British writer, Dr. Priestly. See his lectures on history, lect. 1.
now America, that "human nature, with the various interests and connexions of
men in a state of society, is so complex a subject, that nothing can be safely
concluded a priori with respect to it. It is extremely hazardous, he adds, to
introduce any material change into an established form of government. No human
sagacity can foresee what inconvenience might arise from it." If these
observations are true, and their truth will hardly be controverted by any man
of reflection, considerable changes should be the effect of necessity only.
Forms of government, and modes of administration, that have been found to
answer the end of their institution, should not be hastily changed because some
imperfections are discoverable in their theory. When experience has shown the
necessity of alterations, and they can be made without hazard to public peace
and order, let them be made. A prudent man will not set fire to his house, and
thereby endanger the lives of his family, because some parts are not so
perfectly convenient, or some of its proportions not so agreeable to the eye,
as they might be made in a new edifice.

EVEN necessary alterations should not be precipitated. It is not sufficient
that the necessity be perceived by a few men of superior discernment, skilled
in the science of government. Let them wait till the conviction becomes
general: and a general conviction must be the effect of feeling rather than the
result of reasoning. If, previous to this, any material alteration be
attempted, though it should be with good intentions, the example will have most
of the bad consequences of innovation. It will tend to loosen the bands of
society, excite a political tempest, and give opportunity to some unprincipled,
ambitious, and as yet unknown adventurer to mount the storm, and direct its
vengeance against our wisest and best men, whose very wisdom and goodness will
in his view be crimes, which nothing but their blood can expiate. Our honored
fathers will join with all good men in earnest prayers to the supreme Arbiter
of nations, that the day may be far distant, when so sad a catastrophe shall be
realized, when the people, after being made the instruments of their own
degradation, shall pass from the hands of one master to those of another, with
as little ceremony, as if they were beasts of burden. And we feel a confidence
that the legislature of Massachusetts will set an example of attachment to her
own and the federal constitutions worthy of the imitation of other
legislatures, as well as her own citizens. Lastly, a cheerful submission to the
laws is indispensable to our political happiness.

IN a government like ours the rulers can make no law that does not affect
themselves equally with their constituents. This affords a high degree of
security that all our laws will be dictated by a regard to the general good,
that no restraint will be laid upon individuals, which does not conduce in a
greater degree to the public happiness. Interest therefore as well as duty
enjoins a prompt obedience.

BUT as there are many, and perhaps always will be, in a large community, who
do not perceive that they gain more by the restraints laid on others, than they
lose by those laid on themselves, it is of great importance that rulers set an
example of cheerful obedience to the laws. If they do not, they will be
suspected of having had improper views in enacting them: And the laws will be
hated or despised. It is justly required of the ministers of religion that they
teach by example: It is not less necessary in a free State that rulers should
govern in the same way.

THEIR personal examples and influence may do more than their statutes to
discountenance impiety and vice, to promote a religious observance of the
Christian Sabbath, to check the progress of infidelity and licentiousness, and
to make us a virtuous and a happy people.

ADDRESSES of congratulation to the first and second Magistrates in the
Commonwealth have been usual on this anniversary. But it has pleased the
all-wise GOD, whose counsels and ways are incomprehensible by us, to remove
both of them by death in the last political year.

SOON after its commencement we were called to mourn the loss of our amiable
and worthy Governor SUMNER, He died June 7, 1799.
whose spirit of government, happily tempered with moderation, and guided by
wisdom and integrity, eminently qualified him for the exalted station, to which
for several successive years he was invited by the general suffrages of his
fellow-citizens. We had indulged the pleasing hope of long tranquillity under
his government; but his death afforded an affecting illustration of the
propriety of that scriptural admonition, "Put not your trust in princes, nor in
the son of man, in whom there is no help. His breath goes forth, he returns
to his earth; in that very day his thoughts perish."

By a recent stroke his Honor Lieutenant Governor GILL is also numbered with
the dead, He died May 20, 1800.
after having discharged for nearly a year the duties of the first Magistrate
with zeal and fidelity, and after having received the approbation of his
constituents, expressed by their almost unanimous re-election of him to fill
the station, which he had holden for a number of years.

IT would have been peculiarly pleasing to see the people of this large and
respectable Commonwealth happily united in the choice of a first Magistrate to
succeed his late Excellency Governor SUMNER. But in a free elective government
it cannot be thought strange that the eyes of the people should be turned
toward different persons to fill so important an office. We indulge however
the expectation that there will be a general and cordial acquiescence in the
will of the majority; as we doubt not a great part of the majority have full
confidence, that the CHARACTER, His Excellency Caleb Strong, Esquire.
to whom the prevailing suffrages have been given, will ably and faithfully
discharge the duties of his office.

HONORED Fathers of the Council, Senate, and House of Representatives,

MANY of you have had repeated assurances of the confidence of your
fellow-citizens, who believe that you love your country, and that you will
labor to promote its prosperity.

THEY have a right to expect that you will aim in all your acts and
deliberations at the public welfare, and particularly that you will exert the
powers, with which you are constitutionally vested, to preserve the union of
the States, and to support the general government, which is indispensable to
our liberty happiness. We are happy in the confidence that these just and
reasonable expectations of your constituents will not be disappointed.

You have many motives to fidelity; but none that ought so deeply to impress
your minds as this, that you are accountable for all your conduct to the King
of kings, and Lord of lords, who stands in the congregation of the mighty,
and judges among the gods. Your public and private conduct now will have an
important influence on your future state. You will consider therefore, that,
though you are rulers over men, you are GOD's servants, and his approbation is
of more importance than all other interests.

THOUGH ye are all called gods on earth, ye shall die like men.

WHAT painful demonstrations of this solemn truth have we had in the past year!
Alas! WASHINGTON, whom we loved, and delighted to honor, is no more. The father
of his country sleeps in dust. How long shall our tears continue to flow at the
recollection of his dear name! But it is for ourselves, not for him we are to
weep. Having finished the work, which his Master in heaven had assigned him, he
has been called from the field of his labors to receive, as we trust, his
reward, and to hear, "Well done, good and faithful servant, enter into the joy
of thy LORD."

THOUGH removed from our world, his virtues live in our remembrance. And may
the affection we had for him in his life, and the sorrow we felt at his death,
engage us to honor his memory by an imitation of his pious and virtuous
example! By this may he long continue to bless his country!

IMAGINE, honored fathers, that ye hear him, though dead, yet speaking to you.
And is not his language to this effect? "Remember that you are not elevated to
your present places for your personal emolument, but for the good of your
fellow mortals, whose happiness in life depends much on your conduct.

"REJOICE in the honor conferred on you by your fellow-citizens, chiefly
because you are thereby enabled to be more useful to them during the short
period of your continuance on earth. Bear in mind that however eminent your
talents and usefulness, or however great the affection of your country may be,
you must soon fall by the hand of death, and your heads be laid low in the
dust. Seek therefore the honor that comes from GOD. Let his fear rule, in your
hearts; embrace and obey the gospel of his Son, fulfill the duties of your
respective stations with fidelity, and then you will be prepared to resign your
earthly honors without regret, and enter into possession of glory and
immortality."

Fellow-citizens of this assembly,

IF, as has been said, the real freedom of a people depends very much on their
character and habits, every member of the community by setting a good example
may contribute to the preservation of our liberty and happiness. Every man, who
lives under the influence of Christian principles, who leads a sober, righteous
and godly life, is a benefactor to his country, and he shall not lose his
reward. When all terrestrial kingdoms and states shall be dissolved, and the
fashion of this world shall pass away, he shall be glorious in the eyes of the
LORD his GOD, and shall shine as the firmament, and as a star forever ever.

FINIS.

