AN ORATION, DELIVERED AT WETHERSFIELD, FEBRUARY 22, 1800; ON THE DEATH OF
GENERAL GEORGE WASHINGTON, WHO DIED DECEMBER 14, 1799.

BY EBENEZER GRANT MARSH.

PUBLISHED BY REQUEST.

Nature cannot bring in every period forth,
A finished hero, of exalted worth,
Whose godlike genius, towering and sublime,
Must long lie ripening in the womb of time:
Before a WASHINGTON comes on the stage,
The birth of years, and labor of an age.
In field, and council, born the palm to share,
His voice a senate, as his sword a war;
And each illustrious action of his life,
Conspire to form the patriot, and the chief.
PIT. HARTFORD: PRINTED BY HUDSON AND GOODWIN. 1800

AN ORATION.
FELLOW CITIZENS,
UNITED AMERICA assemble this day to pay their last respects to the admired
hero and sage, the father of his country, the friend of mankind. He has
resigned his spirit into the hand of his maker. "He lives only in his own great
actions, and in the hearts of an affectionate and afflicted people."

A FAITHFUL history of his life, and an impartial delineation of his public and
private virtues, would be the only eulogy worthy of WASHINGTON. But who can
define that sublime philosophy which directed and animated all his actions --
his genius enriched with information and fruitful in resources -- his wisely
concerted and well executed plans! Who can describe his purity of morals,
dignity of manners, mildness and equanimity, patience in adversity and
moderation in prosperity, firmness in danger and perseverance in difficulties!
If, in the sketch of his history and character, a strong affection for the man
should appear, blended with a reverence for his talents, your candor and the
sympathy of your feelings will be the speaker's apology.

THIS day completes sixty eight years since the parish of Washington, in the
county of Westmoreland, in Virginia, gave birth to this great man. He was
educated by private instruction. An excellent understanding early convinced him
of the advantages of virtue, the pleasure of knowledge, and the necessity of
labor. An uncommon mildness and moderation of temper preserved him from the
assaults of passion, and the allurements of vice. By the natural strength and
superiority of his genius, without experience, he broke out at once a general
and a hero. At the age of twenty-three, he was sent, by his native state, with
the command of four hundred men against the French, in the vicinity of the
Ohio, who had committed many acts of hostility against the British subjects.
Attacked at Redstone, by an army nearly four times as numerous as his own,
valiant as Achilles, he made a brave defense, killed two hundred of the enemy,
and obliged the French to grant him an honorable capitulation. The masterly
manner in which he soon after covered the retreating army of Genesis Braddock,
drew upon him the highest encomiums from his country. Through the whole of that
war, he displayed an energy of character, which presaged, that he might be
designed by Providence for a future savior of his country.

IN the Congress of 1775 he was distinguished by every deference, which
superior merit is sure to receive from noble minds. He felt an early
indignation at the oppressions of the British. The command of her armies being
entrusted to him by his country, he accepted it from duty, relinquishing the
enjoyments of affluence, and the highest domestic felicity. Having no
interested views, the friends of liberty reposed the highest confidence in his
abilities and integrity. How well this confidence was placed, every page of our
revolution bears glorious attestation. What difficulties did he not encounter?
What danger did he decline? Who has marked his fortitude in the hour of
adversity, without hoping relief from his prudence? Who has beheld him in
battle, without confiding in the wisdom of his arrangements, and reposing on
the valor of his arm? Who, among his followers, did not find his sufferings
solaced in seeing them shared by his chief? Those can best describe his
military character, who followed him in his expeditions, who studied his
marches, his encampments, his dispositions before a battle, and his courage in
the heat of conflict; who beheld him penetrating, at a glance, the projects of
the enemy, multiplying around them almost inevitable ambushes, creating and
preserving a happy discipline in his army, exciting, by new and efficacious
methods, the ardor of his soldiers, and unremittingly exerting himself for
their preservation.

TO view him as a perfect model of military greatness, to rank him with the
greatest generals of any age, is no amplification. In him were blended
activity, vigilance, great force of judgment, and never failing presence of
mind. He could unite information with talents, reflection with experience, and
stratagem with glory. Cautious, systematic, and inflexible, his genius was
singularly adapted to our revolutionary war. Distinguishing, with precision,
the difference between great difficulties and impossibilities, and never
discouraged by the former, he often appeared to execute the latter.
Indefatigably laborious and active, coolly intrepid in action, he discerned as
by intuition, seized with rapidity, and improved with skill, the favorable, and
often decisive, moments of battle. Never transported by the enthusiasm of
patriotism, never deluded by the ardor of courage, he preferred stratagem to
action, and victory to glory. Modest and magnanimous after victory, he became
the generous protector of his subdued and captive enemies. Resolute and
undejected in misfortunes, he rose superior to distresses, and surmounted
difficulties, which no courage, no constancy, but his own, would have resisted.
His letters, during his most gloomy prospects, announce a hero, conscious of
his danger, but still deriving a well grounded hope from the resources of his
own mind. His valor was never unequal to his duty or the occasion. He attempted
great things with means that appeared totally inadequate, and successfully
prosecuted what he had boldly resolved. He was never disheartened by
difficulties, but had that vigor of mind, which, instead of bending to
opposition, rises above it, and seems to have a power of controling even
fortune itself. His character combined a cool and penetrating judgment and
prompt decision, caution and intrepidity, patience and enterprise, generous
tenderness and compassion, with undaunted heroism. He was a never failing
resource to those who wanted his assistance. No one could have more happily
concentrated the confidence of his troops. Their obedience was less owing to
the authority of his post, than to their opinion of his valor; so attached to
him were the officers and soldiers, that if a principle of duty and virtue had
not secured their obedience to their country, gratitude and respect for their
general would have confirmed it. Even when worn out with fatigue they were ever
ready to execute his orders, and no danger could intimidate them when they were
commanded by WASHINGTON. He himself always shared in the toils he was obliged
to impose, visited in person the sick and the wounded, and expressed, on every
occasion, the greatest regard for a body of men, whose welfare was so closely
connected with that of his country. By the strictest rules he labored to
inspire them with a sense of duty, and neglected no circumstance which might
render them formidable to their enemies. He was eloquent, persuasive, strong,
and pathetic, as occasion required. He had arguments and tears at his command.
In a word, he was a general formed by heaven for just such a period, country,
and cause, as ours. And you too well know to be informed, that his great
talents and patriotism, his equally judicious and vigorous measures, effected
the salvation of his country, and commanded the admiration and applause of the
whole world.

AFTER the ratification of a treaty of peace, which satisfied our most sanguine
wishes and expectations, he resigned his commission, enjoying the pleasing hope
of spending the residue of his days in the retreats and occupations of private
life. Having passed in a rapid revolution from the dangers of slavery to the
possession of liberty, the whole country, in the transports of gratitude,
forgot their own mighty exertions, the influence of general causes, and the
irresistible energy of man fighting for freedom, and ascribed their success to
the virtues and talents of WASHINGTON.

THE character of this great man would be impaired by a comparison with the
most distinguished generals either of ancient or modern times. Alexander,
Charles of Sweden, and Kouli Khan, were born with an insatiable thirst for
human blood, and habituated, from their infancy, to the most inhuman actions.
Their immoderate ambition made them the scourge of mankind and the pest of the
world. -- Hannibal's talents and victories were tarnished by cruelty,
treachery, and a total disregard to truth, honor, and morality. -- Julius
Caesar was provident in council, fearless in action, humane and generous to
excess; but his glory was sullied by an inordinate love of pleasure, and an
unbounded ambition. His great talents would have made him the first citizen of
Rome; but he disdained the condition of a subject. The great object of his life
was to rule, and Cato very justly remarked, that "he came, with sobriety and
meditation, to the subversion of the republic." -- None ever exhibited greater
bravery in dangerous undertakings, or more presence of mind and conduct in
their execution, than Trajan; but the praises of Alexander, blazoned by a
succession of panegyrists, kindled a dangerous emulation in his mind. "Like
him," says Gibbon, "the Roman emperor undertook an expedition against the
nations of the east; but he lamented, with a sigh, that his advanced age
scarcely left him any hopes of equalling the renown of the son of Phillip." --
Charles the first of France, Edward the third of England, and the Emperor
Charles the fifth, displayed astonishing military talents, and were not less
illustrious in the cabinet than in the field. But the first wantonly massacred
4500 Saxons solely for their loyalty to their prince. He appeared to regard
truth, justice, and humanity, only as importunate monitors, which should be
kept at a distance, or punished for their intrusion. The love of glory was the
ruling passion of the two last, to the gratification of which they sacrificed
the interests of their country, and every sentiment of humanity. -- Frederick
the second and the Duke of Marlborough were, perhaps, perfect masters of the
military art. Having been, from their childhood, continually in war, and at the
head of armies, they joined to all the capacity which genius could give, all
the knowledge and skill which experience could teach. But the former
"slaughtered the armies of half the nations of Europe, merely to extend the
limits of an electorate," and, being an open conspirator against the religion
of JESUS, infected the world with his impieties -- the latter, hurried to
excess by the violence of his passions, was much less fitted to prevent evils
by his wise precautions, than to remedy them by his vigor and enterprise.

NONE of these heroes could claim the assemblage of coolness and spirit,
humanity and munificence, prudence and vigor, patient unshaken constancy,
untainted patriotism and superiority to popular clamor, which distinguished the
Father of our country. None of them established the freedom and independence of
his nation; or exchanged the instruments of war for the implements of
husbandry; or was rewarded by the honest pride of virtue, the exquisite delight
of beholding the general happiness of which he was the author. The commanders
of armies are taught, by the example of WASHINGTON, that well earned military
applauses may be preserved, without power or splendour, in private life.

RESTORED to his endeared retirement, and to those rural occupations which
constituted his greatest enjoyment, he was scarcely permitted to repose from
the fatigues of the war, when the imperious voice of his country again summoned
him to her assistance. The confederation, formed under the pressure of foreign
war and domestic distress, was found incompetent to the ends proposed, and both
the honor and happiness of the United States required a reformation. For this
purpose a convention was called in the year 1787, of which he was chosen
President. His opinions and example, at this time, largely contributed to a
spirit of national accommodation, and secured an harmonious acquiescence in our
present system of federal government. Invited by his fellow-citizens to
organize and administer this government, he complied, without balancing a
moment between personal considerations and public duty. His acceptance was the
presage of a prosperity, which was to remedy the evils of internal dissensions
and a feeble government. Clinging to him as the anchor of their hope, the
people were not disappointed. Of the ability and integrity with which he
discharged the functions of this high and arduous office, the public voice and
public regret bear ample and merited testimony. It may, indeed, be truly said,
that the annals of no nation record a series of services, commensurate in their
consequences, with those, which he rendered his country, during his
administration. To an unextinguished ardor for the public good, he joined a
perseverance in the pursuit of it, which subdued all obstacles. His genius,
adequate to every trying occasion, appeared to expand as difficulties occurred.
His discerning judgment filled the several departments of state with officers
of approved merit, with whom he invariably consulted, before he officially
decided, on business of moment to his country. His well timed and efficient
measures preserved us from the desolation and horrors of foreign and domestic
war. Under his administration, the excellent organization of the different
branches of the federal constitution, the judicious appointments, and the
energy applied to all its operations, gave it a basis which secured the
happiness and prosperity of our country.

IN no situation did WASHINGTON appear more truly great than at the helm of our
federal government. Here he displayed an astonishing extent and precision of
political talents, a disinterested integrity, an incorruptible heart, a
constant attention to the grand principles of rational liberty, and an
invariable attachment to his country. His genius was equal to the most enlarged
views, and minute details, of civil policy. A vigorous mind, improved by the
experience and study of mankind, dexterity and application in business, a
judicious mixture of liberality and economy, steadiness to pursue his ends,
and flexibility to vary his means, marked his administration. He guided the
passions of others, because he was master of his own. Had his character and
feelings been more fervid, his conduct might not have been so exemplary, nor
his glory so exalted and permanent. Patriotic from principle, and temperate
from constitution, he neither disdained nor sought elevation; but always
retained a humility, which demonstrated, even to political jealousy, that a
man, capable of bearing so many honors, fully deserved them. He was provident
without timidity, severe in the execution of justice without rigor, moderate
when his own interests were the subject of discussion, and inflexibly firm when
those of his country were in question. He stood a rock in the midst of the
ocean, receiving unmoved the violence of its waves.

WHEN the revolving period of the third election of a President approached, he
considered that duty no longer demanded a sacrifice of inclination, and
published his valedictory address to the people of the United States. In this
second resignation he appears superior to ancient or modern examples. Others
have, indeed, relinquished offices of equal trust; but, generally, the
vicissitudes of fortune, and the disappointment of their favorite schemes,
urged them to abdicate a power, which they ^ound inadequate to their ambition.

THE American leader now consoled himself with the reflection, that he had
entirely quitted the constant anxiety and high responsibility of public life.
Minds long exercised in business rarely form habits of conversing with
themselves, and, in the loss of power, principally regret the want of
occupation. But retirement was natural and delightful to WASHINGTON. He
discharged the duties of a private citizen with a condescension and greatness
of mind peculiar to himself. He had, however, been too long in the public
service to enjoy, without diminution, the comforts and security of retirement.
"Angry clouds began to rise:" And it was impossible, that he could be
unaffected with the afflictions and dangers of his country. At the public call
he again came forward to direct and command our armies, exhibiting another
proof of unrivalled greatness. On this pinnacle of earthly glory he stood,
"venerable in services as in years, the cement and bulwark of our nation," till
he was summoned to join the armies in heaven.

THE private character of this great man eminently corresponded with the
splendour of his public reputation. The native simplicity of his virtue was a
stranger to vanity or affectation. He enjoyed, with moderation, the advantages
of his fortune, and the innocent pleasures of society. He was severe to
himself, indulgent to the imperfections of others, just and beneficent to all
mankind. Sincerity and candor, a true sense of honor, justice, and public
liberty, appeared to be the inherent principles of his nature, and the uniform
rule of his conduct. The largeness of his heart equalled that of his fortune.
Without thinking of his own greatness, without fearing lest others should
forget it, he was easy of access, untainted with rancor or jealousy, and ever
ready to listen to just complaints. "He appears," indeed, "to have been the
complete model of that perfect character, which, under the denomination of a
sage or a wise man, the philosophers have been fond of delineating, rather as a
fiction of their imagination, than in hope of ever seeing it reduced to
practice -- so happily were all his virtues tempered together, so justly were
they blended, and so powerfully did each prevent the other from exceeding its
proper bounds." In a word, co-temporary jealousy, envy, and malignity, were
compelled to applaud both his public and private character, and more impartial
posterity will read it with admiration.

HIS fortitude, in the last scene of his invaluable life, gave an illustrious
stamp to the traits he had exhibited. Oppressed by grievous pain, he breathed
his last with the sublime tranquillity of a good man, conscious of having
devoted his talents to the service of virtue and mankind.

Death loves a shining mark, a signal blow;
A blow which, while it executes, alarms,
And startles thousands with a signal fall.
These high aimed darts -- -- --
-- -- -- -- should draw the public eye.
The gaze and contemplation of the world!
YOUNG. SUCH was the man for whom our country mourns. Humanity cannot withhold
her tears. We have been deprived of our brightest ornament, of the guide and
patron, on whose wisdom, experience, and harmonizing influence, we could
implicitly rely. To him as the author of our independence, and, while he lived,
its firm support, our reverence is particularly due. "He could pass through no
American state, survey no field, and tread on no spot of ground, which he did
not save from devastation." He could "mix with no assembly, visit no family,
and accost no person, who must not say, Our freedom, our peace, our safety, we
owe first to God, and next to you." He could "turn his ear to no sound of joy,
which he had not a share in exciting; and open his eye to no scene of comfort,
which did not trace him as its origin." Like the central orb of the planetary
world, he enlightened and animated, cemented and beautified, our whole
political system. With a skilful, steady, yet gentle, hand, he molded a
confused mass of discordant materials into one regular and harmonious compound.
And by a strictly just and paternal administration, ^e diffused the blessings
of freedom, tranquillity, public and private prosperity, throughout all classes
of people.

HAD he been asked by what posthumous honors we should best commemorate his
services, he would have replied: "Support your government. Resist with care the
spirit of innovation upon its first principles, however specious the pretexts.
In all the changes to which you may be invited, remember, particularly, that
for the efficient management of your common interest, in a country so
extensive, a government of as much vigor as is consistent with the perfect
security of rational liberty, is indispensible. Reverence religion and
morality. In vain would that man claim the tribute of patriotism, who would
labor to subvert these great pillars of human happiness, and the firmest props
of the duties of men and citizens. Promote institutions for the general
diffusion of knowledge. As an important source of strength and security,
cherish public credit. Cultivate peace and harmony with all nations. Exclude
inveterate antipathies against some, and passionate attachments for others. The
nation which indulges toward another an habitual hatred or an habitual
fondness, is a slave to its animosity or to its affection, either of which is
sufficient to pervert it from its duty and interest. If I may flatter myself,
that these counsels of an old, affectionate friend may be productive of some
partial benefit, of some occasional good -- that they may sometimes recur to
moderate the fury of party spirit, to warn against the mischiefs of foreign
influence, and to guard against the impostures of pretended patriotism; this
hope will be a full recompense for the solicitude for your your welfare by
which they have been dictated." See Genesis WASHINGTON's Valedictory Address.



