Judge Minot's Eulogy.

AN Eulogy ON GEORGE WASHINGTON, LATE COMMANDER IN CHIEF OF THE ARMIES OF THE
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, WHO DIED DECEMBER 14, 1799.

Delivered before the INHABITANTS of the Town of Boston, AT THE REQUEST OF
THEIR COMMITTEE.

BY GEORGE RICHARDS MINOT, A.M. A.A.S.

SECOND EDITION.

BOSTON: FROM THE PRINTING-OFFICE OF MANNING and LORING.

BOSTON, January 9, 1800. SIR,
I AM directed by the Committee of Arrangements, to express to you their
acknowledgments, for your compliance with their wishes, in delivering an
Eulogium this day in honor of the late General WASHINGTON; to assure you of
the pleasing though melancholy sensations with which they heard your able
delineation of the character of that illustrious man; and to request a copy for
the press.

I am, Sir, With respect and esteem, Your most obedient Servant, CHARLES
BULFINCH.
Hon. GEORGE RICHARDS MINOT, Esquire.
BOSTON, January 9, 1800. SIR,
THE respectable Committee of Arrangements honor me greatly by their
approbation of the manner in which I have executed the duty assigned to me by
their appointment. I consider the disposal of my production to be their right,
and deliver the copy requested, with regret only that I could do no more, upon
an occasion which deserved every thing that eloquence could bestow.

I am, Sir, With much regard, Your very respectful humble Servant, GEORGE
RICHARDS MINOT.
To CHARLES BULFINCH, Esquire. Chairman of the Committee of Arrangements of the
Town of Boston.
Eulogy.
OUR duty, my Fellow-Townsmen, on this distressing occasion, is dictated by the
dignity and resplendent virtue of the beloved Man whose death we deplore. We
assemble to pay a debt to departed merit, a debt which we can only pay by the
sincerity of our grief, and the respectful effusions of gratitude; for the
highest eulogy left us to bestow upon our lamented WASHINGTON, is the strict
narration of the truth, and the loftiest character which we can assign to him,
is the very display of himself. When ambition allies itself to guilt, when
power tramples upon right, when victory triumphs in blood, when piety sits
clouded in superstition, when humility is affected by cunning, when patriotism
is founded on selfishness; then let adulation spread her prostituted mantle, to
screen the disgraces of her patrons, and amuse with the falsehoods of her
imagination. But to our political Father, the faithful page of history is
panegyric, and the happiness of his country is the monument of his fame.

COME, then, Warriors! Statesmen! Philosophers! Citizens! assemble round the
tomb of this favorite son of virtue; with all the luxury of sorrow recollect
the important events of his life, and partake of the greatest legacy which a
mortal could bequeath you, in the contemplation of his example. Whilst we
solemnize this act, his disembodied spirit, if it be permitted to retrace the
scenes of its terrestrial existence, will smile with approbation on the
instructive rite.

YOUR anniversaries have long honored the eleventh of February, one thousand
seven hundred and thirty-two, as the birthday of our illustrious Chief, and
the parish of his own name in Westmoreland county, in Virginia, boasts itself
the place of his nativity. But to souls like his, local restrictions are not
attached. Where Liberty was, there would be his country: Happy for us, the
Genius of Liberty, responsive to his affections, resolved that where WASHINGTON
was, there also should be her abode.

EDUCATED by private instruction, his virtue grew with his knowledge, and the
useful branches of literature occupied the whole powers of his mind. Exemplary
for solidity of thought, and chastity of morals, he was honored by the
government of Virginia, with an important mission, at an age when the levities
of the human character seldom yield to the earliest operation of reason.

AT the opening of the great war of encroachments upon our western frontiers,
he was the bearer of the remonstrance to the French. Such was the address,
fidelity and perseverance with which he executed this important trust, that he
was honored at twenty-two years of age with the command of a regiment raised
by his province. His military talents were soon called to the test. At
Redstone, Victory perched upon his standard; but, with that volatility by which
she tries the powers of her favorite heroes, she in a few months afterward
left him, by his own exertions, to save the honors of war for his little band,
in an unequal, but well supported battle. In Braddock's slaughtered army, he
was a witness to scenes of horror, which his caution, had it been adopted,
would have prevented, and which his steady courage assisted much to retrieve.
During the remainder of this war, he was employed in fortifying his native
province, in arranging and perfecting its militia, and in checking the
incursions of the enemy, until the crisis of the contest had passed in this
country, when he resigned his command.

RETIREMENT to him was only a different mode of action, and his repose partook
not of indolence. Amidst the honorable pursuits of agriculture, he discharged
various civil offices, until we find him rising amongst the patriots of our
country, as a delegate from Virginia, in the first American Congress.

WE shall ever remember the fifteenth day of June, one thousand seven hundred
and seventy-five, when Providence directed to his appointment as the commander
in chief of our revolutionary army. In this neighborhood he first drew his
sword. Many of you, my Fellow-Townsmen, were then languishing under the fetters
of tyranny, or were imprisoned within the joyless confines of your own
habitations. Your hope was fixed on him. His command, independent of the
resources of his own mind, afforded no ground for the support of your feelings.
He had an army brave indeed, but with little discipline; naked at the approach
of winter; and almost subject to dissolution from temporary enlistments; a
play master without money; a commissary struggling on the utmost stretch of
credit. A veteran army lay under his eye strongly fortified, regularly paid,
warmly clothed, and boasting its superiority to militia. Yet did his victorious
sword relieve you, and save your city. Justly have you ascribed "your
reinstatement to his wise arrangements, which compelled your invaders to adopt
a less destructive policy than that which on other occasions they so wantonly
practiced." Could our gratitude forget it, the heights around us bear the
triumphant evidence of his conquest.

To trace this protector of our liberties through his unrivalled career, from
his gloomy retreat through the Jersies to his several victories and his
splendid triumph at York-Town, would be to narrate the varying history of our
revolution. To him, public labor was amusement, suffering in the cause of
freedom was a luxury, and every hour as it flew carried an offering to his
country.

As obedience to the voice of his oppressed fellow-citizens drew his sword on
the approach of war, so at the declaration of peace, by the same respected
voice he restored it to its scabbard. He left them his blessing and their
liberties. O Human Nature, how have thou been traduced! With thee, has it been
said, is essentially connected that lust of power which is insatiable; which
restores not voluntarily what has been committed to its charge; which devours
all rights, and resolves all laws into its own authority; which labors not for
others, but seizes the fruits of their labors for itself; which breaks down
all barriers of religion, society and nature that obstruct its course; now art
thou vindicated! Here we behold thee allied to virtue, worn in the service of
mankind, superior to the meanness of compensation, humbly hoping for the thanks
of thy country alone, faithfully surrendering the sword, with which thou wast
entrusted, and yielding up power with a promptness and facility equalled only
by the diffidence and reluctance with which thou receivedst it.

Now, will the future inquirer say, this Hero has finished the task assigned
him, the measure of his glory is full. A world is admitted to freedom -- a
nation is born. Favored beyond the leader of Israel, not only with the
prospect, but with the fruition of the promised blessing, he has retired, like
that prince of meekness, to the Mount, whence he is to ascend, unseen by a
weeping people, to the reward of all his labors. No, he is to live another
life upon this globe; he is to reap a double harvest in the field of perennial
honor. The people whom he has saved from external tyranny, suffer from the
agitations of their own unsettled powers. The tree of liberty which he has
planted, and so carefully guarded from the storms, now flourishes beyond its
strength, its lofty excrescences threaten to tear its less extended roots from
the earth, and to prostrate it fruitless on the plain. But, he comes! In
Convention he presides over counsels, as in war he had led the battle. The
Constitution, like the rainbow after the flood, appears to us, now just
emerging from an overwhelming commotion; and we know the truth of the pledge
from the sanction of his name.

THE production was worthy of its authors, and of the magnanimous people whom
it was intended to establish. You adopt it, you cherish it, and you resolve to
transmit it, with the name of WASHINGTON, to the latest generation, who shall
prove their just claim to such an illustrious descent.

WHO was so worthy, as our great legislator, to direct the operations of a
government which his counsels and his sword had labored to erect? By a
unanimous suffrage he was invited to the exalted station of President of the
United States. The call was too sacred to admit of doubt; It superseded the
happiness of retirement, the demands of private interest, the sweet attractions
of domestic society, and the hazard (forgive it, WASHINGTON! for thou wast
mortal) the hazard of public reputation. Behold the man on this occasion so
mighty in the eye of all the world, so humble in his own! He accepts the high
appointment with such distrust of his natural endowments, with such diffidence
in his capacity, as can be relieved only by his reliance on that almighty
BEING, "who rules over the universe, who presides in the councils of nations,
and whose providential aids can supply every human defect."

ONE of the earliest acts of his administration was that circular visit to
transfuse his love, and receive the grateful benedictions of his loving
countrymen, in which you, my Fellow Townsmen, partook so liberal a share. What
sensations rushed upon your minds, when you compared the dreadful aspect of
your besieged city, with its now smiling condition. The well-cultivated fields
were screening from view the late terrific ramparts of the enemy, and the
groans of the distressed had yielded to the busy noise of commerce and
pleasure. How grateful now is the recollection, that with tears of joy you
crowded to meet him in your streets, displaying the very insignia which you
this day bear in mournful procession; and your children, bowing their heads
with eager solicitude to attract his fatherly eye, received his pious blessing.

DID the occasion admit of it, how pleasing would be the review of his
administration, as our Supreme Executive Magistrate! His talents and his
virtues increased with his cares. His soul seemed not to bear the limits of
office, a moment after the obligations of duty and patriotism withdrew their
restraints from his universal love. When the misguided savages of the
wilderness, after feeling his chastisement, had sued for peace, he seemed to
labor for their happiness as the common representative of mankind.
Insurrection was so struck at his countenance, that it fled from the shock of
his arms. Intrigue attempted to entangle him in her poisonous web, but he burst
it with gigantic strength, and crushed* her labors. Anarchy looked out from
her cavern, and was dashed into oblivion, as we trust, forever. The nations of
Europe saw the wisdom of our laws, the vigor of our measures, the justice of
our policy, the firmness of our government, and acquiesced in the neutrality of
our station.

THE dangers of the Commonwealth having subsided at the close of his second
administration, he felt himself justified, after dedicating forty-five years of
his valuable life to her service, in withdrawing to receive with resignation
the great change of nature, which his age and his toils demonstrated to be
near. When he declined your future suffrages, he left you a legacy. What! like
Cesar's to the Romans, money for your sports? Like Attalus's, a kingdom for
your tyranny? No; he left you not such baubles, nor for such purposes. He left
you the records of wisdom for your government: a mirror for the faithful
representation to your own view, of yourselves, your weaknesses, your
advantages, your dangers: a magnet which points to the secret mines and
windings of party spirit, faction, foreign influence: a pillar to the unity of
your republic: a band to enclose, conciliate, and strengthen the whole of your
wonderful and almost boundless communities. Read, preserve the sacred deposit;
and lest posterity should forget the truth of its maxims, engrave them on his
tomb, that they may read them when they weep before it.

IN his second resignation of power and the charms of office, the American
Leader appears superior to ancient or modern examples. Yet another grade was
assigned to his virtue. Our national rights, so well defended at home, were
invaded on the ocean. The alarm reaches his retreat; the honor of our Republic
warms his heart; and he again accepts the sword for its defense from the hand
of another, placed by the voice of the people in that supreme magistracy, which
he alone had heretofore filled. With a less dignified soul, this official
inferiority might have availed to injure his country; but he who could descend
from the head of a nation to discharge the minutest duties of a private
citizen, was too great to allow the influence of etiquette to endanger the
safety of the people. His condescension raises him above himself; his spirit
fires all ranks of men; he is overwhelmed with the gratitude and applause of an
enraptured nation.

WHILST we confide in his arm, and are marshalling our warriors to march under
his banners, the GOD of armies, whose counsels are beyond the scrutiny of man,
prepares for us the test of our submission to his chastising rod. It is decreed
that our WASHINGTON shall die, but that his death shall be worthy of his life.
He is to die by the hand of Virtue. The rapid disease which is selected as the
instrument of his dissolution, instantaneously seizes him. His humanity delays
the immediate aid to which alone it may yield. Inconsolable Domestics! what
storms would you not have braved, what hazards would you not have encountered,
to save that life which was sacrificed to your comfort and safety! At length
Science flies to save him. Alas! what avails its skill against the mandate of
Heaven? It comes too late! -- It is finished.

WONDERFUL event! Greatness departs in glory, and envy is silent! All
acknowledge him to be the first of citizens, and none feel hurt by his
superiority. So impartial was he that none impeach his justice; so moderate,
none complain of his power; so magnanimous, his conquered enemies applaud his
humanity; so philanthropic, that neither color, nor climate, nor religion, nor
politics could exclude the unfortunate from his succor. He had the habit of
combining sentiment with action in such method and force, that he shed his
benevolence on communities of men with the same ease as the sudden impulse of
momentary sensibility bestows it upon individuals. Unexampled virtue! allotted
to its merited reward. Many founders of nations have been left to obtain from
posterity that reputation which prejudice or bigotry has denied at their
deaths. The tomb has been necessary to bury anger, petty interests and
emulation, which barred an equitable judgment. But in regard to this Sage, the
gratitude of his country has been co-existent with his exertions. Time has not
been required to remove him from our view, in order to magnify his exploits
through the medium of same; nor was it requisite that we should be deprived of
the good he had done us, to entertain a just sense of its importance. Medals
and statues have been decreed him when living, and your tears announce his
greater triumph in your hearts, when dead. Disinterested love! What motives
have you, freemen, for thus offering up your applause? He has now no shield to
defend you from the invasions of your enemies; his head lies cold in the grave,
and no counsel can arise from his lips. His eyes were closed by his own
unshaken hand, and no smile can now beam from his countenance to animate your
troops. Grateful Republicans! indeed you weep not from selfishness. Afflicted
with the thought of the blessings which he has showered upon yourselves and
your children, you would call him, could your voice be heard, from the closed
mansions of the dead, again to receive the tribute of your affection. You weep
for her, whose tender participation in the anxieties of a husband relieved his
cares, and protracted the invaluable life which love itself could no longer
detain. Disconsolate woman! mourn not, for the faithful is gone to receive the
reward of his uprightness. The whole desire of his heart, the whole pursuit of
his labors has been the good of his fellow-men. Contrast him with those who
have been raised by the empty, the criminal admiration of mankind, to the
highest ranks in the Pantheon of fame. See one instead of liberating and
protecting, employed in conquering and enslaving a world, and weeping that his
guilty task could be continued no longer. Another retiring from the purple, not
with the united blessings of all religious sects, but the bigoted persecutor of
the only rational and divine religion: See the master of so many crowns, after
yielding them up for a convent, instead of interesting himself in the welfare
of mankind to the hour of his departure, relapsing into the absurdities of
monkish superstition! and another, whose ashes are scarcely cold, slaughtering
the armies of half the nations of Europe, to extend the limits of an
Electorate, with as much zeal as our departed Hero labored to extend the
limits of freedom, civilization and morals. When so much worth steps off from
the stage of life, the weakness of our nature is the only apology for our
tears. Such an exit is not death, it is the triumph of the just.

SONS of Freedom! as you regard the memory of your ^scended Chief, attend to
the injunctions of his will. Remember that it was not for you alone he
labored. It was for your posterity also; it was for the human race. For you
and for them he was first in building the noblest political system that adorns
the world. It is an experiment to ascertain the nature of man; whether he be
capable of freedom, or whether he must be led by the reins of tyranny; whether
he be endowed with that moderation and understanding which checks the extreme
indulgence of his will; and by allowing to others the same rational enjoyment
with himself, forms the liberty of the whole upon the partial restraint of each
individual; or whether he must go on attempting to follow the dictates of
selfishness, and find his only restraint in a power which will establish itself
independent of his consent, and make him its slave. Who of us can be supposed
to be so lost to himself, so forgetful of his children, and so traitorous to
the world, as to contemplate the overthrow of this magnificent temple of
wisdom? No, my Fellow-Townsmen, whatever zeal may suddenly suggest, or
apprehensions tempt us to suspect, there lives not a man among us, so depraved,
so cursed by Heaven. Shall it be said, that the works of his hands whom we this
day almost adore; that the hope which he held out to the nations of the earth,
shall be frustrated by our divisions? To the honor of our country, not a man
but answers, No: all, when rightly informed, wave their particular prejudices
in support of the great pillar of our national union. It is our pride; it was
erected by our fathers; it is the standard of our defense. Let us then, with a
view of forever maintaining it, banish all animosity, melt down all parties,
wipe away all distinctions. Let us no longer designate men who have differed in
sentiment, by odious epithets mutually reflected and mutually disavowed: but if
a common name be wanted, let it be formed from his whom we now seek to honor,
and let it be used to denote good will to one another, respect to our
Constitution, fortitude to our enemies, love to our country, devotion to our
GOD.

IN the condolence of this day, we cannot fail to notice the honor which we
feel by the presence of the Fathers of the State. It was not unbecoming the
dignity of office, on such an occasion, to suspend its occupations and join the
general sorrow. To devote this portion of time to his memory who devoted a long
life to our happiness, is rational and just. Within the present political year,
you, Honorable Magistrates and Legislators, in this place solemnized the
obsequies of the late excellent Governor of our Commonwealth, the much
respected SUMNER. Thus pass away the wise, the virtuous and the faithful; by an
irrevocable decree, less unwelcome to them, as it respects themselves, than
grievous to us. Their lives are long enough for their own glory, but, alas!
still too necessary to their country's welfare. The experience, the learning,
the genius, the various coincidence of circumstances, which are necessary to
form that effulgence of character, by which they enlighten, polish and direct
society, fall to the lot of few. When such lamps are extinguished, we are happy
if our darkness be transient. But in your wisdom the people of our Commonwealth
safely confide; nor as members of our united country, do they mourn like those
who are without hope; for although in the present gloom of our political
hemisphere, their late ruling planet has traveled to the morning of another
clime, yet its kindred luminary rises on the horizon, brilliant, steady, and
propitious to direct their course. They lament that their beloved WASHINGTON
sleeps in death; their consolation is, that his faithful Brother, the vigilant
ADAMS, survives.


