Mr. MEAD's SERMON, ON THE DEATH OF GENERAL WASHINGTON.

A SERMON, DELIVERED DECEMBER 29, 1799; OCCASIONED BY THE DEATH OF GENERAL
GEORGE WASHINGTON, WHO DIED DECEMBER 14th, 1799, IN HIS 68th YEAR.

BY SAMUEL MEAD, A. M. Pastor of a Church in Danvers.

HOW ARE THE MIGHTY FALLEN!

David. Published by Desire.

Printed by JO^H^A CLEMINS, County Street, SALEM. 1800.

THE greatness of the occasion -- a wish to preserve the sweet remembrance of
the great virtues and illustrious actions of WASHINGTON -- to imprint them on
the mind and heart of our rising offspring -- is the Author's apology for
complying with the request of his Friends.

With much respect, this Discourse is now dedicated to its Patrons, by their
Friend and humble Servant,

SAMUEL MEAD.
DANVERS, JAN. 8, 1800.
A FUNERAL SERMON.
2 SAMUEL, iii. 38. KNOW YE NOT THAT THERE IS A PRINCE, AND A GREAT MAN, FALLEN
THIS DAY IN ISRAEL?


THAT elevation and depression of the human character, so observable, forms one
of those striking contrasts in which nature seems to delight in all her works.
While, by a happy disposition of circumstances, the few fortunate travelers
ascend the lofty summit of human honor and glory, the multitude, far below,
move down the vale of obscurity, unnoticed, into soon-forgotten graves. Man,
having opportunities and calls for constant exertion, finds his capacities
unfolding, his mind growing to his situation, till in the end he becomes as
much greater than others, as his circle was larger. He may, by being placed in
advantageous circumstances in society, be instrumental of almost infinite good
to millions; and generations yet unborn, as they rise, shall call him blessed.

BUT few situations will admit extensive usefulness. The circle in which the
greater part move is very confined; consequently their usefulness and fame are
very limited. Happy for the world when the few elevated seats in a nation are
filled with truly great men, who delight in diffusing liberty, peace and
happiness through their extensive circle of influence.

OUR text is the remark of David to his subjects, on the death of Abner, a
distinguished General over the armies of Israel. Above deception and revenge
himself, he did not suspect them in one that called himself his friend. He fell
a sacrifice to the ambition and revenge of a rival, who was jealous of his
deserving and possessing the public confidence and esteem above himself. David,
sensible of his worth as a man, of his prudence, bravery and success as an
officer, most tenderly laments his premature fall; and by example teaches us
the propriety of lamenting public characters, who have rendered essential
services to their country and the world.

THERE is then a sense, in which man may, in the language of inspiration, be
called great. We ^^all,

I. ^NQUIRE what constitutes a man great in the sense of our text.

II. SHOW the ^^opriety of publicly lamenting such men.

I. We are to inquire what constitutes man great. To give him this character in
the judgment of the world, three things are principally important.

1. A MIND which can embrace large and extensive views of human things. (...)
reason and intelligence a man possesses, the higher he rises in the scale of
existence. Men differ as much in their intellectual powers, as in the
constitution of their bodies. Some come into life with feeble constitutions --
always incapable of those bodily labors and exertions, which others can
support. So some have less intelligence -- are incapable of such large,
comprehensive views of things -- and therefore incapacitated for acting upon a
broad, extensive plan. The more extensive views a man has, the deeper he
penetrates into men and things, the more noble creature he is. Hence the
infinite intelligence of GOD -- his cap^^ity ^f comprehending perfectly all
things in the universe -- confer inconceivable dignity on the Divine Mind.
Could we suppose the Divine ^^^d to possess less intelligence -- were his views
diminished -- had he a less perfect acquaintance with all things -- he would
not be so great as he now is. Extensive views of things -- capacities equal to
great occasions -- form the great man.

2. SUCH a mind, to appear great, must be placed in such ci^^^^^^ances as admit
of expressing in action these enlightened conceptions. This is necessary to
give such a mind is due expansion, and call forth all its energies. Man is, in
a great degree, the creature of circumstances and occasions. The mind enlarges
by exercise, and, like the body, owes its growth and strength to its own
operation. Let a man possess the most extensive views of things -- great
degrees of prudence, fortitude, and bravery -- yet, if he is never called to
act in a situation which demands these energies of mind, he cannot appear to
possess them. There is fire in the flint; but, unless it is smitten, it will
not shine. Hence great occasions always produce great men -- display their
greatness to the world* Seasons of public and national danger have called forth
(...) men, who were able to take hold of these great events, and direct them
with fortitude and prudence. These great events, and national concerns, are as
familiar to such a mind, and conducted with as much ease and order, as others
guide their little domestic affairs. There is real greatness and dignity in a
mind equal to great events -- which can direct them with a steady hand. When we
cast our eyes upon the heavens, and observe their order, their motions, and
revolutions, how great does that All-presiding Mind appear, which can direct
all their movements! In this way the powers of the Divine Mind are exhibited,
and GOD appears great. It is in action that a being appears great. When we see
a man forming great designs, and with facility carrying them into effect, he
appears great. Actions, in which great wisdom, prudence, courage and fortitude
are displayed, indicate a great mind.

3. TRUE greatness consists in directing these extensive views, and great
actions, to the good of mankind. To be great as agents of destruction -- in
diffusing misery -- is the greatness of devils. This has been the greatness of
many men, in all ages of the world. Many, before and since the Macedonian and
the Swede, have performed actions which have astonished the world, with design
only to shackle and exterminate the human race. Such men abundantly merit the
eternal execrations of GOD and man. Could we suppose that Deity created the
world, and peopled it with rational creatures, with intention of making them
all miserable; such a design, and such an operation, could not be called great,
but infinitely dreadful. In what an amiable point of light do the designs and
actions of Jesus Christ appear, above those, for instance, of Alexander! Both
possessed extensive designs, and performed great actions: but look at their
objects: one went forth to conquer and destroy the world; and, when he had done
it, wept that there was not another world to encrimson with its blood. The
oth^^ cam^ not to destroy men's lives, but to save them. A m^n who can step
forward, and direct the ^ffairs of a nation -- from confusion bring forth order
-- cause li^^^ to spring from darkness -- and by his exertions give liberty and
good government to unborn generations; he is great -- he is godlike. Such men
in scripture are called Gods. But, alas! they must die like men. This leads to
show,

II. THE propriety of lamenting such characters, wh^^ they fall. Know ye not
that there is a great man fallen this day in Israel* This language could be
adopted in no age, i^ no nation, with more propriety than by ^he people of
America this day. The beauty, excellence and glory of America is fallen upon
one of her high places. In him, how much worth has left our land and world!
From Mount Vernon, the great, the excellent WASHINGTON, like Moses from Pisgah,
has taken his flight to heaven, and, like him, left a nation in tears. He has
left us, and left us without the consolation which Moses gave his people --
that GOD would raise them up another like unto him. This hope we can hardly
indulge. Our pillar seems removed from us; and the crown is fallen from our
head. National sorrow (...) no more than justice to his char^^ter and national
services. When a man of such distinguished worth; who has rendered such
eminent services to his country; when he falls a victim to death, we may say --
A great man indeed has fallen in our Israel. Not to notice his death, would
indicate forgetfulness of his services, and ingratitude (...) GOD, who raised
him up as our National Savior.

MEN, who have benefited the world by their example and active services, are
public blessings to the human race. It is a distinguished favor to a people to
have a truly great man in some important post in society. His example is most
salutary on the public mind. To see a man constantly acting from noble,
disinterested views -- sacrificing private considerations for the public good
-- employing his enlightened mind in forming just and noble plans for national
prosperity and happiness -- to see him directing the complicated concerns of a
nation with success -- tends to elevate the mind, and expose that low
selfishness, which cannot sacrifice a little private good for public happiness.

THE example of Jesus Christ is frequently proposed, in scripture, for the
imitation and improvement of christians. So the example of a great man, in
social, civil and military life, may conduce to the improvement of mankind in
all these characters. No man has more adorned the character of the private
citizen, softened and hum^^i^ed that of the soldier, and dignified that of the
statesman, than GEORGE WASHINGTON. We have seen him great in counsel and in
arms -- crowned with success and glory, both in the cabinet and field; yet
modest -- not elevated with his own greatness, not dazzled with the splendour of
his own great actions, nor intoxicated with the praises of millions -- indeed
of the world. We have seen him modestly declining the applauses of those whom
he had so eminently benefited by his labors and toils. Possessing that fine
sensibility of soul which ever accompanies true greatness, he blushed at his
own deserved honors: and we have seen his manly countenance, which was never
discomposed by fear, softened into a profusion of tears, at the respect of a
grateful people. A little mind, on such occasions, would be lifted into a god;
and never would be satisfied, unless his humble worshippers had bowed the knee,
and in the language of eastern idolaters said, O king, live forever. But a
great mind is satisfied with the consciousness of having benefited mankind.
This is more acceptable and pleasing to it, than all their applauses. The death
of such a man should be lamented for the loss of his example.

DEATH has also closed the scene of his public and important services for his
country. When the head of a rising family, who guides his affairs with
prudence, is taken away, the loss to them is great. He can no more return to
his house. They can no more be benefited by his counsels and labors. A nation
may be as greatly benefited by some great public character, as a family is by
its prudent, industrious head. A single man may, under GOD, really deserve the
character of the deliverer and savior of his country; and may, by his counsels
and dangers, transmit from one generation to another the invaluable blessings
of liberty and good government to millions, when he is no more. A nation may,
after being essentially benefited by the extensive views, and active labors,
of some great character, still need his assistance in seasons of national
danger and distress. The reputation and influence of a man who is great in
counsel and arms, and who has prospered in whatever he has put his hand to,
tend greatly to dismay the enemies, and animate the friends, of his country. In
this view the death of WASHINGTON is a public loss, and greatly to be lamented
in the present crisis.

WE are justified in scripture in lamenting this great man; and we feel it no
profanation of this day, to bring into view our national obligations to that
great, that excellent man, who is no more. Death has shown us he was but man:
and in lamenting him we are countenanced by abundant scriptural examples. When
we read the biographical memoirs of distinguished men, who have essentially
benefited their generation and posterity, and follow them to the closing hour
of life, we find a general sorrow to prevail. It seems a common sentiment of
human nature, that such men should not descend into the grave without general
testimonials of public respect. Mankind have, in all ages and countries,
generally united in bedewing the grave of a benefactor with their tears. Such
sentiments and conduct are certainly rational; and the public expression of
them is due to distinguished merit, and eminent public services. Let the hearse
of the insignificant and worthless-great be followed by a procession of
mercenary mourners, who seek to hide the tears they do not shed -- let them
purchase the sorrow which their merit cannot excite -- let them rear their
proud monuments, and flattery lavish her inscriptions, to perpetuate and
emblazon a worthless name; -- WASHINGTON has a living monument -- a monument in
every heart, deeply inscribed with his actions and virtues -- a monument, which
will be rebuilt in every future generation, and will crumble only with the
skies. America mourns -- her tears will fall, as liberal and pure as the drops
of heaven. He was her father; and her sons will remember that the soil which
they reap, and the ocean which laves their shores, were secured by his toils.
And her fair daughters will recollect that WASHINGTON made them mothers -- not
of a degraded race of slaves, but of a free, independent nation.

EVERY man is bound to commit the remains of a father to the grave with decency
and respect. So a nation may be under obligations to commit the sacred ashes of
a public benefactor to the grave with respect and tears: and should they
withhold them, the stones might reprove their insensibility.

MOSES, in every view, was a great man. He was raised up to break Egyptian
chains, and liberate a great nation. He put himself at their head, fought their
battles, shared their toils, gave them a system of civil government, and
through a long life administered it with undeviating integrity; raised them to
great national respectability, and put their dread on surrounding nations.
After a long life thus spent, he suddenly, like our American Moses, drops
mortality, and dwells with his GOD. Though individuals, envying his honor, had
faulted his administration, and excited insurrection, still he was venerated in
life, and greatly lamented in death. We are informed that the children of
Israel wept for Moses, in the plains of Moab, thirty days.

IN being just to acknowledge all our national deliverances, and public
mercies, as the gifts of GOD, we should not overlook those distinguished
instruments by which they have been conveyed. We may rob man, as well as GOD,
in withholding from him his deserved share of love and respect.

THE MAN, so justly deserving the love and respect of AMERICA, is now no more.
By his prudence, fortitude and success, he has received the applauses of the
world. Raised up, like Moses, to redeem a people from foreign domination, with
a like modesty he accepted from Congress, in 1775, the command of the American
forces. Contending with veteran troops, and generals who had figured on the
European stage of war, he was found their superior in the day of battle. Early
did he step forth in the expiring cause of liberty. Possessed of superior
fortitude to support evils, and bravery to front dangers, he nobly triumphed in
the field; generously refusing any compensation for all his toils, but that
divine one, of having rendered the most important services to his country.
Through a long, arduous revolution, he finally led us to victory, independence
and glory. He then returned to his peaceful home, with the blessings of his
country.

AT a period perhaps equally difficult, he was called by the voice of his
grateful sons, to save them -- not from the ravages of a foreign enemy, but one
still worse -- domestic discord and insurrection. Raised to the Presidential
chair, his plastic hand soon healed our civil wounds, and restored us to a
state of political vigor and happiness. Having filled the chair, for eight
years, with extensive usefulness, dignity and glory, he declined the future
suffrages of his country. He claimed an exemption from the oppressive cares of
public (...) -- a retirement so pleasing to increasing years, and a mind worn
in the public good. To Mount Vernon we saw him retire, to seek repose in the
tranqui^ scenes of private life. There our thoughts attended him; and our
prayers ascended, that he might enjoy every social and religious pleasure,
protracted to a good old age, and then be gently laid to rest in the lap of our
common mother.

BY the threats and lawless depredations of a nation of robbers and atheists,
the constituted authority of our country invited him to the first military
command in the nation. And, to the joy of America, he accepted the appointment.
In this high command Death found him laboring for the good of his country.

SINCE Moses, no people have owed more to any one man, than America does to
that beloved name, GEORGE WASHINGTON. Like Moses, he had some enemies --
sufficient to prove his worth. This is a tribute which great worth must pay.
These men have proved themselves the enemies of all civil and religious order
and happiness. While in office, they have been continually pining away with
unsatisfied desires to see him blunder in his political race, and plunge from
his eminent station of usefulness and glory into obscurity and contempt. As the
sore, wounded eye is pained by the cheering rays of the sun, so envy is
tortured at such a constellation of virtues as distinguished the illustrious
WASHINGTON. While his few enemies have impatiently beheld his wisdom and
inflexible integrity, we have enjoyed every blessing which the nature of his
appointment would admit. About the term of sixteen years has this great man
conducted our arms and councils; at the head of which, he has appeared the
brave, the fortunate, the humane General, and the wise, the prudent, the
accomplished Statesman. In these wide, extensive fields has he gathered laurels
which will never fade while liberty and good policy are known in the world. The
circumstances of his life have been remarkable. He has always been the honor
and glory of his offices. Instead of wearing them out, he has clothed them
with increasing usefulness and glory. No man ever possessed a reputation for
prudence and integrity more unspotted, and a character which the world has more
generally admired. His humanity, his public spirit, with his many other
virtues, will be applauded by posterity.

AS to his religion, let charity follow him into the noise and confusion of the
camp -- into the perplexing cares of government -- and observe his constant
devotional retirement, which he was known to practice; let her see him in his
house, bowing before the SUPREME MAJESTY with the lowest of his fellow
creatures; let her see his devotions in the church; let her connect his
reverence of GOD with his love of man, and would she not say, Truly, this is a
righteous man?

THIS great man has now bid a final adieu to his family, to his country, and
the world. The mournful tidings are now circulating our country, and will soon
reach the distant corners of the globe. It will long be remembered, that GEORGE
WASHINGTON, after a life of extensive usefulness, and unspotted honor and
glory, terminated his mortal existence on the fourteenth of December, 1799, in
the sixty-eighth year of his age; ripe in days and virtue.

WE have dwelt with mournful pleasure on his memory; but we must bid him adieu
-- a long adieu! Farewell, happy shade! We will recount thy virtues and
patriotic labors for the improvement and admiration of our rising offspring:
early shall they learn to li^^ thy name, and hail thee as the benefactor and
savior of their country.

MEN, BRETHREN AND FATHERS,

WE now see what man is -- what the great man is. Such men rise, like the sun,
to gladden and bless the world; like him they run their course with extensive
usefulness and glory, and then go down and leave the world in night. Moses and
Joshua, David and Solomon, with all the other deliverers and benefactors of
mankind, after having served their generation and the world in the most
acceptable manner, must fall asleep. They must leave the throne, the council
and the field, and retire where "kings and slaves have equal thrones." When the
mighty fall, and the highest seats of honor are robbed of their amiable
possessors, how plainly do we see the vanity of man at his best estate! When we
see the great s^ipping from their elevated seats, and making their abode in the
dust, we see how short the distinction is between the great and the small in
this world. Let all remember, that soon they will appear in that world, in
which no distinction will remain, but that eternal (...), between the good and
bad. Let us occupy our talents well, whether one, two, or five: so shall our
Lord and Master say -- Well done, good and faithful servants! enter (...) the
joys of yo^^ Lord.

AMEN.

