A DISCOURSE, ON THE DEATH OF GENERAL WASHINGTON, Late PRESIDENT of the UNITED
STATES; DELIVERED ON THE 22d OF FEBRUARY, 1800, In the Church in WILLIAMSBURG.

BY JAMES MADISON, D. D.

Bishop of the Protestant Episcopal Church in Virginia, and President of
WILLIAM and MARY COLLEGE.

RICHMOND: PRINTED BY T. NICOLSON, JUST BELOW THE CAPITOL. -- 1800.

To the STUDENTS of WILLIAM and MARY COLLEGE.
YOUNG GENTLEMEN,
TO excel in Moral Worth, we must form an ideal Model of Moral Perfection. To
assist you, in forming such a Model, has been my constant endeavor. With the
same view, I here present you, with a real Model; not as the Standard of
Perfection; for that, like the Beauty of Bodies, is not to be discovered in any
Individual; but as an Exemplar of the happy Combination of many of those Moral
Beauties, which constitute the perfect Character. Accept it as a small
Testimony of my Affection; and be assured of my ardent Prayers, that you may
ever strive not only to equal, but to surpass it.

JAMES MADISON.

11 th Timothy, IV. Chapter 7th V. I have fought a good Fight, I have finished my
Course.
IS there a spectacle under Heaven, so interesting to the human heart, as that
of a free and numerous people putting on the ensigns of mourning, and with one
accord, pouring forth their sorrows for the loss, they have sustained in the
death of a beloved and honored Fellow-Citizen? Such, is the spectacle, which
America this day presents. Glorious spectacle! Glorious to humanity, which has
displayed virtues capable of exciting such universal, such heartfelt
veneration and love. Glorious to you, citizens of America, who thus honor
yourselves by evincing the high value you entertain for exalted merit. -- Great
God! On this day, whose rising sun, we, of late, hailed with joyful
acclamations, as ushering in the morn, which gave birth to the illustrious
WASHINGTON, but which now, sad emblem of all things human, is set apart to
bewail his loss, and to retrace the energies of his departed soul; -- on this
day of woe, permit me to express the consolation, which such a triumph of
virtue excites within my heart. I behold a young, but enlightened people
testifying, with one voice, their sincere devotion to virtue; I see the flame
of an ardent love for what is truly great and good, bursting forth from every
bosom; I see a people, but just beginning to move in their political orbit,
giving the surest testimony, that the love of virtue pervades the breast of
every citizen, and that they possess a force, which will retain them throughout
their long career, in the path of social felicity, and social greatness. I see,
from this principle, this sincere love of virtue, the future glories of my
country already to commence. It will be, if preserved in all its strength, the
shield of liberty, the protecting Angel of the republics of this western world;
it will render them for ever illustrious for patriotism, for heroic deeds, for
arts and for sciences. It is thus that they will defy the decrepitude of old
age; it is thus, that they will be perpetually renovated in youth; and under
the guidance of thy Providence, O God! It is thus, they will show to the
astonished world, that the love of virtue has snatched from death, amid his
dread conquests, one victory more. May this love be ever cherished with a holy
zeal! May it ever be the distinguishing characteristic of Americans, to pay to
it the homage, which is due. May this day ever serve to recall the bright
example of a WASHINGTON; and to renew, in the hearts of succeeding generations,
that love for virtue which animates the present.

Ah! My friends and fellow-citizens, I am sensible of the difficulty of
addressing you, upon this mournful occasion, in a manner correspondent to your
feelings. But the love of my country, veneration for those rare qualities which
dignify and ennoble man, and which diffuse such blessings throughout society;
and above all, the invitations of religion, give to me a momentary confidence.
Those virtues which once animated the heroes of America in the day of battle,
now animate the minister of religion, of truth and of justice. -- It is true,
that genius and eloquence have already exerted their powers in calling to
memory the splendid talents, the meritorious actions of the deceased; and that
they have depicted them with a glow of coloring, which I dare not attempt;
but, the subject can never become trite, it can never be exhausted. Let us then
endeavor to retrace some of those qualities, which distinguished our deceased
fellow-citizen, as the hero, the patriot and the sage; let us review some of
the important scenes through which he passed; and let us search, for the grief
we feel in his loss, a consolation in the recital of the wonders of his life.
It is a custom worthy of all free states, and which the most celebrated in
antiquity religiously observed, to be mindful of their ancestors, to extol them
with merited panegyricks, and to honor them on such occasions as the present;
that by doing justice to the actions of the dead, they may excite the virtues
of the living.

If indeed, the illustrious WASHINGTON, whom all America deplores, and whom the
whole civilized world will honor with their eulogies, had obtained only that
celebrity, which extraordinary talents in war, in arts and sciences, or in
politics confer; if he had not been distinguished for his firm adherence to the
truths of religion; if he had not served his God with a zeal worthy of his
superior understanding, however full of glory he might have been in the eyes of
man, religion could not have added her voice to the general plaudit. But
religion joins in the universal woe; she weeps over the tomb of WASHINGTON,
great in arms, great in peace, great in piety; and amidst her sorrows, feels a
gleam of consolation in pronouncing his eulogium.

I. With the life of WASHINGTON is connected a new era in the history of man.
He seems to have been called forth by Heaven, as the instrument of establishing
principles, fundamental in social happiness, and which must and will pervade
the civilized world.

When young he was trained to hardihood and to arms; he was educated in the
school of war, and thus prepared for that mighty conflict, which shook the
pillars of a distant throne. The government which nursed the youthful warrior,
nursed a Sampson, who was one day to break its fetters, and burst it is cords
asunder. Virginia saw in her youthful son traits of that character, which was
to become the admiration of the world; the morning of his life gave the well
founded hope, that the meridian of his day would shine with augmented luster,
and that his setting sun would leave a long tract of glory behind. -- Great
talents soon manifest themselves by the force with which they take their
direction. David, when a youth, sought out the lion and the bear as subjects
for his valor, and voluntarily joined himself to the armies of Israel to be
instructed in the arts of war. WASHINGTON sought out the warrior of the
wilderness, and at an early age, provoked his courage and his stratagems.
GENERAL WASHINGTON was born on the 22d of February 1732, N. S. When a youth, he
was entered a midshipman, on board a British vessel of war; but relinquished
his nautical views, in consequence of the entreaties of his friends. Before he
attained his twentieth year, he was appointed Adjutant of one of the three
districts, into which Virginia was then divided, with the rank of Major. In his
21st year, he was sent by Governor Dinwiddie, with plenary powers to examine
into the encrochments, reported to have been made by the French and Indians, on
the Frontiers of Virginia; to treat with the latter, and to warm the former
against future aggressions. His journal and report to the Governor have been
published. The next year, 1754, he was appointed Colonel of a Regiment, raised
for the defense of the Frontiers* he signalized himself at Fort-Necessity, by a
sally, in which he defeated an army much superior to his own. In 1755, he acted
as Aid-de-Camp, to General Braddock, and attended him in that capacity in the
battle, in which he fell. Not an officer, whose duty obliged him to be mounted
that day, except Colonel WASHINGTON, escaped death or wounds. The conducting of
the retreat devolved upon him; it was effected with a judgment, which acquired
him a high reputation, both in Great Britain, and America. Such was the fatigue
he underwent in the day of action, and the succeeding night, that he was
obliged, the next morning, to be supported on his horse with cushions. -- The
government of Virginia, soon after this period, gave him the command of all the
troops raised, and to be (...) in the Colony. -- He defended the Frontiers,
with skill and judgment, until the year 58; in this year he commanded the
Van-brigade (...) General Forbes, in the capture of Fort Du-Quesne. By this
(...) was restored to the Frontiers of Virginia. The health (...) WASHINGTON,
being greatly impaired, he resigned his (...) in 1759.
Monongalia, thy proud forests first saw the youthful hero impatient for the
conflict; saw him firm and undaunted amid superior foes; saw him, snatch from
an entire destruction the shattered remnant of a brave, but ill-conducted army.

The fatal battle in which Braddock fell, was only the prelude to those
torrents of blood, which flowed from the contest of two vast, but rival powers.
WASHINGTON, now commander of all the forces raised in Virginia, continued the
career of military glory, which he had so happily commenced, until his
constitution, naturally strong and robust, became debilitated, by incessant
fatigue, and the unusual hardship to which he was exposed. He was thus
compelled to retire from the service of his country, attended with the sincere
regret of all his companions in arms. But this retirement was only a
preparation for the august theater, upon which he was afterward to appear. It
would be delightful, could we attend him in this retirement; could we here
trace out the steps which his philosophic mind pursued in the acquisition of
useful knowledge. Hitherto Turenne, Malborough and Eugene, had been his
preceptors. I know with what ardency in the early stage of his life, he
followed them through every campaign, retraced their battles, and thus served
under those illustrious men. WASHINGTON has often been supposed to have made, a
Camillus, a Fabius or an Emilius his prototype. I believe, that he was himself
destined to be a high example to mankind, and that the native strength of his
own mind soated above imitation; but still it is probable, that his knowledge
in tactics was greatly perfected during this period of retirement, by
cultivating an acquaintance with the most distinguished commanders of ancient
and modern times. Nor can it be doubted, that politics, the true principles of
all lawful governments, and especially the rights and interests of America,
often occupied his active and penetrating mind. No one had a firmer hold of the
chain of causes and effects. No one saw with more clearness, the astonishing
progress of America, in population and in wealth; or better knew how to
estimate the operating causes. Perhaps his eagle eye saw, that this vast
continent could not long revolve round a small spot in the ocean. But, whatever
may have been the pre-sentiment of his mind, it is certain, that in this
retirement, he cultivated all those social virtues, which attach man to man,
and faithfully discharged those duties which a good citizen owes to his
country; nor is it less certain, that he continued, without interruption, the
active friend of religion, and at no time forgetful of his God.

During this retirement, a blind policy was preparing the way for an event the
most important in the annals of the world. It is wonderful to consider, how
often the agency of causes, which men put in motion, produce results the most
opposite to their intentions, and which baffle all calculation. Ambition forms
her plans of subjugation, and anticipates her triumphs; but, they are
controuled by an all wise and overruling Providence; instead of oppression and
misery, there often spring forth liberty, social order and social happiness.

That war, in which WASHINGTON had taken his first lessons in the military art
was concluded, in the year '61. The prosperity of the American colonies had
continued to flow with a quick current amid all the devastations of war. The
progress of population, of commerce, of improvement in the most useful of all
arts, agriculture, had received an impulse, which could not be restrained. An
enthusiastic affection for the parent-country had taken deep root. The sons of
America had fought and conquered with the armies of Britain. Their feelings and
their interests had been interwoven with new strength during the hour of danger
and the triumphs of victory. But the tide of affection did not long continue at
the height to which at had risen. An attempt in '64, to tax America, in a
manner unconstitutional and incompatible with political liberty, aroused the
vigilance of the colonies.

At this crisis, observe, fellow-citizens, Virginia first saw the lurking
poison, and first dared to propose the first American Congress that ever met.
At her request it met at New York in '65. By the wisdom and the firmness of
that Congress, the particular measure, which had excited such irritation in
America, was abandoned. But the abandonment was attended with a declaration,
that the right of Britain to bind America by laws and statutes, was unlimited,
or extended to all cases whatever. An assumption of power, so big with disgrace
and ruin, was viewed by America with horror and indignation. In vain did reason
and eloquence, on both sides of the Atlantic, demonstrate and deplore the
calamities, which would ensue from an attempt to enforce this assumed right. It
was attempted. -- The patriotism of Boston foiled the attempt, and whelmed the
insidious bait in the briny deep. Infatuated councils saw not, that an
obstinate perseverance in this mad system of political ambition, would give to
the world an example the most instructive; an example which would rouse nations
from their lethargy, show to them their own strength, teach them those primeval
rights which men hold only from nature's charter, and awake the spirit to
vindicate them. -- Then was the voice of Henry heard. Then was heard the
thunder of that eloquence, which shook this continent. His great soul, burning
with the concentered rays of wisdom and of patriotism, first proclaimed the
meditated treason against the majesty of the people. Immortal Lock! Thine was
the glory to arm the orator with the sacred panoply of truth. Nor to him alone
were thy energies confined. Thy hallowed page dear to liberty, to virtue, and
to religion, shed intellectual light over this western world, and taught a
lesson congenial to the first sentiments of man. The American mind too, nursed
in the bosom of independence, spurned any other control than that which was
founded on legitimate government. At this eventful crisis, Virginia again stood
foremost in the cause of liberty. Like another Athens watching over the safety
of all Greece, and inspiring courage by her councils, Virginia first proposed a
Congress of the different states --

It met. A dreadful appeal to Heaven drew near. A day of mourning and
intercession was appointed, and observed with an awful solemnity. "God! Give
the people one heart and one mind, firmly to oppose every invasion of American
rights," was the prayer then enjoined and addressed to the throne of grace. In
vain were the reasonings and the entreaties of that august Assembly of
statesmen, patriots and heroes who were now consulting for the general
interests of America, and who so eminently distinguished themselves for their
moderation, their firmness and their wisdom. Whose breast is so callous as not
to be touched with the noble sentiments, the profound reasoning, the manly
energetic style, the sacred ardor in the cause of liberty which have
immortalized their records. They are examples to all generations, and will
remain for ever, monuments of human genius and human virtue. Virginia saw that
the moment had arrived, when the rights of freemen, Heaven's sacred gift, were
to be yielded or defended with a courage worthy of such a prize. "To die she
said, is common to all, but to die bravely is peculiar to few. Let us not then
regard our lives as what properly belongs to us, but by exposing them for the
public cause, let us acquire a renown which shall be peculiar and truly our
own. Let us again prove, that an handful of freemen contending for their
rights, is more powerful than a host, numerous as the sands of the sea,
laboring with infamy to infringe them." -- A third time she rose in all the
strength of liberty, and first proposed the declaration of Independence. Nay,
she alone, with a patriotic courage, which astonishes even at this day, took
the bold resolution to sever herself from Britain, and to meet every danger in
defense of her rights. The great council of America, soon saw the necessity of
a similar decision. -- America, be thou Independent; take thy place among the
nations of the earth, was the high decree. Nor let it be forgot, that the voice
of WASHINGTON, sanctioned the decree. -- To arms, to arms, re-echoed throughout
the continent. At this awful moment, when the sword was to reek with kindred
blood, what were the agonizing pangs which wrung every heart! -- Ah! Ye whom
the hand of Providence has still preserved to this day, ye can tell; ye can
recall the memory of times, which tried men's souls. But the spirit of America,
like the daring eagle, mounted as the storm advanced, pierced the thick clouds
with inbred lightning fraught, and from aloft, beheld the promised land of
liberty and peace. It was then, America hailed WASHINGTON, as her conductor
through the tempests of war. Like the chosen leader of the Israelites, reposing
in his God, he obeyed the voice. To him it was ever sacred. But what were his
feelings at this moment! The sea of troubles through which he must pass, lay
before him. -- On one side, he saw vast superiority in numbers, wealth
unbounded, lust of domination insatiable, armies inured to war and to conquest,
fleets which waved their triumphant banners over the ocean, and which vexed
with their prows, the most distant seas; on the other, he saw a people thinly
scattered over an extensive continent, without arms, without funds, without a
regular government to concenter their force, without fleets, with no other
allies, than their own courage, their virtuous oaths, their love of liberty,
and their confidence in the righteousness of their cause. -- But, ardent in the
defense of the rights of his country, animated with the true spirit of exalted
patriotism, he emplored the assistance of Heaven, and hastened to the post
assigned him. Never was there one more perilous. Never was there one, which so
called for all those great qualities of the soul, which command the admiration
of the world. Never was there a trust reposed, on which depended issues so
momentous. On the wisdom, the integrity, the prudence, the fortitude of one
man, hung the destiny of this western world. True glory is always modest and
simple. Nothing but the noble principle of obedience to the will of his
country, could have induced him, to accept such a trust, or to appear as the
chief vindicator of American liberty. His magnanimity was no less evinced by
not declining the immense weight of the office to which he had been called,
than his disinterestedness was, by a refusal to accept any pecuniary
compensation during the war.

No sooner had he arrived at the American army, than he diffused order through
every department. The same greatness of soul, which attended him throughout the
war, manifested itself in the wisdom of his first arrangements, and the
measures which he took to expel the enemy from Boston. Success crowned his
efforts. But trials, which might have shaken the soul of a Joshua, a Maccabeus,
or an Epaminond^s, now awaited him. -- An hostile army, the most formidable in
numbers, in discipline, in all the apparatus of war, commanded by a General,
brave, skillful and enterprising, had landed on our shores. It was now, that
the horrors of war were to rage in all their fury, and the plains of America,
to be drenched with human blood. Ah! Soon did those horrors commence.
Misfortune, for a long time, hovered round the banners of America. In vain did
patriotism animate troops half disciplined, half armed, and inferior in number.
From Long Island, from New York and through the Jersies, discomfiture attended
the American arms. Yet, amid these defeats, a courage was displayed, which was
worthy of the first efforts of men struggling in the cause of humanity. Full
many a hoary Father wept the untimely fate of his gallant son. Full many a
widowed matron was left the sad monument of woe. Fathers, Mothers, Wives, ye
too, tender babes, whose tongues had just learned to lisp a Father's name, your
virtuous tears flowed not in vain. They plead with Angel eloquence in their
country's cause. Heaven itself saw and pitied the sufferings, and the impending
dangers of America. -- Driven from Long Island beyond the Delaware, his army
reduced to a few brave and faithful com-patriots, despondence and dismay marked
every countenance, except that of WASHINGTON. Superior to events, which seemed
more than sufficient to shake the stoutest hearts, they served only to arouse,
and to call forth the strength of WASHINGTON's genius. It was in this crisis of
weakness, of despondency and dismay, when the rigor of winter seemed to oppose
insurmountable obstacles, when the spirit of Delaware's angry flood, shrieked
loud, and threatened destruction, that WASHINGTON, attended by a few faithful
heroes, formed the bold resolution to defy every difficulty, to cross the
enraged flood, to attack the victorious foe, and to snatch from him, an
Immortal Victory, in the midst of his triumphs. The design was formed and
executed with a celerity, a judgment and a fortitude, which was crowned with
complete success. -- This was the first moment that presented the possibility
of victory. It was seized. The bold and gallant achievement astonished the
enemy, revived the American spirit, and opened the door to still greater
enterprise. Reinforcements succeeded this first vi^^^ry. WASHINGTON, returned
to Trenton, where he had just acquired so much glory. The active enemy,
breathing revenge for their late misfortune, hasten also to the same place, and
arrive on the same evening, with a force greatly superior. The setting sun
beheld Trenton containing the two hostile armies, separated only by a small
stream. What a crisis! The returning light of the next morn, threatened a
period to the hopes of America. Destruction or captivity seemed inevitable.
Scarce could the brave sons of Ameririca refrain from censuring the rashness of
their commander. They cast their eyes upon each other, upon their arms, and
upon their country. "The scoffs of the conquerors; their haughty looks, when
disarmed, they should be led through the hostile lines," the loathsome jail, or
the murderous prison-ship, all arose before their eyes. One consolation
remained. They could die in defense of their country. -- But the Genius of
WASHINGTON, ever invigorated by difficulties, here displayed its native force.
A situation so perilous, was to him only the means of acquiring new glory. A
retreat would have been ignominious, a battle, fatal. See the event. At the
return of day, a moment which his enemy had so anxiously anticipated --
WASHINGTON, was a conqueror, on the plains of Princeton. He who appeared
destined to certain captivity, was thundering upon his enemy in a distant
quarter, and gaining new laurels. I do not say, that this exploit was worthy of
the sagacity of an Hannibal, or the wisdom of a Scipio. It was worthy of
WASHINGTON; it will be itself an example to succeeding ages, and will forever
retain the full verdure of glory. A kind Providence forwarded in an astonishing
manner, an enterprise the most distinguished for that quickness of penetration,
which enables great minds to convert circumstances, apparently the most
in-auspicious, into such as are most favorable. This brilliant victory evinced
the deep resources of WASHINGTO'NS mind, and excited the universal admiration
and applause of a people who loved and revered him; whilst his enemy saw, and
had the generosity to acknowledge the pre-eminence of talents, so dangerous to
themselves, but so invaluable to his country. Can we look back with cold
indifference upon events so recent, at which the American heart once rebounded
with joy, felt the full debt of gratitude to Heaven, and fervently expressed
that gratitude in praise and thanksgiving? -- Can we forget the man, whom
Heaven selected as the instrument of its loving kindness toward us? No! Sooner
shall gratitude cease to be a virtue; sooner shall the love and admiration of
heroic deeds, of all those exalted talents which give dignity to man, be
obliterated from the human breast.

Thus did a campaign, which in its beginning, threatened unconditional
subjugation, in it is end, present a prospect the most animating and consolatory
to the friends of liberty. The cause of America had now attracted the attention
of the world. Her armies had evinced a spirit worthy of such a cause; her
enemies had been compelled to retrace their path of victory; whilst WASHINGTON,
tranquil in danger, sure in council, superior in his views and resources, had
acquired the unbounded love, veneration and confidence of his fellow soldiers,
had commanded the respect of his enemies, and proved that he was worthy of the
high trust committed to him. It was this love, this veneration, this
confidence, daily increasing, as his talents and his virtues, were more and
more developed which formed the treasury of America. Yes, ye brave and virtuous
defenders of your country, ye companions of the illustrious WASHINGTON, I call
you to witness, that amid all your sufferings, this devotion to your chief was
your bond of union, your support, and your reward, whether ye lay contented on
the frozen earth, or marked your way by the blood-stained ground on which ye
trod, or caught in haste a scanty morsel, still, amidst all your privations,
your attachment to your commander, founded on the just admiration of his heroic
virtues, supported you in every trial, consoled you under every difficulty, and
animated you with a patriotic enthusiasm in the day of battle. This command of
the affections of brave and virtuous men, this entire possession of the heart
of every soldier, thisun bounded veneration for their chief, whilst it forms
the greatest glory of a general, converts each soldier into a hero. He seizes,
as an example for himself, the great model which his general exhibits. His
temperance, his self command in the heat of battle, his patience in sufferings,
his prudence, his magnanimity, his ardent patriotism, infuse themselves into
every breast, give an elevation to the mind, a dignity, a confidence, a spirit,
which converts man into a new being, communicates to every power a new energy,
and creates a force wonderful and irresistible. Such was the agency of
WASHINGTON's Genius. It possessed a creative power, which assimilated every
thing to itself; or, which called forth in others, talents they felt not
before. His very presence inspired fortitude. No one approached him, but felt
the spirit of heroism transfused into his bosom. I think I see at this moment,
the brave soldier, as he passes, hail him as his Father, Friend and Champion; I
think I see him, rise to redeem his country, exult in his martial exercise, and
with a holy fervency calling down blessings on his commander's honored head,
pant again to fight for freedom, or for freedom die.

But if WASHINGTON had hitherto discovered talents wonderfully great in seizing
with promtitude, the first avenues to success, or of profiting from the
smallest inadvertence of a General, deservedly high in military estimation; the
time had now arrived, when the caution of a Fabius, or rather, a caution so
peculiar to himself, was to be displayed. His inferiority in numbers, and in
all the equipments of war, compelled him to take a position on the strong
grounds of Morristown. It is doubtful whether he manifested greater talents as
a commander, in this situation, or in those scenes of brilliant action which we
have just mentioned. No one knew better the value of that golden curb, which
discretion hangs on bravery. A general engagement, which the enemy so ardently
solicited, would, in all probability, have extinguished for ever the bright
flame of liberty. To the invading army, procrastination was defeat. In vain did
the impetuosity of the American councils urge him to battle. Nothing could move
the soul of WASHINGTON, but the spirit of wisdom, which ever calm and serene,
had determined him now to be content with checking the movements of the enemy,
and to maintain a war of caution. It was this caution, so full of prudence and
military skill, which, continually baffling the designs of the enemy, compelled
them to embark, and to attempt to gain Philadelphia by sea. The attempt forced
WASHINGTON from his strong posts. The battle of Brandy-wine ensued. The value
of our troops was unshaken, but the event was not fortunate for the American
arms. There are casualties, which human prudence cannot always control, but
upon which, the issues of battles often depend. One of these occurred. A false
intelligence prevented the execution of a design, the most bold in its nature;
but so admirably planned, that had an attempt been made to carry it into
effect, victory, and not defeat, would have been the result. Nor were the
actions of German-town, and of Monmouth less signalized for the skill of the
general, and the valor of his troops, than for those untoward events which
defeated their hopes. WASHINGTON had not always the glory of success; but he
had the glory of appearing to deserve it. The wisdom of his measures was never
doubted; success, O God! Depends upon thy Providence.

But, Fellow-Citizens, we should not do justice to the talents, or the virtues
of WASHINGTON, were we to confine our view to those scenes only in which he
himself was the principal actor. During the progress of a war, which raged from
the frozen walls of Quebec to the burning sands of Savannah, the penetrating
eye of WASHINGTON saw every movement; his comprehensive mind took in the vast
whole; his councils were received as the monitions of an oracle; whilst, from
his example, sprung up heroes in every quarter. The enemy had soon, every
where, if not a WASHINGTON to contend with, at least one who gloried in
following the exalted model. His knowledge of human nature gave him the command
of talents wherever they appeared; whilst his magnanimity rendered him always
the first to announce the merit of others, and to participate in their
triumphs. Whose bosom glows with the virtuous pride of being a citizen of
America, and remembers not the gallantry of Green, at Red-Bank; or the noble
defense of Smith at Mud-Island? Who bears not in vivid memory the victors of
Saratoga, or him who rescued South Carolina from the fangs of the lion? Who
calls not to mind, the brave, the virtuous, but unfortunate Fayette? -- Thou
too, lamented Mercer, shall live immortal in the memory of America. Thy wounds,
received in the bloody contest, which preceded the revolutionary war, had
already evinced thy courage and thy patriotism. Ah! Weltering in thy blood,
abandoned in the midst of the inhospitable wilderness, the deadly serpent thy
only food; what but a kind Providence could have preserved thee from such
perils! It did preserve thee, long to live the delight of society, and to
become the firm vindicator of liberty. Yes, the hand of God, preserved thee,
again to unite thy arms with WASHINGTON, and to pour forth thy gallant, but
gentle soul, on the plains of Princeton, covered with glory.

Would time permit, I could here, with that joy, which the love of noble deeds
inspires, trace a long line of heroes, whose names will be for ever dear to
America, and whose energies WASHINGTON saw, combined, and thus produced a force
constant in it is action, and irresistible in it is effects. Recall the image of
this illustrious man; behold him, when not braving the dangers of the field,
seated in council, deep deliberation engraven on his countenance; see him
giving life and motion to distant armies, and incessantly directing every thing
to the political salvation of his country. He seems another Archimedes, sitting
on the shore, and moving at pleasure a vast ship, on an ocean tossed with
tempest, whilst he himself is immovable.

A just eulogium of WASHINGTON requires a detail of the actions of his life.
The wonderful properties the inimitable beauties of those rays which enlighten
and animate all nature to be seen in their full luster, must be viewed
separately. This detail, this separated view of the luminous actions of
WASHINGTON must be left to the judicious and impartial historian. The time with
which you have already favored me, admonishes me to hasten to that scene of
glory, which still awaited our beloved fellow-citizen, and which by closing the
bloody drama, established, we trust in God, for ever, pure republicanism in
this western world. That last scene was reserved for Virginia. Her favorite son
was destined, in her bosom, to receive the reward of all his toils; and to
finish in her sight, his career of military glory. I will not open wounds which
are but just healed, I will not awake the feelings of the friend, the orphan or
the parent; nor will I call to mind the accumulated distress which mourned
throughout this land. Suffice it to say, that a superior and a gallant foe, the
conqueror of India, spread terror and desolation on every side. WASHINGTON saw
the decisive moment; he saw, that Providence had, at length, presented the
opportunity of closing the sufferings of his country. With a decision; a
profoundness of judgment, which astonishes, he projected and formed with his
brave and generous allies, a plan apparently the most difficult in its
execution, and which, to common apprehension, would have indicated only the
feebleness of vanity and folly. A powerful enemy in New York, was to be kept in
a state of alarm, for his safety; allied troops were to be assembled at the
same moment, not only from a distant quarter on the continent, but from Islands
still more remote; a fleet, which gallantly aided in the great design, was to
second every movement, and to assume it is place at the appointed time; his own
troops, by rapid marches, were to ensure their arrival at the period affixed;
the militia of Virginia, provisions of all kinds, were to be collected. How
many powers were here to be combined! What difficulty in their arrangement!
What prudence in adjusting means so discordant! What secrecy in the execution!
-- The mind of WASHINGTON was superior to every difficulty. The hostile army
beheld themselves surrounded by a force, which ensured their captivity, before
they suspected the design. Nothing more clearly evinces the strength of mind,
which this extraordinary man possessed than the sure calculation which he had
made of the result of all his measures, and also, of the consequences which
would attend the success of this bold, but well concerted enterprise. Weak
minds, ever vacillating, find their emblem in the Aspin's leaf. They have no
center of repose. That of WASHINGTON was self-poised; it felt its own weight,
and rested upon its own determinations. The Admiral of the allied forces
hesitated, whether he should keep the station assigned to him. America should
often review the letter, which WASHINGTON wrote to him from this city. Hear it
fellow citizens. "I am unable to describe the painful anxiety under which I
have labored, since the reception of your letter. It obliges me warmly to urge
a perseverance in the plan agreed upon. The attempt upon York, under the
protection of your shipping, is as certain of success, as a superior force, and
a superiority of measures can render any military operation. The capture of the
British army is a matter so important in itself, and in it is consequences, that
it must greatly tend to put an end to the war." After pointing out the certain
and fatal event, which would follow the removal of the allied fleet, he adds:
"I earnestly beg your Excellency to consider, that if by moving your fleet from
the situation agreed upon, we lose the present opportunity, we shall never
hereafter have it in our power to strike so decisive a blow, and the period of
an honorable peace will be farther distant than ever." He then assures the
Admiral, that he had nothing to fear from the fleet of the enemy, however
superior, stationed as he was; and then concludes: "I am to press your
Excellency to persevere in the scheme so happily concerted between us." -- This
letter was the anchor of victory. WASHINGTON, with his brave allies, advanced
to York. They came, they saw, they conquered.

Then did America exclaim, "If God be for us, who can be against us." Yes,
Great God, then was thy providential kindness manifested; then was it felt and
adored by all; but by none with more ardor, or more humility, than by him, who
had been selected as the chief instrument in thy hands, for the establishment
of liberty in this new world. "Let said he, Divine Service be performed to
morrow, in the different Brigades and Divisions. The Commander in Chief
recommends, that all the troops, which are not upon duty, do assist at it with
a serious deportment, and that sensibility of heart, which the recollection of
the surprising and particular interposition of providence in our favor claims."
His thanks are then tendered to the whole army, in the warmest language; and
let it be remembered, that the militia of Virginia, with their Governor and
General, the virtuous and the patriotic Nelson, received, in a particular
manner, his sincere acknowledgments of their brave and zealous cooperation.

Joy, like the rapid lightning, ran from one extremity of the continent to the
other. Every house of public worship resounded with grateful praises and
thanksgivings to the God of battles. Every heart called for blessings on the
head of WASHINGTON. Every American now began to hail the glorious consummation
of all his hopes. The vindicators of liberty now saw, that the storm which had
so long desolated their country, and deluged it with blood, was rapidly
subsiding; the horizon began to gleam around, and promised the speedy
effulgence of the brightest day, which ever illuminated this earth.

That day soon arrived. It was the day which witnessed the acknowledgment of
the Freedom, the Sovereignty, and the Independence, of the different states of
America.

Is the orb of WASHINGTON's glory now full? No! It is increasing in splendour.
How many victors have found a Rubicon, w^^se small current only tempted it is
passage; and when once* ^^ssed, how often has a mad ambition tossed the laws and
libertie^ of the people in the air! -- The integrity of WASHINGTON was a rock,
in the midst of the ocean, which could not be moved. -- His patriotism was as
firm as the continent he had saved. He was now to give another example to
succeeding ages, another proof of the reality, and the greatness of his
virtues. By his prudence, he first drew off silently the wrath of military
tumult; it was an angry cloud, which might have been terrific to this country,
had not WASHINGTON, like the immortal Franklin, known how to avert it is fury.
No sooner had the veterans of America, unrecompensed as they were for all their
labors and their sufferings, resumed the character of citizens, than their
beloved commander repaired to Congress -- Behold him, Fellow-Citizens, in this
exalted act of patriotic duty. See him with a modesty and a dignity of manners,
so peculiar to himself, rising in the august council of America, delivering an
address replete with the noblest sentiments, and unrobing himself, of all his
military authority. "Happy, said he, in the confirmation of our Independence
and Sovereignty, and pleased with the opportunity afforded the United States,
of becoming a respectable nation, I resign with satisfaction the appointment I
accepted with diffidence, a diffidence in my abilities to accomplish so arduous
a task; which however was superseded by a confidence in the rectitude of our
cause, the support of the Supreme power in the union, and the patrionage of
Heaven."

"The successful termination of the war, has verified the most sanguine
expectations; and my gratitude for the interposition of Providence, and the
assistance I have received from my countrymen, increases with every review of
the momentous contest." He concludes with saying, "I consider it as an
indispensible duty to close this last act of my official life, by commending
the interests of our dear country to the protection of Almighty God, and those
who have the superintendence of them, to his Holy keeping. Having now finished
the work assigned, I retire from the great theater of action, and bidding an
affectionate farewell, to this august body, under whose orders I have so long
acted, I here offer my commission, and take my leave of all the employments of
public life."

The thousand emotions, which crowded upon the minds of all present, rendered
the scene awfully impressive. The answer of the President was delivered with a
sensibility, which almost suppressed utterance. It was a just tribute to the
many virtues, military and civil of the illustrious WASHINGTON, and deserves to
be engraved upon his tomb.

The acclamations of a grateful country, the applause and the admiration of the
world, attended him to the peaceful walks of private life. Tyranny only
trembled at the lesson he had taught; a lesson, said the President of Congress,
equally useful to those who inflict, and to those who feel oppression. Yes,
Fellow-Citizens, the eloquent lesson, which he taught, caused those scales,
with which the false luster of power had obscured the vision of men, to drop
from their eyes. The American revolution, like another Ananias, seems to have
been sent by Heaven, to open the eyes of the universe.

Hitherto, Fellow-Citizens, you have admired the departed, but immortal
WASHINGTON, as a commander. Follow his steps still further, and you will
equally admire him as the statesman and the sage.

II. When the interests of America indicated a closer union of those
sovereignties, which the revolution had established, Virginia, ever watchful
over the general prosperity, and faithful to her principles, again stood
foremost. This is the fourth time, that she first suggested to her equals, the
adoption of measures, which were essential to the liberties, the prosperity,
and the aggrandizement of all. Great God! We thank thee, that reason, and not
arms, is the force which has hitherto directed the political movements of a
virtuous and enlightened people. The general council which was proposed, met.
WASHINGTON was again called into the service of his country, and unanimously
elected President of an assembly of men, illustrious for their talents and
their patriotism. From this assembly, emaned the present constitution of the
Federal Government. He who never solicited and office, was solicited by all
America, to accept the important office of President of the United States. With
what diffidence he received this testimony of the confidence, the love and the
veneration of a free and independent people, is in the memory of every one; nor
is the exultation, which spread, like the break of morning light, less strongly
recollected. To see WASHINGTON again at the head of the American people, no
longer clad in armor, but seated in the curule chair, giving energy to the
laws of the Union, and stability to the liberty he had vindicated, watching
over the interests of all, harmonizing discordant states, establishing order
and method in every department, and thus making a fair but grand experiment of
the subserviency of the newly created government to the general happiness, was
a spectacle the most dignified, as well as the most grateful to every heart.
With what assiduity he devoted himself to the duties of his office; with what
consummate prudence and judgment, he directed the legitimate powers entrusted
to him, to their proper ends, let the voice of his country declare. Let the
policy pursued, whilst Europe, maddening with contention, was convulsed to her
center; and whilst conflicting nations were laboring to plunge this country
into the whirlpool of war, testify the wisdom, the magninimity and the
patriotism of its conductor. -- Peace with all nations, close connections with
none, union among ourselves, measures favorable to commercial intercourse, both
internal and external, a militia properly organized, not extensive military
establishments, institutions to develope and to extend the powers of the
intellect, and to diffuse knowledge; These were the objects which engaged his
attention, and formed the basis of his policy. During his administration, it is
true, that parties, the concomitants of all free governments, arose. WASHINGTON
too had his party; it was that of the public good. He was the chief magistrate
of a whole nation, and not of a part of that nation. Onward he bent his steady
course, inflexible in the pursuit of what he deemed just and proper, conscious
of his own integrity, relying upon the favor of Heaven, and affording an
example of that rare assemblage, or rather constellation of virtues, which will
and must be the admiration of ages.

Was then WASHINGTON exempt from error? This I do not say. He was a man; and
consequently had the infirmities of man. But this I do believe, and think the
whole tenor of his life justifies the belief; that, if he did err, his errors
were never intentional. Human wisdom, and human virtue claim no higher
prerogative. To Heaven only infalibility belongs. But though WASHINGTON may have
erred, he had the merit of extracting glory even from his errors. How worthy of
a great soul are the following sentiments, which he delivers in his last
Address? Though, says he, in reviewing the incidents of my administration, I am
unconscious of intentional error: I am nevertheless too sensible of my defects,
not to think it probable, that I may have committed many errors. Whatever they
may be, I servently beseech the Almighty to avert or mitigate the evils to
which they may tend. I shall also carry with me the hope, that my country will
never cease to view them with indulgence; and that forty-five years of my life
having been dedicated to its service, with an upright zeal, the faults of
incompetent abilities will be consigned to oblivion, as myself must soon be to
the mansions of rest.

Twice called to the presidential office, his Fellow-Citizens waited only for
the return of that day, on which they should exercise the sovereign right of
election, again to clothe him with the same honors. But, more anxious to enjoy
the rights of a private citizen than the honors of office, wearied too with the
long and laborious service, which had constantly occupied his mind, and
desirous to spend the evening of his day in domestic tranquillity, he announced
his intention of retiring. He did not however forget, that he still owed to his
country an important duty. This was discharged by an address worthy of
WASHINGTON. It contains the outlines of the policy he pursued, when in office,
and which I have attempted slightly to sketch. It contains also, admonitions
the most wise, founded on long experience and deep reflection; admonitions,
which ought to be indelibly imprinted upon the mind of every American. It is
the advice of the father of American liberty, no less illustrious, as a
statesman and a sage, than as a commander in war. America, hear this sentence.
"Of all the dispositions and habits, which tend to political prosperity,
religion and morality are indispensible supports. In vain would that man claim
the tribute of patriotism, who should labor to subvert those great pillars of
human happiness, those firmest props of the duties of men and citizens. The
mere politician ought to respect and cherish them. A volume could not trace
their connection with private and public felicity." The mind of WASHINGTON saw,
that republicanism without morality was a chimera; and that morality without
religion was as evanescent as the baseless fabric of a vision; he saw, that the
morality, the virtue which republics require, must have its utmost link
fastened to the footstool of the throne of God. -- May the hearts of all be
open to this great truth! When WASHINGTON becomes a preacher, who will not
listen. O! Ye who love your country, and labor for the preservation of her
liberties; ye too, who surrendering yourselves to your passions, have
sacrificed your judgments to your zeal, come to this pure fountain of reason;
it will quench your animosities; look into it as it flows, it will be a mirror
to show you the path to public good; it will reflect the bright image of that
eternal justice, which ought to rule the universe. Yes, Fellow-Citizens, it is
by the observance of principles contained in this last address, that the
happiness of the people, in these states, under the auspices of liberty, will
be complete; and that free Constitution, the work of their own hands, will be
so sacredly maintained and preserved, I use the words of WASHINGTON, as will
acquire to them the glory of recommending it to the applause, the affection and
the adoption of every nation which is yet a stranger to it.

WASHINGTON retired; but he carried along with him, the sentiments which a
dutiful citizen ever owes to his country. Impending dangers, during, this
retirement, alarmed America. WASHINGTON was again ready to protect her with his
shield, and old as he was, to lead her armies to the field of battle.

III. But, that we may do justice to WASHINGTON, as a sage, and the truly good
man, we must view him also in private life. When man is placed upon an elevated
theater, the eyes of the world, the glory of success, give to his soul a force,
and a grandeur, which is often foreign to it. Pride borrows the sentiments of
virtue; we do not see the person, but the personage. How many have acted as
heroes at the head of armies, or appeared more than men, when conscious that
they attracted universal attention; and yet in the shade of retirement, in
their common intercourse with society, have shown that they were less than men,
devoid of all that real moral worth, which constitutes human excellency. To
WASHINGTON, the shade of retirement was as luminous as that of the most public
theater. It was here, that his soul, unbent, displayed all those virtues, which
are the ornament and the delight of society. Humane, charitable, wise and just,
in every situation, he was always consistent, always equal to himself, always
evincing, that rectitude of conduct was his sovereign good. The poor found in
him a guardian, genius a patron, the honest and the meritorious a friend; the
dissolute the impious and the profane, always an enemy. Sincerely religious,
his attendance upon the service of his God, was the dictate of real piety.
Immutably true, he could respect only truth in others. It was to him, the first
duty of man. Such his modesty, that whilst he was the admiration of all, he
alone, like Moses, descended from the mount, seemed ignorant of the light which
shone around him. Such his prudence, that not a word, not an action escaped
him, which would not admit of a rational justification. This singular character
of reason accompanied him through life. Yes, Brethren, it was in WASHINGTON,
that those four cardinal virtues, justice, prudence, temperance and fortitude,
formed an union so rare, and so complete. To these virtues, was added an
understanding, the most clear and extensive. His various official
communications, his addresses to his countrymen, his answers to the innumerable
congratulations which he received, all of which are sufficient to form volumes;
what ever came from his pen, whilst it was always distinguished by a style the
most perspicuous, the most strong and manly, evinced at the same time, a vast
mind, a superior intellect, which could grasp every thing, and which labored
incessantly to promote public and private felicity.

Such was, in part, the illustrious citizen, who filled so wide and so
honorable a space in the eye of America, and of the civilized world; and whose
loss a nation this day deplores. I know, that my attempts to do justice to his
character, have fallen infinitely short, of what your affection demanded. --
But, I am little conversant in the language of panegyric. "Recorded honors
shall gather round the monument of WASHINGTON, and thicken over him. It is a
solid fabric, and will support the laurels that adorn it."

But Ah! Great and good as he was, the scene of mortal existence is closed for
ever. Yes, Fellow-Citizens, your beloved WASHINGTON, has finished his course.
He is gone to appear before that God, in whom he trusted, and his works have
followed him. Happy moment, for thee, illustrious shade! But afflictive to a
nation, which mourns thy loss, and which can find it is consolation only in the
rememberance of thy virtues, in an humble resignation to the decrees of an
all-wise Providence, and in it is gratitude for benefits received through thy
instrumentality. Long shall thy name be dear to thy country. Long shall the
aged father, calling to his son, point to thy tomb, and bid him remember
WASHINGTON; bid him recollect thy virtues, and seize the patriotic flame, which
once glowed within thy bosom. The tender mother too, hanging over her beloved
son, shall drop the anxious tear, and hall the name of WASHINGTON; shall
exclaim, O! Like him, be thou, brave, prudent, temperate and just. O! Be thou,
like him, thy country's shield in war, it is ornament in peace. And thou,
America! Incumbent as thou now art over the tomb of thy beloved citizen, may
thou annually retrace his virtues, and consecrate his memory. May his actions
be ever the objects of thy emulation and thy praise.

Ah! Fellow-citizens, remember that virtue only is estimable in the eyes of
God; and that without it, republics are victims destined for the altars of
ambition. Remember, that without just sentiments of religion, virtue perishes;
a dreadful prostration of morals inevitably ensues, and with that prostration,
liberty is gone for ever -- Would you shoot an arrow at the rapid lightning as
it flies athwart the sky; or, would you attempt to arrest the oceans tide, by a
single pebble? As well might you attempt to retain virtue, the basis of private
and public happiness, the rock of all rational government, without religion.
Ah! In an age, when religion has become the sport of libertinism, and of
philosophists; in an age, when impiety is too often considered as the first
proof of brilliancy of genius; in an age, when thy religion, blessed Jesus! Is
scoffed and reviled by those who are ignorant of it; in an age, when even our
relation to a God, has been derided by wickedness and folly; in such an age,
religion feels more than a momentary consolation in embracing the tomb of
WASHINGTON, and in holding him forth as another immortal example, that man in
his greatest perfection, is ever religious and faithful. O! Ye, who love your
country, ye who would preserve for yourselves and your posterity, republicanism
pure and uncontaminated, again, I entreat you, be it yours to cherish religion,
and to bear in mind the example of WASHINGTON. Ye, who yet contemn the
degrading idea, that death is an eternal sleep; ye, who do not rest upon the
miserable and the dreadful hope of that destruction, that extinction of being,
at the thought of which virtue trembles, and the soul shrinks back with horror;
ye, who can look beyond the grave, and there behold regions enlightened by the
eternal meridian of God's unclouded smile; -- Regions in which piety and
innocence live immortal; O! Make that God your friend. Then, like your beloved
Fellow-Citizen, will you be strong in virtue, and incapable of dismay; then
will you, in that awful moment, which must soon tear us from all the soul holds
dear in this world, be enabled, like him, to exclaim, "I have fought a good
fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the faith. Henceforth, there is
laid up for me a crown of righteousness, which the Lord, the righteous judge
shall give me at that day; and not to me only, but unto all them that love his
appearing."

AMEN.

