MR. MILES's SERMON.

A SERMON, DELIVERED AT TEMPLE, FEBRUARY 22, 1800, ON THE DEATH OF GEORGE
WASHINGTON, LATE PRESIDENT, AND COMMANDER IN CHIEF OF THE ARMIES OF THE UNITED
STATES OF AMERICA; WHO DEPARTED THIS LIFE DECEMBER 14, 1799, IN THE 68TH YEAR
OF HIS AGE.

BY NOAH MILES, A. M. PASTOR OF THE CHURCH IN TEMPLE.

Published at the desire of the hearers.

TO WHICH IS PREFIXED. AN ACCOUNT OF THE PROCEEDINGS OF THE TOWN ON THE
MELANCHOLY OCCASION.

PRINTED BY S. PRESTON, AMHERST. 1800.

AT TEMPLE, FEBRUARY 22, 1800;
BEING the Day* recommended by Congress, to deplore the loss of our departed
friend; that great, good and patriotic man, General GEORGE WASHINGTON. The day
being remarkably fine, the citizens universally assembled, with each an
insignia of mourning, agreeable to the solemnities of the occasion; and formed
a procession in the following order:

All under 16 years of age, two deep, with their respective schoolmasters at
the head of each school, district, or class.

General FRANCIS BLOOD, Marshal. Music. Militia. Minister. Deacons.
Representative. Civil Officers. Selectmen and Town Officers. Citizens.
The procession formed at Col. WHEELER's Hall. The Music performed
"Washington's March," and the Militia marched with supported arms, to the
dwelling house of the Rev. NOAH MILES.

On their return to the Meeting House, the Music performed the "Dead March,"
and the Militia marched with their arms reversed. A pertinent and ingenious
Discourse was delivered by the Rev. NOAH MILES, pastor of the Church in said
town. To this succeeded a solemn Dirge, appropriate to the gloomy scene; which
seemed to excite in the audience mingled emotions of gratitude and sorrow.
After which, various evolutions and firings were performed by the Militia; all
of which were performed with great decency, regularity and good order.

A SERMON.
DEUTERONOMY, XXXIV. 8. And the children of Israel wept for Moses in the plains
of Moab thirty days.


BEMOANING the loss of friends and benefactors -- the loss of the deliverers
and protectors of our nation and land, is both decent in itself, and warranted
by scripture example.

IT has ever been the practice, time immemorial, whenever a prince, princess,
or persons, who had been friends and benefactors to the nation, or society to
which they belonged, were removed by death, for the survivors to consecrate
some time to lament, and to put on tokens of mourning. This practice we find
observed, not only by the heathen world, but also by the most pious, and godly.
For when Sarah was dead, whose name signifies a princess, or a high mother,
Abraham came to Hebron to mourn for her. When Jacob yielded up the ghost, the
Egyptians had such a sense of their loss, (and well they might, for Jacob was
the father of him, who had been their salvation under God in the time of
famine, and an intercessor with God for them) they, I say, made a mourning for
him threescore and ten days. Joseph made a mourning for his father seven days.
When Aaron was dead, they mourned for him thirty days, even all the house of
Israel. They wept for Moses in the plains of Moab thirty days. Though they were
on a journey, and a toilsome one too, and had not arrived to their settled
habitation; yet, they thought no time lost to pay some respect to those
worthies. When David received the tidings of Jonathan's death, who was a
valiant and friendly man, he says, I am distressed for thee, my brother
Jonathan: very pleasant have thou been unto me: thy love to me was wonderful,
passing the love of women. When Josiah, king of Judah, was slain, the good
prophet Jeremiah lamented him; and all the singing men and singing women spoke
of Josiah in their lamentations; they felt the stroke; they were sensible of
their great loss. When our blessed Lord came to the grave of Lazarus, he wept;
a good man had fallen; the little flock of Christ, then in the world, was
deprived (...) one of its precious members. He, who needed no (...) praises of
angels, or of men, to add any thing to him, shed tears. Devout men carried
Stephen to his burial, and made great lamentation over him.

IF pious and good men, heathen and saint, have lamented the loss of their
friends and benefactors; and even the Lord from heaven! Shall we be wanting?
Shall we be backward? Shall we refuse to follow the example of the Lord of
heaven and earth, the example of the pious and godly in all ages? Shall we
demean ourselv^^ below heathens and pagans? Yea, more brutish than the beasts
which perish? Be astonished, O ye heavens! at this, and horribly afraid, O
earth! God forbid. Surely, reason we have to lament, this day, the loss of him,
who, under God, wrought our deliverance, and established our peace, in the
happy enjoyment of our rights.

IN pursuing our discourse, we shall notice two things.

I. The loss we sustain. II. Such a loss calls for great lamentation.
I. The loss we sustain.

IT is not my design, nor is it in my power, to give you a particular
biographical history of the man, the loss of whom, we are requested to deplore
this day. A number of able men have handed to us some things respecting his
excellent abilities and character; no doubt, but we shall have a more full and
complete history of the man. But from what has been said, and from the
experience of many of us, we must be convinced, that a great and good man has
fallen. No two characters did ever more coincide, than Moses' and WASHINGTON's.
To draw their coincidences in character and fortune, a worthy divine of late
has done it, and now in print; therefore, it is needless for me, in
particular, to delineate, or to say all that might be said of the man. Yet,
however, in order to know in some measure our loss, it is necessary that we
have some acquaintance with his excellent abilities and qualifications.

PERHAPS very few, if any, ever exceeded him in every point. He was favored
with as great abilities, and with as good qualifications, as any that have been
in the world; the meekness of Moses, the uprightness and patience of Job, the
wisdom of Solomon, and the resolution of Nehemiah; all these centered in
WASHINGTON. When he was reviled, he reviled not again. He was patient under
fatigue and want, and made but few complaints. He was politic in his plans, and
wise in the execution of them. He was resolute in opposing the Jannes and
Jambres, the Sanballats, the Tobiahs, and Geshems of America, both foreign and
domestic. He ever had the character of faithful and true; an eminent General, a
man of war from his youth; yet; not delighting in human blood; but in justice
and in defending the rights of mankind; a father to his country, and the
deliverer of it from the paw of the lion and the bear, when as weak as the
dove, and as feeble as the lamb; an able and wise statesman; the giver of the
American Constitution; the establisher of his country's peace, in the full
enjoyment of its rights; a friend to literature, virtue, peace and good order;
a professor of the gospel of Christ, with a great sense of divine providence,
which all his writings abundantly testify. He was one, who feared God, and
eschewed evil; given to hospitality; a lover of all men; never elated in
prosperity, nor depressed in adversity; ever ready to fly to his country's
relief, and that in the most discouraging hour; ever steadfast, and immovable
as a rock.

HIS character may be viewed as immaculate. No one, whether at home or abroad,
was ever able to tarnish it. All their calumnies had no more effect, than the
magician's rods had with Moses'. The brightness of WASHINGTON was such, they
could not look steadfastly upon him. His face was like the face of an angels.
His brightness would dispel all the darkness brought for his disadvantage, and
cause it to flee away. The gates of hell never could prevail against him; but
were forced to acknowledge, like the magicians of old, the finger of God is in
this; let the people go.

HIS abilities as a General and as a statesman have been acknowledged, both by
friends and foes, citizens and foreigners. I would take notice of an instance
or two: The late King of Prussia sent him a medal, with this inscription; "From
the oldest General in Europe, to the greatest General in the world." The
Honorable CHARLES J. FOX, one of the ablest statesmen in Europe, in the British
House of Commons, ('94) delivered the following encomium upon General
WASHINGTON: "Illustrious man! deriving honor less from the splendour of his
situation, than from the dignity of his mind; before whom all borrowed
greatness sinks into insignificance. I cannot indeed," added Mr. Fox, "help
admiring the wisdom and the fortune of this great man: -- not that by the
phrase fortune, I mean to derogate from his merit; but notwithstanding his
extraordinary talents and exalted integrity, it must be considered as
singularly fortunate, that he should have experienced a lot, which so seldom
falls to the portion of humanity; and have passed through such a variety of
scenes, without stain and without reproach. It must indeed create astonishment,
that, placed in circumstances so critical, and filling for a series of time a
station so conspicuous, his character should never once have been called in
question: -- that he should in no one instance have been accused either of
improper insolence, or of mean submission in his transactions with foreign
nations. It has been reserved for him to run the race of glory, without
experiencing the smallest interruption to the brilliancy of his career. The
breath of censure has not dared to impeach the purity of his conduct; nor the
eye of envy to raise us malignant glance to the elevation of his virtues. Such
has been the transcendant merit and the unparalleled fate of this illustrious
man." Thus he.

THIS we all must attest to, who have had a knowledge of the day of WASHINGTON.
His enemies never were suffered, nor able to crown him with a crown of thorns,
nor to array him in a purple robe, with a mock scepter in his hand: No; but, by
the grace of God, a diadem of glory, a robe of virtue, and a scepter of justice
and humanity, ever attended him. Surely, to be deprived of such a patriot,
father and friend, must be a loss great indeed, and ought to excite in each of
our breasts great sorrow and mourning. Which brings me

II. Such a loss calls for great lamentation.

HERE I shall give you the reasons, why we should lament, when great and good
men are removed from us by death.

WHEN great and good men are taken away from us, so much of the holy nature of
God, as resided in them when with us, is now taken from the world. Those
precious abilities, those excellent qualifications, gifts and graces, which
they were wont to exercise for the promotion of the honor and glory of God, the
peace and prosperity of the nation, with their prayers, have ceased. The
nation, where they inhabited, had the profit of their abilities, gifts and
graces; but now, no more! except only what is kept in remembrance, or upon
record, of their holy and instructive words and examples.

THE loss of great and good men in a nation; men, who have been patriots,
deliverers and protectors of their nation and country, demands great
lamentation. They mourned for Aaron the high priest thirty days, even all the
house of Israel. They wept for Moses in the plains of Moab thirty days. And
devout men carried Stephen to his burial, and made great lamentation over him.
And why are such to be lamented? Because, thereby, a gap is made to let in the
judgments of God upon the remnant that remains. It is said of Moses; Therefore
he, i. e. God, said, that he would destroy them, had not Moses, his chosen,
stood before him in the breach, lest he should destroy them. Lot was another
such; he shielded wicked Sodom from the judgments of God; for God says to him,
I cannot do any thing till thou art departed. When the Lord removes such
excellent men, he thereby lays open a way to his vengeance. Hence, the death of
great and good men is ominous of heavy judgments at hand. Says the prophet, The
righteous perishes, and no man lays it to heart: and merciful men are taken
away, none considering that the righteous is taken away from the evil to come.
Yet, let us hope better things of our nation. However, this is a very great and
potent argument for our lamentation, this day, for the loss of him, who was our
father and friend.

WHEN the fathers and defenders of a nation are removed by death, the beauty of
that nation is fallen; the nation looks not like itself Wicked men are the
blemishes of a people; but good men, upright men, men of ability and integrity,
are the beauty and glory of a nation. How desolate and melancholy does a family
appear, when the kind husband, father and governor is removed. How much more
so, a commonwealth, when a redeemer, father, protector and citizen is taken
away. Take away good men from their coun^^y and nation, and what are they; but,
like a vineyard, whose hedge is removed, and stone-wall broken down?

THE death of the fathers and defenders of our nation demands bitter
lamentation; because, their virtuous walk, pious and wholesome words, and
examples are no more; and thus a way, for fraud and deceit, sin and iniquity,
and every evil work, to spring forth.

THE time, in which great and good men die, aggravates the loss. The day, in
which we live, is a day of dreadful war and trouble in Europe; and all means
have been prosecuted to involve us in the same; and we may feel the storm
before it be overblown. Thus, to have our General and defender taken from us,
at such a crisis, greatly augments the sorrow of those, who remain; and, that
upon the following accounts: Great and good men are often taken away, when
virtue and religion, when the spirit and power of godliness, are upon the
decline; when the love of many has become cold. Ofttimes they are removed, when
virtuous and religious men are very few; when men of integrity and uprightness
are hardly to be found; when men are full of intrigue and deceit, watching
every opportunity to entrap. But, we hope and trust, that there are some crying
with the Psalmist, Help Lord, for the godly man cease; for the righteous fail
from among the children of men.

BUT that, which most aggravates the loss, is this; when it comes in a time,
wherein the succession is in any measure hindered. In this case, the death of
our political fathers and defenders, is very painful.

LASTLY. The removal of great and good men is a just ground for lamentation.
For, when we consider what influence our sins and iniquities have had upon the
judgments of God, our unworthiness of great and good men, our unthankfulness
for them, and non-improvement of the same, have provoked the Lord to remove
them. Thus we see upon what reasons our sorrows are a debt due to the death of
great and good men.

APPLICATION.
HERE is reproof for three kinds of people.

To those, who are so impious, that they are inwardly glad, when great and good
men are taken away. They took no delight in them, when living, and secretly
rejoice when they are dead. But oh, that such men would consider their loss,
and how exposed they are to the judgments of God: Says the prophet, Except the
Lord of hosts had left unto us a very small remnan^, we should have been as
Sodom, and we should have been like unto Gomorrha. Let the world think as they
will of such men, such men are the salt of the earth; a wall between nations
and destruction.

HERE is reproof for good men, who are too senseless, and too apt, slightly, to
pass over such awful strokes of God. For this it was, God reproved his ancient
people the Jews. The righteous perishes, and no man lays it to heart; and
merciful men and taken away, none considering that the righteous is taken away
from the evil to come. Such tremendous strokes of God's providence, certainly
call for a greater sense and mourning, than is generally to be found in men.

SUCH a stroke of God's providence, as we have experienced, reproves even the
very best of people. It is true, they lament; yet, they do not lament it as
they ought. They say such a worthy has fallen, the defender of our country and
the establisher of its peace; but they do not lament as they ought, in prayer
to the Lord God; they do not cry as the Psalmist did, Help, Lord! for the Godly
man cease; help, Lord! the remnant that is left; help, Lord! to repair the
breach made by death. Alas! it is to be feared, that the lamentations of the
best of men are not as they should be. -- Lam. We may cry with the prophet of
old, My father, my father, the chariot of Israel, and the horsemen thereof!
WASHINGTON -- the GREAT -- the GOOD -- IS DEAD! -- HE, who erected the chariot
of the American Israel, and formed the harness for the government thereof -- is
no more! All his personal services are now at an end! How is the mighty fallen!
Ye daughters of America, weep ye over WASHINGTON, who clothed you in scarlet,
with other delights; who put on ornaments of gold upon your apparel. And, while
we drop a tear, or a sigh, for him, let us not forget other worthies, who have
gone before him; worthies, who were able Generals and statesman, and who were
instrumental in bringing about a glorious peace to these United States.

DIRECTION.
LET us be humble before God, this day, for our sins, which are the procuring
cause of all the calamities and unhappy breaches brought and made upon us. Let
us renounce the ways of sin, and embrace the ways of virtue and religion. Let
us imitate those worthies, who have gone before us, and especially him, the
loss of whom, we are requested to deplore. Let us follow such; so far as they
followed Christ. Let us be humble for our ingratitude to God for all his
mercies, and our non-improvement and hearty acknowledgement of the same, when
we had them in possession.

LET us render praise to God, for all the helps and favors, which we have had
and still enjoy. Particularly, that he was pleased to raise up unto us such an
able General and statesman, and to continue him, till the rights of America
were secured, and all things settled in peace, regularity and order; that he
was pleased to preserve his character inviolate. Let us rejoice in the goodness
and grace of God, that there are some wrestling Jacobs and prevailing Isreal's
yet left in the land.

LET us be earnest in prayer to Almighty God, for a sanctified use and
improvement of the dispensations of his providence and grace. That he would
guide our rulers, counsel our counselors, and grant our senators wisdom: That
he would raise up, qualify, and send forth unto us, faithful men; men, who
shall rule in the fear of God: That Elishas may be found, on whom the mantle of
Elijah may fall: That he would take of the spirit, that was in Moses, and give
unto Joshua. Let us cry earnestly unto God to save us from war, and desolating
judgments; that the blessings of his throne and of his footstool may come upon
us: That human and divine instruction may increase: That peace and good order,
among all denominations of men, may prevail: That he would take under his
fatherly protection our nation and country, the constitution, and several
governments of the same: That he would cause justice and judgment to run down
as a river, and righteousness as an overflowing flood: That he would bless us
by sea and land, in our basket and store: That he would prosper our ministers
in foreign courts, and grant us favor in the eyes of all nations: That he would
put an end to war* and bring on the peaceable kingdom of the Lord Jesus Christ.

ONCE more. Moses my servant is dead! WASHINGTON my servant is dead! It becomes
us to encourage Joshua. How? By a strict observance of the constitution and
laws of the land: In so doing, we shall give life and vigor to the supreme
magistrate and court, and likewise to the several branches of the same. This is
not all* but, it will serve to keep out of sight, such as would be our ruin.

CONCLUSION.
LET us remember, that we are all mortal; that no one is exempted from the
stroke of death. High stations and relations, riches and honor, power, wisdom
and goodness cannot discharge from that war, or give unto God a ransom. The
fathers, where are they? And do the prophets live forever? No. All must bow to
the king of terrors. Let it become our chief concern, that we be ready to meet
our God and Judge: That we be ready to enter in through the gates into the city
new Jerusalem, where sickness and sorrow, death and sin, war and trouble, can
never come; and where tears shall be wiped from all eyes, and God shall be all
in all.

AMEN.

