A FUNERAL SERMON, PREACHED IN NEWARK, DECEMBER 27, 1799. A DAY OF PUBLIC
MOURNING, OBSERVED BY THE TOWN, FOR THE UNIVERSALLY LAMENTED, GENERAL
WASHINGTON, LATE PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES. WHO DIED THE FOURTEENTH OF THE
SAME MONTH. TO WHICH IS SUBJOINED, HIS LAST ADDRESS, TO HIS BELOVED COUNTRYMEN.

-- Quis talia fando.
Temperet a lacrymis. --
BY ALEXANDER MACWHORTER, D. D. PASTOR OF THE FIRST PRESBYTERIAN CHURCH IN
NEWARK.

NEWARK: PRINTED AND SOLD BY JACOB HALSEY. MDCCC.

INTRODUCTION.
THE Committee of Arrangements in behalf of the Town of Newark, return their
thanks to the Reverend Doctor Macwhortor, for the Discourse delivered this day,
on the DEATH of General GEORGE WASHINGTON, and request the savor of a Copy for
Publication.

JAMES HEDDEN, Committee. JOHN PINTARD, Committee. WILLIAM S. PENNINGTON,
Committee.

NEWARK, DECEMBER 27, 1799.
TO THE RESPECTED CITIZENS OF NEWARK,
AT whose request this Discourse was Composed* Delivered and now Published.

IT is most Respectfully Inscribed, BY their Friend, Fellow-Citizen, And most
obedient, And very humble Servant, A. MACWHORTER*

PREFACE.
It cannot be unacceptable to the reader to introduce to his notice, the
ensuing Discourse, by giving an extract from what was published in the Newark
Papers, respecting the observation of that solemn day.

NEWARK, DECEMBER 28, 1799.
PARTICIPATING in the general grief, occasioned by the death of our illustrious
countrymen GENERAL GEORGE WASHINGTON, our village by a unanimous resolution of
its citizens, appointed Friday the 27th inst. to be set apart as a day of
special mourning, accompanied with solemn exercises of devotion: conceiving
that the sacred duties of religion, would not only be the highest tribute of
respect to the memory of the late beloved Father of his country, but also, the
most suitable expression of humble resignation to this afflictive dispensation
of an overruling Providence, in whose hands are the issues of life and death,
in whose sovereign will is suspended the sat of men and empires, and whose
gracious interpositions have been so manifestly displayed in the events of
American history,

IN recording the ceremonies observed on this melancholy and
never-to-be-forgotten occasion, we do not presume that the modest evidences of
our unfeigned sorrow, can possibly shed any luster on a name, which far
transcends all human praise. The plain and simple recital of our village rites
will testify, that though among the least, we were not last, to display within
our humble sphere, emotions of sympathy, in unison with our brethren of the
United States. Following the dictates of pure and genuine gratitude to the
memory of the man, who under God, was the instrument of our country's
independence, every class of citizens combined in one common effusion and
liberal indulgence of the finest feelings of the human heart.

PURSUING the plan previously adopted by the Committee of Arrangements, the
Procession formed at the Academy, with the Military in front, under the command
of Major Beach, and moved at 12 o'clock in the following order: 1. Music,
playing a dead march with muffled drums. 2. Captain Hay's Company of Light
Infantry. 3. Captain Van Arsdale's Company of Federal Blues, with their
standard dressed in mourning. 4. Captain Parkhurst's Company of Artillery. 5.
Captain Johnson's Company of Cavalry, dismounted. 6. Field Officers, and
Officers of Militia. 7. The Rev. Clergy of the town with scarss, and the Clergy
of the vicinage. 8. The members of St. John's Lodge. 9. The Magistrates. 10.
Captain (Colonel) Hay's Company of Silver Greys. 11. Preceptors and Scholars.
12. Citizens.


ALTOGETHER composing perhaps as numerous a Procession as have ever been
assembled in this town.

THE Military marched with reversed arms, and on arriving at the Church door,
opened their ranks, the whole facing inwards, and resting on their arms, formed
an avenue through which the remainder of the Procession passed.

THE ceremonies of the Church were introduced by the Rev. Doctor Ogden in a
well adapted prayer. The Rev. Doctor Macwhorter delivered the ensuing
Discourse. A crowded audience listened with profound attention, and a multitude
of eyes were suffused with the precious crystal of melting sensibility.

As the most appropriate mark of respect to the First of Citizens, the Address
of the late President, on his declining a re-election, was read by Alexander C.
Macwhorter, Esquire. The important advice contained in this last legacy, could
never come more home to the bosoms of Americans than at this solemn moment --
It was the voice of WASHINGTON, speaking from the tomb.

DIVINE Service being concluded, the troops formed in front of the Church, and
the Procession passing through in inverted order, they marched with shouldered
arms and unmuffled drums to the Academy, where the whole was dismissed.

WE should do injustice to the subject, were we to conclude without a remark on
the decorum and orderly conduct observed by every description of persons on
this mournful occasion.

NOT a single incident occurred but what will bear a pleasing retrospect; and
in our village annals, this day may be transmitted to posterity unsullied with
a stain.

WERE we to discriminate any individual circumstance as deserving more
particular notice than the rest, we should select the fraternity of Free
Masons, whose share in the Procession attracted every eye, and gave a solemn
dignity to the whole. The emblems and badges of the order were all veiled in
the deepest mourning; and a monumental Obelisk The Obelisk (since reposited on
the Altar of St. John's Lodge in this town) is three feet in height: consisting
of a base and pyramid of accurate proportion, representing black marble. The
front of which, exhibits an exact likeness of General Washington, in white
bas-relief, above which are masonic emblems in pearl and gold. The remaining
three sides contain the three great characteristics of christianity, Faith,
Hope, and Charity, also in white bas-relief. On the base are inscribed the name
and dates of the age and death of the bright luminary of the western world,
with monumental inscriptions. A wreath of laurel encircles the top.
to the memory of their ILLUSTRIOUS BROTHER, borne by the two eldest and most
respectable members of the Lodge, which, during the time of divine service, was
elevated on the desk below the pulpit, made a most striking impression on every
beholder.

Sic transit Gloria Mundi.

A FUNERAL SERMON, DELIVERED IN NEWARK, DEC. 27, 1799. BY ALEXANDER MACWHORTER,
D. D.
MY DEAR FRIENDS AND FELLOW CITIZENS,
THROUGHOUT a ministerial life of more than forty-one years, I never stood in
the sacred desk with so much reluctance, as on the present occasion. -- The
object, you wish to be eulogized, and to be portrayed in all the colors and
dark shades of weeping sorrow, is far beyond my feeble pencil, and trembling
hand. -- It seemed to me impossible, either to evade, or decently excuse my
self from a compliance with the honorable and solicitous request of my
respected Townsmen. -- But, it is now too late to offer unavailing apology.

THE text I have selected as the theme for our mournful meditations, you find
recorded in

DEUTERONOMY. XXXIV. 5. So Moses the Servant of the Lord died.

WASHINGTON the great! -- WASHINGTON the admired! -- WASHINGTON the beloved! --
is no more. -- Doleful the sound! -- Painful the thought! -- How extensive is
the stroke! -- How deep the wound! -- A nation groans -- clothes herself in
sable weeds -- and pours forth the bitterest lamentations -- Sorrow fills the
heart, and a melancholy sadness broods on every countenance.

BUT, while we pay the just tribute of mourning, in honor of the deceased, and
shed the tear of sympathetic woe, let us remember as men and christians, that
the Lord God Almighty lives; -- He sits at the head of the universe; -- directs
all events throughout his extensive dominions in infinite wisdom and goodness.
-- A sparrow falls not to the ground without the notice of our heavenly Father,
and the hairs of our heads are all numbered with him.

IT cannot be expected that the character of this eminent man can be portrayed
at this time. -- The genius of the poet, and the energetic eloquence of the
orator would fail in the great attempt: how far then must my feeble powers
shrink from daring such an undertaking. -- Poets and orators will no doubt
exert all their learned abilities upon this subject; but, it is the simple
retail of the historic page, which alone will be able to do justice to a life
so extraordinary.

ALL we shall pretend to, on this mournful day, will only be, -- to touch upon
a few of the outlines of some of his virtues, -- some of his more prominent
excellencies, -- and direct our minds to such christian reflections, as may be
a proper improvement of this gloomy dispensation of divine providence.

THIS distinguished personage shone conspicuously in a multitude of the private
virtues. -- It is recorded of Moses, and given as a summary of his private
character; That he was very meek above all the men which were upon the face of
the earth. -- So with regard to him, the laws of meekness, kindness and
benevolence ever dwelt upon his lips. And for many years Mount Vernon has
appeared to be the residence of hospitality, liberality and charity. What
thousands, and thousands have experienced the blessings of his beneficent hand?
-- What Job, in ancient times, the greatest man in all the East, declared, with
respect to himself, may with striking propriety be applied to him. He delivered
the poor that cried, and the fatherless, and him that had none to help him. He
caused the widow's heart to sing for joy. Yea, he "was a father to the poor."
He broke the jaws of the wicked, and plucked the spoil out of his teeth. He
witheld not the poor from their desire, or caused the eyes of the widow to
fail, or eat his morsel alone. GENESIS WASHINGTON was an uniform professor of the
christian religion. He steadily discountenanced vice; abhored the principles of
infidelity, and the practices of immorality. He was a constant and devout
attendant upon divine worship. In the army he kept no chaplain of his own, but
attended divine service with his Brigades, in rotation, as far as convenience
would allow; probably to be an example to his officers, and encourage his
soldiers to respect religion. He steadily attended the worship of God when
President. He was not in this respect like too many, who practically declare
themselves superior to honoring their Maker in the offices of religion. He
firmly believed in the existence of God and his superintending providence. This
appears in almost all his speeches and proclamations. He was educated in the
Episcopal Church, and always continued a member thereof, and was an ornament to
the same. He was truly of a catholic spirit, and considered the distinctions of
the great denominations of christians, rather as shades of difference, than any
thing substantial, or essential to salvation. After President Washington's
inauguration into his high ^ffice in New York, knowing the multiplicity of
business to which he must attend, and that he must not be interrupted by
continual visitants, "he assigned every Tuesday and Friday, between the hours
of two and three, for receiving visits, and that visits of compliments on other
days, and particularly on Sundays, will not be agreeable to him." I produce
this quotation to show the great reverence he had for the Lord's day.


ONE thing very remarkable in him, and was often observed by his friends; how
it was possible for a man, whose mind was full of cares, perplexities,
embarrassments, and great concerns, to attend at all times, with the graces of
the politest ease, to the various minutiae of what is styled good breeding, or
the accomplished gentleman. All ranks of men even to children were objects of
his peculiar politeness, A modest and placid serenity ever surrounded him. Of
what multitudes of little ones did he take a tender and condescending notice?
And ladies of every class universally acknowledged with pride his respectful
attention. He was a person of such finished politeness, that bystanders would
suppose, he had nothing else to attend to, but the etiquette of genteel
ceremony. He was hardly ever known, to be incident to absence of mind.


HIS capacious mind was not only formed for the grand arts of war, policy, and
legislation, but it comprehended the common arts of life to an exceeding high
degree. He was one of the most skillful and successful husbandmen in his
country. He not only cultivated, and improved his own farm in the most
advantageous and beautiful manner, but he greatly improved the farms of his
neighbors in various parts around him by his example and by his instruction.
So that in this line, he might be styled, a complete farmer.

BESIDES this, he had a polished taste for many of the fine arts, and for the
graces of certain branches of polite literature. He exceeded the most of men in
epistolary writing. The volumes of his letters, which have been published will
remain a standing monument of his exalted accomplishments in this respect. The
world has been stunned for ages with encomiums upon the epistles of Cicero and
Pliny, as models of perfection in this species of learning; but, let them be
compared with the former, I must be strangely mistaken, if their glory will not
extremely suffer, and probably be totally overshadowed by the experiment.
Consider the vast difference of the education and employments of Cicero and
Pliny from Washington. The former were educated in all the learning of Greece
and Rome. Composition was their business from their youth. They wrote in all
the quietude of retirement; but the letters of the latter had no advantages
either from a common liberal education or common study. They were written upon
the spur of the monument, and generally in the hurry, tumult and confusion of
war; and many of them, I may say, amidst the beating of drums and din of arms.
Yet the native productions of his pen, flowing from his superior genius, and as
if it were from an inspired polish of literature, in my pinion, far exceed
them, and will be much better models for the imitation of youth.


HE wrote with amazing facility and readiness; communicated his ideas with the
greatest precision, perspecuity and energy. Oftentimes during the late war, he
had to direct and correct in various instances the proceedings of Congress. By
the stretch of his sagacity and superiority of knowledge he frequently flashed
conviction upon the minds of that great house, eminent for wisdom and
understanding, so as to induce them to adopt his measures, and alter or
relinquish their own. His labors in writing in that perilous period were
immense; and were there not the most incontrovertible evidences thereof, would
seem to exceed all credibility. His military orders, his letters to Congress,
etc. compose more than thirty volumes in folio, which are preserved in the
national archives.

LET us now contemplate this great man in his military character. With justice
it may be said, "He was a man of war from his youth." When he was very young,
he girded on the sword, and entered the martial field for the defense and
protection of his country. In the beginning of what is called, The last French
War, the French and Indians made incursions into the frontiers of Virginia.
Young Washington, with a few militia companies of about three hundred men,
immediately flew into the wilderness to repel the invading aggressors. The
enemy were numerous far beyond his expectation. The advanced and reconnoitering
parties had skirmished. He determined, if possible, to check the enemy's
progress. For this purpose he threw up a hasty and trifling fortification, in a
place in that country called a glade or savannah, which is a space of flat
ground destitute of trees, and generally of shrubbery. This wise maneuver was
to oblige the enemy to leave their coverts and their trees, and make the attack
in the open plain. The enemy, conscious of their vast superiority, consisting
of nine hundred French, besides Indians, sure of conquest, rushed furiously to
the assault. They were firmly received, and the action became severe and
dreadful. More than half of Washington's corpse was slain by his side, and more
than twice that number of the enemy fell. The final conclusion of this bloody
scene was, that the French commander, finding with what brave and desperate men
he had to deal, offered him an honorable capitulation, which Washington
accepted, and nobly marched off with the honors of war. -- Although he lost the
field, yet he gained what was equal to a victory, by arresting the progress of
the enemy, and covering the frontier settlements. His conduct, his bravery, and
his military genius displayed at that time, acquired for him great renown, and
turned the attention of the public mind toward him. This was the beginning of
that astonishing martial fame, to which in process of time he arrived. The
event to which I have alluded took place in the year 1754, but it will be said
I ought to have introduced him to public view previous to this. I well know,
that just after he past his age of 21, in the year 1753, he was honored with a
commission by Mr. Dinwiddie, then governor of Virginia, to M. St. Piere, the
commander of a French Fort erected on the Ohio, to demand the reason of his
hostile proceedings, and to require him to withdraw his forces. -- How he
traveled through a trackless wilderness of hundreds of miles with only a single
companion with their provisions on their back, and how he was treated by the
haughty Frenchman, and sent back with ignominy and contempt, every one may see
in the histories of those times.


THE campaign of the following year, according to my recollection, when Genesis
Braddock, a veteran English officer, with a respectable European army under his
command, accompanied with strong colonial additions, marched for the purpose of
destroying Fort Du Quesne, (now Fort Pit) and driving the enemy from that
quarter; exterminating them from our territory, and giving deliverance to an
extensive frontier of our country.

AT this period our rising hero was only a common aid in the general's family.
This mighty European, utterly ignorant of the wiles and prowess of the foe,
plunged precipitately forward, leaving part of his army far in his rear, soon
fell into an Ambuscade. He himself was killed, and his forces routed by an
enemy perhaps, he never saw. At this awful crisis, young Washington burst
forth, flew to the head of the colonial troops, which the general had
contemptuously put in the rear, aroused them from their panic, rallied them,
and understanding the Indian mode of warfare, impeded, checked and baffled the
progress of the enemy, covered to admiration the retreat of an army of Britons,
saved a multitude of lives from the scalping knife, and obtained for himself
immortal laurels. He received the thanks, the plaudits, and blessings of his
country. And it has often been supposed by many* that if he had been general at
that time, stripling as he was, the tide of the war would have been very
different. -- May we no^ say, that Braddock died as a fool dies, but
Washington received crowns of glory. I could not mention in my discourse, how
Washington informed the unadvisable general of the Indian mode of fighting, and
that they were not cowards, as some Europeans were ready to suppose, and wished
and begged to be permitted to go before with some rangers to sco^^ the woods
and guard against a surprise. This same strange commander at the head of 1400
men, suffered himself to be surprised an^ destroyed by about 400, chiefly
Indians.


FINALLY this French war came to a happy termination, greatly to the advantage
of Great Britain, the comfort of America, and the honor of both. And our
youthful hero retired with dignity, and wreathed with laurels, to the silent
walks of private life.

SOON after these important events, the British government advanced doctrines
and enacted laws, which struck death into our chartered rights, our colonial
privileges, and just and long enjoyed liberties.

THE first instance of alarm was the ever memorable Stamp Act. This enkindled a
flame of righteous, and universal opposition in America against the parent
country. Washington soon appeared among other high characters, as a
distinguished opponent to these unconstitutional measures. -- After a short
struggle, by the firm, united and determinate fortitude of the colonies, the
offensive act was repealed. -- Then the storm ceased and calmness and
tranquillity were restored. But this repeal was accompanied, with a horrid
declaration, That they had a right to bind (or tax) the colonies in all cases,
whatsoever. Which doctrine, if put in practice, must have proved the
extinguisher of every spark of liberty in this country. It was the fixed
determination of the Britons to reduce it to practice in some form or other.
Hence presently came forward the fatal revenue acts. These rekindled the flame
which blazed for some years; but by non-importation agreements, by
remonstrances, and the determinate conduct of America, the all-grasping
parliament, was ^gain forced to retreat, leaving only a duty upon tea. But we
would import no teas from them, and while they kept them in their own island,
the flame of dissension did not burst forth into extreme violence. Yet, when
they were resolved to open the ^ay for the taxation of America, and by an
artful and circuitous ^^ute, through their East India company, would absolutely
force their teas upon us; We as absolutely and with indignity rejected them.
Their pride was then wrought up to almost intemperate fury, and nothing
proceeded from them, but the demolition of charters, suspension acts, port
bills, fishery bills, etc. In this mighty contest, before the shedding of
blood, we find our beloved Washington making a leading and conspicuous figure,
in committees, conventions and congresses. At last in the madness of their
rage, they plunged the sword into our bowels, determined to have our lives, or
property, or both. Then our country was compelled to raise armies in their own
defense, and to repel force by force. Immediately the eyes of congress were
fixed on Washington, and he was duly appointed commander in chief.

AS Moses with timidity and reluctance obeyed the divine decree when he was
ordered by heaven to go and put himself at the head of the chosen tribes, and
deliver them from the fangs of a cruel tyrant, from bondage and slavery, lead
them to liberty, and conduct them to the promised land: so General Washington,
when the high appointment was announced to him by the voice of Providence and
the voice of his country, for the deliverance of these American tribes, with
what struggles in his breast, with what fear and hesitation did he submit to
the solemn undertaking? -- When Moses once assumed the charge, he never
murmured under all his burdens, toils and adverse trials, till he had
accomplished all that God intended by him: so, our American Moses, when once he
had undertook the arduous task, we never find him murmuring or threatening to
resign, even in the worst of times, or in the darkest and most perplexing
seasons of adversity. He steadfastly persevered to the last, till he completely
finished all the work requested of him by his country; till he had fully
established for them their glorious INDEPENDENCE, and precious LIBERTIES.

MOSES accomplished the emancipation of more than two millions of people, and
led them to exalted freedom and the glories of independence. Our hero
accomplished the emancipation of more than three millions of people and
perfectly introduced them to the highest liberties, civil and sacred, and
endowed them with privileges and advantages altogether incalculable.

WE do not read that Moses received any pecuniary reward from his people for
all his services; so, our great leader and deliverer would accept no
compensation for all his mighty labors.

MOSES was the greatest and most successful general in remote antiquity; so
Washington has been the most eminent, the most prosperous, and the most honored
general in modern times. He was not only the wonder of his own country, but the
admiration of the world. His fame encircled the globe. Especially in Europe,
his name was extolled by kings, emperors and the greatest generals. The late
king of Prussia, Frederick III, it is said, presented him an elegant sword,
accompanied with this grand compliment, "From the oldest general in Europe, to
the greatest general in the world."


WE must not enter into the wonderful conduct of our illustrious general during
an eight years war. Let it be here observed, what a young, raw, undisciplined
people Genesis Washington had to oppose to the mighty power and vengeance of
Britain. His country was destitute of every article of military furniture, of
magazines, arms, ammunition and money. There was scarcely a man in America,
that understood the detail of, or how to provide for an army. The fact was,
Washington, unacquainted as he was with military rotine, by his natural powers,
and amazing application and diligence, superintended the whole business, from
the drill sergeant to the highest officer. He was for a long time, in a leading
measure, quartermaster, commissary, waggon-master, etc. and every thing, and
accountable for all. -- There is no describing the greatness of this man. --
Bring forward Themistocles, Epimanondas, and all the heroes of free
governments, their exploits can scarcely form spots in his unclouded SUN.
To retail his sufferings, his manouvres, his stratagems, his sleepless nights
and anxious days; his circumventing, out-generaling, worrying and mortifying
his enemies, would far exceed the limits of a contracted discourse. -- One
thing only ought not to pass unobserved, that whenever he was foiled by the
adversary, his defeats escaped censure* and even by the shades of adversity, he
obtained acquisitions to his fame. Time would not admit in a narrow discourse,
of further consideration of this remarkable man, but I ought to have mentioned
the last honor conferred upon him by his country, and which he condescended to
accept. When Congress deemed it expedient, from the state of some of our
foreign relations, to raise an army for the security and defense of this
country, he was appointed (and surely no person so proper) Lieut. General of
all the forces that should be raised in the United States. -- His acceptance of
this commission, has been viewed by many as one of the most disinterested
traits of his amor patriae or patriotism. He had been chief commander of all
the armies of America for eight years; he had been President for eight years,
and of consequence Commander in chief of all the forces by land and sea; for
him to stoop to this inferior appointment is an instance of such strange and
disinterested patriotism the world never before saw. It could not be same, or
any other motive inducing him hereto, but the pure and exalted love of his
country.


BEHOLD the days, the transporting days, of sweet and blissful peace, after an
awful and tremendous conflict, arose and beamed upon this favored land; a land,
like Canaan of old, in which the SUPREME delighted. Contemplate the great and
honored warrior with raptures of pleasure sheathing his sword, bidding a final
adieu to war, and in tearful floods of love, gratitude and friendship, taking a
last leave of his beloved officers and fellow soldiers. The moment was full of
the most feeling passion in this farewell It took place in the city of
New York. The officers being previously assembled for this purpose, their
general and father addressed them in these words, With a heart full of love and
gratitude, I now take leave of you. I most devoutly wish, that your latter days
may be as prosperous and happy, as your former ones have been honorable. The
officers came up to him one after another, and with reciprocal showers of
tears, like children embracing a tender father, bid him an affectionate
farewell.


ATTEND him now to Congress, and there returning his commission to the hands
from which he received it, with an elated mind, and with the most tender,
delicate, and pathetic speech. The scene was full of weeping (...) and
heartfelt sorrowful gladness. Behold the Congress, the venerable representative
sages of our country, all bathed in tears on the happy occasion* His speech was
in the following words: Mr. President, The great events on which my resignation
depended, having at length taken place, I have now the honor of offering my
sincere congratulations to Congress, and of presenting myself before them, to
surrender into their hands the trust committed to me, and to claim the
indulgence of retiring from the service of my country.

Happy in the confirmation of our independence and sovereignty, and pleased
with the opportunity afforded the United States of becoming a respectable
nation, I resign with satisfaction the appointment I accepted with dissidence;
a dissidence in my abilities to accomplish so arduous a task, which, however,
was superceded by a confidence in the rectitude of our cause, the support of
the supreme power of the union, and the patronage of heaven.

The succes^ful termination of the war has verified the most sanguine
expectations, and my gratitude for the interposition of Providence, and the
assistance I have received from my countrymen, in^^eases with every review of
the momentous contest.

While I repeat my obligations to the army in general, I should do injustice to
my own feelings, not to acknowledge in this place, the peculiar services, and
distinguishing merits of the persons, who have been attached to my person
during the war. It was impossible the choice of confidential officers, to
compose my family, should have been more fortunate. Permit me, sir, to
recommend in particular those who have continued in the service, to the present
moment, as worthy of the favorable notice and patronage of Congress.

I consider it as an indispensable duty to close this solemn act of my official
life, be commanding the interests of our dearest country to the protection of
Almighty God, and those who have the superintendance of them to His Holy
Keeping.

Having now finished the work assigned me, I retire from the great theater of
action; and bidding an affectionate farewell to this august body, under whose
orders I have long acted, I here offer my Commission, and take my leave of all
the employments of public life.

Allow me here to make a quotation from Dr. Ramsey, after the President had
returned his answer to Genesis Washington's speech. -- The great scenes that
crowded in upon the imagination of the General, and of the President, so
affected them both, that they almost lost the power of utterance. The mingled
emotions that agitated the minds of the spectators, on seeing the Commander in
chief of their armies resigning all public employments, and his country
acknowledging his services, and loading him with their blessings, were beyond
description. See Ramsey's history.




HERE the illustrious man, the patriot, and citizen shone forth in a greater
effulgence of glory than he had ever done in the fields of his most brilliant
victories. He was here more glorious than he was in that day, that great day,
in which he triumphed over Lord Cornwallis and the whole British army.

WE now leave the Cincinnatus of the age returning in joyful pleasure to the
peaceful walks of Mount Vernon, there to cultivate again his farm, and all the
sweet charities of domestic bliss.

THIS country soon felt to the center, that the federal compact, which aided us
through the war, was absolutely incapable of securing happiness to us in times
of tranquillity. State was taking the advantage of State, and all things were
rapidly hurrying to discord and ruin. In this dreadful conjuncture of affairs,
it was happily proposed that a convention should be called, to alter and amend
that compact, or frame a new constitution. The convention of our wise men
assembled; among whom Washington appears, compelled again by the suffrages of
his State to forsake his delightful retirement, and to enter upon a new scene
for the trial of his mental abilities; to consider of all governments in the
world, which was the best; and to form a civil constitution for these United
States most promotive of their happiness.

HE is the man immediately exalted to the chair of this grand convention. This
council was called upon the most extraordinary business, and blessed with the
most extraordinary success, while all America stood, in awful suspense,
listening and waiting for their decissions. Such a civil body upon such great
concerns had never assembled in our world from the creation of man, and
perhaps, all circumstances taken into consideration, there never will be such
another. -- Here Washington, amidst his great compeers, acquired honor and
applause in a new line; for his profound wisdom, his extensive and various
knowledge, his ^ast ideas, his consummate prudence, and his immense powers of
accommodation.

THE new constitution was framed, published, and adopted. -- BUT, who must be
the personage, that would hazard himself, his reputation, and his all, to put
this strange, this novel, and untried political machine into operation? --
Washington is the man called upon by the universal and unanimous voice of the
nation, to risk all his hard and well earned fame, and make the critical and
dangerous experiment.

FOR the good of his country, which he always had at heart above all sublunary
things, with struggles and perplexing difficulties in his own mind, and with
shedding many tears, he nobly abandons personal ease and domestic felicity, and
bravely ventures to accept the helm of government, and ascend that thorny seat,
the Presidential Chair.

HERE his great abilities, beyond the hope of his constituents, enabled him to
acquit himself as usual, to the acquisition of new fame, and more accumulated
honor; and to the shedding down peace, prosperity, riches, glory and
innumerable blessings upon his beloved country. He served in this exalted
station, he laboriously served, like a second season of war, another eight long
years, till he saw the government established, and promising a permanent
duration; then he breathed for rest, like the weary labourer for the evening
shade. He fervently requested his dear country not to elect him again to the
dignity of the Presidency, but to suffer him to retire to his delightful
solitude, as he found the declension of life approaching, and his setting sun
fast hastening to the horizon. -- His desire was honorably, though reluctantly
gratified. A person of eminence in England, observed to an American gentleman
in office there, on the report that President Washington intended to decline
standing as a candidate at the next election; "That such a thing was
impossible; he could not give up such honors." Upon the American's saying, by
the letters he had received from home, he had no doubt but that would be the
case; the English gentleman then replied; If such be the case, I will say, that
if all the heroes, from the beginning of creation to the present day, were
formed into one Pyramid, Washington would make the Apex of the whole.


NOW comes on the most uncommon, interesting, and indescribable scene that
probably ever took place under the sun. -- The father of his country, the long
tried, venerable and reverend father taking his last leave, bidding a final
farewell, and delivering his dying speech to the dear sons, the beloved
children of his country. This subject is too refined, too passionate, and
sublime for me to touch. I refer you to the wonderful address itself, which
will bye and bye be repeated to you. Your hearts must be of adamant and steel,
if the big tears do not roll down the face, while it is pronounced. See the
Address at the end.


BUT, to what have I been persuading your attention? -- To the deeds -- to the
life of a mortal or immortal man? -- Alas! mortality is inscribed upon all
things in this nether world. And man, however great, eminent, distinguished, or
useful, must depart hence and be here no more. This is the last trait in every
human character, he died. "So Moses, the servant of the Lord died." Moses, that
favorite of heaven, the greatest general, legislator and statesman, the most
useful friend to, and the father of his nation, died. -- So, Washington, the
famed warrior, the mighty soldier, the illustrious magistrate, the great father
of this American nation, the father, under God, of our independence, liberties,
privileges, flourishing commerce and prosperity, is -- how can I utter the
word? -- dead. -- "How are the mighty fallen? -- How are the mighty fallen?" --
His great soul has burst the bands of mortality, disencumbered itself of this
clay tabernacle, and winged its way into the world of spirits; and every
American cries -- "My father, my father, the chariots of Israel, and the
horsemen thereof!" -- The Lord accepts not the person of princes, nor
regards the rich more than the poor, for they are all the work of his hands,
and in a moment they shall die. -- Greatness, honor, and dignity cannot shield
from death. The conqueror is conquered. And robes of state must give way to the
shroud. -- Admit here two lines of vast ideas from Dr. Young: Death, -- great
proprietor of all! it is thine
To tread out empires, and to quench the stars.


THE king of terrors cannot glut his insatiable maw with such another victim.
Here we may take up the lamentation and say, All flesh is as grass, and all the
glory of man as the flower of grass; the grass withers, and the flower
thereof falls away. -- "Lord, what is man?" -- What is the life even of
superior men? -- It is a vapor, which appears for a little time, and then
vanishes. -- Let us be silent -- the righteous God has done it.

THE death of this exalted personage ought to lead us to devout reflections,
and to a wise and christian improvement thereof; that we, that our whole nation
may be consoled under our sorrows -- not faint in the day of rebuke, but have
our faith, our hope, our confidence strengthened in God, even in the living God.

THE first improvement we ought to make of this mournful providence is, to
learn and practice the great duties of submission and resignation. Has God,
the just governor of the world, done it? -- How should our mourning souls
reply, It is the Lord, let him do what seems him good? Submission and
resignation in unavoidable adversity are not only indispensable duties, but in
the cultivation of them, there is much consolation. They apply balm to the
wounded spirit, and shed abroad on the soul a sacred calmness, peace and
tranquillity. When in extreme troubles, the heart can devoutly put up that
petition taught us by our divine master, saying "Thy will be done." This
happily quells the tumults of our thoughts, detaches our affections from the
transitory objects of the world, and elevates our minds to things celestial and
unchangeable. Let the potsherd strive with the potsherds of the earth, but woe
unto him that striveth with his Maker. We are extremely prone from the frailty
of our nature, to murmur, repine, revolt against heaven, and indulge hard,
unreasonable and unbecoming thoughts of a wise superintending providence. These
things exhibit the selfishness and pride of our hearts, and that we would wish
the Almighty under our control, and that we were exalted above the character
of dependent creatures. We should instantly expel them from our minds, and with
the high priest of God in ancient times, be silent under the chastening of
heaven; "Aaron held his peace." Or imbibe the spirit of mourning Job, and say,
The Lord gave and the Lord has taken away, blessed be the name of the Lord.
Christian resignation excludes despondercy. -- That God who raised up a
Washington, and furnished him with all those important and brilliant
qualifications; rendered him such a blessing to mankind, and made him the
father and savior of his country, can and will raise up another, whenever he
shall deem it expedient for the good of the world, and similar circumstances
require it.

A second improvement, we and our land should make of this calamitous event,
which has caused us to consecrate this day to mourning and sorrow is, to render
gratitude to the Supreme Ruler of the Universe, that he enriched this country
with his invaluable life so long. We should offer upon this solemnity to
indulgent and merciful heaven, souls full, running over, and pressed down, of
grateful sentiments. I too well know it is incident to human nature, the longer
we have possessed a precious blessing, and the more our hearts are attached to
it, when the unhappy hour of its removal comes, the more we are prone to murmur
and complain. Even blessings, which in the enjoyment we cared but little for,
when taken away, our feelings are apt to rise in resentment. These things, with
a thousand others exhibit to view the exceeding great depth, subtle and
tortuous nature of the moral corruption in the children of men. Alas! let a
favorite object depart, and be everlastingly separated from us, how is
gratitude, christian gratitude, for its long continuance, thrown into a very
distant back ground. -- You may think it strange I should preach gratitude upon
this melancholy day; but were I preaching to his nearest connections, to the
wife of his bosom overwhelmed in sorrow, and to all his tender domestics,
pouring out their weeping souls around his hearse, I would preach to them, as a
part of their duty, gratitude and thanksgiving as a principal source, from
whence flow the refreshing streams of succor and consolation. Sure I am, if
ever any people on earth had causes of gratitude, they stand at the head of the
column of obligations. They have enjoyed a distinguished blessing for many
years; they are enveloped in blessings now, and they have the afflicted hearts
of a great nation condoling with them, and all the floods of tears flowing down
the face of Columbia, are flowing to their honor.

HIS exit has taken place at the most proper time and in the fittest manner.
The God of all the earth is always doing that which is right.

WHAT if he had died at some forlorn period of our war with Britain? --
Speaking after the manner of men, we would now have been groaning and wreathing
under the mortifying yoke, which his life as the principal instrument under
heaven has res^^ed us from. -- What if he had died just at the adoption of our
new constitution, when some states received it not, and multitudes in the
adopting states opposed it? -- All things in probability would have rushed into
confusion, and this country been involved in all the horrors of domestic war.
-- State stood ready to draw sword against state. -- And nothing suspended or
prevented the direful event, but deliberations upon a new constitution, and the
seasonable adoption of the same. Had Washington been removed at this critical,
doubtful and all-important time, let every rational mind conjecture the train
of incalculable evils, which would have started into tremendous existence.

HE died at the very moment that was proper, and in the manner that was
infinitely fit, by a few hours sickness, Allow here an abstract of his last
illness, as published by his physicians, Dr. Craik and Dr. Dick. Sometime in
the night of Friday (December 13th.) Genesis Washington was attacked with an
inflamatory affection in the upper part of the Windpipe. The disease commenced
with a violent ague, which was soon succeeded by a fever, and a quick and
laborious respiration. Plentiful bleedings four times were used, a blister
applied to the throat, calomel and repeated doses of (...) tartar were given,
vapors of vinegar an^ water were frequently inhaled; blisters were applied to
the extremities, together with a cataplasm of bran and vinegar to the throat.
All these applications could neither mitigate or stay the disease. At half
after eleven on Saturday night, retaining the full possession of his
intellects, he expired without a struggle.
therefore let the citizens of America raise their hearts in gratitude and
praise to God, the sovereign God, who does according to his pleasure in the
armies of heaven, and among the inhabitants of this lower world; that he
granted to us, his important, useful and invaluable life so long, and that he
transmitted him down to the tomb, richly adorned with his unfaded laurels, and
with all his unstained honors, and untarnished glories. A brief account of his
funeral, I presume will not be unacceptable.

On Wednesday, December 18th, the mortal part of Washington the great, -- the
father of his country and the friend of man, was consigned to the tomb, with
solemn honors and funeral pomp.

On the ornament at the head of the Coffin was inscribed, Surg^, ad Judicium,
-- about the middle of the Coffin, Gloria Deo, and on the silver plate,

GENERAL GEORGE WASHINGTON, DEPARTED THIS LIFE ON THE 14th OF DEC. 1799, Aet.
68.

Between three and four o'clock, at the sound of artillery from a vessel in the
river firing minute guns, the corpse was moved, a band of music with mournful
melody, melted the soul into all the tenderness of woe.

The procession was formed, and moved on in the following order: Cavalry,
Infantry, Guard with arms reversed. Then music and the clergy. Next was the
General's horse, with his saddle, holsters and pistols. Then the corpse,
attended by six pall-bearers, who were colonels, viz. Little, Pa^ne,
Marsteller, Ramsay, Gilpin and Simmes. The mourners then followed, next the
masonic brethren, and after them the citizens.

When the procession had arrived at the bottom of the elevated lawn on the
banks of the Patomac, where the family vault is placed, the Cavalry halted, --
the Infantry marched toward the mount, and (...) their lines. -- The Clergy,
the Masonic brothers, and the citizens descended to the vault, and the funeral
service of the church was performed.

The firing was repeat from the vessel in the river, and the sound echoed from
the hills around. -- Three general discharges by the infantry, the cavalry and
eleven pieces of artillery, which lined the banks of the Potomac back of the
vault, paid the last tribute to the commander in chief of the armies of the
United States, and to the venerable departed Hero.




A MULTITUDE of christian improving thoughts crowd upon my mind, of which, I
will only detain your attention to one, and abruptly leave a subject entirely
inexhaustible.

THE last improvement, I shall mention is this, -- That as men and christians,
it behooves us to maintain an unwavering immovable confidence, and firm trust in
that God, who never dies; -- in his wisdom, righteousness, goodness, and all
his adorable perfections; -- and in the certain rectitude, supreme equity, and
immutable excellency of his government.

HOW will this faith console the grieving heart, heal the wounded spirit, and
dissipate more than half its sorrows? -- It will wipe the big tear from the
eye, bind up the broken bone, illumine the gloom of the sad countenance, and
cause the soul of mourning to rejoice.

HAS God, the infinitely wise and infinitely good God, taken from us our Moses;
let us believe, trust and hope in him, as becomes christians, and he will not
only raise up a Joshua, to maintain our independance, guard our privileges, and
support our liberties; but, if as a nation we cultivate virtue and practice
righteousness, he will raise up a succession of Joshuas, to be our leaders,
guardians and defenders, while suns and moons shall endure.

LET our mourning hearts be now filled with faith and confidence in God, the
immortal God, and unite, And sing the song of Moses the servant of God, and the
song of the lamb, saying, great and marvelous are thy works, Lord, God,
Almighty; just and true are thy ways, thou king of saints.

NOW unto the king eternal, immortal, invisible, the only wise God, be honor
and glory forever and ever. Amen -- and Amen.

ADDRESS OF THE PRESIDENT, TO THE PEOPLE OF THE UNITED STATES.
Friends and Fellow-Citizens,
THE period for a new election of a Citizen, to administer the executive
government of the United States being not far distant, and the time actually
arrived when your thoughts must be employed in designating the person, who is
to be clothed with that important trust, it appears to me proper, especially
as it may conduce to a more distinct expression of the public voice, that I
should now apprise you of the resolution I have formed, to decline being
considered among the number of those, out of whom a choice is to be made.

I BEG you at the same time to do me the justice to be assured, that this
resolution has not been taken, without a strict regard to all the
considerations appertaining to the relation, which binds a dutiful citizen to
his country; and that in withdrawing the tender of service which silence in my
situation will imply, I am influenced by no diminution of zeal for your future
interest; no deficiency of grateful respect for your past kindness; but am
supported by a fall conviction that the step is compatible with both.

THE acceptance of, and continuance hitherto in the office to which your
suffrages have twice called me, have been an uniform sacrifice of inclination
to the opinion of duty, and to a deference for what appeared to be your desire.
I constantly hoped that it would have been much earlier in my power,
consistently with motives, which I was not at liberty to disregard, to return
to that retirement from which I had beeen reluctantly drawn. The strength of my
inclination to do this, previous to the last election, had even led to the
preparation of an address to declare it to you; but mature reflection on the
then perplexed and critical posture of our affairs with foreign nations, and
the unanimous advice of persons entitled to my confidence, impelled me to
abandon the idea.

I REJOICE, that the state of your concerns, external as well as internal, no
longer renders the pursuit of inclination incompatible with the sentiment of
duty or propriety: and am persuaded whatever partiality may be retained for my
services, that in the present circumstances of our country, you will not
disapprove of my determination to retire.

THE impressions with which I first undertook the arduous trust, were explained
on the proper occasion. In the discharge of this trust, I will only say, that I
have with good intentions contributed toward the organization and
administration of the government, the best exertions of which a very fallible
judgment was capable. Not unconscious, in the out-set, of the inferiority of
any qualifications, experience in my own eyes, perhaps still more in the eyes
of others, has strengthened the motives to diffidence of myself: and every day
the increasing weight of years admonishes me more and more, that the shade of
retirement is as necessary to me as it will be welcome. Satisfied that if any
circumstances have given peculiar value to my services, they were temporary, I
have the consolation to believe, that while choice and prudence invite me to
quit the political scene, patriotism does not forbid it.

IN looking forward to the moment which is intended to terminate the career of
my public life, my feelings do not permit me to suspend the deep acknowledgment
of that debt of gratitude which I owe to my beloved country, for the many
honors it has conferred upon me; still more for the steadfast confidence with
which it has supported me; and for the opportunities I have thence enjoyed of
manifesting my inviolable attachment, by services faithful and persevering,
though in usefulness, unequal to my zeal. If benefits have resulted to our
country from these services, let it always be remembered to your praise, and as
an instructive example in our annals, that under circumstances in which the
passions, agitated in every direction, were liable to mislead amidst
appearances sometimes dubious -- vicissitudes of fortune often discouraging --
in situations in which not unfrequently want of success has countenanced the
spirit of criticism -- the constancy of your support was the essential prop of
the efforts, and a guarantee of the plans by which they were effected --
Profoundly penetrated with this idea, I shall carry it with me to my grave, as
a strong incitement to unceasing wishes, that heaven may continue to you the
choicest tokens of its benificence: that your union and brotherly affection may
be perpetual -- that the free constitution, which is the work of your hands,
may be sacredly maintained -- that its administration in every department may
be stamped with wisdom and virtue -- that in fine, the happiness of the people
of these states, under the auspices of liberty, may be made complete, by so
careful a preservation and so prudent a use of this blessing, as will acquire
to them the glory of recommending it to the applause, the affection and the
adoption of every nation which is yet a stranger to it.

HERE, perhaps, I ought to stop. But a solicitude for your welfare, which
cannot end but with my life, and the apprehension of danger, natural to that
solicitude, urge me on an occasion like the present, to offer to your solemn
contemplation, and to recommend to your frequent review, some sentiments, which
are the result of much reflection, of no inconsiderable observation, and which
appear to me all important to the permanency of your felicity as a people.
These will be offered to you with the more freedom, as you can only see in them
the disinterested warnings of a parting friend, who can possibly have no
personal motive to bias his counsel. Nor can I forget, as an encouragement to
it, your indulgent reception of my sentiments on a former, and not dissimilar
occasion.

INTERWOVEN as is the love of liberty with every ligament of your hearts, no
recommendation of mine is necessary to fortify or confirm the attachment.

THE unity of Government, which constitutes you one people, is also now dear to
you. It is justly so; for it is a main pillar in the edifice of your real
independence; the support of your tranquillity at home; your peace abroad; of
your safety, of your prosperity; of that very liberty which you so highly
prize. But as it is easy to foresee, that from different causes and from
different quarters, much pains will be taken, many artifices employed to weaken
in your minds the conviction of this truth; as this is the point in your
political fortress against which the batteries of internal and external enemies
will be most constantly and actively (though often covertly and in^^duously)
directed, it is of (...) moment, that you should properly estimate the immense
value of your national Union, to your collective and individual happiness; that
you should cherish a cordial, habitual and immovable attachment to it;
accustoming yourselves to think and speak of it as of the palladium of your
political safety and prosperity, watching for its preservation with jealous
anxiety; discountenancing whatever may suggest even a suspicion that it can in
any event be abandoned; and indignantly frowning upon the first dawning of
every attempt to alienate any portion of our country from the rest, or to
enfeeble the sacred ties which now link together the various parts.

FOR this you have every inducement of sympathy and interest. Citizens by birth
or choice, of a common country, that country has a right to concentrate your
affections. The name of AMERICAN, which belongs to you, in your national
capacity, must always exalt the just pride of patriotism, more than any
appellation derived from local discriminations. With slight shades of
difference, you have the same religion, manners, habits and political
principles. You have in a common cause fought and triumphed together; the
independence and liberty you possess are the work of joint councils, and joint
efforts of common dangers, sufferings and successes.

BUT these considerations, however powerfully they address themselves to your
sensibility, are greatly outweighed by those which apply more immediately to
your interest. Here every portion of our country finds the most commanding
motives for carefully guarding and preserving the Union of the whole.

THE North, in an unrestrained intercourse with the South, protected by the
equal laws of a common government, finds in the productions of the latter,
great additional resources of maritime and commercial enterprise and precious
materials of manufacturing industry. The South in the same intercourse,
benefitting by the agency of the North, sees its agriculture grow and its
commerce expand. Turning partly into its own channels the seamen of the North,
it finds its particular navigation invigorated -- and while it contributes, in
different ways, to nourish and increase the general mass of the national
navigation, it looks forward to the protection of a maritime strength, to which
itself is unequally adapted. The East, in like intercourse with the West,
already finds, and in the progressive improvement of interior communications,
by land and water, will more and more find a valuable vent for the commodities
which it brings from abroad, or manufactures at home. The West derives from the
East supplies requisite to its growth and comfort -- and what is perhaps of
still greater censequence, it must of necessity owe the secure enjoyment of
indispensable outlets for its own productions to the weight, influence, and the
future maritime strength of the Atlantic side of the Union, directed by an
indissoluble community of interest as one nation. Any other tenure by which the
West can hold this essential advantage, whether derived from its own separate
strength, or from an apostate and unnatural connection with any foreign power
must be intrinsically precarious.

WHILE then every part of our country thus feels an immediate and particular
interest in Union, all the parties combined cannot fail to find in the united
mass of means and efforts, greater strength, greater resource, proportionably
greater security from external danger, a less frequent interruption of their
peace by foreign nations; and what is of inestimable value they must derive
from Union an exemption from those broils and wars between themselves which so
frequently afflict neighboring countries, not tied together by the same
government; which their own rivalships alone would be sufficient to produce,
but which opposite foreign alliances, attachments and intrigues, would
stimulate and embitter. Hence likewise they will avoid the necessity of those
overgrown military establishments, which under any form of government are
inauspicious to liberty, and which are to be regarded as particularly hostile
to Republican Liberty: In this sense it is, that your Union ought to be
considered as a main prop of your liberty, and that the love of the one ought
to endear to you the preservation of the other.

THESE considerations speak a persuasive language to every reflecting and
virtuous mind, and exhibit the continuance of the Union as a primary object of
patriotic desire. Is there a doubt whether a common government can embrace so
large a sphere? Let experience solve it. To listen to mere speculation in such
a ease were criminal. We are authorized to hope that a proper organization of
the whole, with the auxiliary agency of governments for the respective
subdivisions, will afford a happy issue to the experiment. It Is well worth a
fair and full experiment. -- With such powerful and obvious motives to Union,
affecting all parts of our country, while experience shall not have
demonstrated its impractibility, there will always be reason to distrust the
patriotism of those, who in any quarter may endeavor to weaken its bands.

IN contemplating the causes which may disturb our Union, it occurs as a matter
of serious concern, that any ground should have been furnished for
characterising parties by Geographica^ discriminations -- Northern and Southern
-- Atlantic and Western (...) whence designing men may endeavor to excite a
belief that there is a real difference of local interests and views. One of the
expedients of party to acquire influence, within particular districts is to
misrepresent the opinions and aims of other districts. You cannot shield
yourselves too much against the jealousies and heart burnings which spring from
these misrepresentations: the^ tend to render alien to each other those who
ought to be boun^ together by fraternal affection. The inhabitants of our
wester^ country have lately had a useful lesson on this head: they have seen,
in the negotiation by the Executive, and in the unan^mous ratification by the
Senate, of the treaty with Spain, and (...) the universal satisfaction at that
event, throughout the Unit^^ States, a decisive proof how unfounded were the
suspicions propagated among them of a policy in the General Government, and in
the Atlantic States, unfriendly to their interests in regard to the
MISSISSIPPI: they have been witnesses to the formation of two treaties, that
with Great Britain and that with Spain, which secure to them every thing they
could desire, in respect to our foreign relations, toward confirming their
prosperity. Will it not be their wisdom to rely for the preservation of these
advantages on the UNION by which they were procured? Will they not henceforth
be deaf to those advisers, if such there are, who would sever them from their
Brethren, and connect them with aliens?

TO the efficay and permanency of your union, a government for the whole is
indispensable -- No alliances, however strict, between the parts can be an
adequate substitute; they must inevitably experience the infractions and
interruptions which all alliances in all times have experienced. Sensible of
this momentous truth, you have improved upon your first essay, by the adoption
of a constitution of government better calculated than your former for an
intimate Union, and for the efficacious management of your common concerns.
This government, the offspring of our own choice, uninfluinced and unawed,
adopted upon full investigation and mature deliberation, completely free in its
principles, in the distribution of its powers, uniting security with energy,
and containing within itself a provision for its own amendment, has a just
claim to your confidence and your support. Respect for its authority,
compliance with its laws, acquiescence in its measures, are duties enjoined by
the fundamental maxims of true Liberty. The basis of our political systems is
the right of the people to make and to alter their Constitutions of Government
-- But ^he Constitution which at any time exists, until changed by an explicit
and authentic act of the whole people, is sacredly obliga^ory upon all. The
very idea of the power and the right of the people to establish government,
presupposes the duty of every indi^idual to obey the established government.

ALL obstructions to the execution of the laws, all combinations and
associations, under whatever plausible character, with the real design to
direct, control, counteract, or awe the regular deliberation and action of the
constituted authorities, are destructive of this fundamental principle, and of
fatal tendency. They serve to organize faction, to give it an artificial and
extraordinary force, to put in the place of the delegated will of the nation,
the will of a party, often a small, but artful and enterprising minority of the
community; and according to the alternate triumphs of different parties, to
make the public administration the mirror of the ill-concerted and incongruous
projects of faction, rather than the organ of consistent and wholesome plans,
digested by common councils, and modified by mutual interests.

HOWEVER combinations or associations of the above description may now and then
answer popular ends, they are likely in the course of time and things to become
potent engines, by which cunning, ambitious, and unprincipled men, will be
enabled to subvert the power of the people, and to usurp for themselves the
reins of government; destroying afterward the very engines which have lifted
them to unjust dominion.

TOWARD the preservation of your government, and the permanency of your
present happy state, it is requisite not only that you speedily discountenance
irregular oppositions to its acknowledged authority, but also that you resist
with care the spirit of innovation upon its principles however specious the
pretexts. -- One method of assault may be to effect in the forms of the
constitution alterations which will impair the energy of the system, and thus
to undermine what cannot be directly overthrown. In all the changes to which
you may be invited, remember that time and habit are at least as necessary to
fix the true character of governments, as of other human institutions -- that
experience is the surest standard, by which to test the real tendency of the
existing constitution of a country -- that facility in changes upon the credit
of mere hypothesis and opinion, exposes to perpetual change, from the endless
variety of hypothesis and opinion; and remember, especially that for the
efficient management of your common interests, in a country so extensive as
ours, a government of as much vigor as is consistent with the perfect security
of liberty, is indispensable. Liberty itself will find in such a government,
with powers properly distributed and adjusted, its surest guardian. It is
indeed, little else than a name, where the government is too feeble to
withstand the enterprises of faction, to confine each member of the society
within the limits prescribed by the laws, and to maintain all in the secure and
tranquil enjoyment of the rights of person and property.

I have already intimated to you, the danger of parties, in the state, with
particular reference to the founding of them on geographical discriminations.
Let me now take a more comprehensive view, and warn you in the most solemn
manner against the baneful effects of the spirit of party, generally.

THIS spirit, unfortunately, is inseparable from our nature, having its root in
the strongest passions of the human mind. It exists under different shapes in
all governments, more or less stifled, controuled, or repressed; but in those
of the popular form, it is seen in its greatest rankness, and is truly their
worst enemy.

THE alternate domination of one faction over another, sharpened by the spirit
of revenge, natural to party dissension, which in different ages and countries
has perpetrated the most horrid enormities, is itself a frightful despotism. --
But this leads at length to a more formal and permanent despotism. -- The
disorders and miseries, which result, gradually incline the minds of men to
seek security and repose in the absolute power of an individual* and sooner or
later the chief of some prevailing faction, more able or more fortunate than
his competitors, turns this disposition to the purposes of his own elevation,
on the ruins of Public Liberty.

WITHOUT looking forward to an extremity of this kind (which nevertheless ought
not to be out of sight) the common and continual mischiefs of the spirit of
party are sufficient to make it the interest and duty of a wise People to
discourage and restrain it.

IT serves always to distract the Public Councils and enfeeble the Public
Administration. It agitates the Community with ill-founded jealousies and false
alarms; kindles the animosity of one part against another, foments occasionally
riot and insurrection. It opens the door to foreign influence and corruption,
which find a facilitated access to the government itself through the channels
of party passions. Thus the policy and the will of one country are subjected to
the policy and will of another.

THERE is an opinion that parties in free countries are useful checks upon the
administration of the Government, and serve to keep alive the spirit of
Liberty. This within certain limits is probably true; and in Governments of a
Monarchial cast, Patriotism may look with indulgence, if not with favor upon
the spirit of party. But in those of the popular character, in Governments
purely elective, it is a spirit not to be encouraged. From their natural
tendency, it is certain there will always be enough of that spirit for every
salutary purpose. And there being constant danger of excess, the effort ought
to be, by force of public opinion to mitigate and assuage it. A fire not to be
quenched; it demands a uniform vigilence to prevent its bursting into a flame,
lest, instead of warming it should consume.

IT is important likewise, that the habits of thinking in a free country,
should inspire caution, in those entrusted with its administration, to confine
themselves within their respective constitutional spheres, avoiding in the
exercise of the powers of one department to encroach upon another. The spirit
of encroachment tends to consolidate the powers of all the departments in one,
and thus to create, whatever the form of government, a real despotism. A just
estimate of that love of power, and Proneness to abuse it, which predominates
in the human heart, is sufficient to satisfy us of the truth of this position.
The necessity of reciprocal checks in the exercise of political power; by
dividing and distributing it into different depositaries, and constituting each
the Guardian of the Public Weal against invasions by the others has been
evinced by experiments ancient and modern: some of them in our country and
under our own eyes. To preserve them must be as necessary as to institute them.
If in the opinion of the People, the distribution or modification of the
constitutional powers, be in any particular wrong, let it be corrected by an
amendment in the way which the constitution designates. -- But let there be no
change by usurpation; for though this in one instance, may be the instrument of
good, it is the customary weapon by which free governments are destroyed. --
The precedent must always greatly overbalance in permanent evil, any partial or
transient benefit which the use can at any time yield.

OF all the dispositions and habits which lead to political prosperity,
Religion and Morality are indispensable supports. -- In vain would that man
claim the tribute of Patriotism, who should labor to subvert these great
pillars of human happiness, these firmest props of the duties of Men and
Citizens. -- The mere Politician, equally with the pious man, ought to respect
and to cherish them. -- A volume could not trace all their connections with
private and public felicity. Let it simply be asked, where is the security for
property, for reputation, for life, if the sense of religious obligation desert
the oaths, which are the instruments of investigation in Courts of Justice? And
let us with caution indulge the supposition, that morality can be maintained
without religion. Whatever may be conceded to the influence of refined
education on minds of peculiar structure; reason and experience both forbid us
to expect that national morality can prevail in exclusion of religious
principles.

IT IS substantially true, that virtue or morality is a necessary spring of
popular government. The rule indeed extends with more or less force to every
species of free government. Who that is a sincere friend to it can look with
indifference upon attempts to shake the foundation of the fabric?

PROMOTE then, as an object of primary importance, institutions for the general
diffusion of knowledge. -- In proportion as the structure of a government gives
force to public opinion, it is essential that public opinion should be
enlightened.

As a very important source of strength and security, cherish public credit.
One method of preserving it is to use it as sparingly as possible; avoiding
occasions of expense by cultivating peace, but remembering also that timely
disbursements to prepare for danger, frequently prevent much greater
disbursements to repel it; avoiding likewise the accumulation of debt, not only
by shunning occasions of expense, but by vigorous exertions in time of peace to
discharge the debts which unavoidable wars may have occasioned, not
ungenerously throwing upon posterity the burden which we ourselves ought to
bear. -- The execution of these maxims belongs to your representatives, but it
is necessary that public opinion should cooperate. -- To facilitate to them
the performance of their duty, it is essential that you should practically bear
in mind, that toward the payment of debts there must be Revenue; that to have
Revenue there must be Taxes; that no taxes can be devised which are not more or
less inconvenient and unpleasant; that the intrinsic embarrassment inseparable
from the selection of the proper objects (which is always a choice of
difficulties) ought to be a decisive motive for a candid construction of the
conduct of the government in making it, and for a spirit of acquiesence in the
measures for obtaining Revenue which the public exigencies may at any time
dictate.

OBSERVE good faith and justice toward all Nations, cultivate peace and
harmony with all; Religion and Morality enjoin this conduct; and can it be that
good policy does no equally enjoin it? It will be worthy of a free,
enlightened, and at no distant period a great Nation, to give to mankind the
magnanimous and too novel example of a people always guided by an exalted
justice and benevolence. Who can doubt that in the course of time and things
the fruits of such a plan would richly repay any temporary advantages which
might be lost by a steady adherence to it? Can it be, that Providence has not
connected the permanent felicity of a Nation with its Virtue? The experiment,
at least, is recommended by every sentiment which ennobles human nature. Alas?
is it rendered impossible by its vices?

IN the execution of such a plan, nothing is more essential than that
permanent, inveterate, antipathies against particular nations, and passionate
attachments for others should be excluded: and that in place of them just and
amicable feelings toward all should be cultivated. The nation, which indulges
toward another an habitual hatred, or an habitual fondness, is in some degree
a slave. It is a slave to its animosity or to its affection, either of which is
sufficient to lead it astray from its duty and its interest. Antipathy in one
nation against another, disposes each more readily to offer insult and injury,
to lay hold of slight causes of umbrage, and to be haughty and intractable,
when accidental or trifling occasions of dispute occur.

HENCE frequent collusions, obstinate, envenomed and bloody contests. The
Nation, prompted by ill will and resentment, sometimes impels to war the
government, contrary to the best calculations of policy. The government
sometimes participates in the national propensity, and adopts through passion
what reason would reject; at other times, it makes the animosity of the nation
subservient to projects of hostility instigated by pride, ambition and other
sinister and pernicious motives. The peace often, sometimes, perhaps, the
liberty of Nations has been the victim.

SO likewise, a passionate attachment of one nation for another produces a
variety of evils. Sympathy for the favorite nation facilitating the illusion of
an imaginary common interest in cases where no real common interests exists,
and infusing into one the enmities of the other, betrays the former into a
participation, in the quarrels and wars of the latter, without adequate
inducement or justification. It leads also to concessions to the favorite
nation of privileges denied to others which is apt doubly to injure the Nation
making the concessions: by unnecessarily parting with what ought to have been
retained; and by exciting jealousy, ill will, and a disposition to retaliate,
in the parties from whom equal privileges are witheld: -- And it gives to
ambitious, corrupted or deluded citizens (who devote themselves to the favorite
Nation) facility to betray, or sacrifice the interests of their own country,
without odium, sometimes even with popularity; gilding with the appearances of
a virtuous sense of obligation, a commendable deference for public opinion, or
a laudable zeal for public good, the base or foolish compliances of ambition,
corruption, or infatuation.

AS avenues to foreign influence in innumerable ways, such attachments are
particularly alarming to the truly enlightened and independent patriot. How
many opportunities do they afford to tamper with domestic factions, to practice
the arts of seduction, to mislead public opinion, to influence or awe the
public Councils I Such an attachment of a small or weak, toward a great and
powerful nation, dooms the former to be the satellite of the latter. -- Against
the insidious wiles of foreign influence (I conjure you to believe me,
fellow-citizens) the jealousy of a free people ought to be constantly awake;
since history and experience prove that foreign influence is one of the most
baneful foes of Republican Government. But that jealousy to be useful must be
impartial; else it becomes the instrument of the very influence to be avoided,
instead of a defense against it. Excessive partiality for one foreign nation,
and excessive dislike of another, cause those whom they actuate to see danger
only on one side, and serve to veil and even second the arts of influence on
the other. Real patriots, who may resist the intrigues of the favorite, are
liable to become suspected and odious; while its tools and dupes usurp the
applause and confidence of the people, to surrender their interests.

THE great rule of conduct for us, in regard to foreign nations, is in
extending our commercial relations, to have with them as little political
connection as possible. So far as we have already formed engagements, let them
be fulfilled with perfect good faith. Here let us stop.

EUROPE has a set of primary interests, which to us have none, or a very remote
relation. Hence she must be engaged in frequent controversies, the causes of
which are essentially foreign to our concerns. Hence, therefore, it must be
unwise in us to implicate ourselves by artificial ties, in the ordinary
vicissitudes of her politics, or the ordinary combinations and collisions of
her friendships, or enmities.

OUR detached and distant situation invites and enables us to pursue a
different co^rse. If we remain one people, under an efficient government, the
period is not far off, when we may defy material injury from external
annoyance; when we may take such an attitude as will cause the neutrality, we
may at any time resolve upon, to be scrupulously respected; when belligerent
nations, under the impossibility of making acquisitions upon us, will not
lightly hazard the giving us provocation; when we may choose peace or war, as
our interest, guided by justice, shall counsel.

WHY forego the advantages of so peculiar a situation? Why quit our own to
stand upon foreign ground? Why, by interweaving our destiny with that of any
part of Europe, entangle our peace and prosperity in the toils of European
ambition, rivalship, interest, humor or caprice?

IT IS our true policy to steer clear of permanent alliances, with any portion
of the foreign world; so far, I mean, as we are now at liberty to do it; for
let me not be understood as capable of patronising infidelity to existing
engagements. I hold the maxim no less applicable to public than to private
affairs, that honesty is always the best policy. I repeat it, therefore, let
those engagements be observed in their genuine sense. But in my opinion, it is
unnecessary and would be unwise to extend them.

TAKING care always to keep ourselves, by suitable establishments, on a
respectable defensive posture, we may safely trust to temporary alliances for
extraordinary emergencies.

HARMONY, liberal intercourse with all nations, are recommended by policy,
humanity, and interest. But even our commercial policy should hold an equal and
impartial hand; neither seeking nor granting exclusive favors or preferences;
consulting the natural course of things; diffusing and diversifying by gentle
mean^ the streams of commerce, but forcing nothing; establishing, with powers
so disposed, in order to give trade a stable course, to define the rights of
our merchants, and to enable the government to support them; conventional rules
of intercourse, the best that present circumstances and mutual opinion will
permit, but temporary, and liable to be from time to time abandoned or varied,
as experience and circumstances shall dictate; constantly keeping in view, that
it is folly in one nation to look for disinterested favors from another; that
it must pay with a portion of its independence for whatever it may accept under
that character; that by such acceptance, it may place itself in the condition
of having given equivalents for nominal favors, and yet of being reproached
with ingratitude for not giving more. There can be no greater error than to
expect, or calculate upon real favors from nation to nation. It Is an illusion
which experience must cure, which a just pride ought to discard.

IN offering to you, my countrymen, these counsels of an old and affectionate
friend, I dare not hope they will make the strong and lasting impression I
could wish -- that they will control the usual current of the passions, or
prevent our nation from running the course which has hitherto mark the destiny
of nations: But if I may even flatter myself, that they may be productive of
some partial benefit, some occasional good; that they may now and then recur to
moderate the fury of party spirit, to warn against the mischiefs of foreign
intrigues, to guard against the impostures of pretended patriotism; this hope
will be a full recompense for the solicitude for your welfare, by which they
have been dictated.

HOW far in the discharge of my official duties, I have been guided by the
principles which have been delineated, the public records and other evidences
of my conduct must witness to you and to the world. To myself, the assurance of
my own conscience is, that I have at least believed myself to be guided by them.

IN relation to the still subsisting war in Europe, my Proclamation of the 22d
of April 1793, is the index to my plan -- Sanctioned by your approving voice,
and by that of your Representatives in both Houses of Congress, the spirit of
that measure has continually governed me; uninfluenced by any attempts to deter
or divert me from it.

AFTER deliberate examination with the aid of the best lights I could obtain, I
was well satisfied that our country, under all the circumstances of the case,
had a right to take, and was bound in duty and interest, to take a neutral
position. Having taken it, I determined, as far as should depend upon me, to
maintain it, with moderation, perseverance and firmness.

THE considerations which respect the right to hold this conduct, it is not
necessary on this occasion to detail. I will only observe, that according to my
understanding of the matter, that right, so far from being denied by any of the
Belligerent Powers, has been virtually admitted by all.

THE duty of holding a neutral conduct may be inferred, without any thing more,
from the obligation which justice and humanity impose on every nation, in cases
in which it is free to act, to maintain inviolate the relations of peace and
amity toward other nations.

THE inducements of interest for observing that conduct will best be referred
to your own reflections and experience. With me, a predominant motive has been
to endeavor to gain time to our country to settle and mature its yet recent
institutions, and to progress without interruption, to that degree of strength
and consistency, which is necessary to give it, humanly speaking, the command
of its own fortunes.

THOUGH in reviewing the incidents of my administration, I am unconscious of
intentional error: I am nevertheless too sensible of my defects not to think it
probable that I may have committed many errors. Whatever they may be I
fervently beseech the Almighty to avert or mitigate the evils to which they may
tend. I shall also carry with me the hope that my country will never cease to
view them with indulgence; and that after forty-five years of my life dedicated
to its service, with an upright zeal, the faults of incompetent abilities will
be consigned to oblivion, as myself must soon be to the mansions of rest.

RELYING on its kindness in this as in other things, and actuated by that
fervent love toward it, which is so natural to a man who views in it the
native soil of himself and his progenitors for several generations; I
anticipate with pleasing expectation that retreat, in which I promise myself to
realize, without alloy, the sweet enjoyment of partaking, in the midst of my
fellow-citizens, the benign influence of good laws under a free government --
the ever favorite object of my heart, and the happy reward, and trust, of our
mutual cares, labors and dangers.

G. WASHINGTON.
UNITED STATES, Sept. 17, 1796.

