A SERMON ON THE DEATH OF General George Washington.

BY THOMAS MORRELL, ELDER IN THE METHODIST EPISCOPAL CHURCH.

Delivered on the 22d of February 1800, in the City of Baltimore -- and
published at the request of many of the hearers.

BALTIMORE* PRINTED by WARNER and HANNA.

PSALM LXXXIX, 48. What man is he that lives and shall not see death?
IT has been the custom in every civilized nation, to perpetuate the memory of
illustrious men by monumental inscriptions; or in the historic page to record
their worth, and to hold up to view their peculiar virtues, not only for the
admiration, but for the imitation of succeeding ages: And to promote the same
laudable purposes, funeral sermons, and orations have for several hundred years
been delivered in Europe. And I am persuaded, that scarcely a congregation in
America, hardly a Preacher in the UNITED STATES would have omitted this last
tribute of respect, to the worthy character whose death we this day deplore, if
the government had not recommended it. Let the solemn funeral processions in
our Cities, and Villages -- Let the elegies, and the orations, that have
already been written and delivered -- Let the tokens of mourning so generally
worn throughout our nation -- Let these avouch the truth of my sentiment, that;
WASHINGTON, the great, the virtuous WASHINGTON, as he lived almost universally
admired and loved, so he died universally lamented. Our assembling in this
Church this morning is a partial evidence, that we are of the number who
conceive his death to be loss to our country. But let us remember that
Washington is not alone to die; that, we shall soon follow him into the region
of eternity, and that the great business of our life is to be prepared for our
death. To assist my hearers in seeking this preparation, and to recount the
virtues of our illustrious patriot, our hero and our friend, are the designs I
have in view in this discourse; and in order to execute these important
purposes, I shall in the,

First place, Briefly consider the origin -- the nature -- and the effects of
death; and Secondly, Illustrate the happy consequences of being prepared for
this awful hour; and under this head shall introduce the The historick and
characteristic parts of this sermon are derived from the most respectable
authorities; or given on my own knowledge. The publications from which I have
made extracts are Dr. Morse's Geography; a peace said to be written by a
Senator of the United States, and published in the news papers of this city;
and General Lee's Oration. Sometimes I have omitted whole sentences in the
quotations, in order to include in as few words as possible the great variety
of matter necessarily introduced.
character of our departed and beloved General. In pursuance of this method; I
begin with considering the origin, nature and effects of death. First its
origin. Here we are entirely indebted for information to the sacred oracles; we
might enquire, but enquire in vain at any other source to know, whether man was
made originally mortal, or, became so by any casuality. Revelation assures us
Romans V-12. "Wherefore as by one man sin entered into the world, and death by
sin; and so death passed upon all men, for that all have sinned." Our first
progenitor having tasted the interdicted fruit, became instantly liable to the
threatened penalty. "In the day that thou eatest thereof thou shall surely die."
Genesis 11-17. On that day his soul died to God. i. e. he lost that knowledge of,
and love to God, he so eminently possessed before his transgression; and his
body with those of his posterity became inevitably subject to death.

Secondly, The nature of death; is the dissolution of the union subsisting
between our bodies and our souls; on this union the animal life depends. This
union it is impossible in our present state to understand, or describe; it is
one of the mysteries that in eternity only we shall be able to comprehend. This
union is dissolved by the command, or permission of God, when he summonses our
spirits hence. He gave us life, and when he pleases he divests us of it. In
vain we try with all our efforts to retain the spirit of departing friends; our
prayers, and tears are of no avail; they faulter -- they sink -- they die.

Night Thoughts
When by the bed of languishment we sit,
Or, over our dying friends, in anguish hang,
Wipe the cold dew, or stay the sinking head,
Number their moments, and in every clock;
Start at the voice of an eternity;
See the dim lamp of life just feebly lift
An agonising beam, at us to gaze,
Then sink again, and quiver into death.
Thirdly, The effects of death* 1st, It is the termination of our present
existence; the final period of our joys and sorrows concerning the things of
this life. The sun shall rise with its accustomed luster, and spread its
beaming light, and genial warmth throughout the earth; but not to them who are
in the cold and dreary mansions of the grave. The busy scenes of life no more
attract the sight, nor the love of riches, fame, or pleasure, arrest the
midnight hour of sleep. See, the corpse all pale and wan! -- It Is active
strength is gone! -- It Is vigor prostrate! -- It Is hands forget to move, the
pliant fingers stiff and cold! Once we surveyed our friend; we saw, admired and
loved -- Once we viewed our rising offspring, and as they played and prattled
our hearts beat fondness. But, they are dead! Not many days since we met the
eye of our friend -- Our love, with joy and pleasure; but its closed for ever,
no more to convey in silent language, the soft, the tender movements of the
heart. The tongue, that busy member so prone to please -- to hurt -- to wound
moves now no more in scandal or in praise. Death! Death! Displays his triumphs
over every part, and silence, awful, universal silence reigns.

2 ndly. Death renders all distinctions void. If we view the reposotiries of
our lifeless bodies; we shall see persons of every age and character, of every
rank and condition in life; the young and the old, the poor and the rich, the
gay and the grave, all mingling promiscuously their dust together in their
parent earth. There the poor oppressed slave lays down at the last the burden
of his toilsome life, and feels his cruel servitude no more; no more to be
raised from needful slumber on his bed of earth, nor driven from his s^anty
meal to the hard labors of the day. There lies the aged parent of a numerous
offspring who sunk into rest amidst the tears of his progeny. Here is entombed
the smiling infant; the flower nipped as it began to blow. The parents wonder
why heaven has been so unkind, and are ready to say (although improperly) "all
these things are against me." Thus one generation comes, and passes away,
another rises, and is no more seen. We may say therefore at the tomb of the
Monarch, as well as the slave. A heap of dust alone remains of thee,
It Is all thou art, and all the proud shall be.
Oh! transitory and fleeting life. When will the sons of men learn to think of
thee as they ought? when will they every day, nay every hour recollect, that
nothing can shield them from the stroke of death? "That there is no escape in
that war?" If consummate beauty could have saved from death, Absalom, nor Helen
would never have died. If valor could have stopped his career, Alexander would
now be traversing the earth. If philosophic wisdom, learning or judgment, could
have saved mortals from his icy arms, a Newton, a Critchton and a Lock would
still have been living. If piety and usefulness could have secured our
existence here, an Usher and a Baxter; a White-field and a Wesley, would be
daily displaying their holy and heavenly zeal, in building up the Church of
God; and if love of his country, disinterestedness, gentleness, humanity,
valor, and patriotism could have eluded the insatiate monster's grasp, our
Washington would not have been laid in the silent tomb. But the unchangable
decree of heaven is " Dust thou art, and unto dust shall thou return." And we
may enquire in the language of our text, what man is he that lives, and shall
not see death? But our enquiry will be fruitless and vain.

3 dly. Another effect of death is still more awful. It is the gate that opens
into eternity -- It leads us to God; to receive a reward or a punishment as our
works have been; to hear our impartial, irrevocable doom. No time now for
repentance; no promises of acceptance, or pardon to encourage us; no sermons to
direct us to the sinner's friend; no friends to counsel and to pray for us; our
state is unalterably, unchangably fixed. How necessary then is it, that we NOW
endeavor to attain a suitable preparation for the solemn moment? The happy
consequences attending such a preparation, I was in the second place to point
out. Here we may first enquire what this preparation is? And,

1 st. We have all sinned against our Maker. If we say we have not sinned, we
make him a liar, and his word is not in us. 1 John 1 cap. 10. We are guilty
therefore before God; and if the holy law which we have violated is a righteous
law; we are consequently justly condemned; and if so, must be under the
displeasure of the MOST HIGH. This guilt therefore must be pardoned, those sins
must be forgiven, or God will not receive us to favor or to happiness. Our
guilt can only be removed, and pardon bestowed, through a deep consciousness of
our lost and sinful state; wrought in our souls by the HOLY SPIRIT, exciting us
to confess -- to mourn for, and to forsake our sins; and by looking to, and
believing in that glorious savior who died for our offenses. A cloud of
scriptures prove these important truths. I shall refer you only to Matt. V. 4.
Luke XIII. 3. John XVI. 8. and III. 16. Proverbs XXVIII. 13.

2 dly. We are unholy, and consequently unfit for the company and employments
of heaven. It would be an insult to those who have bibles in their houses, or,
attend to the exercises of their own minds, to suppose them ignorant of this
essential truth. If any doubt it, let them read Psalm XIV. 2 and 3* 11. 5. Romans
VI. 16 to 22. Isai 1. 6. In fact, all the exhortations to purity and holiness,
with which the scripture abounds necessarily presuppose that we are unholy.
Then it clearly follows, we must be made holy, must have a disposition suited
to the nature of Heaven, "For without holiness no man shall see the Lord." Heb.
XII. 14. And as we cannot make ourselves holy it must be wrought in us by the
power and grace of God. The suitable preparation for death then is; to be
justified through faith in the merit and righteousness of the Lord Jesus; and to
be sanctified through the same medium, by the Spirit of the living God. That
without this work of grace we can have no admittance to heaven, is undeniably
proved from Acts XXVI. 18. 1 Cor. VI. II. Colos. 1. 12, 15, 22. Heb. XII. 14.
From this work of grace always proceeds a life of holy obedience to the
precepts of the Gospel. Our Redeemer has given us this test to try our
religion. "He that has my commandments and keeps them, he it is that loves
ME." The happiness attending such a preparation I am now to point out. And

1 st. Such gracious souls have an abiding confidence of the favor of God. St.
Paul says "WE KNOW that if our earthly house of this tabernacle were dissolved,
we have a building of God, a house not made with hands, eternal in the
heavens." And he again informs us, We are always confident etc. etc. 2 Cor. V.
1-5-6. How exquisite the joy that arises from this consciousness of the favor
of God, is beyond the power of language to communicate; called therefore by one
who possessed it for many years, and who could have described it, if any man
could, "a joy unspeakable and full of glory." This sweet sensibility of our
heavenly Father's love, chases from the mind the fear of death. Psalm 23-4.
"Though I walk through the valley of the shadow of death, I will fear no evil."
This calms the terrors, and draws the sting of death: "The sting of death is
sin, but thanks be to God who gives us the victory through our Lord Jesus
Christ." 1 Cor. XV. 56. Victory! over its horrors that it cannot amaze;
victory! over its power that it cannot detain.

Therefore,

2 ndly. In every saint when God calls him hence, there is a willingness to go.
The grace and love of God opens his grasp of life. Although his friends -- his
bosom friend -- his rising progeny are entwined about his heart, with the cords
of earthly affection, so close and firm, that with the highest aids of reason
they can never be loosed. But when our Jesus shines into the soul with a ray of
heavenly light and joy, his language is "I desire to depart and to be with
Christ, which is far better. Some of the Saints die in the full triumphs of
faith; while others equally pious, who are greatly emaciated by lingering
disease, feel sweet submission, and sail more gently with a peaceful stream
into the haven of eternal rest. Some have had hard fighting with the adversary
on the confines of eternity, but have always obtained the victory before the
conflict closed. "My grace is sufficient for thee." And "I will never leave
thee, nor forsake thee," are the legacies left to every saint.

3 dly. They rest from all their toils. "Blessed are the dead that die in the
LORD from henceforth: Yea, says the Spirit, that they may rest from their
labors; and their works do follow them." Rev. XIV-13. In this (...) their joys
were intermingled with sorrows* "But when the ransomed of the Lord shall return
to Zion, they shall obtain joy and gladness, and sorrow and sighing shall flee
away." Jsai. XXXV. 10. Their grief and sorrows in this life arise from many
causes, not necessary now to enumerate; but in that "rest which remains for the
people of God," every tear is wiped from every eye; there sorrow never comes;
there all is calm, and joy and peace.

Once more,

4 thly. To crown their joys they receive the approbation of their God. "Well
done good and faithful servant, enter thou into the joy of thy Lord." The
smiles of their heavenly Father when introduced into His glorious presence,
fill their enlarged souls with extatic rapture. But on this part of the subject
I shall not endeavor to enlarge; our excursions might probably sully the views
of that land of rest, they endeavor to exalt. I shall only say, that besides
the presence, and manifested love of their God, and their Savior, they shall
mingle with Prophets, Patriarchs and Apostles, and with all those great, pious,
and illustrious spirits, who through faith and patience have already inherited
the promises. Amidst this heavenly choir; this bright assemblage of the spirits
of the just made perfect; we may humbly hope our much loved Washington is gone
to dwell; among them to celebrate in celestial strains, the love that redeemed
him, and the (...) which protected him in the greatest dangers, and at last
conducted him to the blisfull region of love and praise; where the sound, nor
the alarm of war is never heard. -- Where peace eternal dwells -- Where joy
seraphic reigns.

This day is dedicated by authority publicly to express our sorrow (though with
submission to heaven) for his removal. This day is peculiarly set apart to
rehearse his matchless deeds -- To recount his virtues, and declare his praise.

He was born the 11th of February 1732 old style, at the parish of Washington,
Westmoreland county in Virginia. Was the first fruit of a second marriage, and
received his education from a private tutor employed in the family. He early
discovered a disposition for a military life; and at the age of fifteen was
entered as a midshipman on board a British man of war then on the American
coast, but the reluctance his mother expressed to his engaging in the sea
service, occasioned the prosecution of the plan to be abandoned. "Previous to
this transaction when he was but ten years of age his Father died, and the
charge of the family devolved on his eldest brother: This brother had a command
in the colonial troops employed against Carthagena; and on his return from that
expedition named his new patrimonial Mansion, Mount Vernon, in honor of the
admiral of that name from whom he had received many civilities, and who
commanded the squadron on that expedition. But he did not long survive; at his
decease the eldest son by the second marriage (who was our Washington)
inherited this seat, and a considerable landed property. Before he attained to
his twentieth year, he was made Adjutant General of the militia in Virginia
with the rank of Major. When he was about twenty one years old an event occured
which called his abilities into public notice, in 1773 encroachments were
reported to have been made by the French on the territories of the British
colonies to the westward. Major Washington was sent with full powers to
ascertain the facts; to treat with the savages; and to warn the French to
desist from their aggressions; he performed the duties of this mission with
singular industry, intelligence and address; and his report to governor
Didwiddie discovered those talents in embryo, which have since been unfolded to
general admiration." In 1755 he was advanced to the rank of colonel, in the
provincial troops employed in conjunction with the British forces, to drive the
French from their encroachments on our frontiers. We have all heard, or read of
^he obstinate, and unfortunate Braddock who commanded those forces. He was
totally defeated; slain himself; his whole force routed; British and American
blood mingling and flowing in torrents along the banks of the Monongahela. "It
was here our youthful Washington in the gloomy hour of Indian victory, saved by
his judgment and his valor, the remains of a flying army, pressed by the
conquering savage foe." It was on this occasion that the Revd. Mr. Davies, who
was afterward President of Princeton College uttered that remarkable prophecy.
"That Washington was raised up by the providence of God to be the protector and
savior of his country." In this war he had at different times separate
commands, in all which victory declared Washington her future favorite. The
great fatigues he underwent in the three succeeding years of the war, brought
on a complaint of the lungs, which it was then thought would prove mortal; and
tranquillity being at this time restored to the frontiers, by a series of
splendid victories gained by American and British valor; Colonel Washington
resigned his military appointment. His health was gradually re-established; and
until the beginning of the American revolution he cultivated the arts of
peace; he was constantly a member of the Assembly; a magistrate of his county;
and a judge of the court.

The worth of Washington was not yet fully known. "Once more the gathering
storm of war agitates this peaceful country -- our rights are violated by
Britain -- our privileges abridged -- a tribute claimed -- a sense of fancied
superior power, requiring submission presents itself. From the shore to the
mountains -- from Georgia to Maine, all is commotion, while resentment, hope
and despair alternately predominate." In '74 a continental congress convened,
Washington was chosen a delegate from his native state; the next year he was
chosen again. The aggressions of Britain, and the insolence of her officers
increased. They spilled American blood at Lexington in the month of April --
Horror, and resentment thrilled through our hearts. TO ARMS, TO ARMS the
patriots cry. TO ARMS -- TO ARMS, re-echoed through the land; while I remember
the eventful period, the sound still vibrates on the ear. We appealed to the
world that we were forced into the contest. We appealed to heaven for the
justice of our cause. An army was collected in the vicinity of Boston.
Washington was appointed to command. A seven years war succeeds. The memorable
events are too recent to need a particular recital. It closed in the
dismemberment of a Mighty Empire; in the establishment of American freedom.

The warrior's sword is sheathed, and the graceful victor comes dressed in the
garland of peace. His country now completely triumphant, is universally
acknowledged independent and free. Now he enjoys a full recompense for all his
toils, a consciousness of having done his duty with effect; and with the
approbation of his fellow citizens. "Entwined with laurel he now returns to his
native home equally the object of esteem and admiration: He lives the theme of
the brave, the counsel of the wise, the benefactor of the poor, and the friend
of mankind."

The confederation these states had formed in the hour of danger, was found
after 11 years trial to be inadequate for a peaceful system; indeed it was a
compound of necessity and jealousy which threatened danger only held together;
the danger being over, it relaxed in all its parts, and was rapidly sinking to
a dissolution. The necessity of a new system of government appeared to all -- A
convention was called -- Washington presided. A constitution is formed on the
model of human perfection; combining in its various branches whatever is
excellent in every other form of government, and partaking of none of their
defects. In this constitution an executive Magistrate is wanted to enforce its
laws, when the unanimous voice of our country call him to be President of the
United States. "Under his administration industry raised her drooping head --
Agriculture resumed her plow -- virtue smiled -- learning rejoiced -- commerce
flourished" -- peace and plenty; joy and gladness were seen and heard
throughout our land; but the revolutions and wars in Europe reach in their
effects our happy shores, and threaten our country's peace. Washington is equal
to every danger. He proclaims the laws of peace; yet wisely prepares for war.
He lays the foundation of his policy in the principles of private justice, and
public faith;" from these he deviates not a moment, and his country now feels
and rejoices in their good effects. How well he performed his part, how highly
we esteemed, and approved his conduct, are clearly evinced by the universal
call for him to fill the presidental chair again without one dissenting voice.
"Again he serves, and again he manifests that he is still the same wise and
faithful guide." To recount all his services, and the difficulty of steering at
the helm of government, amidst the convulsive wars and jarring interests of the
European nations, would take up too much time; let it suffice to say, that
wisdom, prudence and firmness were discovered on every occasion. His duty well
performed he once more returns to domestic life. "He served from a sense of
duty, and he retired from a voluntary choice." But how uncertain is the state
of human affairs? While we were cultivating peace with all the hostile powers,
a cloud gathered in our horison, and the alarm of threatened war again was
heard throughout our land. Our cities, our villages resound with martial music;
embattled ranks of Volunteers proffer their service to repel the foe -- an army
is raising, and Washington, the aged Washington is invited to command. When his
country calls, he instantly obeys; he accepted the charge, and confidence
chears our anxious minds. -- But! oh! he is gone -- No more! in case of war to
lead our armies to victory; to grace our councils with his presence, and
enlighten them by his wisdom. He is gone! to the silent mansions of the dead!
Yet he lives in the hearts of the American people. He lives in the esteem and
admiration of the world, -- And while suns shall rise and set; while virtue
remains on the earth, the name of Washington shall be pronounced with
veneration.

In collecting, and arranging materials for this luminous character, from the
observations of others, and from my own knowledge; considerable difficulties
have occurred in determining what parts to retain, or to omit. The all of
Washington was worth rehearsing; but this would have lengthened my discourse
beyond all reasonable bounds, and I fear that I have already trespassed on your
patience; but as you will not probably hear another sermon on this interesting
subject; be pleased to permit me before I conclude, to point out a few of the
excellencies of his mind, exemplified in correspondent actions.

First. As a soldier and a commander he was intrepid and brave, he was cool and
determined. Let the dangerous, but successful attack he made at Trenton, in the
dead of winter, in a dark and gloomy night, with dispirited soldiers, evince
his prowess and the vigor of his mind. "He fought -- He conquered -- The
morning sun cheered the American world -- Our country rose on the event." Let
his retiring not long after this victory, from the front of a numerous army,
and while he retreated unperceived from their front, he unexpectedly fell upon
their rear cantoned at Princeton, and captured the whole. Let these masterly
maneuvres declare his superior knowledge in the art of war. They will testify
to succeeding ages, his sagacity, his prudence and his valor. -- Long Island
can witness a retreat not surpassed in the page of history; an hostile army in
his front, not two hundred yards distant, consisting of more than three times
his number; a rapid river a full mile wide in his rear; the enemies shipping
ready to move in order to cut off his only retreat; not boats sufficient to
transport a fifth part of his army at once, this army unused to discipline; and
consequently to silence. Under all these disadvantages almost impossible to be
surmounted by any other general; he brought off his troops to the great
surprise of the enemy, without the loss of a single man. -- Let the hills of
Brandewine -- Let the fields of Germantown -- Let the plains of Monmouth
witness his bravery, his cool and determined valor. How often have I seen him
undismayed in the greatest danger, giving his orders with calmness, while
deaths flew thick around. The author of this discourse was an officer in the
Continental army, in the Jersey line, and was in every action in the
revolutionary war, where the illustrious Washington personally commanded;
except the battle of Monmouth, and the siege of York Town.


2 ndly. He was apparently unmoved in the most adverse circumstances. Ah! my
brethren had you seen our little army in the fall of '76 retreating through the
Jerseys, after the enemy had made the garrison of Fort Washington prisoners of
war; had you seen the small remains of this army diminishing every day by the
time of their enlistments expiring; scarcely amounting to 3000 men; had you
beheld these brave soldiers without sufficient clothing, shivering with cold;
had you observed many of them to be without shoes, and the frozen ground marked
with the blood, that issued from their uncovered feet, as they marched along;
had you seen this little band pressed by a numerous well appointed army, with a
most formidable train of artillery, and a proportionate number of dragoons; had
you seen the militia at this early period of the war, (unused to such sad
reverses) appearing like persons in the deepest amazement, and few of them to
be found embodied After the army had retreated across the Delaware Genesis
Washington was reinforced by a body of Pennsylvania militia, previous to the
attack at Trenton; and at the same time the Jersey militia embodied in numbers,
and skirmished frequently with the enemy.
; had you seen the inhabitants who were friends fo their country for eighty
miles in length, and from 6 to 12 miles in breadth flying in all directions, to
secure their movable property, preserve their families, and save their lives;
had you seen all this consternation; had you heard our intestine enemies (when
not overawed by superior numbers) exulting in the prospect of British
conquest; had you heard the most sanguine friends to their country's freedom
giving up in a moment of despair; that all was lost; you might have read dismay
on almost every countenance. All looked to Washington. No sorrow seemed to set
on his brow. He was serene and clear as the unclouded sun. He was indeed then
more than a host. His words, his example, his countenance all jointly
contributed to inspire us with confidence and courage. To finish this part of
his character, I must say that he was unequalled by any of the heroes of
antiquity; by any general of modern times. They shrink from the comparison. --
They possessed virtues it is true, but they were tarnished by their defects.
Alexander was brave like Washington, but he was cruel and intemperate. Caesar
was intrepid, but he enslaved his country. Cromwell was wise and successful,
but he acted like a hypocrite, and aimed at the regal power. Suwarrow is
undoubtedly a great commander, but has he not boasted of his achievements?
Buoneparte is full of martial fire, is an able and excellent General, but has
he not like Cromwell destroyed the sacred right of election? the grand
palladium of liberty. Has he not undertaken to frame a constitution for the
French people, when they have not delegated to HIM this authority? Marlborough
in the reign of Queen Anne, in many things most resembled our Washington. He
had like our hero a handsome person, and an elegant manner of address. He was
wise in the cabinet, he was brave in the field -- he knew when to attack and
when to be passive -- He possessed great calmness in action, and was merciful
in victory; but Marlborough, the famous Marlborough was avaritious. He
possessed by the bounty of his Country the highest honors, and one of the
greatest estates in England. Yet he defrauded the soldiers by diminishing their
allowance of bread, and applying their loss to his own use; the cloth for the
use of the soldiers was purchased by his agents and overcharged to the
government; these disgraceful peculations caused a poet Pope.
of his time to satirize him in the following lines. "Triumphant leaders at an
army's head,
Hemmed round with glories, pilfer cloth and bread,
As meanly plunder, as they bravely fought;
Now save a nation, and now save a groat."
But our Washington was, thirdly: disinterested. Let it be remembered that he
received no pay for his long and toilsome services: he suffered, he fought for
his country's freedom, and not for its money. Let it be known that when the
Governor and Legislature of Virginia, by an act of that common wealth vested in
him fifty shares in the companies for opening the navigation of the James and
Patowmac rivers, as a small acknowledgment of his merit and services; he made
this noble and generous reply. "When I was first called to the station with
which I was honored during the late conflict for our liberties; to the
diffidence which I had so many reasons to feel in accepting it, I thought it my
duty to join a firm resolution to shut my hand against every pecuniary
recompense."

4 thly. He was not ambitious of retaining power. I adduce his cheerful and
voluntary resignation of the command of the army as a sufficient proof. Let his
intention of retiring from the Presidentship when the term of his first
election expired (though certain of being re-elected) demonstrate to the world,
that his motives were pure; that neither ambition, nor the love of power
reigned in his breast.

5 thly. As a statesman he was well informed. He understood the true interests
of his country, and pursued them with undeviating ardour. With what ability and
skill he conducted the helm of government undeniably appears in the unparaleled
growing greatness of our country.

6 thly. He was a useful citizen; as he ever paid the strictest obedience to
the laws of the land. He encouraged every plan calculated to increase the
welfare of our country. Some of the measures entered into, for the opening, and
improving our inland navigation, are said to have originated with him; and it
is certain that he promoted every measure of public utility by all the means in
his power.

7 thly. He was mild and condescending, and never treated with contemptuous
language, any person that behaved with propriety, or addressed him with
decency. He had none of that hautier of office, so frequently discovered in
some men, who are in exalted stations; he was always accessible, at suitable
times by the private soldier, and the poorest citizen.

8 thly. He was humane and merciful. No unnecessary punishment appeared in our
army; he always pardoned when consistent with prudence, and the good of the
service would possibly admit of it.

9 thly. He was temperate, and decent in all his deportment. No noisy,
indecent, (much less impious) In 1777, he reproved a general officer at his
table, for attempting to ridicule the ceremony of asking a blessing before they
sat down to dinner, which ceremony Genesis Washington very politely asked a
clergymen to perform, who had been invited to dine with him.
mirth was allowed in his presence; no excess nor luxury was permitted at his
table; he conducted himself on every occasion with uncommon propriety and
decorum, and evinced to all, that he was not only the wise statesman, and the
great commander, but that he was really a gentleman.

10 thly. He was charitable and generous. His secretary informed me in New
York, that during his residence in that city, he distributed to the common
objects of distress that resorted to his house for relief, upwards of a guinea
every day; besides what he gave occasionally in larger amounts to persons of
worth, who had been reduced to poverty. Let his generous gifts to charity
schools in his life time, -- Let the ample donations in his will, for similar
purposes, and the advancement of learning, declare that Washington was
charitable and generous. -- HIS WILL Ah! let HIS WILL, prove that he possessed
a beneficient heart. What sweet emotions of philanthrophy moved in his breast
while he penned that heaven-inspired sentence; ALL MY NEGROES ARE TO BE FREE?
What soft benevolence flowed through his soul, when he made provision for the
helpless infancy, and decrepid age that should be found among them? While I am
reciting these magnanimous acts of Washington; I catch some of his generous
spirit, and am ready to exclaim; happy slaves! thrice happy master! and to
raise my heart to the GREAT ETERNAL in devout supplication; that he would be
pleased to incline the hearts of those in similar circumstances, to imitate so
noble an example.

11 thly. He had a deep and solemn reverence for God and religion. During his
residence in Philadelphia, he generally kept a BIBLE open, in a private
apartment, to which he used to resort; The author of this discourse was
stationed at Philadelphia in 1794 as a preacher in that Church of which he is a
member; and received the above recited fact through a channel which leaves in
his mind no doubt of its authenticity.
He frequently attended public prayers, and preaching in the army; and as we
had chaplains of different denominations, he gave a proof that his mind was not
confined with narrow bigotry, by attending at convenient opportunities, the
prayers at the different brigades, and regiments. While he resided in New York,
and Philadelphia he regularly attended divine service in that church of which
he was a member. Let it be remembered to his praise, that he always attributed
to the superintending providence of God, the success of every measure both
civil and military. The answers to all the numerous addresses presented to him
on his first elevation to the Presidental chai^ -- All his proclamations -- All
his public addresses to the army -- To our citizens -- To the world, all
jointly conspire to testify, that he acknowledged, and felt his dependence on
the DEITY for assistance, and direction in the performance of every duty to
which he was called. In a word; although many have been equally brave as
soldiers -- Equally patriotic as citizens; while some have been equally
charitable and generous, mild and humane, while others have been equally wise,
unambitious, or pious; I have not known; I have not heard of; I have not read
of, one man in whom, all these qualities and virtues have been concentered as
in our Washington. And to close our description of his character in the words
of another. "Whether we view him in the field or the cabinet; the shade of
retirement or chair of state, he is ever the same. Great and powerful in
command. A hero in the day of battle. In victory mild and merciful. In policy,
uniting perfection of system with grandeur of design. Firm and unshaken in the
face of danger, and storm of adversity. Uniting and blending with all;
gentleness and simplicity of manners. With pure and bright morality. -- "And
thus forming a character as well calculated to inspire confidence; command
respect, and benefit his country, as ever was exhibited by a mortal man." --
Then let love and gratitude enroll his name among the wise, the honorable, and
the virtuous of every age. -- And the people of America to the latest
generations, shall speak of Washington with veneration and delight. He died on
the 14th of December, 1799; had he lived to this day he would have been 68
years old. He died with composure of mind, without any dread of death. We hope;
we humbly hope; we have reason to hope, he is gone to GOD.

To conclude -- We are not called to the command of armies, or to fill the
chair of state* but we are called to be good citizens; let us then imitate our
departed Washington, in obeying the laws of our country; in promoting its
welfare by every laudable means in our power. Let us practice all the relative
and social virtues as he has done before us; let us be humane and temperate,
and mild and condescending, and charitable and generous, let us fill up our
several stations with duty and dignity; with propriety and decency. We are
called to be christians, let us then prize in our judgments, and obey in our
practice, the sacred truths, and holy precepts in the word of GOD.

We are called this day by the providence of GOD; by the death of Washington;
and the voice of the preacher, to remember, THAT WE ARE TO DIE. That in a few
years at most our bodies will be carried on men's shoulders, and lodged in the
cold and silent tomb, and our souls shall wing their flight into a dreadful,
or, a glorious eternity; where we must lie down in unabating sorrows, or, be
raised to everlasting joys. Let us remember that it is our duty and our
privilege; our wisdom and our interest, to be prepared for those solemn scenes.
"Let our faith this day be to us as the evidence of things not seen," and bring
home to our hearts an impressive view of our near approach to the world of
spirits; and while solemnity rests on our minds, let us raise our hearts to GOD
in fervent prayer; that he would be pleased to enlighten our minds by the Holy
Spirit, to a discovery of our wretched and guilty state; of the evil and
malignant nature of sin; and excite in us answerable affections to this view of
ourselves; that we may detest every evil way, and turn to the Lord our God; and
under a deep consciousness of the just desert of our transgressions, that we
may apply to, and believe in, the meritorious mediation of the adorable Jesus,
for the remission of sins that are past. And being thus brought into the favor
of GOD, we may from love and gratitude be "steadfast, unmovable, always
abounding in the work of the Lord;" that we may "increase in the knowledge, and
love of GOD;" and through mercy and grace, attain a meetness to be partakers of
the inheritance of the saints in light, that when our spirits are disembodied,
we may join those holy souls who have left this world before us, in adoring,
and praising the GOD of our salvation. GOD grant it for Christ's sake.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 4, instead of "be loss" read be a loss.

4, in the note, instead of "peace" read piece.


