MIRANDA, OR THE DISCOVERY. A TALE. TO WHICH ARE ADDED, CHARIESSA, OR A PATTERN
FOR HER SEX. ALSO, AN ORGINAL STORY, FOUNDED ON A FACT Being a pleasing
Companion for young GENTLEMEN and LADIES.

Norwich. -- Printed by J. TRUMBULL. 1800.

MIRANDA OR THE DISCOVERY.
CAPTAIN INGOLDSBY was a soldier of fortune; the younger son of a younger
branch of a great and respectable family; but his sword was his patrimony; and
having entered early into the profession of arms ^or a maintenance, he pursued
it with that enthfiuastic spirit of honor, which is dictated by the
consideration of family pride, the hope of fame, the dread of disgrace, and the
most ardent love of glory, and of his country.

He married too, like a soldier: interest made no part of his composition. He
saw and admired his Emma^^ ^e formed an acquaintance with her; and found her
mind the counterpart of her person: young, handsome and gallant, he met with no
difficulty in inspiring mutual regard, or in obtaining the consent of her
father, a venerable unbeneficed clergyman.

Happiness is neither confined to fortune or condition: the amiable couple
loved, and love supplied all deficiencies. Love restrained the ga^ty of Mr.
Ingoldsby's disposition; and taught his amiable partner the prudence necessary
to regulate expenses, which were to be bounded by the pay of a lieutenant of
foot.

Nor did the increase of their family, (for Heaver blessed them with a female
infant within the first year after their marriage) add to their difficulties;
it served only to augment the attention of the father, and the circumspection
of the mother; and they rejoiced in the participation of their scanty
possessions, to the offspring of love, the pledge of the tenderest affection.

In the care and superintendance of their darling daughter, did their years
roll on in peaceable and humble content. If they heaved a sigh, it was for
their Miranda's future welfare, if they breathed a wish, it was to see her
placed in a situation which might guard her against the attacks of poverty, and
the designs of iniquity: from the former they were aware beauty and
accomplishments would prove no shield; and they trembled when they reflected,
that they might prov^ the most powerful incitements to the latter.

The sweets of life are not to be enjoyed without its accompanying
embitterments. These disquietudes were augmented by a circumstance as
unexpected as it was alarming: they were in a moment destined to be torn from
each other's arms; or to purchase a continuance of the joys they had
experienceed in sixteen years society, by incurring an expense they were unable
to support, and ^^^quing dangers and difficulties which female delicacy is
little calculated to encounter. The regiment in which Mr. Ingoldsby served,
received orders to imbark for America in transports already prepared for their
reception.

On the communication of this intilligence, so subversive of their little plans
of economy and felicity, Mrs. Ingoldsby earnestly entreated, that she and her
daughter might be the companions of his voyage; she enumerated in the most
lively and affectionate terms, all the advantages that might be derived from
keeping their little family together; and she displayed, in all the eloquence
of feeling grief, the horrors that must await her and her daughter at the
moment of their separation. No arguments were necessary to convince him that
what he wished most be right; folded his Emma and Miranda to his bosom; and
whilst he wept over the distresses to which all he held dear might be exposed,
a smile of approbation burst through the manly cloud, and he exhaulted in such
a wife and such a daughter. All the difficulties which the narrowness of their
finances suggested, were obviated by a thousand arrangements, the ingenious
devices of love; and the command of a company, which was confered o^ Mr.
Ingoldsby before the embarkation, relieved them from no other anxiety than what
concerned a future provision for their Miranda.

Few events, differing enough from the common occurences of life to be worth
recording, happened either in the course of their voyage, or on their arrival
at Boston: except that the assiduities of a young officer of another regiment,
who seemed to have made some impression on the heart of the gentle Miranda; who
listened to tales of love, sanctioned by the approbation of her parents, and
sighed out her own confession in strains of artless and irresistible harmony.

Mr. Monson was formed on the model which Captain Ingoldsby had it in idea
fixed on for the husband of his Miranda. His manners were as mild as his soul
was brave: he carried command in one hand, and affection in the other; and his
orders were obeyed with that mingled fear and love, with which inferiors in
every station look up to those who neither exert their powers in tyranny, nor
suffer them to fall into contempt by imprudent and ill-timed indulgence. To the
qualifications of a soldier he added those which most highly adorn private
life: he was lively, yet steady; generous, without profusion; and, if his
expenses ever exceeded the strictest limits of prudence, the excess might be
attributed to some acts of violence, to which his heart and his purse were
always equally open. Nor was his income limited: for he was the only son of a
gentleman of fortune, who had indulged his propensity to arms at the expense of
the most acute and agonizing sensations; and who, with a parental effection as
laudable as it is uncommon, subjected to no restrictions but in the choice of a
wife, and in this grand object of the happiness (...) his life, had only
enjoined him to conside^ birth, education, and virtue, as the most valuable
possessions she could bestow on him.

But both Captain Ingoldsby and Mr. Monson were too regardful of decency and
propriety to hasten an event of so much importance, till the father of the
young gentleman had been acquainted with the attachment; and letters from Mr.
Ingoldsby and the lover were prepared to be dispatched by the first ships which
should sail for Europe: and the young soldier conquered his impatience, by the
suggestions of conscious dignity and rectitude in this discharge of his filial
duty.

But alas! these precautions were soon rendered fruitless, by events which
dissolved the bands of affection; rent asunder the ties of mutual love;
darkened the fairest prospects of future happiness, and involved in a gloom,
apparently everlasting, connubial joys, present and promised!

On that day which will ever be marked with horror in the remembrances of those
who feel for their country; and which will never revolve without renewing the
most acute anguish in the bosoms of those whose fathers, husbands, brothers, or
relatives suffered in the dreadful conflict! on th^^ day, when the attack of
Bunker's Hill occasioned a carnage which thinned the British* ranks, and laid
her heroes in the dust! Captain Ingoldsby, and Mr. Monson, stood foremost in the
bloody contest; accident had placed them in the same brigade, and they fought
and fell together; the body of the young officer being carried off by the
Americans, and the mortally wounded Captain conveyed to the habitation of his
wretched wife and daughter!

To attempt the description of such a scene, would require a pen inspired by
pity herself; let those who wish to paint it, figure to themselves a brave
officer, unstained by a single act in life which he could possibly recollect
with ^egrete, expiring of wounds received in the service of his country; and
with all the dignity of virtue, administering consolation to the objects of his
latest affection! let them represent the wife sinking under the load of
accumulated woe, on the bosom of the dying possessor of her heart, and calling
back his fleeting spirits to guard her against giving way to the impulses of
grief, and the impressions of despair! let them pourtray youth, beauty, and
virtue, stabbed with a double blow; and bereft, in one moment of a father
unequalled in affection of a lover unrivalled in fidelity, exclaiming by turns
for each, and with all the frenzy of inarticulate rage, arraigning the justice
of Heaven^ and the villainy of man! And if they desire to revel in all the
luxuries of woe, let them attend to the heart-piercing shrick, which announced
the departure of the brake, the regreted Ingoldsby.

We shall not follow the unfortunate mourners through the various progressions
of grief, from keen and piercing anguish, to silent and corroding melancholy:
in the last state, they embarked for England; after having received every
attention which the governor and garrison could offer, as a tribute to the
memory of the deceased, and to the virtues and excellencies of the survivors.

On their arrival in England, the case being made known to their benevolent
sovereign, they were soon relieved by his bounty from the apprehensions of
indigence; and on a pansion granted to the mother, and continued to the
daughter in case of her death, they retired to a village very remote from the
metropolis, and rendered desirable to them by its being the residence of a
maiden sister of Captain Ingoldsby, who possessed a considerable potion of the
virtues of a brother, and an affection for her niece which could only by
exceeded by that of her mother.

As the fortunes of this lady, though large enough to gratify her wishes, were
limited* she and the widow agreed to join their narrow incomes, and as Miranda
was their (...) care, so it was the earnest wish of the (...), that she might
be accommodated at their mutual expense; and they entered on their little plan
with the most affectionate intentions of rendering it as agreeable and
comfortable to each other, as the nature of a situation, in which they each
felt, though in different degrees, the pangs of softened but unabated grief,
would admit.

But as no retirement will conceal the charms of beauty, nor any circle,
however confined, prevent the fame of accomplishments from spreading beyond its
limit; Mr. Maxwell, a neighboring gentleman of fortune and character, was soon
captivated with the reports of Miranda's excellencies, and as he was a widower
not much past the prime of life, and had yet an inclination again to wear the
silken chains of matrimony, he determined to visit the fair; and if he found
her worthy his heart, to offer his hand; an offer which he doubted not would be
accepted, as his person was far from being disagreeable, his manners polished
and elegant, his character unexceptionable, and his fortune very far above any
expectations which orphan indigence could form*

To a man of Mr. Maxwell's consequence, few excuses were necessary for a
liberty, which however improper among people of equal fortunes, custom has
unworthily commissioned the possessors of wealth to take, with those whose
situations in life are less eminently favored by the smiles of the blind and
undistinguishing goddess.

But Mr. Maxwell was not of a disposition to avail himself of this unmerited
superiority, he languished for a proper introduction, and suffered all the
pains of impatience till accident threw in his way the gratification of his
wishes. The house which the ladies inhabited was advertised for sale; and,
under pretense of an intention to purchase, he obtained permission, in
consequence of a proper request, to inspect in on a particular day, which at
his instance had been named by the f^^^tenants.

On that day, Mr. Maxwell, hastened to the village, and in the earliest moment
that had been mentioned; he alighted at Mrs. Ingoldsby's door not without the
most flattering expectations that the pol^^^ess of the ladies would prove
instrumental to the attachment of the only object he had in view.

Nor were his hopes disappointed; after he had viewed the house and gardens
with an air of an intended purchaser, the refreshment of tea was proposed to
him, and being accepted without hesitation, he was introduced to the fair, the
amiable, the still mourning Miranda.

Prepared by the universal voice to admire, love was the immediate consequence
of a visit, which (...) requested leave to repeat in terms with which civility
could not refuse to comply; and a very few days confirmed Mr. Maxwell the
ardent, and the professed lover of Miranda.

But her heart was still engaged, nor could she abandon even an hopeless
passion; she wished to indulge her regrets through life, and averse to every
proposition which tended to turn the edge of her melancholy, and most to those
which offered a new object for the affections.

Yet the character, the fortune, the unobjectionable person of Mr. Maxwell,
were e^ged to her by her only friends, with such energy, but mildness of
persuasion, that, enforced by the declarations of her admirer, that he hoped
not to inspire her with love, but to engage her friendship, and opinion, that
in accepting the hand of a man advanced in years, she offered less violence to
her former engagement, than if she yielded to the solicitations of a young and
pleasing lover; she was prevailed on to promise Mr. Maxwell the accomplishment
of his wishes; and a day, at no very considerable distance, was named for the
completion of his happiness.

The necessary preparations now engaged the attention of Maxwell and the two
matron ladies; whilst Miranda, like a sacrifice adorned with garlands for the
alter, passively yielded to the assiduities of her friends, and suffered the
ornaments of her person, and the intended provisions of settlement, to be
adjusted, without interfering in the management, or participating in the result.

But a very few mornings before the appointed day, when the intended nuptials
were to take place, as Miranda was at breakfast with her mother and aunt, a
servant put into her hands a letter, which being known by the superscription to
be from Mr Maxwell, she immediately delivered it to Mrs. Ingoldsby, who, to the
utter astonishment of both her auditors, read aloud the contents of it as
follows:

MADAM,
THAT your heart is not at all interested in the intended event, you have with
that candor, which renders your character the object of universal admiration,
frequently acknowledged to me; you will not therefore even wish to receive an
apology for my releasing you from an unsuitable engagement: but as my heart
still holds you dear, and your virtues and beauties will ever possess my mind
with unalterable regard; so I think it my duty to explain to you the motives by
which I am influenced, in a conduct, which however censurable it may appear in
the public eye, will I am persuaded, find a full justification in your goodness
of heart, and in the sensibility of your worthy relations.

My long lost son! my son, who I had for years resigned* to Heaven, is restored
to me; and Providence, which has bestowed on this consomate of happiness, will
not pe^^^ (...) to add to it a wish which concerns myself.

But I have another explanation to make, in which I am to bespeak your
forgiveness for an imposition, which however innocent with respect to myself, I
must confess to have been rather improper with regard to you. My real name is
not Maxwell, which (...) assumed upon the supposed death of my son, when I
retired from my usual place of residence, in a distant part of the kingdom, to
avoid the importunities of some worthless and disagreeable relations; and this
secret I entrusted to only one friend in the metropolis, from whom my son
procured directions to his concealed and almost forgotten father.

It is at the particular instance of this son, that I take the liberty to
enclose an order on my banker for three thousand pounds, which I entreat you to
except as a small tribute of my gratitude, for your intended goodness to him;
who, till he has the honor to disclose to you in person his real name, begs
leave to subscribe himself, madam,

Your most devoted, obliged, and obedient servant, J. MAXWELL


P. S. Let me entreat you to suffer me to introduce my son to you in the course
of our morning's ride.

Before the three could recover from the surprise which this extraordinary
epistle had occasioned, the arrival of Mr. Maxwell and another gentleman was
announced: and the former entered the room, he presented his son to Miranda;
who having uttered the words, "Mr. Monson!" fell into the arms of his father.

The conclusion of the story is obvious. He who held the welfare of his son in
higher estimation than his own happiness, could have no objection to a match
which heaven itself had ordained: and where worth, honor, beauty, virtue, and
fortune, are united, happiness must be the sure, the constant attendant.

CHARIESSA, OR, A PATTERN FOR HER SEX.
CHARIESSA, was the youngest child of a worthy and active gentleman, who though
his name had a place in the will of a very opulent father, suffered many
hardships, in the early part of his (...), from the scantiness of his
patrimony. His father was infected with that rediculous, or rather detestable
pride, by which many persons are tempted to leave their younger children in
absolute indigence, from the vain and absurd prospect of aggrandizing and
eldest son; a project which was suggested to the old gentleman we are spr^^ing
of by his discovery of a genealogical table, which unluckily enabled him to
trace his progenitors to the reign of Edward the Fourth, when it appeared that
(...) of his ancestors was high sheriff for the county in which he resided,

As the father of Chariesla had keenly felt all the evils arising from an
unjust distribution of property, he determined to leave whatever fortune he
might himself acquire, in equal proportions among his children. From a very
fortunate marriage, and much unexpected success in life, he was enabled, at his
de^^se, to leave to his son, and to each of his daughters, a portion equivalent
to sixteen thousand pounds.

The son had been educated in one of the first merchantile houses in London;
and, at the time of his father's death, was just returned from a tour to the
continent, where he had been engaged in fixing his future correspondencies,
before he ^^ttled as a merchant.

He had passed some few years in trade, when his uncle the eldest brother of
his father, died without issue, and left him the family estate, on the
condition of his quitting commerce entirely, and residing at the ancient seat
of the Trackums. He obeyed the injunction of the will, and retired into the
country with his wife; who, tho a celebrated beauty, was a lady of infinite
discretion, and distinguished th^^ (...) by the most prudent attention to a
numerous family.

Squire Trackum, as we shall now call him, changed his manners with his place
of abode; and quitted the grave address of the important merchant, to assume
the boistrous jocularity of the Esquires that surrounded him. In a short time
he was so completely metamorphosed, that, in his first visit to town, he
greatly astonished and entertained his old acquaintance of the city; but his
real character remained the same.

He now concealed under the mask of rustic jovialty, that uncommon share of
worldly wisdom, which he formerly hid under the mantle of serious and solemn
frankness: he even carried into the field of rural sport that incessant
attention to interest which he used to exert upon Change; and, in the very
moment when he was galloping after a hare, would calculate the charges of
settling a daughter in marriage, or setting a farm to advantage. In one
unguarded moment of real frankness, when he was war^^^ed by the bottle, he
boasted, to an intimate friend, that he never passed ten minutes in the company
of any man, without considering how he might derive some degree of pecuniary or
interested advantage from his acquaintance.

Before the squire assumed his rural character Erinnis, the eldest of his two
sisters, had married a gentleman of a distant county, who was respected as the
descendant of an ancient family, and the possessor of a large estate.

The unmarried Chariessa, whose temper, suitable to her pleasing, elegant
person, was sprightly, generous, and unsuspecting, conceived a most lively
attachment to the wife and children of her brother, whom she always regarded
with such affectionate confidence, that she suffered herself to be guided, in
all important points, by his judgment and advice.

The provident squire, considering that a rich ^^^den aunt is an amiable prop
to the younger branches of a very fruitful house, had very early determined
within himself, that his sister, Chariessa, should pass her life in single
blessedness; and he doub^ed not but that he had sufficient address to confirm
her an old maid, by the artful device of perpetually expressing the most
friendly solicitude for her marrying to advantage. He had persuaded ^er, on his
leaving London, to ch^se for ^er residence a provincial town, in the
neighborhood, of Trackun Hall; and by thus securing her within the reach of his
constant observation, and studying to increase the influence which he had
already acquired over her frank and affectionate spirit, he took the most
effectual precaution for accomplishing his wishes. As Chariessa was in that
rank of life, in which matrimonial approaches are made rather in a slow and
ceremonious, than a rapid and ardent manner, the watchful squire had sufficient
time and opportunity to countract the attempt of every man whom he found
guilty, or whom he suspected, of a design on the heart and hand of this devoted
vestal.

By inducing his innocent sister to believe, that he most heartily wished to
see her well married; and by persuading her, at the same time, to think highly
of his penetration into the real characters of men -- he brought the good and
credulous Chariessa to see all her lovers exactly in that unfavorable point of
view, in which his own interest and artifice contrived to show them. In
consequence of her affectionate reliance on his assiduous counsel, she
absolutely rejected the overtures of three gentlemen, who were generally
esteemed unexceptionable; but the friendly zeal of the vigilant squire had
discovered that they were all utterly unworthy of so excellent a creature as
Chariessa.

The mean designs of self interest are frequently punished with the heavy tax
of solicitude, concerning the many dangers to which they are commonly exposed.
I happened thus with our prudent and successful squire. He triumphed, indeed,
by putting every suitor to flight, while Chariessa resided within the reach of
his indefatigable attention; but there were periods, in which he was torm^nted
by the restless apprenension of losing all the fruits of his ungenerous labor.

Attached as she was to the person and family of her brother, Chariessa did not
cease to love or to visit her sister Erinnis; and she resolved to pass the
summer of every third year as the house of that lady, who was settled in a very
distant part of the kingdom. Erinnis was one of those extraordinary women, whom
nature, in a fit of perversity, now and then produces, apparently for no
purpose but that of proving a burden to themselves, and a torment to all around
them. Erinnis had possessed, like her sister, youth and beauty, oppolence and
understanding; but (...) possessed them only to show that, valuable (...) these
endowments are, they are utterly insufficient to secure happiness or esteem,
without the noble blessings of a benevolent heart and a regulated mind. She was
early married to Sir Gregory Gourd, a placid and honest baronet, who, in rather
an advanced season of life, had united himself to this young lady, by the
advice of his relations, for the two following purposes: first to pay off an
encumbrance on his ancient estate with a part of her ample dower; and,
secondly, to provide a male heir to that honorable house, whose antiquity he
coutemplated with a complacent and ino^fencive pride. The luckliness knight was
doubly disappointed in these his two favorite projects. As to the first,
indeed, he paid off a mortgage; but soon found himself involved, by the
profusion of his wife, in much heavier debts. As to his second hope, weather he
had entered two ^ar into the vail of years to be gratified in such an
expectation; or weather nature, who had certainly given no maternal tenderness
to the temper of Erinnis, had therefore wisely determined that she should never
be a mother, I will not pretend to decide; but certain it is, that, vehemently
as she painted for this event, Erinnis, had never any near prospect of
producing a child. This disappointment, from what cause soever it might
proceed, had such an incessant tendancy to inflame the natural contemptuous
malignity of her spirit, and she insulted the poor submissive old knight with
very humiliating outrage which an imperious wife can inflict on a terrified and
unresisting husband.

Her passions, naturally vehement and acrimonious were inflamed into fits of
frenzy by her wishes in this point being disappointed; but, in the moments of
her most intemperate absurdity and extravagance, she constantly retained a
considerable potion of hypocritical cunning; and, however insolent and
injurious in her treatment of all her other relations, she forever expressed,
though in a disgusting manner, the fondest affection for her sister Chariessa.
This affection was partly real, and partly pretended. There was indeed, so
engaging, so pure, so sublime a spirit of indulgent benevolence, in the
character of Chariessa, that it could not fail to inspire even malignity and
madness with some potion either of love or respect. But this passionate
attachment of Erinnis to her sister arose chiefly from a mercenary motive.

Though Chariessa was in general blessed with good health and good spirits, she
was frequently subject to certain ^everish attacks, in which her life was
supposed to be in danger; and Erinnis, who had squandered enormous sums in the
public display of such ^ukward magnificence, and in many private articles of
expense, was grown so needy and rapacious, that she locked forward, with all
the eagerness of averice, to the several thousand pounds which she was ^u^e of
gain^^^ if the good angel Chariessa took her (...) to Heaven. In her most
stupi^ying (...) of intoxication, and in her most furious sallies of ill humor,
she never lost sight of this expected legacy. Chariessa, whose pure and
generous mind could hardly have been induced to believe that such an idea ever
entered into any human breast, not only never uspected the profuse professions
of this pretended, love but gave a very singular and touching proof of the
genuine sisterly affection and confidence with which her own heart was
inspired. It happened that she was attacked by a very dangerous fever, at the
house of Erinnis. After many days confinement to her bed, being alone with her
physician, she said to him, in a very calm and unem^affed manner -- "Pray, Sir,
till me very frankly, do you think I shall die!" As her destemper had just
taken a favorable turn, the doctor very cheerfully replied -- "No, indeed, my
good Madam." Upon which she exclaimed, in a very affection^^^ tone -- I am glad
of it, for the sake of my dear sister!" Nor was this the exclamation of a f^ble
mind, afraid of death, and disguising that fear under the mask of affection.

Chariessa was a genuine Christian, who, having weighed both this world and the
next in the balance of reason and of faith, was at all times perfectly
prepared for her natural dissolution. Her exclamation was the dictate of a most
generous and disinterested tenderness. She had seen the artful Erinnis
counterfeit such inordinate sorrow during the course of her malady, and she so
fondly believed the truth of that well dissembled affection^ that* totally free
from every selfish idea, the innocent Chariessa considered only the joy with
which she supposed her sister would contemplate her unexpected recovery.

Though her own affectionate and unsuspecting temper made her receive with an
amiable credulity, all the lavis^ endearments of Erinnis, Chariessa was very
far from being blind to ^he many glaring faults of her ^^rbulent sister; but
she generously found an excuse for them, which converted them at once into
objects of the tenderest compassion. She persuaded herself, that the ^^llow and
ferocious appearance, in the (...) countenance of Erinnis, proceeded enti^^
from a disease in her liver; and that all ^he furious perversities of her
temper were ^wing either to the internal pain of this cruel ^^order, or to the
medicines which she was tempted to try.

Under the influence of this kind idea, she most assiduously labored, not only
to apologize for the offensive irregularities in the conduct and manners of
Erinnis, but to counteract, to the utmost of her power, all the mischievous
effects of her capricious and vindictive ill-humour. She raised and comforted
the poor knight, whenever she saw him reduced to a painful state of humiliation
by the frantic insolence of his wife; she consoled and rewarded the innocent
and unfortunate domestics, whenever she found them stripped and discarded by
their turbulent and offended mistress; in short, she endeavored to maintain a
degree of order justice and decency, throughout a numerous household^ under the
chaotic dominion of a manevolent, intoxicated fury: and whoever has seen her in
this trying situation, has seen a perfect image of Charity; "beliving all
things, hoping all things, enduring all things."

Although the peaceable and cheerful spirit of Chariessa could find but little
pleasure in a house like that of Erinnis, a compassionate affection to her
sister made her very exact in her stated visits: their duration always extended
to six months, and sometimes amounted to seven; a circumstance which did not
fail to increase the tormenting sears (...) (...) distant brother Trackum, who
always contemplated the return of Chariessa into this neighborhood with that
sort of satisfaction which is felt by the tamer of a bird, on seeing it, after
flattering to the limits of an extensive chamber, return, in an easy and
voluntary manner, to the open door of its cage.

Chariessa, however, was very ^ar from feeling any degree of constraint: she
departed on many of these distant visits, and returned as often to her own
mansion, without once suspecting the inquietude which her long absence never
sailed to excite. Indeed the fearful squire might have saved himself the pain
of many teazing doubts, and many private perplexing enquiries, had he been
capable of forming a just estimate of the heart and mind of Chariessa: (...)
(...) indeed, he was not; and though he knew that the magnificent but lonely
habitation of Erinns was as much avoided as the d^n of a savage, yet he
trembled at the idea of the lovers that the unguarded Chariessa, might meet in
that pompous solitude. He was assured, that a rustic apothecary, and a more
rustic divine, were the only frequent (...) at this dreary castle; (...) has he
had no confidence in female de^^racy or discretion, and as he found that the
man of physic and the man of God were both single men, and that each would have
many opportunities of being alone with Chariessa, he greatly feared that she
and her fortune might fall a sacrifice to one or the other of these formiable
assailants. This groundless terror, instead of being diminished by time,
increasing with the increasing age of Chariessa. The squire was very coarse in
his idea of old maids: he concluded, that no virgin turned of forty, and left
entirely to her own discretion, could resist any matrimonial offer whatever;
and, as his sister had reached that decisive period on her last visit to
Erinnis, his spirits were not a little depressed by his despair of her return
in that state of vestal purity which he had so zealously wished her to
maintain. At length, however, (...) apprehensions were effectually terminated
by an event which, though much more probable than the dreaded marriage of
Chariessa, was not so strongly anticipated by the imagination of the distant
squire. This event was the death of Erinnis; who, having utterly worn out a
good constitution by the most absurd and disgraceful intemperance, died, as she
had lived, in magnificent misery.

The tender Chariessa paid the last office of affection to her unworthy sister;
and returned in a calm and pious state of mind from the abode of joyless
grandeur, whose vanity was now most completely shown, to her own peaceful and
comfortable mansion. Her disposition was still remarkably cheerful; and she
took too kind and too virtuous an interest in the general happiness of the
living, to think affected sorrow a proper compliment to the dead. She had too
clearly seen all the various infelicity of Erinnis, not to consider her release
as a blessed event; and it pleased Heaven to reward the long and indulgent
attention which she has paid to the bodily and mental infirmities of that
unhappy relation with many years undisturbed tranquilities to contemplate her
interesting character at this season of her life; and, as I believe her to have
been, for several years, one of the happiest (...) (...), I shall enlarge on
the particular (...) (...) which constituted that happiness; and menutely
examine that invaluable cast of mind which enabled her to gain and to secure
the rarest and most pecarious of all human possessions. -- Chariessa was about
forty two when she returned to a constant residence in her own quiet and
comfortable mansion. She was naturally fond of society; and her easy fortune
enabled her to enjoy it in that temperate and rational manner which suited her
inclination. Having made many just remarks on the different conditions of
female life, she was perfectly convinced, that she had great reason to be
satisfied with her own single state; and no incidents arose that could make her
wish to change it. Her patrimonial fortune had been much increased by some
considerable legacies; and she enjoyed an income which by her prudent
regulation of it, not only supplied her with all the usual comforts of
affluence, but furnished her with the exalted pleasure of conferring happiness
on a selected number of industrious poor. She had a spacious and cheerful
house, that peculiarly pleased her own fancy; and a set of intelligent and good
humored domestics, who were attached, more by affection than interest, to her
person; and the neighboring seat of her brother afforded her a (...)
flourishing family, whom she frequently survaved with all the tender delight of
an effectionate parent.

Such were the external circumstances that contributed to form the happiness of
Chariessa; circumstances, indeed, highly desirable in themselves, yet utterly
insufficient to make a woman happy, without those noble internal blessings
which were the true riches of Chariessa. She possessed, in the most emienent
degree, a cheerful simplicity of heart, inexhaustible benevolence, and
unaffected piety. It was by the constant, yet modest exercise of those
admirable qualities that Chariessa secured to herself, not only more felicity,
but even more public regard and attention, than was obtained by some single
ladies of her neighborhood, who were undoubtedly her superiors in the
attractive endowments of beauty, opulence, and wit. Chariessa, perhaps was
never known in her life to utter a witty repartee; but such is the lively
influence of genuine goodnature, that her conversation never failed to
delight, and her house was frequented as the abode of benevolent vivacity. Though
she had passed the gay period of youth, and never affected to disguise her age,
she took a particular satisfaction in promoting the innocent amusements of the
young: indeed, she was a general friend to every season and every rank of life;
even the common acquaintance of Chariessa, if they had any occasion to wish for
her assistance, were sure of finding her, without solicitation, a zealous
promoter of their prosperity and pleasure.

There was a period in her life, at which some of her uncandid neighbors
conjectured, that the subtle vice of avarice was beginning to infect her; she
suddenly parted with her chariot, and reduced her establishment, without
assigning her seasons for a conduct so surprising. In a few years she resumed
her eqiupage, and recommenced her usual style of living, with as much, or
rather more splendour than ever.

This still more engaged the attention of the neighborhood; and the very
people who, on the former alteration, had accused her of avarice, now
exclaimed, that she was either seized with the frenzy of extravagance, or was
endeavoring to allure a husband. It was, however, proclaimed upon her death, by
the worthy family of a deceased merchant, that, under the promise of the most
absolute secresy, she had allotted to his assistance, during the years of the
abovementioned retranchment, a full moiety of her income; by which generous
exertion she had supported him through the most cruel and undeserved
distresses, enabled him to retrive his circumstances, and preserve his family
from impending ruin.

Though her spirits were naturally quick, and her affections strong, I never
heard an instance of her being at any time of her life betrayed into an
uncanded animosity. The town in which she resided was frequently distracted by
ecclesiastical and parliamentary contentions. In those uncharitable struggles
for power, the relations of Chariessa were often hotly engaged. Her
affectionate heart never failed, indeed, to take a lively interest in all their
pursuits; but she never ridiculed or vilified their opponents with those eager
and illiberal invectives which have been known to flow, upon such exasperating
occasions, from the lips of many a quiet spinster, and of many a sober matron.
The enmity of Chariessa was as generous as her friendship; and, when ever she
heard such petty abusive tales, as are basely fabricated in every popular
contest, for the purpose of the hour, although they favored her own party, she
would discountenance that circulation, or expose their absurdity. Nor was this
liberality of conduct without its reward: Chariessa had the satisfaction of
perceiving, that she conciliated to herself the perfect respect and good will
of the most opposite contending characters. Perhaps their never lived a human
being so fairly and fully possessed of general esteem; and, to a mind truly
amiable, there can hardly be a state of earthly enjoyment superior to what
arises from incessant and open proofs of being universally beloved. Having
possessed for many years this tranquil and pure delight, the tender Chariessa
began to sink under natural infirmity. She sustained a short but severe illness
with exemplary composure: and, in the close of it, with that calm and cheerful
devotion which had distinguished her life, she resigned her benevolent spirit
to the Great Parent of benevolence.

The influence of her virtue was far from ceasing with her mortal existence;
though twelve years now elapsed since the decease of this admirable woman, her
excellent qualities are still fresh in the memory of all who had the happiness
of her acquaintance; and they hardly ever pass the house in which she resided,
without bestowing a sigh of regret, or a sentence of praise, on the merits of
Chariessa.

LEONTINE, OR THE IMPIETY OF MURMURING AGAINST PROVIDENCE.
THE murmurs of mankind against the degrees of Omnipotence are as unjust as
they are impious. Resignation to the will of his Creator in the duty of every
human being, who by presuming to censure the unequal distribution of good and
evil in this world, discovers a weak head, or a depraved heart; sometimes both.

Short sighted as we are, how childish are our complaints, how absurd are our
repinings! repinings and complaints into which we surely should never fall, did
we ^eriously reflect on the infinite and amazing vicitudes in human affairs,
did we consider that the severes^ afflictions, according to our hasty
apprehensions, are often eventually the most substantial blessings.

Against the degrees of Omnipotence I once murmured myself. The unequal
distribution of good and evil in this world, I once censured -- I repined at
the sight of beings in a more prosperous situation, and complained of my own
hard fate in the beterest terms. I am now in another, in a better frame of
mind, and sincerely hoping that many of my discontented fellow*creatures may be
rendered otherwise by reading the following narrative, written with the pen of
experience, I beg the favor of you to give it a passport to the public.

I was born to the inheritance of a small paternal estate, the income arising
from which would, in this age of luxury and dissipation, be reckoned a trifling
one. Little, however, as it was I could not hope to see it increased as I was
not, being an only and a fondled child, with a tender constitution, bred up to
any business, though I received a very good education.

Having lost my father and mother as soon as my education was finished, I could
not help thinking that what had served us all three, would undoubtedly, be
sufficient for me alone; especially as I looked upon my orphan situation in a
desponding light, and had no desire to live in an expensive manner.

So violent was my grief, so deep was my affliction, on being deprived of my
parents, that I gave myself up to despair, and accused heaven of cruelty for
snatching them away from me instead of being thankful for having enjoyed them
so long. Time however, and the tenderness with which the gentleman whom my
father had appointed to be the guardian, treated me, alleviated my sorrow -- My
friendship too for that gentleman's son, who was remarkably formed to please,
who was as amiable in my eyes, as he was agreeable, and who professed the
sincerest esteem for me, not a little contributed to its alleviation.

The happiness which I enjoyed with my young friend was excessive, and I
thought that nothing could make any addition to it: but while I was pluming
myself on my peculiar felicity, and depending upon its continuance, I was
extremely disapointed; for the most esteemed companion of my heart was obliged
to make a voyage to Lisbon, his father's affairs rendering his presence at that
place absolutely necessary.

During his absence, which affected me greatly I became acquainted with one of
the most amiable girls in the world; and soon sell so desperately in love with
her, that I had no rest night nor day, because I had reason to believe that her
father would think my fortune too small; and that he would expect a more
advantageous match for a girl with her person and accomplishments -- Then --
then I wished, more ardently wished that I had been thrown in a way to improve
my patrimony, and to make it more worthy of the acceptance of the only woman
with whom I could be happy: without whom, indeed, I should be actually wretched.

I had been fortunate enough, as I thought, to find several opportunities to
make my address to the lady; but the dread of being rejected by him, who had
alone a right to dispose of her, kept me for a considerable time in a state of
the most racking uncertainty; and I was weak enough to front the memory of my
once beloved and reverend parents by accusing them of having been cruelty
inatentive to my future welfare -- "Had I been brought up to business, I might
have enabled, perhaps, to offer myself to this adorable creature, without
fearing a refusal either from her or her father!"

I was not, indeed, too far advanced in life to settle to business, but love
engaged my thoughts so much, and forbade me also to embark my little all on a
precarious bottom, that, instead of endeavoring to increase my income by
industry, I abandoned myself to despair.

Despair, at length, drove me to ask the father of my Maria for his consent.

I was as I feared I should be, repulsed with a peremptory denial.

This was a finishing stroke; I could not support it -- I murmured at
Providence for not having given me the exact sum I wanted, fretted myself ill,
and was soon pronounced to be in danger.

My guardian and his family, who had ever behaved in the tenderest manner to
me, well knowing the cause of my disorder, informed Maria of my situation.

She, who had never been averse to me, on being acquainted with it, flew to her
father and with tears in her eyes, entreated him to let her come and see me.

Moved by her sorrow, he complied with her request; but he was so much more
affected, at her return, by the account she gave of my indisposition, that he
consented to our union.

Our marriage was to be solemnized as soon as my health was restored; and I
believed myself to be the happiest of men.

My wife's fortune was but little, if at all superior to mine. Her parents,
however, reckoning upon her person and accomplishments, had higher views for
her, and had flattered themselves that she would be raised considerably by her
external attractions cooperating with her intrinsic merit: they were
consequently, at first, rather chagrined to see their schemes defeated; but
finding that she was satisfied with her lot, and that I continued extravagantly
fond of her, they also became more contented.

In a short time after our marriage, her grandfather died and left her only
five thousand pounds; but, at the same time ordered five thousand more to be
paid on the birth of a son; and in case of our having only girls to be made
over to another branch of the family.

This unkind, this unjust procedure, rouzed my sentiments, and I insulted the
memory of the deceased old gentleman with the keenest invectives -- I ought to
have been thankful for his having remembered us at all, as he had a large
family. who wanted what he had bequeathed to us more than we did.

We were now perpetually wishing, and wishing with anxiety, to have a boy, to
bring so good a legacy home to us; but heaven, justly offended, no doubt, at
our unreasonable disquietude, sent us only a female, who was to me, in
particular very disgusting merely as a female; and her mother was so much
displeased with her sex as to deny it nourishment from her own breast. The poor
child, though as fine a one as ever was born, was turned out of the house at
the tenderest age, not only to partake of the rude accomidations and homely
fare of one of the lowest cottagers, but to run the risque of imbibing, with
the milk of a stranger, all the ill-blood and humors with which that stranger
might be filled. -- Thus did we throw away a treasure, of which we were not
capable of estimating the value.

My wife, not finding herself breeding again, soon began to take a fancy to a
different style of living -- She had hitherto been satisfied with privacy, and
paid a proper regard to domestic economy, as we were by no means in splendid
circumstances; but her disappointment arising from the birth of her daughter,
had made a change in her temper; and the society of some gay people of her own
sex, with whom she struck up an acquaintance, at first, in order to dissipate
her uneasiness, inspired her with too strong a passion for pleasure -- Yet was
not my fondness in the least abated by her new propensities. -- I still doated
on her and indulged her in the gratification of her heart's every wish. Just
about this time I received a great deal of pleasure, pleasure very little
expected, from my friend Theodore's return from Lisbon: his arrival gave me the
greater delight, as I had flattered myself that he would, as a sincere friend,
enjoy by the force of sympathy, the happiness which I felt in my lovely Maria's
company.

I flew to him, therefore, immediately, and presented him to my wife with the
highest encomiums on each other, which, indeed, they both deserved, and with
they both soon felt neither proceeded from the extravagence of love, or the
romantic ardour of friendship. -- Few men were more agreeable than Theodore;
few women more amiable than Maria.

I now began almost to forget my late disapointment in the arms of my wife, and
in the conversation of my friend, between whom I spent all my happy hours -- My
felicity was, in truth, so complete, that I even thought not of the diminution
of our fortune -- My felicity, however, -- (how can we expect permanent
felicity here?) was soon interrupted. -- My wife fell sick of a fever -- In a
few days afterward she was declared to be hastening to her dissolution, and in
a few more expired in my arms.

It is impossible to describe the agnonies which my soul endured when I beheld
the woman whom I had ever loved to distriction stretched out before me a
lifeless corpse. -- I behaved like a mad man, and, in the height of my frenzy,
dared, impiously dared, to accuse the Almighty of having given her to me only
to make me a thousand times more miserable than I should have been, if I had
never known her, by an early separation. I stamped -- I tore my hair -- I
committed innumberable irregularities. When I grew somewhat less distrubed, I
sunk into a fullenness which nothing could remove.

Soon after the death of my wife, my friend Theodore was obliged to settle
abroad -- His departure occasioned new murmurings, new impieties.

There was now but one object left so attract my attention; that object was my
little girl, against whom, from her birth, my bosom was steeled.

Maria now had just entered into her fourth year; but having been shamefully
neglected both by her mother and me, had contracted a great many low ways,
under the tuition of her vulgar nurse. I went to see her -- but O, sharp
reproach for having so long stifled parental affection in my bosom -- she
screamed at the sight of me -- was, indeed, a stranger.

Pitying the poor child's situation, I to^^ her home: however, as I gave myself
trouble about her education, she only exchanged as she grew up, the coarse
dialect of the nurse, for the pert language of the chambermaid -- Forced by
recollection to dwell on the losses I had sustained, certain of never seeing my
beloved wife again, and doubtful with regard to the reappearance of my friend,
I sat either stupefied with sorrow, or raving with despair; unmindful of my
mouldering fortune; unmindful of my injured daughter.

One day the maid came into my room telling me, that Miss was cutting her
double teeth, and was very ill, adding, that she wished I would give her an
anodyne necklace, which she knew her mistress had in her cabinet.

On being thus unnecessarily, I thought, reminded of my wife, I was thrown into
a violent rage and in the first transports of my passion, severely reprimanded
the maid for her officiousness; but passing soon afterwords through a room in
which the young Maria lay on her lap in extreme pain, I was struck with the
resemblance between her and her late lovely mother, a little while before she
expired.

A sigh, which I could not suppress, heaved my bosom; and as I hung over the
innocent, the tears of paternal sensibility rushed from my eyes, and rushed
down her pallid face. -- I then hastened to the cabinet to search for the
necklace, or any thing that might probably relieve her.

In turning over several papers, which were intermixed with my dear Maria's
trinkets, I recognized the hand of Theodore.

Astonished beyond expression at so unexpected a sight, I opened the letter
with precipitation, and read it with horror -- I was stabbed with the perusal
of it -- Every word planted a dagger in my heart -- It was -- Oh, heaven! I
still tremble at the recollection of it -- a letter from Theodore, the man whom
I believed to be my firmest, sincerest friend, to Maria, to my wife who doated
on me, I also believed, as fondly as I did on her -- After having thanked her
for the great regard which she had discovered for him, he thus proceeded --
"You need not be in the least afraid of your husband's suspicions, for I do not
know upon the face of the earth a man who has a stronger confidence in any
person than he has both in you and me; nor is there a man in the world, in my
opinion, more easy to be duped."

This heartbreaking discovery made me quite furious -- I now exclaimed against
Providence in the most daring and irreverent terms, for having suffered me to
be so deceived, and despised; so grossly imposed upon, and injuriously treated.
I declared with much vehemence that no human being had ever been so cruelly
used, and swore in tremendous accents that no man should so use me with
impunity.

Could I have reached Theodore in those moments of madness, when I smarted with
resentment, and breathed nothing but revenge, I should have certainly murdered
him; but luckily he was at a distance, and I had leisure to grow cool -- My
rage gradually subsided; but the misery I felt by reflecting on the undeserved
treatment which I had received from two persons the dearest to me in the world,
threw me into a violent fever.

From that fever, I with great diffi^^^^^, recovered, and sunk into a dejection
which almost rendered me incapable of doing any thing. I neglected my affairs
-- life became came burdensome to me -- all the efforts of my acquaintance to
rise my spirits, and to put me in humor with existence, were ineffectual -- I
at last grew so disgusted with society that I only admitted the visits of the
old gentleman, who was a man of exceeding good sense, and irreproachable
morals. By his frequent visits I found myself by degrees less and less
embarrassed in his company; and at last I grew so unguarded, that I made a
discovery of the true cause of my melancholy, which I had tell then concealed
from every living creature.

No sooner was he acquainted with the source of my sorrow, then he told me that
I was in his opinion, very deservedly punished -- "Learn henceforward," said
he, to submit without the least murmuring to the will of the Supreme* for you
may be assured, that every thing in this world is ordered by unerring wisdom*
and that we poor, imperfect beings, know not what i^ best for us. You thought
yourself the most miserable of men when you loft your wife; but had she lived,
what torments would you have endured! you would have seen her prefer your
friend to yourself: you would have known that she had been guilty of a very
atrocious crime, and the continued sight of her would have doubled your concern
as well as your aversion. -- Had you been divorced or only separated from her,
the talk occasioned by it, and the apprehensions with regard to your meeting
somewhere, might have produced the most painful sensations in your breast.
Besides, with what propriety could your daughter have been educated under the
eye of a mother who had violated her conjugal vows; and how severely must she
have been shocked at the idea of a woman whom she could not, without being
scandalized at her conduct, acknowledged as a parent! You, ought, therefore
fervently to offer up praises to heaven for having delivered you from so much
unhappiness by the death of your wife: and not with less fervency ought you to
pour out your thanksgivings for the absence of your friend -- Had your friend
been within your reach at the time when you discovered the treachery, you would
have, it is highly probably, challenged him in the heat of your resentment. You
might by so doing, possibly have been sent yourself, unprepared and loaded with
guilt, into the awful presence of Him, who has expressly prohibited revenge in
these emphatical words: Vengeance is mine, and I will repay it. Look up,
therefore, with devotion and with gratitude to that Being, who is as merciful^
as he is almighty; think, seriously think, how unworthy you have been of his
interposition in your favor; and may you always be able to say, for the future,
on the most trying occasions, Thy will be done, without feeling your heart at
variance with your lips."

I was struck with the good sense and piety uttered by my valuable neighbor,
who had taken the most efficacious measures to restore the tranquillity of my
mind by setting things before me in a proper light, and by endeavoring to make
me sensible, that under the pressure of any misfortunes whatever, a thorough
submission to the dispensations of Providence is as much our interest as it is
our duty.

I now began to reproach myself severely for having behaved in so unbecoming,
so unjustifiable a manner; and tried to alone for my past ill conduct, by
making myself (...) (...) satisfied as the situation of my affairs, which ha^
been considerably injured by the extravagance of my wife, in consequence of her
immoderate love of pleasure, would suffer me to be. -- Yet still I could not
bring myself to behold my little daughter with eyes of an affectionate parent
-- I repined continually because my child was not a son, as I should have had
during the minority of a son, the management of five thousand pounds, which
would have been of great service to be. Setting aside her having been estranged
from me for so long a time, Maria had none of those whinings, fond yearnings
after me, which children generally have who are trained up under the inspection
of their fathers and mothers. Of this want of filial sensibility in my
d^ughter, I complained in the betterest terms, to my good old neighbor, who
told me that I had brought upon myself the disquitetude which tormented me --
"At the very time," continued he "that the tender affections take root, you
cast your daughter from you as if she had been an alien; from your unfatherly
behavior, therefore, to her, during her infancy, arises her attention to you.
Folly is its own punishment -- However, it is not yet too late to make her
sensible, by a proper carriage, that you are her best friend; and possibly,
that despised girl may turn out every thing you can wish her to be."

I listened a second time to the voice of reason -- I began to apply myself to
the education of my child. I hired, in the place, an elderly woman, recommended
by my friend, who had been bred a gentlewoman, but having met with misfortunes,
was glad, with a moderate allowance, to undertake the care of my family, and to
teach my girl all kinds of needle work: in reading, writing, accomp^,
geography, French, and music, I was her only instructor; and by accompanying my
instructions with many rewards and few punishments. I at length carried my
point so far, as to make her love the father, while she revered the master^ I
had at the same time the satisfaction to see that she improved every day in her
person and manner, and became a very fine girl.

When she was about 11 years old, my excellent friend and neighbor (to whom I
was indebted for all the pleasure I at last received as a parent, and to whom
my daughter was also indebted both for her father and her education; as I
should not, probably, have behaved to her in a paternal way, or have taken any
pains to render her an accomplished woman, if I had not been acquainted with
him) was suddenly taken ill, and died in a few (...).

The first news of his (...) was a blow which almost stunned me -- So deeply
was I affected by it, that I gave myself up again to murmuring and despondence.

While I was throwing out some very melancholy effusions, dictated by despair,
I was informed that he had left my daughter in his will, having few relations
of his own, and none who were not richer than himself, ten thousand pounds,
five of which I was at liberty to improve by any sort of business or traffic,
the most agreeable to me till my daughter was six and twenty: with the other
five she was to be invested on her being of age. I had, however, only the use
of my five thousand during the stipulated term of years, on condition that I
tied up a part of of my estate which would produce an equivalent sum at the
expiration of them, in case I should be guilty of any embezzlements, o^ be
disabled by unforeseed contingencies from making a restitution.

This was a noble legacy, as unmerited as it was unexpected; but it
administered no consolation to me for the loss of the worthy testator. The
generosity of my excellent friend I remembered every hour of with the sincerest
regret. However, as I paid too great a regard to the memory of him whom I had
so justly and so highly esteemed when living, to nelect the improvement of the
sum for which I was responsible, I offered myself to a sober careful man, who
had been his book keeper, to go into partnership with him, provided he would
thoroughly instruct me in his business; and he cheerfully complied with my
proposal, as the stock advanced by me would be of considerable advantage to him.

In this manner I obeyed my dear deceased friend's injunctions, and made an
honest old servent of his happy. By strictly attending to the duties of my new
employment, I not only kept my mind from dwelling on any disagreeable subjects;
but, in a few years, trebled the five thousand committed to my stewardship.
When my daughter came of age, I made over ten thousand pounds to her, and
married her to a very amiable and deserving young man, for whom she had a great
affection. With the remaining sum, added to my little patrimony, I resolved to
spend the rest of my days in doing all the good in my power, as my daughter and
her husband were in too affluent circumstances to wish for my decease. In acts
of benificence, therefore, I have spent my time from that happy era, in
supplicating the Almighty's pardon for my past offenses, and in pouring forth
praises to Him for all the blessings which he has showered on on my undeserving
head -- Never am I so happy, never do I feel such transporting sensations, as
when I am offering up my fervent thanksgivings to the throne of grace -- More
and more am I every hour convinced, that the goodness of the Deity is equal to
his power; that we ought ever to pay the most implicit submission to his
decrees; and that whatever he permitts to be is permitted for the wisest ends.

LEONTINE.

AN ORIGINAL TALE, FOUNDED ON A FACT.
PREVIOUS to the late wa^ between America and Great Britain, a British officer,
by the name of Jones, an accomplished young man, resided near Fort Edward. His
visits thither became more frequent, when he found himself irresistibly drawn
by the charms of native worth and beauty. Miss M'Kray, whose memory is dear to
humanity and true affection, was the object of his peregrinations.

Mr. Jones had not taken the precautions necessary in hazardous love, but had
manifasted to the lady by his constant attention, undissembled and ingenuous
demeanor, that ardea^^t affection, which a susceptible heart compelled her
implicitly to return. In this mutual interchange of passions, they suffered
themselves to be transported on the ocean of imagination, till the unwelcome
necessity of a separation cut off every springing hope.

The different nations, of which they were members, were at war. A removal,
from this Elvsium, was suggested to Mr. Jones, as indispensable.

Nothing could alleviate their mutual horror, but duty -- nothing could allay
their reciprocal grief, so as to render a separate cor-Fort, a descent was
daily ^rojecting. Here Mr. Jones could not but recognize the spot, on which
rested all his joys. He figured to his mind the dread, which his hostile
approach must raise in the breast of her, whom of all others, he thought it is
highest interest to delight!

In spite of arrettes and commands to the contrary, he ^ound means secretly to
convey poreal existence tolerable, but solemn vows, with the ideas of a future
meeting. Mr. Jones repaired to Canada, where all intercourse with the
Provincials was prohibited. Despair, which presented itself in aggravated
colors when General Burgoyne's expedition through the States was fixed,
succeeded to his former hopes. The British army being encamped about three
miles from the a letter, entreating her not to leave the town with the family,
assuring her, that as soon as the fort should have surrendered, he would convey
her to an asylum, where they might peaceably consummate the nuptial ceremony.
Far from discrediting the sincerity of him who could not deceive her, she
heroically refused to follow the flying villagers. The remonstrances of a
father, or the tearful entreaties of a mother and numerous friends could not
avail^^ It was enough that her Lover was her friend, She confidered herself
protected by the love and voluntary asseverations of her youthful hero. With
the society of a servant maid, she impatiently waited the desired conveyance.
Mr. Jones finding the difficulty into which he was brought, at length, for want
of better convey, hared a party of twelve Indians, to carry a letter to Miss
M'Kray, with his own horse, for the purpose of carrying her to the place
appointed. They set off, f^^ed with the anticipation of their promised premium,
which was to consist of a quantity of spirits, on condition that they brought
her off in safety, which, to an Indian, was the most cogent stimulus the young
Lover could have named. Having arrived in view of her window, they sagaciously
held up the letter, to prevent the fears and apprehensions which a savage knows
he must excite, in the sight of tenderness and sensibility. Her faith and
expectations enabled her to divine the means of these ferocious missionaries,
while her frightened maid uttered ^ought but shrieks and cries. They arrived,
and by their signs convinced her from whom they had their instructions.

If a doubt could remain, it was removed by the letter -- it was from her
Lover. A lock of his hair, which it contained, presented his manly figure to
her glowing fancy. This confirms a truth she had too well understood.

Here, reader, g^^ss what must have been her ecstacy. -- She resolved to "brave
even the most horrid aspect, which might appear between her and him, whom she
considered already hers," without a sigh. She did not for a moment hesitate to
follow the wishes of her Lover; and took journey with these bloody messengers,
expecting very soon to be sheilded in the arms of legitimate affection.

A short distance only then seemed to sep^^ate two of the happiest of mortals.
Alas! how soon are the most briliant pictures of felicity defaced by the
burning hand of affliction and woe! How swiftly are the halcyon dreams, which
lull the supine indolence of thought, succeeded by the real pangs which are
inflicted by a punishing Providence, or a persecuting foe!

Having risen the hill, at about equal distances from the camp and her former
home, a second party of Indians having heard of the captivating offer made by
Mr. Jones, determined to avail themselves of the oppertunity. The reward was
the great object. A clashing of real and assumed rights was soon followed by a
furious and bloody engagement, in which several were killed on each side. The
commander of the first party, perceiving that naught but the lady's death could
appease the fury of either, deliberately knocked her from her horse, mangling
her scalp from her beautiful temples, which he exultingly bore as a trophy of
his zeal to the expectant and anxious Lover! Here, O disappointment, was "thy
sting." It was with the greatest difficulty that Mr. Jones could be kept from
total delirium. His horror and indignation could not be appeased; his remorse
for having risked his most valuable treasure in the hands of savages, drove him
almost to madness.

When this reached General Burgoyne, he ordered the survivors of both these
parties to immediate execution; and all those who would not subject themselves
to martial law, he remanded back to Canada.

AUGUSTUS AND AURELIA. A FRAGMENT.
AUGUSTUS had just entered his 19th year, when, by the death of a father he
came to the possession of a large and independent fortune; he had one year
before completed his education. (...) was not remarkable for regularity of
beauty and fairness of complexion, but for a manly appearance and winning
demeanor. Although he possessed some foibles which are always attendant on
mortality, yet his many shining qualities far preponderated. His was not like
to the authority of a British noble whom his tenants almost worshipped. He
acknowledged the plain and industrious farmer his equal, and to them his house
and heart were open; for he dwelled in the beautiful and fertile regions of
America, where liberty and equality spread their extensive domain; where the
language of the inhabitants is, "We will be free." A refined sensibility which
he possessed made him seek for the distressed, and to delight to soothe the
breast of affliction by his affability and charity. He now resided at his
country seat with an only sister and his family domestics, beloved by all who
knew him. His seat was large and beautifully situated; his youthful mind was
not yet inclined to domestic affairs, he therefore entrusted them to an old and
faithful steward who had long been attached to the house. His time he commonly
employed in the improvement of his mind, and in the company of some select
friends. He delighted often to wander from home, to behold the beautiful scenes
with which the country abounds.

As Augustus and his sister Louisa were returning from a rural excursion, they
were much delighted with the beauty and situation of a little cot which stood
on their property; they would have advanced unto it, but the evening being far
spent prevented them.

Some time after as Augustus was walking out unaccompanied in the evening, he
directed his steps toward this cot which he formerly so much admired, and when
he had come up to it he leaned on the fence with which it was enclosed; he cast
his eyes around and beheld with admiration and pleasure the neatness of the
house, as well as the improvements which surrounded it; but a still more
beautiful object attracted his attention, he beheld a beautiful young female
gracefully reclined beneath a tree; her side face was turned toward him, and
he indulged himself with the pleasing feeling that he feasted not at the
expense of delicacy. He observed by her pale countenance, on which he could
perceive that the rose formerly bloomed, that some secret uneasiness sat heavy
on her heart; she was stroaking the neck of a little dog which fawned at her
feet; she was clothed in the simple weeds of rusticity, but even at her first
appearance the idea arose in Augustus's mind, that so much beauty could not be
born in so low a sphere. Augustus silently retired behind some trees for fear
that this beautiful stranger should perceive him. He had not been long there
before she arose, cast her expressive black eyes around, and walked toward the
door of the cot, calling her little dog, in a voice which eq^^lled the sweetest
music. Her graceful movement and elegantly proportioned person did not then
escape the transported attention of Augustus. From her appearance he judged her
to be about sixteen years of age. After she had disappeared, Augustus rose from
his place of concealment, and directed his steps toward home reflecting on the
beauty of this fair cottager, and planning some scheme to become acquainted
with her. His imagination from such an outside appearance, already painted the
amiable and cultivated mind, while his suspicion that she was not the daughter
of the possessor of the cot, was greatly increased. When he returned home his
first enquiry was for his old steward; he enquired of him who it was that lived
in the cot; but all that the steward could inform him, was, that a Mr. Amber^,
a clever honest man had been there for the space of a year. To his question
whether he had any daughters, was answered, he had never perceived any children
there but a little son. These answers, although they did not satisfy Augustus,
confirmed him that the young female was not the farmer's daughter. While his
curiosity was greatly excited to discover who she was, his feelings were much
more now interested; his heart already beat with sympathy for the distress
which he thought he discovered, in this beautiful unknown. When he had related
these circumstances and suspicions to his sister Louisa, her curiosity was
immediately excited, and she was already planning some scheme to become
acquainted with her situation, but hers was sympathy for imagined distress,
unaccompanied with the feeling which afflicted beauty imparted to the tender
breast of Augustus, and which none of a different sex could feel. Augustus
resolved by some mean or another to get acquainted with the possessor of the
cot, in order to draw from him some particulars relative to the affair, and to
render his visiting at the cot proper. He therefore dispatched a servant next
morning with a letter, inviting him to his house in the evening, the servant
returned with an answer, that Mr. Ambern would do himself the honor of waiting
on him, and when asked by Augustus who he had seen, O^ cries he, besides the
man and his wife, I saw a most beautiful young lady, who appeared about the age
of Miss Louisa, sitting in the corner with her eyes swimming in tears, and a
beautiful picture tied by a ribbon hung from her neck, I think it must surely
be that of some lover. This simple speech of the servant made such an
impression on the mind of Augustus, as convinced him that his breast was in
this instance susceptible to the charms of beauty, as well as to the feelings
of sympathy and sorrow. In short, let it be sufficient to say, that the charms
of this lovely maid had smitten the susceptible breast of Augustus. When the
evening arrived, and Augustus was alone in his chamber, a rap was heard at the
door, and a servant directly led in Mr. Ambern* Augustus arose to receive him,
and after he had welcomed him to his house, they sat down sociably together.
Although his manners were not what is commonly called graceful, they were
simple and easy, free from all affectation. Augustus was informed by him, that
he had been an officer in the American army; that he had been in several
engagements, in one of which he had received a wound. Augustus's young mind,
which glowed with patriotism, now burned with redoubled friendship toward him.
He enquired how many children he had, to which he replied after a little
hesitation only one. He was about to question him concerning the young lady
which he meant to say his servant had seen there; when Mr. Ambern looking at
him with a smile, cried, I know it is in vain, my young friend, to hide from
you what you allude to, and although requested to secrecy I will inform you of
what little I know, (...) only from a motive to satisfy you, but that you being
acquainted with the circumstances, may be in some degree useful. Augustus
replied, that there needed not (...) other plea but distress to engage his
p^^tection; but especially, in favor of (...) arrayed in such charms, his
interested (...) must be greatly increased, for he now informed Mr. Ambern he
had been an eye witness of them. Mr. Ambern replied, you are yet acquainted
with but half her charms, for equal to her beauty is the cultivation of her
mind; her sweet enticing manners, her engaging conversation, have so won upon
the affections of my wife and myself, that we love her almost equally with our
son. We feel almost equally with herself for the distress under which she
appears to labor. She has a little instrument through which she breathes the
sorrows of her soul in such melancholy strains as to often draw tears from our
eyes. But, my friend* I will pass from this, to tell you what little I know
concerning this amiable young lady. About a week past late in the evening (...)
we sat at tea, we heard a carriage stop, and soon after a knocking at the door,
when opening it, a young gentleman of genteel appearance, and noble
countenance, led in this young female; they both appeared to be in distress; I
invited them to sit down, which they immediately did; we all sat for some time
in profound silence, at last the young gentlemen arose, and in the sweetest and
most melancholy ^^^cents desired me to walk a little way ^n the field with him.
I immediately complied, leaving the young lady with my wise; we had not
proceeded far when he thus addressed me -- you will, no doubt, wonder to see
two persons thus enter your house with whom you have not the least
acquaintance; but it will be sufficient to inform you that it is distress which
has thus obliged us abruptly to claim an entrance; and at the door of the
industrious and honest countryman, misery is seldom refused admittance. I
interrupted him with assurances of the sufficiency of his apology, and
expressed, in sincere terms, my interest in his sorrows; that if I could in any
way serve him, it would give me the greatest pleasure. With tears of joy and
gratitude he acknowledged my kindness and hospitality: He told me, I need not
harbor the least suspicion of their dishonesty, for it was virtue that bade
them fly hither. But (continued he) you must pardon me for not relating the
cause of our appearance here, you shall hear it at some future time; the few
minutes which circumstances allow me to stay here will not permit me: But let
me now call your attention to the trouble which I solicit from you -- This
lovely female which I have brought under your roof, I beseech you to protect*
let her remain with you as one of your family; be a kind and indulgent parent
to her; let it remain a secret that she is here; endeavor to soothe her in her
affliction, but do not endeavor to draw the cause of it from her, as it will
heighten it -- excuse, my protector, the shortness and abruptness of my
expressions, as haste will allow me no others. We then turned toward the
house; when the young gentlemen entered it, and, while the tears trickled down
his cheeks, he exclaimed, now, my Aurelia, having found a faithful guardian for
you, suffer me to bid you farewell: It shall not be long before I shall return
to restore you to joy and to your home. The lovely Aurelia sprang from her
chair, and encircled his neck with her snowy arms, exclaiming, in accents
almost inarticulate, return soon my Ferdinand, my dearest --. The last word
here I was unable to distinguish. Ferdinand, after having embraced her, and,
with all the politeness of afflicted gratitude, bid us farewell, walked hastily
from the door. He immediately sprang in his carriage, dropping his purse, which
I had formerly refused. I returned to the house, much touched by the generosity
and distress of the youth. Aurelia the next morning seemed to have much
recovered her spirits -- to prevent discovery she dressed herself in those
garments in which you have seen her. This is all my dear young gentleman, that
I know about the beautiful Aurelia. After much other conversation chiefly
concerning the same subject, Mr. Ambern returned home. When Augustus was left
alone, his thoughts naturally remained with the object of his late
conversation: his curiosity, instead of being diminished, was rather increased.
The behavior of Ferdinand, the young gentleman who accompanied her, and the
picture which the servant had seen about Aurelia's neck, convinced him that he
was her lover. The pain which these reflections gave, told him the state of his
heart -- He was resolved to guard himself against her charms.

One evening, which was very calm and beautiful, when silence wafted her gentle
hand, and hushed the world in quiet and repose, when the mind is filled with
thoughts congenial to the scene, Augustus took up his flute, upon which he was
a great proficient, and directed his steps toward a little grove, which grew a
small distance behind the house of Mr. Ambern. Aurelia was the subject of his
meditation. When he came to the grove, he reclined himself beneath a tree, and,
after having remained for some time in silence, he applied his mouth to his
flute, and through it breathed forth such harmonious strains as corresponded
his feelings: The melody, in sweetest vibrations, floated on the air, and the
hills were responsive to the trembling notes -- The feathered songsters forgot
their song and listened in attentive silence -- Nor were these the only
listeners -- This grove was often the resort of Aurelia -- The beauty of the
present evening had invited her thither, and she was now listening in a little
place surrounded by bushes, a silent hearer and spectator of Augustus -- She,
unseen, now perceived him, as he formerly did her -- She was charmed with the
beauty of the music, which was also congenial to her feelings -- but the manly
appearance of Augustus claimed her attention more than his strains. While thus
Augustus indulged his feelings, his sister Louisa, who had observed him walk
toward the grove, and who determined to follow him, now came up, and,
laughing, caught old of his flute, and said, Why, Augustus, what is the matter
with you -- what makes you so grave and serious of late, that you must run into
the woods to play such dolesome d^^ties? -- Augustus smiling, without making
any reply, took his sister by the hand, and they directed their steps home. --
Aurelia, when she returned to the co^, did not^ relate what she had seen --
From the appearance of Augustus, she supposed he was a young gentleman of
fortune, and that some secret uneasiness dwelled within his breast -- Her heart
acknowledged the charms of his music, and of himself. The next morning Augustus
determined to pay a visit at the cot -- He, therefore, after breakfast, went
unaccompanied, and was received with great joy by its industrious inhabitants
-- In casting his eyes around the room, he missed the object for whom the
present visit was designed -- Delicacy prevented him from expressing his
disappointment, but Mr Ambern perceived it by his countenance -- It was however
of short duration, for he had set but a few minutes, when Aurelia entered, with
her hat on, just returned from a walk -- She did not perceive Augustus, who had
arisen at her entrance, until she had advanced a few steps in the room; but
directly after, her eyes meeting his, a crimson blush diffused itself over both
their countenances -- Aurelia immediately recollected the young gentleman she
had seen in the grove, whose music had so greatly entertained her. Mr. Ambern
then introduced them to each other -- a certain embarrassment was visible in
Aurelia -- After they had set down, Augustus, with his usual engaging demeanor,
endeavored to enter into conversation, nor were his attempts unsuccessful, and
the common embarrassment which subsists between strangers was soon removed --
He could not behold, but with admiration and emotion, her beauty, which was
heightened by the exercise she had been taking -- Without the aid of ornament,
and richness of dress, she now appeared in her own cha^^is -- her beautiful
eyes beamed sweetness and love -- her flowing locks hung graceful on her back,
unadorned by the hand of art -- She had not the fragrance of cosmetic perfume,
but the flowers of the garden bloomed on her bosom. Augustus was equally
pleased with her conversation, and he found that his imagination had not
painted her in two high colors.

He passed the evening in her company, and was sorry to see it so happily glid
away. At his departure, he informed Aurelia, that he had a sister nearly of the
^ame age with herself, who would be happy to possess such an invaluable
acquaintance* Aurelia thanked him for his politeness, and expressed the
happiness she should experience from a friend. When Augustus returned home, his
mind was almost wholly occupied with Aurelia -- His sister Louisa ^ocularly
questioned him concerning whe^^ (...) had been -- He, without disguise,
informed her of the conversation at the cot, and of the liberty he had taken in
offering her friendship to Aurelia. Louisa rejoiced in this opportunity of
getting acquainted with her -- Her curiosity had become so greatly excited that
she resolved the very next day to visit her -- She did so, and she and Aurelia
became intimates at the very first meeting -- This intimacy gradually
increased; Aurelia often visited Augustus's seat, himself and his sister often
at the cot. Augustus now informed Aurelia, where he had first seen her, but
never ventured to utter a syllable respecting her situation. She* in return,
informed Augustus where she had first seen him, and how much she had been
entertained with his flute.

While thus the intimacy and passion of Augustus were daily increasing, an
event happened, which draws my tale to a speedy conclusion: --

One evening Augustus was on a visit to the cot; when he had approached within
view of it, he perceived a carriage standing before the door; his curiosity was
greatly excited, to know to whom it belonged. He softly entered the house, but
what was his surprise, when the first object that struck his eyes, was a young
gentleman with Aurelia clasped in his arms -- His heart throbbed, his pulse
beat quick, the thought immediately occurred, that he was to have his beloved
Aurelia snatched from him forever* by a successful lover. The young gentleman
who held Aurelia, did not perceive Augustus at his first entrance, but upon her
whispering to him, he turned round. They instantly caught each other's eye
stood for a moment gazing on each other, then flew into each other's arms,
while Augustus exclaimed, O my Ferdinand, is it you, my former dearest friend
and classmate? After this warm embrace, Augustus's first enquiry to Ferdinand
was, why he had come hither? -- Ah! my dear Augustus (he cried) I have come on
a very pleasing embassy; to recall home an only and beloved sister, who has
fled here for protection from a father who was going to force her into marriage
with one whom she detested. As soon as Ferdinand pronounced the name of sister,
Augustus was unable to contain himself -- he sprang forward toward Aurelia,
and pressed her rosy cheek to his -- she did not receive him with a frown, but
with a^ blush and a smile. Here the author breaks off his narrative, assuring
those who have honored his little tale with their perusal, that the conclusion
which they will be naturally led to draw, will be the true and right one; such
an one as the author, if he had felt, himself disposed, would have drawn
himself.

ON EDUCATION.
AN industrious and virtuous education of children is a better inheritance for
them than a great estate. To what purpose is it said Crates, to heap up great
riches, and have no concern what manner of heirs you leave them to?

The foundation of knowledge and virtue is laid in our childhood, and without
an early care and attention we are almost lost in our very cradles; for the
principles we imbibe in our youth we carry commonly to our graves. It is
education that makes the man. To speak all in a few words, children are but
blank paper, ready indifferently for any impression, good or bad; for they take
all upon credit, and it is much in the power of the first comer to write saint
or devil upon it, which of the two he pleases; so that one step out of the way
of the institution is enough to poison the peace and reputation of a whole life.

In a family where I lately spent some days on a visit, I observed a very
remarkable instance of the outward management of two children. Young master is
a boy of strong, ungovernable passions, of no mean capacity, and an open,
liberal temper; add to this, the disadvantage that he is brought up to the
prospect of a great estate. The girl is of surprising natural parts; but
pettish, sullen, and haughty, though not without a considerable fund of native
goodness. Both of them are excessively ind^led by their parents. The father,
who jumped into the estate by means of his relation to a wealthy citizen, is a
strange ignorant, unpolished creature; and having had no education himself, has
little notion of the importance of one; and is neither anxious about theirs,
nor meddles in it; but leaves them to the chances of life, and the ordinary
track of training up children. The mother, a woman of goodness, but who never
had any of the improvements of education, is, you may very well believe, but
little versed in the arts of forming young minds; yet she thinks herself
qualified by her natural s^gacity, of which, indeed she has a considerable
share for directing and managing her own children. But though she were better
qualified than she is, her immoderate fondness would baffle the nicest
management* Her son is her favorite, in whom she sees no fault; or, if they
are too glaring to be hid she winks at them: and if any of ^he family or
friends complain of them to her, she is ready to put the fairest coloring on
them, and is ready to ascribe the complaints to some unreasonable partiality or
prejudice against her darling boy. The young gentleman, finding himself so
secure of mama's favor, takes all advantages, and stretches his prerogative to
the utmost. The servants of the family he disciplines with all the force his
fists and feet are masters of; and uses strangers who come to visit the family
with the most indecent familiarities: some he calls names, others he salutes
with a slap, or pulls off their wigs, or treads on their toes, with many such
instances of rough courtesy. His is indulged, and (if I may use the expression)
trained in the love of money. It is made the reward of doing his task; and the
end of all his labors. His pockets are generally full; at least, money is
never denied him when he either coaxes or cries for it; and indeed I have seen
him do both with great dexterity. He is allowed to play as much as he pleases
at cards, draughts, or any other game; and it is always for money. I have been
divirted to see how how the chances of the game have roused all his little
passions. If he won, he triumphed over his adversary with immense eagerness and
joy; if he loft, he cried, stormed, and bullied, like a petty tyrant, and
parted with his money with infinite regret. If the mother was provoked at any
time to take notice of his irregularities, she did it with so little judgment,
and so much heat, that it had little or no influence. Perhaps she frowned, and
fired, and made a thundering noise for a while, but this was soon over; and
master's tears, or fullen silence, soon brought on a perfect reconciliation.
She showed no care and steady indignation, such as would have been sufficient
to produce a lasting affect; nor were her rebukes seconded with any substantial
marks of displeasure, so as to make a deep impression on such a perverse child.

The young lady's temper is a little softer, but not less imperious. She is
brought up with a high opinion of the dignity of her rank, and contempt of the
vulgar; therefore the little thing imagines herself already a very considerable
personage, taken state upon her in all companies, swells with rage at every
little imaginary affront, and never thinks she is treated with respect enough;
the servants must pay her uncommon homage; she must be helped at table before
strangers of an ordinary rank. Her pretty features must not be discomposed by
crossing her; in short, humoured she must be in all things; and when her
ladyship is dressed in all her finery, she is admired, caressed, and exalted
into a little queen. This makes her vain and insolent to a degree of
extravagance. She and her brother have pretty nearly the same task set them.
They read, write, dance, and play together; but will only read, or write, or do
just as much as their little honors think proper. They go to learn as to some
terrible task are restless and impatient till it is over* and mind their tutor
almost as much as the maid that puts them to bed: for his authority not being
duly supported by their parents, has no weight. In fine they are so much
humoured, so little restrained or kept under proper government, that he must
have more than the patience of a man who can bear with their insolence, and
almost the capacity of an angel to shape and improve them into any tolerable
figure: though with the genius and temper they have, they migh be taught any
thing, or molded into any form, were they under the influence of proper
discipline and authority. Upon the whole, I could not help thinking them an
instance of the indiscreet conduct of parents in the management of their
children, whom by an ill judged fondness, they expose to the contempt and
derision of mankind, and perhaps to irretrivable calamities.

EUGENIO is just out of his minority, and in the twenty-second year of his age;
be practices the man with all that virtue and decency that makes his father's
acquaintance cover his company; and indeed they may learn by his discourse the
art of good reasoning, as well as the precepts of religion from his example. He
is an entertaining companion to the gay young gentlemen his equals; and yet
divines and philosophers take a pleasure to have Eugenio amongst them. He is
caressed by his superiors in honor and in years; and though he is released
from the discipline of parental education, yet he treats the lady his mother
with all the affectionate duty that could be desired or demanded of him ten
years ago: his father is content to see his own youth outshone by his son, and
confesses that Eugen^o already promises greater things than Agathus did at
thirty.

It you ask whence these happy qualities arise, I grant there was some
foundation for them in his very nature, there was ^^^thing of complexional
virtue min^^^ with this frame; but it is much more owing to the wife conduct of
his parents from his ve^ry infancy, and the blessing of Divine grace attending
their labors, their prayers, and their hopes.

He was trained up from the very cradle to all the duties of infant virtue, by
the allurements of love and reward, suited to his age; and never was driven to
practice any thing by a frown or a hasty word, where it was possible for kinder
affections to work the same effect by indulgence and delay.

As fast as his reasoning powers began to appear and exert themselves, they
were conducted in any easy track of thought, to find out and observe the
reasonableness of every part of his duty, and the lovely character of a child
obedient to reason and to his parents will; while every departure from duty was
shown to be so contrary to reason, as laid an early foundation for conscience
to work upon: conscience began here to assume its office, and to manifest its
authority in dictates, and reproofs, and reflections of mind, peaceful or
painful, according to his behavior. When his parents observed this inward
monitor to awake in his soul, they could better trust him our of their sight.

When he became capable of conceiving an almighty and invisible Being, who made
this world and every creature in it, he was taught to pay all due regard to
this God his Maker; and from the authority and love of his father on earth, he
was led to form right ideas (as far as childhood permitted) of the power,
government, and goodness of the universal and supreme Father of all in Heaven.

He was informed why punishment was due to an offense against God, or his
parents, that his fear might become an useful passion to awaken and guard his
virtue; but he was instructed, at the same time, that where heartily repented
of a fault, and returned to his duty with new diligence, there was forgiveness
to be obtained both of God and man.

When at any time a friend interceded for him to his father, after he had been
guilty of a fault, he was hereby directed into the doctrine of Jesus, the
mediator between God and man; and thus he knew him as an intercessor, before he
could well understand the notion of his sacrifice and atonement.

In his younger years he passed but twice under the correction of the rod: once
for a sit of obstinacy and persisting in a falsehood; then he was given up to
severe chastisement, and it dispelled and cured the sullen humou^ for ever: and
once for the contempt of his mother's authority he endured the scourge again,
and he wanted i^ no more,

He was enticed sometimes to the love of letters, by taking his lesson a reward
of some domestic duty; and a permission to pursue some parts of learning was
the appointed recompense of his diligence and improvement in others.

There was nothing required of his memory but what was first (as far as
possible) let into his understanding; and by proper images and representations,
suited to his years, he was taught to form some conception of the thin^^
described, before he was bid to learn the words by heart. Thus he wa^ freed
from the danger of treasuring up the cant and jargon of mere names, instead of
the riches of solid knowledge.

Where any abstruse and difficult notions occurred in his course of learning,
his preceptor postponed them till the had gone through that subject in a more
superfici^^ way; for this purpose he passed twice through all the sciences; and to
make the doctrines of Christianity easy to him in his childhood, he had two or
three Catechisms composed by his tutor, each of them suited to his more early
or more improved capacity, till at 12 years old he was thought fit to learn
that public form, which is more universally taught and approved.

As he was inured to reasoning from his childhood, so he was instructed to
prove every thing, according to the nature of the subject, by natural or moral
arguments, as far as years would admit: and thus he drew much of his early
knowledge from reason or from revelation by the force of his judgment, and not
merely from his teachers by the strength of his memory.

His parents were persuaded indeed that they ought to teach him the principles
of virtue while he was a child, and the most important truths of religion (...)
natural and revealed, before he was capable of deriving them from the fund of
his own reason, or of fraiming a religion for himself out of so large a book as
the Bible. They thought themselves under the obligation of that divine command,
"Train up a child in the way that he should go, and when he it old to he will
not depart from it." And therefore from a child they made him acquainted with
the Holy Scriptures, and presuaded him to believe that they were given by the
inspiration of God, before it was possible for him to take in the arguments
from reason, history, tradition, etc. which must be joined together to confirm
the sacred canon, and prove the several books of the Bible to be divine. Thus,
like Timothy, "he continued in the things which he had learned." Yet as his
years advanced, they thought it requisite to show him the solid and national
foundation of his faith, that his hope might be built upon the authority of God
and not of men.

After he arrived at fifteen, he was suffered to admit nothing into his full
assent, till his mind saw the rational evidence of the proposition itself; or
at least till he felt the power of those reasons which obliged him to assent,
upon (...) evidence and testimony* where the evidences of sense or of reason
ought not to be expected. He knew tha^ he was not to hope for mathematical
proof that there is a pope at Rome, that the Turks have dominion over Judea,
that St. Paul wrote an Epistle to the Romans, that Christ was crucified without
the gates of Jerusalem, and that in three days time he rose from the dead; and
yet that there is just and reasonable evidence to enforce and support the
behalf of all the facts. Where truths were too sublime for present
comprehension, he would never admit them as a part of his faith till he saw the
full evidence of a speaking God and a divine revelation.

His tutor never imposed any thing on him with a magisterial air; but by way of
advice recommended to him such studies and such methods of improvement, as his
experience had long approved; he gave frequent hints of the danger of some
opinions, and the fatal consequences of some modish and mistaken principles. He
let him know generally what sentiments he himself embraced among the divided
opinions of the age; and what clear and comprehensive knowledge, what
satisfaction of judgment, serenity of mind, and piece of conscience, where to
he found in the principles which he had chosen: but he exhorted his pupil still
to choose widely for himself, led him onward in the sciences, and, in common
and sacred affairs, to frame his own sentiments by just rules of reasoning.
Though Eugenio did not superstitiously confine his belief to the opinions of
his instructor, yet he could not but love the man that indulged him such a
liberty of thought, and gave him such an admirable clue, by which he let
himself into the secrets of knowledge, human and divine* thus, under the happy
and insensible inflences of so prudent a supervisor, he traced the paths of
learning, and enjoyed the unspeakable pleasure of being his own teacher, and of
framing his opinions himself. By this means he began early to use his reason
with freedom, and to judge for himself, without a servile submission to the
authority of others; and yet to pay a just and solemn deference to persons of
age and experience, and particularly to those who were the proper appointed
guides of his youth, and who led him on so gently in the paths of knowledge.

He was not kept a stranger to the errors and follies of mankind, nor was he
let loose amongst them either in books or in company, without a guard and a
guide. His preceptor let him know the gross mistakes and iniquities of men,
ancient and modern, but inland him with proper principles of truth and virtue,
and furnished him with such rules of judgment, as led him more easily to
distinguish between good and bad; and thus he was secured against the infection
and the poison, both of the living and the dead.

He had early cautions given him to avoid the bantering tribe of mortals, and
was instructed to distinguish a jest from an argument, so that a loud laugh at
his religion never puts him nor his faith out of countenance. He is every ready
to render a reason of his christian hope, and to defend his Creed; but he
scorns to enter the lists with such a disputant that has no artillery but squib
and flash, no arguments besides grimance and ridicule. Thus he supports the
character of a Christian with honor: he confines his faith to his Bible, and
his practice to all the rules of piety; and yet thinks as freely as that vain
herd of Atheists and. Deists who arrogate the name of Free-thinkers to
themselves.

You will inquire, perhaps, how he came to attaint so manly a conduct in life
at so early an age, and how every thing of the boy was worn off so soon. Truly,
besides other influences, it is much owing to the happy management of Eraste,
(the name of the lady his mother); the was frequent into the nursery, and
inspired sentiments into his childhood becoming riper years. When their was
company in the pa^^our, with whom she could use such a freedom, she brought her
son in among them, not to entertain them with his own noise and tattle and
impertinence, but to hear their discourse, and sometimes to answer a little
question or two they might ask him. When he was grown up to a youth, he was
often admitted into the room with his father's acquaintance, and was indulged
the liberty to ask and inquire on subjects that seemed to be above his years:
he was encouraged to speak a sentence or two of his own thoughts, and thus to
learn and practice a modest assurance. But when the company was gone he was
approved and praised if he behaved well, or received kind hints of admonition
that he might know when he had been too silent, and when too forward to speak.
Thus, by enjoying the advantage of society above the level of his own age and
understanding, he was always aspiring to imitation; and the excesses and
defects of his conduct were daily noticed and cured.

His curiosity was gratified abroad with new sights and scenes as often as his
parents could do it with convenience, that he might not stare and wonder at
every strange object or occurrence; but he was made patient of restraint and
disappointment, when he seemed to indul^te an excessive desire of any needless
diversion. If he sought any criminal pleasures, or diversions attended with
great danger and inconvenience, the pursuit of them was absolutely forbidden;
but it was done in so kind a manner, as made the guilt or peril of them appear
in the strongest light, and thereby they were rendered hateful or formidable,
rather than the objects of wish or desire.

When Eugenio first began to go abroad in the world, his companions were
recommended to him by the prudence of his parents; or if he chose them himself,
it was still within the reach of his tutor's observation, of the notice of his
father's eye: not was he suffered to run loose into promiscuous company, till
it appeared that his mind was furnished with steady principles of virtue, till
he had knowledge enough to defend those principles, and to repel the assaults
that might be made upon his faith and manners.

Yet it was hardly thought fit to trust him to his own conduct for whole days
together, lest he should meet with temptations too hard for his virtue, till he
had gained resolution enough to say NO boldly, and to maintain an absolute
refusal of pre^^cious pleasures. He was told beforehand how the profane and the
lewd would use all the arts of address, and how subtilely they would practice
upon his good humor with powerful and tempting importunities. This set him
ever upon his guard; and though he carried his sweetness of temper always about
with him, yet he learned to conceal it wheresoever it was neither proper nor
safe to appear. By a little converse in the world, he found that it was
necessary to be positive, bold, and unmovable in rejecting every proposal
which might endanger his character or his morals: especially as he soon became
sensible that a soft and cold denial gave courage to new attacks, and left him
liable to be teased with fresh solicitations. He laid down this therefore for a
constant rule, that where his reason had determined any practice to be either
plainly sinful or utterly expedient, he would give so firm a denial, upon the
principles of virtue and religion, as should for ever discourage any farther
solicitations. This gave him the character of a man of resolute virtue, even
among the rakes of the time, nor was he ever esteemed the less on th^^ account.
At first indeed he thought it a happy victory which he had gotten over himself,
when he could defy the shame of the world, and resolve to be a Christian in the
face of vice and infidelity: he found the shortest way to conquor this foolish
shame was to renounce it at once: then it was easy to practice singularity
amidst a profane multitude. And when he began to get courage enough to profess
resolute piety without a blush, in the midst of such company as this, Agathus
and E^aste then permitted their son to travel abroad, and to see more of the
world, under the protection of their daily prayers. His first tour was through
the neighboring counties of England; he afterward enlarged the circuit of his
travels till he had visited foreign nations, and learned the value of his own.

In short, the restraints of his younger years were tempered with so much
liberty, and managed with such prudence and tenderness, and these bonds of
discipline were so gradually loosened as fast as he grew wise enough to govern
himself, that Eugenio always carried about with him an inward conviction of the
great love and wisdom of his parents and his tutor. The humors of the child
now and then self some reluctance against the pious discipline of his parents;
but now he is arrived at man's estate, there is nothing that he looks back upon
with greater satisfaction than the steps of their conduct, and the instances of
his own submission He often recounts those things with pleasure, as some of the
chief favors of heaven, whereby he was guarded through all the dangers and
follies of youth and childhood, and effectually kept, through Divine Grace
operating by those happy means, from a thousand sorrows, and perhaps from
everlasting ruin.

Though he has been released some years from the strictness of paternal
government, yet he still makes his parents his chosen friends; and though they
cease to practice authority upon him and absolute command, yet he pays the
utmost deference to their counsels, and to the first notice of their
inclinations. You shall never find him resisting and debating against their
desires and propensities in little common things of life, which are indifferent
in themselves; he thinks it carries in it too much contempt of those whom God
and nature require him to honor. Whenever he enters into any important
action of life, he takes a filial pleasure to seek advice from his worthy
parents; and it (...) uneasy to him to astempt any thing of moment without it.
He does not indeed universally practice all their sentiments, but he gains
their consent to follow his own reason and choice,

Some of the wild young gentlemen of the age may happen to ^^ugh at him for
being so much a boy still, and for showing such subjection to the old folks (as
they call them*) With a scornful (...) they bid him "Break off his
leading-strings, and cast away his yokes of bondage." But for the most part he
observes, that the sa^^ persons shake off all yokes at once, and at once break
the bonds of nature, duty, and ^eligion* they pay but little regard to their
Superior in heaven, and more than to those on earth, and have forgotten God and
their parents together. "No^ will I ever be moved (says he) with the reproaches
of those who make a jest of things sacred as well as civil, and treat their
mother and their Maker with the same contempt."

AN EXAMPLE OF FRIENDSHIP.
WHEN Damon was sentenced by Dionysius of Sy^^^se to die on a certain day, he
begged permission, in the interim, to retire to his own country, to set the
affairs of his disconsolate family in order. This the tyrant intended
peremptorily to refuse, by granting it, as he conceived on the impossible
conditions of his procuring some one to remain as hostage for his return, under
equal forfeiture of life. Pythias heard the conditions, and did not watt for an
application upon the part of D^mon: he instantly offered himself as security
for his friend; which being accepted, D^mon was immediately set at liberty. The
king and all the courtiers were astonished at this action; and therefore when
the day of execution drew near, his majesty had the ^ur^osity to visit Pythias
in his confinement. After some conversation on the subject of friendship, in
which the tyrant delivered it as his opinion that self-interest was the ^ole
mover of human actions; as for virtue, friendship, benevolence, love of one's
country, and the like, he looked upon them as terms invented by the wise to
keep in awe and impose upon the weak. "My lord," said P^thias, with a firm
voice and noble aspect, "I would it were possible that I might suffer a
thousand deaths, rather than my friend should fail in any article of his
honor. He cannot fail therein, my lord: I am as confident of his virtue, as I
am of my own existence. But I pray, I beseech the gods, to preserve the life
and integrity of my Damon together: oppose him, ye winds, prevent the eagerness
and impatience of his honorable endeavou^s, and suffer him not to arrive till
by my death I have redeemed a life a thousand times of more consequence, of
more value, than my own; more estimable to his lovely wi^e, to his precious
little innocents, to his friends, to his country. (...) leave me not to die the
worst of deaths in my Damon." Di^nysius was awed and confounded by the dignity
of these sentiments, and by the manner in which they were uttered: he felt his
heart st^uck by a slight sense of invading truth; but it served rather to
perplex than undeceive him. The fatal day arrived. Pythias was brought fourth,
and walked amidst the guards with a seriou, but satisfied air, to the place of
execution. Dion sin; was already there; he was exalted on a moving throne, that
was drawn by six white horses, and sat pensive and attentive to the pr^soner.
Pythias ^^me, he vaulted I (...) on the scaffold, and beholding for some (...)
the apparatus of (...) death, be (...) with a placed counte^ance, and
ad^^ressed the specta^ors; "My rayers are heard," he cried, "the gods (...)
propitious; you know, my friends, that (...) winds have been contrary till
yesterday. Damon could not come, he could not conner impossibilities; he will
be here tomorrow, and the blood which is shed today, shall have ransomed the
life of my friend. O could I erase from your bosoms every doubt, every mean
suspicion, of the honor of the man for whom I am about to suffer, I shall go
to my death even as I would to my br^^al. Be it sufficient in the mean time,
that my friend will be found noble; that his truth is unimpeachable; that he
will speedily prove it; that he is now on his way, hurrying on, accusing
himself, the adverse elements, and the gods: but I haste to prevent his speed;
execu^^^ner do your office." As he pronounced the last words, a buz began to
(...) among the remotest of the people; a distant voice was heard, the crowd
caught the words, and Stop, stop the execution; was repeated by the whole
assembly: a man at full haste; the throng gave way to his approach: he was
mounted on a steed of foam; in an instant he was off his horse, on the
scaffold, and held Pythias straightly embraced. "You are safe," he cried, "you
are safe, my friend, my beloved friend, the gods be praised you are safe. I now
have nothing but death to suffer, and am delivered from the anguish of those
reproaches which I gave myself for having endangered a life so much dearer than
my own." Pa^e, cold, and halt-speechless in the arms of his Damon, Pythias
replied in broker-accents -- "Fatal haste! -- Cruel impatienced -- What envious
powers have wrought impossibilities in your favor? -- But I will not be wholly
disappointed. -- Since I cannot die to save, I will not survive you. Dionysi^s
heard, beheld, and considered all with astonishment. His heart was touched, he
wept, and leaving his throne he ascended the scaffold: "Live, live, ye
incomparable pair I" cried he, "ye have borne unquestionable testimony to the
ex^stence of virtue! and that virtue equally evinces the existence of a God to
reward it. Live happy, live renowned; and, O! form me by your precepts, as ye
have invited me by your example, to be worthy of the participation of so sacred
a friendship."

AN EXAMPLE OF CHASTITY.
LUCRETIA was a lady of great be^^^ty and noble ex^raction; she married
^^^tinus, a relat^on of Tarq^^^nius Suppe^^^, king of Rome. During the siege of
A dea, which lasted much longer than was expected, the young princes passed
their time in entertainments and diver^^^^. One day as they were at (...) at
Sexi^s T^rquin's the king's eldest son, with Collatinus, Lueretia's husband,
the conversation turned on the merit of their wives; every one gave his own the
preference. "What signify so many words?" says Collati^us; "you may in a few
hours, if you please be convinced by your own eyes, how much my Lucretia excels
the rest. We are young: let us mount our horses, and go and surprise them.
Nothing can better decide our dispute than the state we shall find them, in at
a time, when most certainly they will not expect us." They were a little warmed
with wine: "Come on, let us go," they all cried together. They quickly galloped
to Rome, which was about twenty miles from Ardes, where they find the
princesses, wives of the young Tarquins, surrounded with company, and every
circumstance of the highest mirth and pleasure. From thence they rode to
Collatia, where they saw Lucretia in a very different situation. With her maids
about her, she was at work in the inner part of her house, talking on the
dangers to which her husband was exposed. The victory was adjudged to her
unanimously. She received her guests with all possible politeness and civility.
Luc^etia's virtue which should have commanded respect, was the very thing which
kindled in the breast of Sextus Ta^quin a strong and detestable passion. Within
a sew days he returned to Collatia, and upon the plausible excuse he made for
his visit, he was received with all the politeness due to a near relation, and
the eldest son of a king. Watching the fittest opportunity, he declares the
passion she had excited in his last visit, and employed the most tender
entreaties, and all the artifices possible to touch a woman's heart; but all to
no purpose. He then endeavored to extort her compliance by the most terrible
threatenings. It was in vain. She still persisted in her resolution; not could
she be moved, even by the fear of death. But, when the monster told her that he
would first dispatch her, and then having murdered a slave, he would lay him by
her side, after which he would, spread a report, that having caught them in the
act of adultery, he had punished them as they deserved; this seemed to shake
her resol^tion. She hesitated, not knowing which of these dreadful alternatives
to take, whether, by consenting, to dishonor the bed of h^^ husband, whom she
tenderly loved; or, by refusing, to die under the odious character of having
prostituted her person to the lust of a slave. He saw the struggle of her soul;
and seizing the unlucky moment, obtained an inglorious conquest. Thus
Lucretia's virtue, which had been proof against the fear of death, could not
hold out against the fear of infamy. The young prince, having gro^ified his
passion, returned home as in triumph.

On the morrow, Lucretia, overwhelmed with grief and despair, lent early in the
morning to desire her father and her husband to come to her, and bring with
them each a trusty friend, assuring them there was no time to lose. They came
with all speed, the one accompanied with Vale^ius, (so famous after under the
name of Publicola) and the other with B^utus. The moment she saw them come, she
could not command her tears; and when her husband asked her if all was well:
"By no means," said she, "it cannot be well with a woman after she has lost her
honor. Yes, Collonus, thy bed has been defiled by a stranger: but my body only
is polluted; my mind is innocent, as my death shall witness. Promise me only,
not to suffer the a^ulterer to go unpunished: it is Sext^ Tarq^^^ius, who last
night, treacher^^s guest, or rather cruel she, offered me violence, and reaped
as joy (...) to me; but if you are men it will be still more fatal to him." All
promised to revenge her: and, at the same time, tried to comfort her with
representi^^, that the mind only sins, not the body; and where the consent is
wanting, there can be no guilt." "What Sextus deserves," replies Lucretia, "I
leave you to judge; but for me, though I declare myself innocent of the crime,
I exempt not myself from punishment. No immodest woman shall ^lead Lucretia's
example to outlive her dishonor." Thus saying, she plunged into her breast a
dagger she had concealed under her to^e, and expired at their feet.

Lucretia's tragical death has been praised and extolled by Pagan wr^^ers, as
he highest and m^st noble act of her (...). The g^^spel thinks not so: it is
murder, even according to Lucretia's own principles, since she pun sh^d with
death an innocent (...), at least acknowledged as such or (...). She was
ignorant that our life is not in our own power, but in his disposal from whom
we receive it.

St. Austin, who carefully examines, in his book "D^civitate D^^." what we are
to think of Lucretia's death, considers it not as (...) courageous action,
flowing from a true love of chastity, but as an infirmity of a woman two
sensible of worldly same and glory; and who, from a dread of appearing in the
^^es of men an accom^^^ce of the violence she abhorred, and of a crime to which
she was entirely a stranger, commits a real crime upon herself voluntarily and
designedly. But what cannot be sufficiently admired in this Roman lady is her
abhorrence to adultery, which the seems to hold so detestable as not to bear
the thoughts of it. In th^^ sense, she is a noble example for all her sex.

A person of birth and fortune struck with beauty of a Lacedemonian lady, sent
her a letter, entreating the last favor; to which she (...) the following
answer.

"When I was a child, I acted in obedience to my parents, and I was very
punctual in it; since I became a wife, I have been equally obedient to my
husband; and therefore, if you want my consent to a dishonest action, first
propose the matter to him."

CHIOMARA, the wife of Ortiagon, a Gaulish prince, was equally admirable for
her beauty and chastity. During the war between the Romans and the Gauls, A. R.
563, the latter were totally defeated on Mount Olympus. Chiomara, among many
other ladies, was taken prisoner, and committed to the care of a centurion, no
less passionate for money than women, He, at first, endeavored to gain her
consent to his infamous desires, but not being able to prevail upon her, and
subvert her constancy, he thought he might employ force with a woman whom
misfortune had reduced to slavery. Afterward, to make her amends for that
treatment, he offered to restore her liberty; but not without ransom. He a^^eed
with her for a certain sum, and to con^l this design from the other Romans, he
^^mitted her to send any of the prisoners (...) should choose to her relations,
and assigned a place near the river where the lady should be exchanged for
gold. By accident, there was one of her own slaves amongst the prisoners. Upon
him she fixed, and the centurion soon after carried her beyond the advanced
posts, under the cover of a dark night. The next evening two of the relations
of the princes came to the place appointed, whither the centurion also carried
his captive. When they had delivered him the Attic talent they had brought,
which was the sum they had agreed on, the lady in her own language, ordered
th^^ who came to receive her to draw their swords and kill the centurion, who
was than ^^^sing himself with weighing the gold. Then charmed with having
revenged the injurry done her chastity, she took the head of the officer, which
she had out off with her own hands, and hiding it under her robe, went to her
husband Ortiagon, who had returned home after the defeat of his troops. As soon
as she came into his presence, she threw the centurions head at his feet. He
was strangely surprised at such a sight; and asked her whose head it was, and
what had induced her to do an act so uncommon (...) her sex? With a face
covered with a (...) blush, and at the same time expressing (...) fierce
indignation, she declared the (...) which had been done her, and the (...) she
had taken for it.

During the rest of her life, she sted^a^^^ retained the same atrachment for
the purity of manners which constitutes the principal (...) of the sex, and
nobly sustained the honor of so glorious, bold, and herion a^nction.

FINIS.

