THE ENGLISH READER: OR, PIECES IN PROSE AND POETRY, SELECTED FROM The best
Writers, Designed to assist young Persons TO READ WITH PROPRIETY AND EFFECT; TO
IMPROVE THEIR LANGUAGE AND SENTIMENTS; AND TO INCULCATE SOME OF THE MOST
IMPORTANT PRINCIPLES OF Piety and Virtue. With preliminary Observations. ON THE
PRINCIPLES OF GOOD READING.

BY LINDLEY MURRAY, AUTHOR OF "ENGLISH GRAMMAR, EXERCISES," etc.

Philadelphia: PRINTED FOR J. ORMROD, NO. 41, CHESNUT-ST. ^. and J. JOHNSON,
NO. 147, HIGH-ST. AND JOSEPH and JAMES CRUKSHANK, NO. 87, HIGH-ST. 1800.

PREFACE.
MANY selections of excellent matter have lately been made for the benefit of
young persons. Performances of this kind are of so great utility, that fresh
productions of them, and new attempts to improve the young mind, will scarcely
be deemed superfluous, if the writer make his compilation instructive and
interesting, and sufficiently distinct from others.

THE present work, as the title expresses, aims at the attainment of three
objects: to improve youth in the art of reading; to meliorate their language
and sentiments; and to inculcate some of the most important principles of piety
and virtue.

THE pieces selected, not only give exercise to a great variety of emotions,
and the correspondent tones and variations of voice, but contain sentences, and
members of sentences, which are diversified, proportioned, and pointed with
accuracy. Exercises of this nature are, it is presumed, well calculated to
teach youth to read with propriety and effect. A selection of sentences, in
which variety and proportion, with exact punctuation, have been carefully
observed, in all their parts as well as with respect to one another, will
probably have a much greater effect, in properly teaching the art of reading,
than is commonly imagined. In such constructions, every thing is accommodated
to the understanding and the voice; and the common difficulties in learning to
read well, are obviated. When the learner has acquired a habit of reading such
sentences, with justness and facility, he will readily apply that habit, and
the improvements he has made, to sentences more complicated and irregular, and
of a construction entirely different.

THE language of the pieces chosen for this collection, has been carefully
regarded. Purity, propriety, perspicuity, and, in many instances, elegance of
diction, distinguish them. They are extracted from the works of the most
correct and elegant writers. From the sources whence the sentiments are drawn,
the reader may expect to find them connected and regular, sufficiently
important and impressive, and divested of every thing that is either trite or
eccentric. The frequent perusal of such composition, naturally tends to infuse
a taste for this species of excellence; and to produce a habit of thinking, and
of composing, with judgment and accuracy The Grammatical Student, in his
progress through this work, will meet with numerous instances of composition,
in strict conformity to the rules for promoting perspicuous and elegant writing
contained in the Appendix to the Author's English Grammar. By occasionally
examining this conformity, he will be confirmed in the utility of those rules;
and be enabled to apply them with ease and dexterity.
.

THAT this collection may also serve the purpose of promoting piety and virtue,
the Compiler has introduced many extracts, which place religion in the most
amiable light; and which recommend a great variety of moral duties, by the
excellence of their nature, and the happy effects which they produce. These
subjects are exhibited in a style and manner, which are calculated to arrest
the attention of youth; and to make strong and durable impressions on their
minds In some of the pieces, the Compiler has made a few alterations, chiefly
verbal, to adapt them the better to the design of his work.
.

THE Compiler has been careful to avoid every expression and sentiment, that
might gratify a corrupt mind, or, in the least degree, offend the eye or ear of
innocence. This he conceives to be peculiarly incumbent on every person who
writes for the benefit of youth. It would, indeed, be a great and happy
improvement in education, if no writings were allowed to come under their
notice, but such as are perfectly innocent; and if, on all proper occasions,
they were encouraged to peruse those which tend to inspire a due reverence for
virtue, and an abhorrence of vice, as well as to animate them with sentiments
of piety and goodness. Such impressions deeply engraven on their minds, and
connected with all their seize, could scarcely fail of attending them
through life; and of producing a solidity of principle and character, that
would be able to resist the danger arising from future intercourse with the
world.

THE Author has endeavored to relieve the grave and serious parts of his
collection, by the occasional admission of pieces which amuse as well as
instruct. If, however, any of his readers should think it contains too great a
proportion of the former, it may be some apology to observe that, in the
existing publications designed for the perusal of young persons, the
preponderance is greatly on the side of gay and amusing productions. Too much
attention may be paid to this medium of improvement. When the imagination, of
youth especially, is much entertained, the sober dictates of the understanding
are regarded with indifference; and the influence of the good affections, is
either feeble, or transient. A temperate use of such entertainment seems
therefore requisite, to afford proper scope for the operations of the
understanding and the heart.

THE reader will perceive, that the Compiler has been solicitous to recommend
to young persons, the perusal of the sacred Scriptures, by interspersing
through his work, some of the most beautiful and interesting passages of those
invaluable writings. To excite an early taste and veneration for this great
rule of life, is a point of so high importance, as to warrant the attempt to
promote it on every proper occasion.

TO improve the young mind, and to afford some assistance to tutors, in the
arduous and important work of education, were the motives which led to this
production. If the Author should be so successful as to accomplish these ends,
even in a small degree, he will think his time and pains well employed, and
himself amply rewarded.

INTRODUCTION.
OBSERVATIONS ON THE PRINCIPLES OF GOOD READING.
TO read with propriety is a pleasing and important attainment; productive of
improvement both to the understanding and the heart. It is essential to a
complete reader, that he minutely perceive the ideas, and enter into the
feelings of the author, whose sentiments he professes to repeat: for how is it
possible to represent clearly to others, what we have but faint or inaccurate
conceptions of ourselves? If there were no other benefits resulting from the
art of reading well, than the necessity it lays us under, of precisely
ascertaining the meaning of what we read; and the habit thence required, of
doing this with facility, both when reading silently and aloud, they would
constitute a sufficient compensation for all the labor we can bestow upon the
subject. But the pleasure derived to ourselves and others, from a clear
communication of ideas and feelings; and the strong and durable impressions
made thereby on the minds of the reader and the audience, are considerations,
which give an additional importance to the study of this necessary and useful
art. The perfect attainment of it doubtless requires great attention and
practice, joined to extraordinary NOTE.
For many of the observations contained in this preliminary tract, the Author
is indebted to the writings of Dr. Blair, and to the Encyclopaedia Brittannica.




natural powers; but as there are many degrees of excellence in the art, the
student whose aims fall short of perfection, will find himself amply rewarded
for every exertion he may think proper to make.

To give rules for the management of the voice in reading, by which the
necessary pauses, emphasis, and tones, may be discovered and put in practice,
is not possible. After all the directions that can be offered on these points,
much will remain to be taught by the living instructor: much will be attainable
by no other means, than the force of example influencing the imitative powers
of the learner. Some rules and principles on these heads will, however, be
found useful, to prevent erroneous and vicious modes of utterance; to give the
young reader some taste of the subject; and to assist him in acquiring a just
and accurate mode of delivery. The observations which we have to make, for
these purposes, may be comprised under the following heads: PROPER LOUDNESS OF
VOICE; DISTINCTNESS; SLOWNESS; PROPRIETY OF PRONUNCIATION; EMPHASIS; TONES;
PAUSES; and MODE OF READING VERSE.

SECTION I. Proper Loudness of Voice.
THE first attention of every person who reads to others, doubtless, must be,
to make himself be heard by all those to whom he reads. He must endeavor to
fill with his voice the space occupied by the company. This power of voice, it
may be thought, is wholly a natural talent. It is, in a good measure, the gift
of nature; but it may receive considerable assistance from art. Much depends,
for this purpose, on the proper pitch and management of the voice. Every person
has three pitches in his voice; the HIGH, the MIDDLE, and the LOW one. The
high, is that which he uses in calling aloud to some person at a distance. The
low is, when he approaches to a whisper. The middle is, that which he employs
in common conversation, and which he should generally use in reading to others.
For it is a great mistake, to imagine that one must take the highest pitch of
his voice, in order to be well heard in a large company. This is confounding
two things which are different, loudness or strength of sound, with the key or
note on which we speak. There is a variety of sound within the compass of each
key. A speaker may therefore render his voice louder, without altering the key:
and we shall always be able to give most body, most persevering force of sound,
to that pitch of voice, to which in conversation we are accustomed. Whereas, by
setting out on our highest pitch or key, we certainly allow ourselves less
compass, and are likely to strain our voice before we have done. We shall
fatigue ourselves, and read with pain; and whenever a person speaks with pain
to himself, he is always heard with pain by his audience. Let us therefore give
the voice full strength and swell of sound; but always pitch it on our ordinary
speaking key. It should be a constant rule, never to utter a greater quantity
of voice, than we can afford without pain to ourselves, and without any
extraordinary effort. As long as we keep within these bounds, the other organs
of speech will be at liberty to discharge their several offices with ease; and
we shall always have our voice under command. But whenever we transgress these
bounds, we give up the reins, and have no longer any management of it. It is a
useful rule too, in order to be well heard, to cast our eye on some of the most
distant persons in the company, and to consider ourselves as reading to them.
We naturally and mechanically utter our words with such a degree of strength,
as to make ourselves be heard by the person whom we address, provided he is
within the reach of our voice. As this is the case in conversation, it will
hold also in reading to others. But let us remember, that in reading, as well
as in conversation, it is possible to offend by speaking too loud. This extreme
hurts the ear, by making the voice come upon it in rumbling indistinct masses.

By the habit of reading, when young, in a loud and vehement manner, the voice
becomes fixed in a strained and unnatural key; and is rendered incapable of
that variety of elevation and depression which constitutes the true harmony of
utterance, and affords ease to the reader, and pleasure to the audience. This
unnatural pitch of the voice, and disagreeable monotony, are most observable in
persons who were taught to read in large rooms; who were accustomed to stand at
too great distance, when reading to their teachers; whose instructors were very
imperfect in their hearing; or who were taught by persons, that considered loud
expression as the chief requisite in forming a good reader. These are
circumstances which demand the serious attention of every one to whom the
education of youth is committed.

SECTION II. Distinctness.
IN the next place, to being well heard and clearly understood, distinctness of
articulation contributes more than mere loudness of sound. The quantity of
sound necessary to fill even a large space, is smaller than is commonly
imagined; and, with distinct articulation, a person with a weak voice will make
it reach farther, than the strongest voice can reach without it. To this,
therefore, every reader ought to pay great attention. He must give every sound
which he utters, its due proportion; and make every syllable, and even every
letter in the word which he pronounces, be heard distinctly; without slurring,
whispering, or suppressing any of the proper sounds.

An accurate knowledge of the simple, elementary sounds of the language, and a
facility in expressing them, are so necessary to distinctness of expression,
that if the learner's seize are, in this respect, imperfect, (and many
there are in this situation,) it will be incumbent on his teacher, to carry him
back to these primary articulations; and to suspend his progress, till he
become perfectly master of them. It will be in vain to press him forward, with
the hope of forming a good reader, if he cannot completely articulate every
elementary sound of the language.

SECTION III. Due Degree of Slowness.
IN order to express ourselves distinctly, moderation is requisite with regard
to the speed of pronouncing. Precipitancy of speech confounds all articulation,
and all meaning. It is scarcely necessary to observe, that there may be also an
extreme on the opposite side. It is obvious that a lifeless drawling manner of
reading, which allows the minds of the hearers to be always outrunning the
speaker, must render every such performance insipid and fatiguing. But the
extreme of reading too fast is much more common; and requires the more to be
guarded against, because, when it has grown into a habit, few errors are more
difficult to be corrected. To pronounce with a proper degree of slowness, and
with full and clear articulation, is necessary to be studied by all, who wish
to become good readers; and it cannot be too much recommended to them. Such a
pronunciation gives weight and dignity to the subject. It is a great assistance
to the voice, by the pauses and rests which it allows it more easily to make;
and it enables the reader to swell all his sounds, both with more force and
more harmony.

SECTION IV. Propriety of Pronunciation.
AFTER the fundamental attentions to the pitch and management of the voice, to
distinct articulation, and to a proper degree of slowness of speech, what the
young reader must, in the next place, study, is propriety of pronunciation; or,
giving to every word which he utters, that sound which the best usage of the
language appropriates to it; in opposition to broad, vulgar, or provincial
pronunciation. This is requisite both for reading intelligibly, and for reading
with correctness and ease. Instructions concerning this article may best be
given by the living teacher. But there is one observation, which it may not be
improper here to make. In the English language, every word which consists of
more syllables than one, has one accented syllable. The accent rests sometimes
on the vowel, sometimes on the consonant. The genius of the language, requires
the voice to mark that syllable by a stronger percussion, and to pass more
slightly over the rest. Now, after we have learned the proper seats of those
accents, it is an important rule, to give every word just the same accent in
reading, as in common discourse. Many persons err in this respect. When they
read to others, and with solemnity, they pronounce the syllables in a different
manner from what they do at other times. They dwell upon them, and protract
them; they multiply accents on the same word; from a mistaken notion, that it
gives gravity and importance to their subject, and adds to the energy of their
delivery. Whereas this is one of the greatest faults that can be committed in
pronunciation: it makes what is called a pompous or mouthing manner; and gives
an artificial affected air to reading, which detracts greatly both from its
agreeableness, and its impression.

Sheridan and Walker have published dictionaries, for ascertaining the true and
best pronunciation of the words of our language. By attentively consulting
them, particularly "Walker's Pronouncing Dictionary," the young reader will be
much assisted, in his endeavors to attain a correct pronunciation of the words
belonging to the English language.

SECTION V. Emphasis.
BY Emphasis is meant a stronger and fuller sound of voice, by which we
distinguish some word or words, on which we design to lay particular stress,
and to show how they affect the rest of the sentence. Sometimes the emphatic
words must be distinguished by a particular tone of voice, as well as by a
particular stress. On the right management of the emphasis depends the life of
pronunciation. If no emphasis be placed on any words, not only is discourse
rendered heavy and lifeless, but the meaning left often ambiguous. If the
emphasis be placed wrong, we pervert and confound the meaning wholly.

Emphasis may be divided into the SUPERIOR and the INFERIOR emphasis. The
superior emphasis determines the meaning of a sentence, with reference to
something said before, presupposed by the author as general knowledge, or
removes an ambiguity, where a passage may have more senses than one. The
inferior emphasis enforces, graces, and enlivens, but does not fix, the meaning
of any passage. The words to which this latter emphasis is given, are in
general, such as seem the most important in the sentence, or, on other
accounts, to merit this distinction. The following passage will serve to
exemplify the superior emphasis.

"Of man's first disobedience, and the fruit
"Of that forbidden tree, whose mortal taste
"Brought death into the world, and all our woe," etc.
"Sing heavenly Muse!"
Supposing that originally other beings, besides men, had disobeyed the
commands of the Almighty, and that the circumstance were well known to us,
there would fall an emphasis upon the word man's in the first line; and hence
it would be read thus: "Of man's first disobedience, and the fruit," etc.

But if it were a notorious truth that mankind had transgressed in a peculiar
manner more than once, the emphasis would fall on first; and the line be read,
"Of man's first disobedience," etc.

Again, admitting death (as was really the case) to have been an unheard of and
dreadful punishment, brought upon man in consequence of his transgression; on
that supposition the third line would be read, "Brought death into the world,
etc.

But if we were to suppose, that mankind knew there was such an evil as death
in other regions, though the place they inhabited had been free from it till
their transgression, the line would run thus: "Brought death into the world,"
etc.

The superior emphasis finds place in the following short sentence, which
admits of four distinct meanings, each of which is ascertained by the emphasis
only.

"Do you ride to town today?" The following examples illustrate the nature and
use of the inferior emphasis.

Many persons mistake the love, for the practice of virtue.

Shall I reward his services with falsehood! Shall I forget him who cannot
forget me!

If his principles are false, no apology from himself can make them right: if
founded on truth, no censure from others can make them wrong.

"Though deep, yet clear; though gentle, yet not dull;
" Strong, without rage; without overflowing, full."
A friend exaggerates a man's virtues; an enemy, his crimes.

The wise man is happy, when he gains his own approbation; the fool, when he
gains that of others.

The superior emphasis, in reading as in speaking, must be determined entirely
by the sense of the passage, and always made alike: but as to the inferior
emphasis, taste alone seems to have the right of fixing its situation and
quantity.

Among a number of persons, who have had proper opportunities of learning to
read, in the best manner it is now taught, very few could be selected, who, in
a given instance, would use the inferior emphasis alike, either as to place or
quantity. Some persons, indeed, use scarcely any degree of it: and others do
not scruple to carry it much beyond any thing to be found in common discourse;
and even sometimes throw it upon words so very trifling in themselves, that it
is evidently done with no other view, than to give greater variety to the
modulation By modulation is meant that pleasing variety of voice, which is
perceived in uttering a sentence, and which, in its nature, is perfectly
distinct from emphasis, and the tones of emotion and passion. The young reader
should be careful to render his modulation correct and easy; and, for this
purpose, should form it upon the model of the most judicious and correct
speakers.
. Notwithstanding this diversity of practice, there are certainly proper
boundaries, within which this emphasis must be restrained, in order to make it
meet the approbation of sound judgment and correct taste. It will doubtless
have different degrees of exertion, according to the greater or less degree of
importance of the words upon which it operates; and there may be very properly
some variety in the use of it: but its application is not arbitary, depending
on the caprice of readers.

As emphasis often falls on words in different parts of the same sentence, so
it is frequently required to be continued, with a little variation, on two, and
sometimes more words together. The following sentences exemplify both the parts
of this position: If you seek to make one rich, study not to increase his
stores, but to diminish his desires. The Mexican figures, or picture-writing,
represents things not words: they exhibit images to the eye, not ideas to the
understanding.

Some sentences are so full and comprehensive, that almost every word is
emphatical: as Ye hills and dales ye rivers, woods, and plains! or, as that
pathetic expostulation in the prophecy of Ezekiel, "Why will ye die!"

Emphasis, besides its other offices, is the great regulator of quantity.
Though the quantity of our syllables is fixed, in words separately pronounced,
yet it is mutable, when these words are ranged in sentences; the long being
changed into short, the short into long, according to the importance of the
words with regard to meaning. Emphasis also, in particular cases, alters the
seat of the accent. This is demonstrable from the following examples. "He shall
increase, but I shall decrease." There is a difference between giving and
forgiving. In this species of composition, plausibility is much more essential
than probability. In these examples, the emphasis requires the accent to be
placed on syllables, to which it does not commonly belong.

In order to acquire the proper management of the emphasis, the great rule to
be given, is, that the reader study to attain a just conception of the force
and spirit of the sentiments which he is to pronounce. For to lay the emphasis
with exact propriety, is a constant exercise of good sense and attention. It is
far from being an inconsiderable attainment. It is one of the most decisive
trials of a true and just taste; and must arise from feeling delicately
ourselves, and from judging accurately of what is fittest to strike the feeling
of others.

There is one error, against which it is particularly proper to caution the
learner; namely, that of multiplying emphatical words too much, and using the
emphasis indiscriminately. It is only by a prudent reserve and distinction in
the use of them, that we can give them any weight. If they recur too often; if
a reader attemps to render every thing he expresses of high importance, by a
multitude of strong emphasis, we soon learn to pay little regard to them. To
crowd every sentence with emphatical words, is like crowding all the pages of a
book with Italic characters; which, as to the effect, is just the same as to
use no such distinctions at all.

SECTION VI. Tones.
TONES are different both from emphasis and pauses; consisting in the notes or
varia^ions of sound which we employ, in the expression of our sentiments.
Emphasis affects particular words and phrases, with a degree of tone or
inflexion of voice; but tones, peculiarly so called, affect sentences,
paragraphs, and sometimes even the whole of a discourse.

To show the use and necessity of tones, we need only observe, that the mind,
in communicating its ideas, is in a constant state of activity, emotion, or
agitation, from the different effects which those ideas produce in the speaker.
Now the end of such communication being, not merely to lay open the ideas, but
also the different feelings whieh they excite in him who utters them, there
must be other signs than words, to manifest those feelings; as words uttered in
a monotonous manner, can represent only a similar state of mind, perfectly free
from all activity or emotion. As the communication of these internal feelings
was of much more consequence in our social intercourse, than the mere
conveyance of ideas, the Author of our being did not, as in that conveyance,
leave the invention of the language of emotion, to man; but impressed it
himself upon our nature, in the same manner as he has done with regard to the
rest of the animal world; all of which express their various feelings, by
various tones. Ours, indeed, from the superior rank that we hold, are in a high
degree more comprehensive; as there is not an act of the mind, an exertion of
the fancy, or an emotion of the heart, which has not its peculiar tone, or note
of the voice, by which it is to be expressed; and which is suited exactly to
the degree of internal feeling. It is chiefly in the proper use of these tones,
that the life, spirit, beauty, and harmony of delivery consist.

The limits of this introduction, do not admit of examples, to illustrate the
variety of tones belonging to the different passions and emotions. We shall,
however, select one, which is extracted from the beautiful lamentation of David
over Saul and Jonathan, and which will, in some degree, elucidate what has been
said on this subject. The beauty of Israel is slain upon thy high places: how
are the mighty fallen! Tell it not in Gath; publish it not in the streets of
Askelon: left the daughters of the Philistines rejoice; lest the daughters of
the uncircumcised triumph. Ye mountains of Gilboa, let there be no dew nor rain
upon you, nor fields of offerings; for there the shields of the mighty was
vilely cast away; the shield of Saul, as though he had not been anointed with
oil! Th first of these divisions expresses sorrow and lamentation; therefore
the note is low. The next contains a spirited command, and should be pronounced
much higher. The other sentence, in which he makes a pathetic address to the
mountains where his friends had been slain, must be expressed in a note quite
different from the two former; not so low as the first, nor so high as the
second, in a manly, firm, and yet plaintive tone.

The correct and natural language of the emotions, is not so difficult to be
attained, as most readers seem to imagine. If we enter into the spirit of the
author's sentiments, as well as into the meaning of his words, we shall not
fail to deliver the words in properly varied tones. For there are few people,
who speak English without a provincial note, that have not an accurate use of
tones, when they utter their sentiments in earnest discourse. And the reason
that they have not the same use of them, in reading aloud the sentiment^ of
others, may be traced to the very defective and erroneous method, in which the
art of reading is taught; whereby all the various, natural, expressive tones of
speech, are suppressed; and a few artificial, unmeaning reading notes, are
substituted for them.

But when we recommend to readers, an attention to the tone and language of
emotions, we must be understood to do it with proper limitation. Moderation is
necessary in this point, as it is in other things. For when reading becomes
strictly imitative, it assumes a theatrical manner, and must be highly
improper, as well as give offense to the hearers; because it is inconsistent
with that delicacy and modesty, which are indispensable on such occasions. The
speaker who delivers his own emotions, must be supposed to be more vivid and
animated, than would be proper in the person who relates them at second hand.

We shall conclude this section with the following rule, for the tones that
indicate the passions and emotions. In reading, let all your tones of
expression be borrowed from those of common speech, but, in some degree, more
faintly characterized. Let those tones which signify any disagreeable passion
of the mind, be still more faint than those which indicate agreeable emotions:
and, on all occasions, preserve yourselves so far from being affected with the
subject, as to be able to proceed through it, with that easy and masterly
manner, which has its good effects in this, as well as in every other art.

SECTION VII. Pauses.
PAUSES or rests, in speaking or reading, are a total cessation of the voice,
during a perceptible, and, in many cases, a measurable space of time. Pauses
are equally necessary to the speaker, and the hearer. To the speaker, that he
may take breath, without which he cannot proceed far in delivery; and that he
may, by these temporary rests, relieve the organs of speech, which otherwise
would be soon tired by continued action: to the hearer, that the ear also may
be relieved form the fatigue, which it would otherwise endure from a continuity
of sound; and that the understanding may have sufficient time to mark the
distinction of sentences, and their several members.

There are two kinds of pauses; first, emphatical pauses; and next, such as
mark the distinctions of sense. An emphatical pause is generally made, after
something has been said of peculiar moment, and on which we desire to fix the
hearer's attention. Sometimes, before such a thing is said, we usher it in with
a pause of this nature. Such pauses have the same effect as a strong empasis;
and are subject to the same rules; especially to the caution, of not repeating
them too frequently. For as they excite uncommon attention, and of course raise
expectation, if the importance of the matter be not fully answerable to such
expectation, they occasion disappointment and disgust.

But the most frequent and the principal use of pauses, is, to mark the
divisions of the sense, and at the same time to allow the reader to draw his
breath; and the proper and delicate adjustment of such pauses, is one of the
most nice and difficult articles of delivery. In all reading, the management of
the breath requires a good deal of care, so as not to oblige us to divide words
from one another, which have so intimate a connection, that they ought to be
pronounced with the same breath, and without the least separation. Many a
sentence is miserably mangled, and the force of the emphasis totally lost, by
divisions being made in the wrong place. To avoid this, every one, while he is
reading, should be very careful to provide a full supply of breath, for what he
is to utter. It is a great mistake to imagine, that the breath must be drawn
only at the end of a period, when the voice is allowed to fall. It may easily
be gathered at the intervals of the period, when the voice is suspended only
for a moment; and, by this management, one may always have a sufficient stock
for carrying on the longest sentence, without improper interruptions.

Pauses in reading must generally be formed upon the manner in which we utter
ourselves in ordinary, sensible conversation; and not upon the stiff artificial
manner, which is acquired from reading books according to the common
punctuation. It will by no means be sufficient to attend to the point used in
printing; for these are far from marking all the pauses, which ought to be made
in reading. A mechanical attention to these resting places, has perhaps been
one cause of monotony, by leading the reader to a similar tone at every stop,
and a uniform cadence at every period. The primary use of points, is to assist
the reader in discerning the grammatical construction; and it is only as a
secondary object, that they regulate his pronunciation. On this head, the
following direction may be of use: Though in reading great attention should be
paid to the stops, yet a greater should be given to the sense; and their
correspondent times occasionally lengthened beyond what is usual in common
speech.

To render pauses pleasing and expressive, they must not only be made in the
right place, but also accompanied with a proper tone of voice, by which the
nature of these pauses is intimated; much more than by the length of them,
which can seldom be exactly measured. Sometimes it is only a slight and simple
suspension of voice that is proper; sometimes a degree of cadence in the voice
is required; and sometimes that peculiar tone and cadence which denote the
sentence to be finished. In all these cases, we are to regulate ourselves by
attending to the manner in which Nature teaches us to speak, when engaged in
real and earnest discourse with others. The following sentence exemplifies the
suspending and the closing pauses: Hope, the balm of life, sooths us under
every misfortune. The first and second pauses are accompanied by an inflection
of voice, that gives the hearer an expectation of something further to complete
the sense: the inflection attending the third pause, signifies that the sense
is completed.

The preceding example is an illustration of the suspending pause, in its
simple state: the following instance exhibits that pause with a degree of
cadence in the voice: If content cannot remove the disquietudes of mankind, it
will at least alleviate them.

The suspending pause is often, in the same sentence, attended with both the
rising and the falling inflection of voice; as will be seen in this example:
Moderate exercise`, and habitual temperance, strengthen the constitution The
rising inflection is denoted by the acute, the falling, by the grave accent.
.

As the suspending pause may be thus attended with both the rising and the
falling inflection, it is the same with regard to the closing pause: it admits
of both. The falling inflection generally accompanies it; but it is not
unfrequently connected with the rising inflection. Interrogative sentences, for
instance, are often terminated in this manner: as, "Am I ungrateful?" "Is he in
earnest?"

But where a sentence is begun by an interrogative pronoun or adverb, it is
commonly terminated by the falling inflection: as, "What has he gained by his
folly`?" "Who will assist him`?" "Where is the messenger`?" "When did he
arrive`?"

Where two questions are united in one sentence, and connected by the
conjunction or, the first takes the rising, the second the falling inflection:
as, Does his conduct support discipline, or destroy it`?

The rising and falling inflections must not be confounded with emphasis.
Though they may often coincide, they are, in their nature, perfectly distinct.
Emphasis sometimes controls those inflections.

The regular application of the rising and falling inflections, confers so much
beauty on expression, and is so necessary to be studied by the young reader,
that we shall insert a few more examples to induce him to pay greater attention
to the subject. In these instances, all the inflections are not marked. Such
only are distinguished as are most striking, and will best serve to show the
reader their utility and importance.

Manufactures`, trade`, and agriculture, naturally employ more than nineteen
parts in twenty, of the human species.

He who resigns the world, has no temptation to envy, hatred`, malice`, anger;
but is in constant possession of a serene mind: he who follows the pleasures of
it, which are in their very nature disappointing, is in constant search of
care`, solicitude, remorse, and confusion`.

To advise the ignorant`, relieve the needy`, comfort the afflicted, are duties
that fall in our way almost every day of our lives.

Those evil spirits, who, by long custom, have contracted in the body habits of
lust, and sensuality`; malice and revenge`; an aversion to every thing that is
good`, just`, and laudable, are naturally seasoned and prepared for pain and
misery.

I am persuaded, that neither death, nor life`; nor angels, nor principalities,
nor powers`; nor things present, nor things to come`; nor height, nor depth`;
nor any other creature, shall be able to separate us from the Love of God`.

The reader who would wish to see a minute and ingenious investigation of the
nature of these inflections, and the rules by which they are governed, may
consult the first volume of Walker's Elements of Elocution.

SECTION VIII. Manner of reading Verse.
WHEN we are reading verse, there is a peculiar difficulty in making the pauses
justly. The difficulty arises from the melody of verse, which dictates to the
ear pauses or rests of its own; and to adjust and compound these properly with
the pauses of the sense, so as neither to hurt the ear, nor offend the
understanding, is so very nice a matter, that it is no wonder we so seldom meet
with good readers of poetry. There are two kinds of pauses that belong to the
melody of verse: one is, the pause at the end of the line; and the other, the
caesural pause in or near the middle of it. With regard to the pause at the end
of the line, which marks that strain or verse to be finished, rhyme renders
this always sensible; and in some measure compels us to observe it in our
pronunciation. In respect to blank verse, we ought also to read it so as to
make every line sensible to the ear: for, what is the use of melody, or for
what end has the poet composed in verse, if, in reading his lines, we suppress
his numbers, by omitting the final pause; and degrade them, by our
pronunciation, into mere prose? At the same time that we attend to this pause,
every appearance of sing-song and tone must be carefully guarded against. The
close of the line, where it makes no pause in the meaning, ought not to be
marked by such a tone as is used in finishing a sentence; but, without either
fall or elevation of the voice, it should be denoted only by such a slight
suspension of sound, as may distinguish the passage from one line to another,
without injuring the meaning.

The other kind of melodious pause, is that which falls somewhere about the
middle of the verse, and divides it into two hemistichs; a pause, not so great
as that which belongs to the close of the line, but still sensible to an
ordinary ear. This, which is called the caesural pause, may fall, in English
heroic verse, after the 4th, 5th, 6th, or 7th syllables in the line. Where the
verse is so constructed, that this caesural pause coincides with the slightest
pause or division in the sense, the line can be read easily; as in the two
first verses of Pope's Messiah: "Ye nymphs of Solyma! begin the song;
"To heavenly themes, sublimer strains belong."
But if it should happen that words which have such a strict and intimate
connection, as not to bear even a momentary separation, are divided from one
another by this caesural pause, we then feel a sort of struggle between the
sense and the sound, which renders it difficult to read such lines
harmoniously. The rule of proper pronunciation in such cases, is to regard only
the pause which the sense forms; and to read the line accordingly. The neglect
of the caesural pause may make the line sound somewhat unharmoniously; but the
effect would be much worse, if the sense were sacrificed to the sound. For
instance, in the following line of Milton, -- "What in me is dark,
"Illumine; what is low, raise and support."
the sense clearly dictates the pause after illumine, at the end of the third
syllable, which, in reading, ought to be made accordingly; though, if the
melody only were to be regarded, illumine should be connected with what
follows, and the pause not made till the fourth or sixth syllable. So in the
following line of Pope's Epistle to Dr. Arbuthnot, "I sit, with sad civility I
read." The ear plainly points out the caesural pause as falling after sad, the
fourth syllable. But it would be very bad reading to make any pause there, so
as to separate sad and civility. The sense admits of no other pause than after
the second syllable sit, which therefore must be the only pause made in reading
this part of the sentence.

There is another mode of dividing some verses, by introducing what may be
called demi-caesuras, which require very slight pauses; and which the reader
should manage with judgment, or he will be apt to fall into an affected
sing-song mode of pronouncing verses of this kind. The following lines
exemplify the demi-caesura.

"Warms in the sun, refreshes in the breeze,
"Glows in the stars, and blossoms in the trees;
"Lives through all life, extends through all extent,
"Spreads undivided, operates unspent."
Before the conclusion of this introduction, the Compiler takes the liberty to
recommend to those teachers, who may favor his compilation, to exercise their
pupils in discovering and explaining the emphatic words, and the proper tones
and pauses, of every portion assigned them to read, previously to their being
called out to the performance. These preparatory lessons, in which they should
be regularly examined, will improve their judgment and taste; prevent the
practice of reading without attention to the subject; and establish a habit of
readily discovering the meaning, force, and beauty, of every sentence they
peruse.

CONTENTS.
PART I. PIECES IN PROSE.
CHAPTER I.
SELECT SENTENCES AND PARAGRAPHS, Page 37
CHAPTER II. NARRATIVE PIECES.
SECT. 1. No rank or possessions can make the guilty mind happy, Page 61.... 2.
Change of external condition often adverse to virtue, Page 62.... 3. Haman; or
the misery of pride, Page 64.... 4. Ortogrul; or the vanity of riches, Page
66.... 5. Lady Jane Gray, Page 69.... 6. The hill of science, Page 73.... 7.
The journey of a day; a picture of human life, Page 78
CHAPTER III. DIDACTIC PIECES.
SECT. 1. The importance of a good education, Page 83.... 2. On gratitude, Page
85.... 3. On forgiveness, Page 86.... 4. Motives to the practice of gentleness,
Page 87.... 5. A suspicious temper the source of misery to its possessor, Page
89.... 6. Comforts of Religion, Page 91.... 7. Diffidence of our abilities, a
mark of wisdom, Page 92 SECT 8. On the importance of order in the distribution
of our time, Page 93.... 9. The dignity of virtue amidst corrupt examples, Page
96.... 10. The mortifications of vice greater than those of virtue, Page 98....
11. On contentment, Page 100.... 12. Rank and riches afford no ground for envy,
Page 104.... 13. Patience under provocations our interest as well as duty, Page
106.... 14. Moderation in our wishes recommended, Page 108.... 15. Omniscience
and omnipresence of the Deity, the source of consolation to good men, Page 111
CHAPTER IV. ARGUMENTATIVE PIECES.
SECT. 1. Happiness is founded in rectitude of conduct, Page 116.... 2. Virtue
man's highest interest, Page 117.... 3. The injustice of an uncharitable
spirit, Page 118.... 4. The misfortunes of men mostly chargeable on themselves,
Page 120.... 5. On disinterested friendship, Page 124.... 6. On the immortality
of the soul, Page 128
CHAPTER V. DESCRIPTIVE PIECES.
SECT. 1. The seasons, Page 132.... 2. The cataract of Niagara, in Canada,
North America, Page 134.... 3. The grotto of Antiparos, Page 135.... 4. The
grotto of Antiparos continued, Page 137.... 5. Earthquake at Catanea, Page 138
SECT. 6. Creation, Page 140.... 7. On charity, Page 141.... 8. Prosperity is
^^doubled to a good man, Page 142.... 9. On the beauties of the Psalms, Page
144.... 10. Character of Alfred, King of England Page 146.... 11. Character of
Queen Elizabeth, Page 147.... 12. On the slavery of vice, Page 149.... 13. The
man of integrity, Page 151.... 14. On gentleness, Page 152
CHAPTER VI. PATHETIC PIECES.
SECT. 1. Trial and execution of the Earl of Strafford, Page 156.... 2. An
eminent instance of true fortitude of mind, Page 158.... 3. The good man's
comfort in affliction, Page 159.... 4. The close of life. Page 161.... 5.
Exalted society, and the renewal of virtuous connexions, two sources of future
felicity, Page 163.... 6. The clemency and amiable character of the Patriarch
Joseph, Page 165.... 7. Altamont, Page 169
CHAPTER VII. DIALOGUES.
SECT. 1. Democritus and Heracli^us, Page 172.... 2. Dionysius, Pythias, and
Damon, Page 175.... 3. Lock and Bail, Page 180
CHAPTER VIII. PUBLIC SPEECHES.
SECT. 1. Cicero against Verres, Page 189.... 2 Speech of Adherbal to the Roman
Senate, imploring their protection against Jugurtha, Page 193 SECT. 3. The
Apostle Pa^^'s noble defense before Festus and Agrippa, Page 198.... 4. Lord
Mansfield's speech in the House of Lords, 1770, on the bill for preventing the
delays of justice, by claiming the privilege of Parliament, Page 201.... 5. An
address to young persons, Page 206
CHAPTER IX. PROMISCUOUS AND MIXED PIECES.
SECT. 1. Earthquake at Calabria, in the year 1638, Page 214.... 2. Letter from
Pliny to Geminius, Page 216.... 3. Letter from Pliny to Marcellinus, on the
death of an amiable young woman, Page 217.... 4. On discretion, Page 219.... 5.
On the government of our thoughts, Page 222.... 6. On the evils which flow from
unrestrained passions, Page 224... 7. On the proper state of our temper, with
respect to one another, Page 227.... 8. Excellence of the Christian religion,
Page 230.... 9. Reflections occasioned by a review of the blessings, pronounced
by Christ on his disciples, in his sermon on the mount, Page 231.... 10.
Schemes of life often illusory, Page 233.... 11. The pleasures of virtuous
sensibility, Page 236.... 12. On the true honor of man, Page 239.... 13. The
influence of devotion on the happiness of life, Page 242.... 14. The planetary
and terrestrial worlds comparatively considered, Page 245 SECT. 15. On the
power of custom, and the uses to which it may be applied, Page 248.... 16. The
pleasures resulting from a proper use of our faculties, Page 251.... 17.
Description of candor, Page 252.... 18. On the imperfection of that happiness
which rests solely on worldly pleasures, Page 254.... 19. What are the real and
solid enjoyments of human life, Page 259.... 20. Scale of beings, Page 261....
21. Trust in the care of Providence recommended, Page 265.... 22. Piety and
gratitude enliven prosperity, Page 268.... 23. Virtue, when deeply rooted, is
not subject to the influence of fortune, Page 271.... 24. The speech of
Fabricius, a Roman Ambassador, to King Pyrrhus, who attempted to bribe him to
his interests, by the offer of a great sum of money, Page 273.... 25. Character
of James I. King of England, Page 274.... 26. Charles V. Emperor of Germany,
resigns his dominion, and retires from the world, Page 275.... 27. Continuation
of the Emperor Charles V. Page 280
PART II. PIECES IN POETRY.
CHAPTER I. SELECT SENTENCES AND PARAGRAPHS.
SECT. 1. Short and easy sentences, Page 285.... 2. Verses in which the lines
are of different length, Page 288 SECT. 3. Verses containing exclamations,
interrogations, and parentheses, Page 290.... 4. Verses in various forms, Page
592.... 5. Verses in which found corresponds to signification, Page 295.... 6.
Paragraphs of greater length, Page 297
CHAPTER II. NARRATIVE PIECES.
SECT. 1. The bears and the bees, Page 301.... 2. The nightingale and the
glowworm, Page 302.... 3. The trials of virtue, Page 303.... 4. The youth and
the philosopher, Page 306.... 5. Discourse between Adam and Eve, retiring to
rest, Page 308.... 6. Religion and death, Page 311
CHAPTER III. DIDACTIC PIECES.
SECT. 1. The vanity of wealth, Page 315.... 2. Nothing formed in vain, Page
315.... 3. On Pride, Page 316.... 4 Cruelty to brutes censured, Page 317.... 5.
A paraphrase on the latter part of the 6th chapter of Matthew, Page 319.... 6.
The death of a good man a strong incentitive to virtue, Page 320.... 7.
Reflections on a future state, from a review of winter, Page 321.... 8. Adam's
advice to Eve, to avoid temptation, Page 322.... 9. On procrastination, Page
324.... 10. That philosophy, which stops at secondary causes, reproved, Page
325 SECT. 11. Indignant sentiments on national prejudices and hatred; and on
slavery, Page 327
CHAPTER IV. DESCRIPTIVE PIECES.
SECT. 1. The morning in summer, Page 329.... 2. Rural sounds, as well as rural
sights, delightful, Page 330.... 3. The rose, Page 331.... 4. Care of birds for
their young, Page 332.... 5. Liberty and slavery contrasted, Page 333.... 6.
Charity. A paraphrase on the 13th chapter of the First Epistle to the
Corinthians, Page 334.... 7. Picture of a good man, Page 336.... 8. The
pleasures of retirement, Page 338.... 9. The pleasure and benefit of an
improved and well-directed imagination. Page 339
CHAPTER V. PATHETIC PIECES.
SECT. 1. The hermit, Page 342.... 2. The beggar's petition, Page 343.... 3.
Unhappy close of life, Page 345.... 4. Elegy to pity, Page 346.... 5. Verses
supposed to be written by Alexander Selkirk, during his solitary abode in the
island of Juan Fernandez, Page 347.... 6. Gratitude, Page 349.... 7. A man
perishing in the snow; from whence reflections are raised on the miseries of
life, Page 351.... 8. A morning hymn, Page 354
CHAPTER VI. PROMISCUOUS AND MIXED PIECES.
SECT. 1. Ode to Content, Page 356.... 2. The shepherd and the philosopher,
Page 358.... 3. The road to happiness open to all men, Page 360.... 4. The
goodness of Providence, Page 362.... 5. The Creator's works attest his
greatness, Page 363.... 6. Address to the Deity, Page 364.... 7. The pursuit of
happiness often ill-directed, Page 366.... 8. The fireside, Page 367.... 9.
Providence vindicated in the present state of Man, Page 370.... 10. Selfishness
reproved, Page 372.... 11. Human frailty, Page 373.... 12. Ode to Peace, Page
374.... 13. Ode to Adversity, Page 375.... 14. The creation required to praise
its Author, Page 377.... 15. The universal prayer, Page 379.... 16. Conscience,
Page 381.... 17. On an infant, Page 382.... 18. The cuckoo, Page 382.... 19.
Day. A pastoral in three parts, Page 383.... 20. The order of Nature, Page
387.... 21 Hymn composed during sickness, Page 389... 22. Hymn, on a review of
the seasons, Page 390
THE ENGLISH READER.
PART I. PIECES IN PROSE.
CHAPTER I. SELECT SENTENCES AND PARAGRAPHS.
SECTION I.
DILIGENCE, industry, and proper improvement of time, are material duties of
the young.

The acquisition of knowledge is one of the most honorable occupations of
youth.

NOTE.
In the first chapter, the Compiler has exhibited sentences in a great variety
of construction, and in all the diversity of Punctuation. If well practiced
upon, he presumes they will fully prepare the young reader for the various
pauses, inflections, and modulations of voice, which the succeeding pieces
require. The Author's "English Exercises," under the head of Punctuation, will
afford the learner additional scope for improving himself in r^ading sentences
and paragraphs variously constructed.




Whatever useful or engaging endowments we possess, virtue is a necessary
requisite, in order to their shining with proper luster.

Virtuous youth gradually brings forward accomplished and flourishing manhood.

Sincerity and truth form the basis of every virtue.

Truth and error, virtue and vice, are things of immutable nature.

Change and alterations form the very essence of the world.

True happiness is of a retired nature, and an enemy to pomp and noise.

In order to acquire a capacity for happiness, it must be our first study to
rectify inward disorders.

Whatever purifies, fortifies also the heart.

From our eagerness to grasp, we strangle and destroy pleasure.

A temperate spirit, and moderate expectations, are the best safeguard of the
mind, in this uncertain and changing state.

There is nothing, except simplicity of intention, and purity of principle,
that can stand the test of near approach and strict examination.

The value of any possession is to be chiefly estimated, by the relief which it
can bring us in the time of our greatest need.

No person who has once yielded up the government of his mind, and given loose
rein to his desires and passions, can tell how far these may carry him.

Tranquillity of mind is always most likely to be attained, when the business of
the world is tempered with thoughtful and serious retreat.

He who would act like a wise man, and build his house on the rock, and not on
the sand, should contemplate human life, not only in the sunshine, but in the
shade.

Let usefulness and beneficence, not ostentation and vanity, direct the train
of your pursuits.

To maintain a steady and unbroken mind, amidst all the shocks of the world,
marks a great and noble spirit.

Patience, by preserving composure within, resists the impression which trouble
makes from without.

Compassionate affections, even when they draw tears from our eyes for human
misery, convey satisfaction to the heart.

They who have nothing to give, can often afford relief to others, by imparting
what they feel.

Our ignorance of what is to come, and of what is really good or evil, should
correct anxiety about worldly success.

The veil which covers from our sight the events of succeeding years, is a veil
woven by the hand of mercy.

The best preparation for all the uncertainties of futurity, consists in a
well-ordered mind, a good conscience, and a cheerful submission to the will of
Heaven.

SECTION II.
THE chief misfortunes that befall us in life, can be traced to some vices or
follies which we have committed.

Were we to survey the chambers of sickness and di^tress, we should often find
them peopled with the victims of intemperance and sensuality, and with the
children of vicious indolence and sloth.

To be wise in our own eyes, to be wise in the opinion of the world, and to be
wise in the sight of our Creator, are three things so very different, as rarely
to coincide.

Man, in his highest earthly glory, is but a reed floating on the stream of
time, and forced to follow every new direction of the current.

The corrupted temper, and the guilty passions of the bad, frustrate the effect
of every advantage which the world confers on them.

The external misfortunes of life, disappointments, poverty, and sickness, are
nothing in comparison of those inward distresses of mind, occasioned by folly,
by passion, and by guilt.

No station is so high, no power so great, no character so unblemished, as to
exempt men from being attacked by rashness, malice, or envy.

Moral and religious instruction derives its efficacy, not so much from what
men are taught to know, as from what they are brought to feel.

He who pretends to great sensibility toward men, and yet has no feeling for
the high objects of religion, no heart to admire and adore the great Father of
the universe, has reason to distrust the truth and delicacy of his sensibility.

When, upon rational and sober inquiry, we have established our principles, let
us not suffer them to be shaken by the scoffs of the licentious, or the cavils
of the skeptical.

When we observe any tendency to treat religion or morals with disrespect and
levity, let us hold it to be be a sure indication of a perverted understanding,
or a depraved heart.

Every degree of guilt incurred by yielding to temptation, tends to debase the
mind, and to weaken the generous and benevolent principles of human nature.

Luxury, pride, and vanity, have frequently as much influence in corrupting the
sentiments of the great, as ignorance, bigotry, and prejudice, have in
misleading the opinions of the multitude.

Mixed as the present state is, reason and religion pronounce, that generally,
if not always, there is more happiness than misery, more pleasure than pain, in
the condition of man.

Society, when formed, requires distinction of property, diversity of
conditions, subordination ^f ^anks, and a multiplicity of occupations, in order
to adva^e the general good.

That the temper, the sentiments, the morality, and, in general, the whole
conduct and character of men, are influenced by the example and disposition of
the persons with whom they associate, is a reflection which has long since
passed into a proverb, and been ranked among the standing maxims of human
wisdom, in all ages of the world.

SECTION III.
THE desire of improvement discovers a liberal mind; and is connected with many
accomplishments, and many virtues.

Innocence confers ease and freedom on the mind; and leaves it open to every
pleasing sensation.

Moderate and simple pleasures relish high with the tempe^ate: in the midst of
his studied refinements, the voluptuary languishes.

Gentleness corrects whatever is offensive in our manners; and, by a constant
train of humane attentions, studies to alleviate the burden of common misery.

That gentleness which is the characteristic of a good man, has, like every
other virtue, its feat in the heart: and, let me add, nothing except what flows
from the heart, can render even external manners truly pleasing.

Virtue, to become either vigorous or useful, must be habitually active: not
breaking forth occasionally with a transient luster, like the blaze of the
comet; but regular in its returns, like the light of day: not like the aromatic
gale, which sometimes feasts the sense; but like the ordinary breeze, which
purifies the air, and renders it healthful.

The happiness of every man depends more upon the state of his own mind, than
upon any one external circumstance: nay, more than upon all external things put
together.

In no station, in no period, let us think ourselves secure from the dangers
which spring from our passions. Every age, and every station they beset; from
youth to gray hairs, and from the peas^nt to the prince.

Riches and pleasures are the chief temptations to criminal deeds. Yet those
riches, when obtained, may very possibly overwhelm us with unforeseen miseries.
Those pleasures may cut short our health and life.

He who is accustomed to turn aside from the world, and commune with himself in
retirement, will, sometimes at least, hear the truths which the multitude do
not tell him. A more sound instructor will lift his voice, and awaken within
the heart those latent suggestions, which the world had overpowered and
suppressed.

Nothing can be more amiable than a constant desire to please; and an
unwillingness to offend or hurt.

He that waits for an opportunity to do much at once, may breathe out his life
in idle wishes; and regret, in the last hour, his useless intentions and barren
zeal.

The spirit of true religion breathes mildness and affability. It gives a
native, unaffected ease to the behavior. It is social, kind, and cheerful, far
removed from that gloomy and illiberal superstition, which clouds the brow,
sharpens the temper, dejects the spirit, and teaches men to fit themselves for
another world by neglecting the concerns of this.

Reveal none of the secrets of thy friend. Be faithful to his interests.
Forsake him not in danger. Abhor the thought of acquiring any advantage by his
prejudice.

Man, always prosperous, would be giddy and insolent; always afflicted, would
be sullen and despondent. Hopes and fears, joy and sorrow, are, therefore, so
blended in his life, as both to give room for worldly pursuits, and to recall,
from time to time, the admonitions of conscience.

SECTION IV.
TIME once past never returns: the moment which is lost, is lost for ever.

There is nothing on earth so stable, as to assure us of undisturbed rest; nor
so powerful, as to afford us constant protection.

The house of feasting too often becomes an avenue to the house of mourning.
Short, to the licentious, is the interval between them.

It is of great importance to us, to form a proper estimate of human life;
without either loading it with imaginary evils, or expecting from it greater
advantages than it is able to yield.

Among all our corrupt passions, there is a strong and intimate connection. When
any one of them is adopted into our family, it seldom quits us until it has
fathered upon us all its kindred.

Charity, like the sun, brightens every object on which it shines: a censorious
disposition casts every character into the darkest shade it will bear.

Many men mistake the love, for the practice of virtue; and are not so much
good men, as the friends of goodness.

Genuine virtue has a language that speaks to every heart throughout the world.
It is a language which is understood by all. In every region, every clime, the
homage paid to it is the same. In no one sentiment were ever mankind more
generally agreed.

The appearances of our security are frequently deceitful. When our sky seems
most settled and s^rene, in some unobserved quarter gathers the little black
cloud, in which the tempest ferments, and prepares to discharge itself on our
head.

The man of true fortitude may be compared to the castle built on a rock, which
defies the attacks of surrounding waters: the man of a feeble and timourous
spirit to a hut placed on the shore, which every wind shakes, and every wave
overflows.

Nothing is so inconsistent with self-possession as violent anger. It
overpowers reason; confounds our ideas; distorts the appearance, and blackens
the appearance of every object. By the storm which it raises within, and by the
mischiefs which it occasions without, it generally brings on the passionate and
revengeful man, greater misery than he can bring on the object of his
resentment.

The palace of virtue has, in all ages, been represented as placed on the
summit of a hill; in the ascent of which, labor is requisite, and difficulties
are to be surmounted; and where a conductor is needed, to direct our way, and
to aid our steps.

In judging of others, let us always think the best, and employ the spirit of
charity and candor. But in judging of ourselves, we ought to be exact and
severe.

Let him that desires to see others happy, make haste to give while his gift
can be enjoyed; and remember, that every moment of delay, takes away something
from the value of his benefaction. And let him who proposes his own happiness
reflect, that while he forms his purpose, the day rolls on, and "the night
comes when no man can work.

To sensual persons, hardly any thing is what it appears to be: and what
flatters most, is always farthest from the reality. There are voices which sing
around them; but whose strains allure to ruin. There is a banquet spread, where
poison is in every dish. There is a couch which invites to repose; but to
slumber upon it, is death.

If we would judge whether a man is really happy, it is not solely to his
houses and lands, to his equipage and his retinue, we are to look. Unless we
could see farther, and discern what joy, or what bitterness, his heart feels,
we can pronounce nothing concerning him.

The book is well written; and I have perused it with pleasure and profit. It
shows, first, that true devoti^ is rational and well founded; next, that it is
of the highest importance to every other part of religion and virtue; and,
lastly, that it is most conducive to our happiness.

There is certainly no greater felicity, than to be able to look back on a life
usefully and virtuously employed; to trace our own progress in existence, by
such tokens as excite neither shame nor sorrow. It ought therefore to be the
care of those who wish to pass the last hours with comfort, to lay up such a
treasure of pleasing ideas, as shall support the expenses of that time, which
is to depend wholly upon the fund already acquired.

SECTION V.
WHAT avails the show of external liberty, to one who has lost the government
of himself?

He that cannot live well today, (says Martial,) will be less qualified to
live well tomorrow.

Can we esteem that man prosperous, who is raised to a situation which flatters
his passions, but which corrupts his principles, disorders his temper, and,
finally, oversets his virtue?

What misery does the vicious man secretly endure! -- Adversity! how blunt are
all the arrows of thy quiver, in comparison with those of guilt!

When we have no pleasure in goodness, we may with certainty conclude the
reason to be, that our pleasure is all derived from an opposite quarter.

How strangely are the opinions of men altered, by a change in their condition!

How many have had reason to be thankful, for being disappointed in designs
which they earnestly pursued, but which, if successfully accomplished, they
have afterward seen, would have occasioned their ruin?

What are the actions which afford in the remembrance a rational satisfaction?
Are they the pursuits of sensual pleasure, the riots of jollity, or the
displays of show and vanity? No: I appeal to your hearts, my friends, if what
you recollect with most pleasure, are not the innocent, the virtuous, the
honorable parts of your past life.

The present employment of time should frequently be an object of thought.
About what are we now busied? What is the ultimate scope of our present
pursuits and cares? Can we justify them to ourselves? Are they likely to
produce any thing that will survive the moment, and bring forth some fruit for
futurity?

Is it not strange, (says an ingenious writer,) that some persons should be so
delicate as not (...) bear a disagreeable picture in the house, and yet, by
their behavior, force every face they see about them, to wear the gloom of
uneasiness and discontent?

If we are now in health, peace, and safety; without any particular or uncommon
evils to afflict our condition; what more can we reasonably look for in this
vain and uncertain world? How little can the greatest prosperity add to such a
state? Will any future situation ever make us happy, if now, with so few causes
of grief, we imagine ourselves miserable? The evil lies in the state of our
mind, not in our condition of fortune; and by no alteration of circumstances is
likely to be remedied.

When the love of unwarrantable pleasures, and of vicious companions, is
allowed to amuse young persons, to ingross their time, and to stir up their
passions; the day of ruin, -- let them take heed, and beware! the day of
irrecoverable ruin, begins to draw nigh. Fortune is squandered; health is
broken; friends are offended, affronted, estranged; aged parents, perhaps, sent
afflicted and mourning, to the dust.

On whom does time hang so heavily, as on the slothful and lazy? To whom are
the hours so lingering? Who are so often devoured with spleen, and obliged to
fly to every expedient, which can help them to get rid of themselves? Instead
of producing tranquillity, indolence produces a fretful restlessness of mind;
gives rise to cravings which are never satisfied; nourishes a sickly effeminate
delicacy, which sours and corrupts every pleasure.

SECTION VI.
WE have seen the husbandman scattering his seed upon the furrowed ground! It
springs up, is gathered into his barns, and crowns his labors with joy and
plenty. -- Thus the man who distributes his fortune with generosity and
prudence, is amply repaid by the gratitude of of those whom he obliges; by the
approbation of his own mind; and by the favor of Heaven*

Temperance, by fortifying the mind and body, leads to happiness: intemperance,
by enervating them, ends generally in misery.

Title and ancestry render a good man more illustrious; but an ill one, more
contemptible. Vice is infamous, though in a prince; and virtue honorable,
though in a peasant.

An elevated genius, employed in little things, appears (to use the simile of
Longinus) like the sun in his evening declination: he remits his splendor, but
retains his magnitude; and pleases more, though he dazzles less.

If envious people were to ask themselves, whether they would exchange their
entire situations with the persons envied, (I mean their minds, passions,
notions, as well as their persons, fortunes, and dignities,) -- I presume the
self-love common to human nature, would generally make them prefer their own
condition.

We have obliged some persons: -- very well! -- what would we have more? Is not
the consciousness of doing good, a sufficient reward?

Do not hurt yourselves or others, by the pursuit of pleasure. Consult your
who^ nature. Consider yourselves not only as sensitive, but as rational beings;
not only as rational, but social; not only as social, but immortal.

Art thou poor? -- Show thyself active and industrious, peaceable and
contented. Art thou wealthy? -- Show thyself beneficent and charitable,
condescending and humane.

Though religion removes not all the evils of life, though it promises no
continuance of undisturbed prosperity, (which indeed, it were not salutary for
man always to enjoy,) yet, if it mitigates the evils which necessarily belong
to our state, it m^ ^stly be said to give rest to them who labor and ar^ ^eavy
laden.

What a smiling aspect does the love of parents and children, of brothers and
sisters, of friends and relations, give to every surrounding object, and every
returning day! With what a luster does it gild even the small habitation, where
such placid intercourse dwells! where such scenes of heartfelt satisfaction
succeed uninterruptedly to one another!

How many clear marks of benevolent intention appear every where around us!
What a profusion of beauty and ornament is poured forth on the face of nature!
What a magnificent spectacle presented to the view of man! What supply
contrived for his wants! What a variety of objects set before him, to gratify
his senses, to employ his understanding, to entertain his imagination, to cheer
and gladden his heart!

The hope of future happiness is a perpetual source of consolation to good men.
Under trouble, it sooths their minds; amidst temptation, it supports their
virtue; and, in their dying moments, enables them to say "O death! where is thy
sting? O grave! where is thy victory?"

SECTION VII.
AGESILAUS, king of Sparta, being asked, "What things he thought most proper
for boys to learn," answered, "Those which they ought to practice when they
come to be men." A wiser than Agesilaus has inculcated the same sentiment:
"Train up a child in the way he should go, and when he is old he will not
depart from it."

An Italian philosopher expressed in his motto, "that time was his estate." An
estate, indeed, which will produce nothing without cultivation; but which will
always abundantly repay the labors of industry, and satisfy the most extensive
desires, if no part of it be suffered to lie waste by negligence; to be
overrun with noxious plants; or laid out for show, rather than use.

When Aristotle was asked, "What a man could gain by telling a falsehood," he
replied, "Not to be credited when he speaks the truth."

L'Estrange, in his Fables, tells us, that a number o^ frolicksome boys were
one day watching frogs, at the side of a pond; and that, as any of them put
their heads above the water, they pelted them down again with stones, One of
the frogs, appealing to the humanity of the boys, made this striking
observation: "Children, you do not consider, that though this may be sport to
you, it is death to us."

Sully, the great statesman of France, always retained at his table, in his
most prosperous days, the same frugality to which he had been accustomed in
early life. He was frequently reproached, by the courtiers, for this
simplicity; but he used to reply to them, in the words of an ancient
philosopher: "If the guests are men of sense, there is sufficient for them: if
they are not, I can very well dispense with their company."

Socrates, though primarily attentive to the culture of his mind, was not
negligent of his external appearance. His cleanliness resulted from those ideas
of order and decency, which governed all his actions; and the care which he
took of his health, from his desire to preserve his mind free and tranquil.

Eminently pleasing and honorable was the friendship between David and
Jonathan. "I am distressed for thee, my brother Jonathan," said the plaintive
and surviving David; "very pleasant have thou been to me: thy love for me was
wonderful; passing the love of women."

Sir Philip Sidney, at the battle near Zutphen, was wounded by a musket-ball,
which broke the bone of his thigh. He was carried about a mile and a half, to
the camp; and being faint with the loss of blood, and probably parched with
thirst through the heat of the weather, he called for drink. It was immediately
brought to him: but as he was putting the vessel to his mouth, a poor wounded
soldier, who happened at that instant to be carried by him, looked up to it
with wishful eyes. The gallant and generous Sidney took the bottle from his
mouth, and delivered it to the soldier, saying "thy necessity is yet greater
than mine."

Alexander the Great demanded of a pirate whom he had taken, by what right he
infested the seas? "By the same right," replied he, "that Alexander enslaves
the world. But I am called a robber, because I have only one small vessel; and
he is styled a conqueror, because he commands great fleets and armies." We too
often judge of men by the splendor, and not by the merit of their actions.

Antoninus Pius, the Roman Emperor, was an amiable and good man. When any of
his courtiers attempted to inflame him with a passion for military glory, he
used to answer: That he more desired the preservation of one subject, than the
destruction of a thousand enemies."

Men are too often ingenious in making themselves miserable, by aggravating to
their own fancy, beyond bounds, all the evils which they endure. They compare
themselves with none but those whom they imagine to be more happy; and
complain, that upon them alone has fallen the whole load of human sorrows.
Would they look with a more impartial eye on the world, they would see
themselves surrounded with sufferers; and find that they are only drinking out
of that mixed up, which Providence has prepared for all. -- I will restore thy
daughter again to life," said the eastern sage, to a prince who grieved
immoderately for the loss of a beloved, child "provided thou art able to
engrave on her tomb, the names of three persons who have never mourned." The
prince made inquiry after such persons; but found the inquiry vain, and was
silent.

SECTION VIII.
HE that has no rule over his own spirit, is like a city that is broken down,
and without walls.

Better is a dinner of herbs where love is, than a stalled ox and hatred
therewith.

A soft answer turns away wrath; but grievous words stir up anger.

Pride goes before destruction; and a haughty spirit before a fall.

Hear counsel, and receive instruction, that thou may be truly wise.

He that has pity on the poor, lends to the Lord: that which he has given,
will he pay him again.

The sluggard will not plough by reason of the cold; he shall therefore beg in
harvest, and have nothing.

Faithful are the wounds of a friend; but the kisses of an enemy are deceitful.
Open rebuke is better than secret love.

He that is slow to anger, is better than the mighty; and he that rules his
spirit, than he that takes a city.

If thine enemy be hungry, give him bread to eat; and if he be thirsty, give
him water to drink.

See thou a man wise in his own conceit? There is more hope of a fool than of
him.

It is better to be a doorkeeper in the house of the Lord, than to dwell in
the tents of wickedness.

He that planted the ear, shall he not hear? He that formed the eye, shall he
not see?

I have been young, and now I am old; yet have I never seen the righteous
forsaken, nor his seed begging bread.

I have seen the wicked in great power; and spreading himself like a green
bay tree. Yet he passed away: I sought him, but he could not be found.

Happy is the man that finds wisdom. Length o^ days is in her right hand; and
in her left hand, riches and honor. Her ways are ways of pleasantness, and all
her paths are peace.

How good and how pleasant it is for brethren to dwell together in unity! It is
like precious ointment -- Like the dew of Hermon, and the dew that descended
upon the mountains of Zion.

I went by the field of the slothful, and by the vineyard of the man void of
understanding: and lo! it was all grown over with thorns; nettles had covered
its face; and the stone-wall was broken down. Then I saw, and considered it
well; I looked upon it, and received instruction.

Honorable age is not that which stands in length of time; nor that which is
measured by number of years: -- But wisdom is the gray hair to man; and an
unspotted life is old age.

Solomon, my son, know thou the God of thy fathers; and serve him with a
perfect heart, and with a willing mind. -- If thou seek him, he will be found
of thee; but if thou forsake him, he will cast thee off for ever.

SECTION IX.
THAT every day has its pains and sorrows, is universally experienced, and
almost universally confessed. -- But let us not attend only to mournful truths:
if we look impartially about us, we shall find, that every day has likewise its
pleasures and its joys.

We should cherish sentiments of charity toward all men. The Author of all
good nourishes much piety and virtue in hearts that are unknown to us; and
beholds repentance ready to spring up among many, whom we consider as
reprobates.

No one ought to consider himself as insignificant in the sight of his Creator.
In our several stations, we are all sent forth to be laborers in the vineyard
of our heavenly Father. Every man has his work allotted, his talent committed
to him; by the due improvement of which he may, in one way or other, serve God,
promote virtue, and be useful in the world.

The love of praise should be preserved under proper subordination to the
principle of duty. In itself, it is a useful motive to action; but when allowed
to extend its influence too far, it corrupts the whole character and produces
guilt, disgrace, and misery. To be entirely destitute of it, is a defect. To be
governed by it, is depravity. The proper adjustment of the several principles
of action in human nature, is a matter that deserves our highest attention. For
when any one of them becomes either too weak or too strong, it endangers both
our virtue and our happiness.

The desires and passions of a vicious man, having once obtained an unlimited
sway, trample him under their feet. They make him feel that he is subject to
various, contradictory, and imperious masters, who often pull him different
ways. His soul is rendered the receptacle of many repugnant and jarring
dispositions; and resembles some barbarous country, cantoned out into different
principalities, which are continually waging war on one another.

Diseases, poverty, disappointment, and shame, are far from being, in every
instance, the unavoidable doom of man. They are much more frequently the
offspring of his own misguided choice. Intemperance engenders disease, sloth
produces poverty, pride creates disappointments, and dishonesty exposes to
shame. The ungoverned passions of men betray them into a thousand follies;
their follies into crimes; and their crimes into misfortunes.

When we reflect on the many distresses which abound in human life; on the
scanty proportion of happiness which any man is here allowed to enjoy; on the
small difference which the diversity of fortune makes on that scanty
proportion; it is surprising, that envy should ever have been a prevalent
passion among men, much more that should have prevailed among Christians. Where
so much is suffered in common, little room is left for envy. There is more
occasion for pity and sympathy, and inclination to assist each other.

At our first setting out in life, when yet unacquainted with the world and its
snares, when every pleasure enchants with its smile, and every object shines
with the gloss of novelty; let us beware of the seducing appearances which
surround us; and recollect what others have suffered from the power of
headstrong desire. If we allow any passion, even though it be esteemed
innocent, to acquire an absolute ascendant, our inward peace will be impaired.
But if any which has the taint of guilt, take early possession of our mind, we
may date, from that moment, the ruin of our tranquillity.

Every man has some darling passion, which generally affords the first
introduction to vice. The irregular gratifications into which it occasionally
seduces him, appear under the form of venial weaknesses; and are indulged, in
the beginning, with scrupulousness and reserve. But, by longer practice, these
restraints weaken, and the power of habit grows. One vice brings in another to
its aid. By a sort of natural affinity they connect and entwine themselves
together; till their roots come to be spread wide and d^ ^ver all the foul.

SECTION X.
WHENCE arises the misery of this present world? It is not owing to our cloudy
atmosphere, our changing seasons, and inclement skies. It is not owing to the
debility of our bodies, or to the unequal distribution of the goods of fortune.
Amidst all disadvantages of this kind, a pure, a steadfast, and enlightened
mind, possessed of strong virtue, could enjoy itself in peace, and smile at the
impotent assaults of fortune and the elements. It is within ourselves that
misery has fixed its seat. Our disordered hearts, our guilty passions, our
violent prejudices, and misplaced desires, are the instruments of the trouble
which we endure. These sharpen the darts which adversity would otherwise point
in vain against us.

While the vain and the licentious are revelling in the midst of extravagance
and riot, how little do they think of those scenes of sore distress which are
passing at that moment throughout the world; multitudes struggling for a poor
subsistence, to support the wife and the children whom they love, and who look
up to them with eager eyes for that bread which they can hardly procure;
multitudes groaning under sickness in desolate cottages, untended and
unmourned; many, apparently in a better situation of life, pining away in
secret with concealed griefs; families weeping over the beloved friends whom
they have lost, or, in all the bitterness of anguish, bidding those who are
just expiring the last adieu.

Never adventure on too near an approach to what is evil. Familiarise not
yourselves with it, in the slightest instances, without fear. Listen with
reverence to every reprehension of conscience; and preserve the most quick and
accurate sensibility to right and wrong. If ever your moral impressions begin
to decay, and your natural abhorrence of guilt to lessen, you have ground to
dread that the ruin of virtue is fast approaching.

By disappointments and trials the violence of our passions is tamed, and our
minds are formed to sobriety and reflection. In the varieties of life,
occasioned by the vicissitudes of worldly fortune, we are inured to habits both
of the active and the suffering virtues. How much soever we complain of the
vanity of the world, facts plainly show, that if its vanity were less, it could
not answer the purpose of salutary discipline. Unsatisfactory as it is, its
pleasures are still too apt to corrupt our hearts. How fatal then must the
consequences have been, had it yielded us more complete enjoyment? If, with all
its troubles, we are in danger of being too much attached to it, how entirely
would it have seduced our affections, if no troubles had been mingled with its
pleasures?

In seasons of distress or difficulty, to abandon ourselves to dejection,
carries no mark of a great or a worthy mind. Instead of sinking under trouble,
and declaring "that his soul is weary of life," it becomes a wise and a good
man, in the evil day, with firmness to maintain his post; to bear up against
the storm; to have recourse to those advantages which, in the worst of times,
are always left to integrity and virtue; and never to give up the hope that
better days may yet arise.

How many young persons have at first set out in the world with excellent
dispositions of heart; generous, charitable and humane; kind to their friends,
and amiable among all with whom they had intercourse! And yet, how often have
we seen all those fair appearances unhappily blasted in the progress of life,
merely through the influence of loose and corrupting pleasures; and those very
persons, who promised once to be blessings to the world, sunk down, in the end,
to be the burden and nuisance of society!

The most common propensity of mankind, is, to store futurity with whatever is
agreeable to them; especially in those periods of life, when imagination is
lively, and hope is ardent. Looking forward to the year now beginning, they are
ready to promise themselves much, from the foundations of prosperity which they
have laid; from the friendships and connexions which they have secured; and
from the plans of conduct which they have formed. Alas! how deceitful do all
these dreams of happiness often prove! While many are saying in secret to their
hearts, "Tomorrow shall be as this day, and more abundantly," we are obliged
in return to say to them; "Boast not yourselves of tomorrow, for you know not
what a day may bring forth!"

CHAPTER II. NARRATIVE PIECES.
SECTION I. No Rank or Possessions can make the guilty Mind happy.
DIONYSIUS, the tyrant Sicily, was far from being happy, though he possessed
great riches, and all the pleasures which wealth and power could procure.
Damocles, one of his flatterers, deceived by these specious appearances of
happiness, took occasion to compliment him on the extent of his power, his
treasures, and royal magnificence; and declared that no monarch had ever been
greater or happier than Dionysius. "Have thou a mind, Damocles," says the King,
"to taste this happiness; and to know, by experience, what the enjoyments are,
of which thou have so high an idea?" Damocles, with joy, accepted the offer.
The King ordered that a royal banquet should be prepared, and a gilded sofa,
covered with rich embroidery, placed for his favorite. Sideboards, loaded with
gold and silver plate of immense value, were arranged in the apartment. Pages
of extraordinary beauty were ordered to attend his table, and to obey his
commands with the utmost readiness, and the most profound submission. Fragrant
ointments, chaplets of flowers, and rich perfumes, were added to the
entertainment. The table was loaded with the most exquisite delicacies of every
kind. Damocles, intoxicated with pleasure, fancied himself amongst superior
beings. But in the midst of all this happiness, as he lay indulging himself in
state, he sees let down from the ceiling, exactly over his head, a glittering
sword hung by a single hair. The sight of impending destruction put a speedy
end to his joy and revelling. The pomp of his attendance, the glitter of the
carved plate, and the delicacy of the viands, cease to afford him any pleasure.
He dreads to stretch forth his hand to the table. He throws off the garland of
roses. He hastens to remove from his dangerous situation; and earnestly
entreats the king to restore him to his former humble condition, having no
desire to enjoy any longer a happiness so terrible.

By this device, Dionysius intimated to Damocles, how miserable he was in the
midst of all his treasures; and in possession of all the honors and enjoyments
which royalty could bestow.

CICERO. SECTION II. Change of external Condition often adverse to Virtue.
IN the days of Joram, King of Israel, flourished the prophet Elisha. His
character was so eminent, and his fame so widely spread, that Benhadad the King
of Syria, though an idolater, sent to consult him, concerning the issue of a
distemper which threatened his life. The messenger employed on this occasion
was Hazael, who appears to have been one of the princes, or chief men, of the
Syrian court. Charged with rich gifts from the king, he presents himself before
the prophet; and accosts him in terms of the highest respect. During the
conference which they held together, Elisha fixed his eye steadfastly on the
countenance of Hazael; and discerning, by a prophetic spirit, his future
tyranny and cruelty, he could not contain himself from bursting into a flood of
tears. When Hazael, in surprise, inquired into the cause of this sudden
emotion, the prophet plainly informed him of the crimes and barbarities, which
he foresaw that he would afterward commit. The soul of Hazael abhorred, at
this time, the thoughts of cruelty. Uncorrupted, as yet, by ambition or
greatness, his indignation rose at being thought capable of such savage
actions, as the prophet had mentioned; and, with much warmth, he replies: "But
what? is thy servant a dog, that he should do this great thing?" Elisha makes
no return, but to point out a remarkable change, which was to take place in his
condition; "The Lord has shown me that thou shall be king over Syria." In
course of time, all that had been predicted came to pass. Hazael ascended the
throne, and ambition took possession of his heart. "He smote the children of
Israel in all their coasts. He oppressed them during all the days of king
Jehoahaz:" and, from what is left on record of his actions, he plainly appears
to have proved, what the prophet foresaw him to be, a man of violence, cruelty,
and blood.

In this passage of history, an object is presented, which deserves our serious
attention. We behold a man who, in one state of life, could not look upon
certain crimes without surprise and horror; who knew so little of himself, as
to believe it impossible for him ever to be concerned in committing them; that
same man, by a change of condition, and an unguarded state of mind, transformed
in all his sentiments; and as he rose in greatness rising also in guilt; till
at last he completed that whole character of iniquity, which he once detested.

BLAIR. SECTION III. HAMAN; or, the Misery of Pride.
AHASUERUS, who is supposed to be the prince known among the Greek historians
by the name of Artaxerxes, had advanced to the chief dignity in his kingdom,
Haman, an Amalekite, who inherited all the ancient enmity of his race to the
Jewish nation. He appears, from what is recorded of him, to have been a very
wicked minister. Raised to greatness without merit, he employed his power
solely for the gratification of his passions. As the honors which he possessed
were next to royal, his pride was every day fed with that servile homage, which
is peculiar to Asiatic courts; and all the servants of the king prostrated
themselves before him. In the midst of this general adulation, one person only
stooped not to Haman. This was Mordecai the Jew; who, knowing this Amalekite to
be an enemy to the people of God, and, with virtuous indignation, despising
that insolence of prosperity with which he saw him lifted up, "bowed not, nor
did him reverence." On this appearance of disrespect from Mordecai, Haman "was
full of wrath: but he thought scorn to lay hands on Mordecai alone." Personal
revenge was not sufficient to satisfy him. So violent and black were his
passions, that he resolved to exterminate the whole nation to which Mordecai
belonged. Abusing, for this cruel purpose, the favor of his credulous
sovereign, he obtained a decre^ to be sent forth that, against a certain day,
all the Jews throughout the Persian dominions should be put to the sword.
Meanwhile, confident of success, and blind to approaching ruin, he continued
exulting in his prosperity. Invited by Ahasuerus to a royal banquet, which
Esther the queen had prepared, "he went forth that day joyful, and with a glad
heart." But behold how slight an incident was sufficient to poison his joy! As
he went forth, he saw Mordecai in the king's gate; and observed, that he still
refused to do him homage: "He stood not up, nor was moved for him;" although he
well knew the formidable designs, which Haman was preparing to execute. One
private man, who despised his greatness, and disdained submission, while a
whole kingdom trembled before him; one spirit, which the utmost stretch of his
power could neither subdue nor humble, blasted his triumphs. His whole soul was
shaken with a storm of passion. Wrath, pride, and desire of revenge, rose into
fury. With difficulty he restrained himself in public; but as soon as he came
to his own house, he was forced to disclose the agony of his mind. He gathered
together his friends and family, with Zeresh his wife. "He told them of the
glory of his riches, and the multitude of his children, and of all the things
wherein the king had promoted him; and how he had advanced him above the
princes and servants of the king. He said, moreover, Yea, Esther the queen
suffered no man to come in with the king, to the banquet that she had prepared,
but myself; and tomorrow also am I invited to her with the king." After all
this preamble, what is the conclusion? -- "Yet all this avails me nothing, so
long as I see Mordecai the Jew sitting at the king's gate."

The sequel of Haman's history I shall not now pursue. It might afford matter
for much instruction, by the conspicuous justice of God in his fall and
punishment. But contemplating only the singular situation, in which the
expressions just quoted present him, and the violent agitation of his mind
which they display, the following reflections naturally arise: how miserable is
vice, when one guilty passion creates so much torment! how unavailing is
prosperity, when, in the height of it, a single disappointment can destroy the
relish of all its pleasures! how weak is human nature, which, in the absence of
real, is thus prone to form to itself imaginary woes!

BLAIR. SECTION IV. ORTOGRUL; or, the Vanity of Riches,
AS Ortogrul of Basra was one day wandering along the streets of Bagdat, musing
on the varieties of merchandise which the shops offered to his view; and
observing the different occupations which busied the multitudes on every side,
he was awakened from the tranquillity of meditation, by a crowd that obstrusted
his passage. He raised his eyes, and saw the chief vizier, who, having returned
from the divan, was entering his palace.

Ortogrul mingled with the attendants; and being supposed to have some petition
for the vizier, was permitted to enter. He surveyed the spaciousness of the
apartments, admired the walls hung with golden tapestry, and the floors covered
with silken carpets; and despising the simple neatness of his own little
habitation.

"Surely," said he to himself "this palace is the seat of happiness; where
pleasure succeeds to pleasure, and discontent and sorrow can have no admission.
Whatever nature has provided for the delight of sense, is here spread forth to
be enjoyed. What can mortals hope or imagine, which the master of this palace
has not obtained? The dishes of luxury cover his table; the voice of harmony
lulls him in his bowers; he breathes the fragrance of the groves of Java, and
sleeps upon the down of the cygnets of Ganges. He speaks, and his mandate is
obeyed; he wishes, and his wish is gratified; all whom he sees obey him, and
all whom he hears flatter him. How different, Ortogrul, is thy condition, who
art doomed to the perpetual torments of unsatisfied desire; and who have no
amusement in thy power, that can withhold thee from thy own reflections! They
tell thee that thou art wise; but what does wisdom avail with poverty? None
will flatter the poor; and the wise have very little power of slattering
themselves. That man is surely the most wretched of the sons of wretchedness,
who lives with his own faults and follies always before him; and who has none
to reconcile him to himself by praise and veneration. I have long sought
content, and have not found it; I will from this moment endeavor to be rich."

Full of this new resolution, he shut himself in his chamber for six months, to
deliberate how he should grow rich. He sometimes purposed to offer himself as a
counselor to one of the kings of India; and sometimes resolved to dig for
diamond in the mines of Golconda. One day, after some hou^^ passed in violent
fluctuation of opinion, sleep insensibly ^eized him in his chair. He dreamed
that he was ranging a desert country, in search of some one that might teach
him to grow rich; and as he stood on the top of a hill, shaded with cypress, in
doubt whither to direct his steps, his father appeared on a sudden standing
before him. "Ortogrul," said the old man, "I know thy perplexity; listen to thy
father; turn thine eye to the opposite mountain." Ortogrul looked, and saw a
torrent tumbling down the racks, roaring with the noise of thunder, and
scattering its foam on the impending woods. "Now," said his father, "behold the
valley that lies between the hills." Ortogrul looked, and espied a little well,
out of which issued a small rivulet. "Tell me now," said his father, "do thou
wish for sudden affluence, that may pour upon thee like the mountain-torrent;
or for a slow and gradual increase, resembling the rill gliding from the well?
"Let me be quickly rich," said Ortogrul; "let the golden stream be quick and
violent." "Look round thee," said his father, "once again." Ortogrul looked,
and perceived the channel of the torrent dry and dusty; but following the
rivulet from the well, he traced it to a wide lake, which the supply, slow and
constant, kept always full. He awoke, and determined to grow rich, by silent
profit, and persevering industry.

Having sold his patrimony, he engaged in merchandise; and in twenty years
purchased lands, on which he raised a house, equal in sumptuousness to that of
the vizier, to which he invited all the ministers of Pleasure, expecting to
enjoy all the felicity which he had imagined riches able to afford. Leisure
soon made him weary of himself, and he longed to be persuaded that he was great
and happy. He was courteous and liberal; he gave all that approached him hopes
of pleasing him, and all who should please him, hopes of being rewarded. Every
art of praise was tried, and every source of adulatory fiction was exhausted.
Ortogrul heard his flatterers without delight, because he found himself unable
to believe them. His own heart told him its frailties; his own understanding
reproached him with its faults. "How long," said he, with a deep sigh, "have I
been laboring in vain to amass wealth, which at last is useless! Let no man
hereafter wish to be rich, who is already too wise to be flattered!"

DR. JOHNSON. SECTION V. LADY JANE GRAY.
This excellent personage was descended from the Royal Line of England by both
her parents.

She was carefully educated in the principles of the Reformation; and her
wisdom and virtue rendered her a shining example to her sex. But it was her lot
to continue only a short period on this stage of being; for, in early life, she
fell a sacrifice to the wild ambition of the Duke of Northumberland; who
promoted a marriage between her and his son, Lord Guilford Dudley; and raised
her to the throne of England, in opposition to the rights of Mary and
Elizabeth. At the time of their marriage, she was only about eighteen years of
age, and her husband was also very young: a season of life very unequal to
oppose the interested views of artful and aspiring men; who, instead of
exposing them to danger, should have been the protectors of their innocence and
youth.

This extraordinary young person, besides the solid endowments of piety and
virtue, possessed the most engaging disposition, the most accomplished parts;
and being of an equal age with King Edward VI, she had received all her
education with him, and seemed even to possess a greater facility in acquiring
every part of manly and classical literature. She had attained a knowledge of
the Roman and Greek languages, as well as of several modern tongues; had passed
most of her time in an application to learning; and expressed a great
indifference for other occupations and amusements usual with her sex and
station. Roger Ascham, tutor to the Lady Elizabeth, having at one time paid her
a visit, found her employed in reading Plato, while the rest of the family were
engaged in a party of hunting in the park; and upon his admiring the
singularity of her choice, she told him, that she "received more pleasure from
that author, than the others could reap from all their sport and gaiety." --
Her heart, replete with this love of literature and serious studies, and with
tenderness toward her husband, who was deserving of her affection, had never
opened itself to the flattering allurements of ambition; and the information of
her advancement to the throne was by no means agreeable to her. She even
refused to accept of the crown; pleaded the preferable right of the two
princesses; expressed her dread of the consequences attending an enterpise so
dangerous, not to say so criminal; and desired to remain in that private
station in which she was born. Overcome at last with the entreaties, rather
than reasons, of her father and father-in-law, and above all, of her husband,
she submitted to their will, and was prevailed on to relinquish her own
judgment. But this honor was of very short continuance. The nation declared
for Queen Mary; and the Lady Jane, after wearing the vain pageantry of a crown
during ten days, returned to a private life, with much more satisfaction than
she felt when the royalty was tendered to her.

Queen Mary, who appears to have been incapable of generosity or clemency,
determined to remove every person, from whom the least danger could be
apprehended. Warning was, therefore, given the Lady Jane to prepare for death;
a doom which she had expected, and which the innocence of her life, as well as
the misfortunes to which she had been exposed, rendered no unwelcome news to
her. The Queen's bigoted zeal, under color of tender mercy to the prisoner's
soul, induced her to send priests, who molested her with perpetual disputation;
and even a reprieve of three days was granted her, in hopes that she would be
persuaded, during that time, to pay, by a timely conversion to Popery, some
regard to her eternal welfare. The Lady Jane had presence of mind, in those
melancholy circumstances, not only to defend her religion by solid arguments,
but also to write a letter to her sister, in the Greek language; in which,
besides sending her a copy of the Scriptures in that tongue, she exhorted her
to maintain, in every fortune, a like steady perseverance. On the day of her
execution, her husband, Lord Guilford, desired permission to see her; but she
refused her consent, and sent him word, that the tenderness of their parting
would overcome the fortitude of both; and would too much unbend their minds
from that constancy, which their approaching end required of them. -- Their
separation, she said, would be only for a moment; and they would soon rejoin
each other in a scene, where their affections would be for ever united; and
where death, disappointment* and misfortunes, could no longer have access to
them, or disturb their eternal felicity.

It had been intended to execute the Lady Jane and Lord Guilford together on
the same scaffold, at Towerhill; but the council, dreading the compassion of
the people for their youth, beauty, innocence, and noble birth, changed their
orders, and gave directions that she should be beheaded within the verge of the
Tower. She saw her husband led to execution; and having given him from the
window some token of her remembrance, she waited with tranquillity till her own
appointed hour should bring her to a like fate. She even saw his headless body
carried back in a cart; and found herself more confirmed by the reports, which
she heard of the constancy of his end, than shaken by so tender and melancholy
a spectacle. Sir John Gage, constable of the Tower, when he led her to
execution, desired her to bestow on him some small present, which he might keep
as a perpetual memorial of her. She gave him her table book, in which she had
just written three sentences, on seeing her husband's dead body; one in Greek,
another in Latin, a third in English. The purport of them was, "that human
justice was against his body, but the Divine Mercy would be favorable to his
soul: and that if her fault deserved punishment, her youth, at least, and her
imprudence, were worthy of excuse; and that God and posterity, she trusted,
would show her favor." On the scaffold, she made a speech to the bye-standers,
in which the mildness of her disposition led her to take the blame entirely on
herself, without uttering one complaint against the severity with which she had
been treated. She said, that her offense was, not having laid her hand upon the
crown, but not rejecting it with sufficient constancy: that she had less erred
through ambition than through reverence to her parents, whom she had been
taught to respect and obey: that she willingly received death, as the only
satisfaction which she could now make to the injured state; and though her
infringement of the laws had been constrained, she would show, by her voluntary
submission to their sentence, that she was desirous to atone for that
disobedience, into which too much filial piety had betrayed her* that she had
justly deserved this punishment for being made the instrument, though the
unwilling instrument, of the ambition of others: and that the story of her
life, she hoped, might at least be useful, by proving that innocence excuses
not great misdeeds, if they tend any way to the destruction of the
commonwealth. -- After uttering these words, she caused herself to be disrobed
by her women, and with a steady, serene countenance submitted herself to the
executioner.

HUME. SECTION VI. The Hill of Science.
IN that season of the year, when the serenity of the sky, the various fruits
which cover the ground, the discolored foliage of the trees, and all the
sweet, but fading graces of inspiring autumn, open the mind to benevolence, and
dispose it for contemplation, I was wandering in a beautiful and romantic
country, till curiosity began to give way to weariness; and I sat down on the
fragment of a rock overgrown with moss; where the rustling of the falling
leaves, the dashing of waters, and the hum of the distant city, soothed my mind
into the most perfect tranquillity; and sleep insensibly stole upon me, as I was
indulging the agreeable reveries, which the objects around me naturally
inspired.

I immediately found myself in a vast extended plain, in the middle of which
arose a mountain higher than I had before any conception of. It was covered
with a multitude of people, chiefly youth; many of whom pressed forwards with
the liveliest expressions of ardour in their countenance, though the way was in
many places steep and difficult. I observed, that those who had but just begun
to climb the hill, thought themselves not far from the top; but as they
proceeded, new hills were continually rising to their view; and the summit of
the highest they could before discern seemed but the foot of another, till the
mountain at length appeared to lose itself in the clouds. As I was gazing on
these things with astonishment, a friendly instructor suddenly appeared: "The
mountain before thee," said he, "is the Hill of Science. On the top is the
temple of Truth, whose head is above the clouds, and a veil of pure light
covers her face. Observe the progress of her votaries; be silent and attentive."

After I had noticed a variety of objects, I turned my eye toward the
multitudes who were climbing the steep ascent; and observed amongst them a
youth of a lively look, a piercing eye, and something fiery and irregular in
all his motions. His name was Genius. He darted like an eagle up to the
mountain; and left his companions gazing after him with envy and admiration:
but his progress was unequal, and interrupted by a thousand caprices. When
Pleasure warbled in the valley, he mingled in her train. When Pride beckoned
toward the precipice, he ventured to the tottering edge. He delighted in
devious and untried paths; and made so many excursions from the road, that his
feebler companions often outstripped him. I observed that the Muses beheld him
with partiality; but Truth often frowned, and turned aside her face. While
Genius was thus wasting his strength in eccentric flights; I saw a person of a
very different appearance, named Application. He crept along with a slow and
unremitting pace; his eyes fixed on the top of the mountain, patiently removing
every stone that obstructed his way, till he saw most of those below him, who
had at first derided his slow and toilsome progress. Indeed, there were few who
ascended the hill with equal, and uninterrupted steadiness; for beside the
difficulties of the way, they were continually solicited to turn aside, by a
numerous crowd of Appetites, Passions, and Pleasures, whose importunity, when
once complied with, they became less and less able to resist: and though they
often returned to the path, the asperities of the road were more severely felt;
the hill appeared more steep and rugged; the fruits which were wholesome and
refreshing, seemed harsh and ill-tasted; their sight grew dim; and their feet
tript at every little obstruction.

I saw, with some surprise, that the Muses, whose business was to cheer and
encourage those who were toiling up the ascent, would often sing in the bowers
of Pleasure, and accompany those who were enticed away at the call of the
Passions. They accompanied them, however, but a little way; and always forsook
them when they lost sight of the hill. The tyrants then doubled their chains
upon the unhappy captives; and led them away, without resistance, to the cells
of Ignorance, or the mansions of Misery. Amongst the innumerable seducers, who
were endeavoring to draw away the votaries of Truth from the path of Science,
there was one, so little formidable in her appearance, and so gentle and
languid in her attempts, that I should scarcely have taken notice of her, but
for the numbers she had imperceptibly loaded with her chains. Indolence, (for
so she was called,) far from proceeding to open hostilities, did not attempt to
turn their feet out of the path, but contented herself with retarding their
progress; and the purpose she could not force them to abandon, she persuaded
them to delay. Her touch had a power like that of the torpedo, which withered
the strength of those who came within its influence. Her unhappy captives still
turned their faces toward the temple, and always hoped to arrive there; but
the ground seemed to slide from beneath their feet, and they found themselves
at the bottom, before they suspected they had changed their place. The placid
serenity, which at first appeared in their countenance, changed by degrees into
a melancholy languor, which was tinged with deeper and deeper gloom, as they
glided down the stream of Insignificance; a dark and sluggish water, which is
curled by no breeze, and enlivened by no murmur, till it falls into a dead sea,
where startled passengers are awakened by the shock, and the next moment buried
in the gulf of Oblivion.

Of all the unhappy deserters from the paths of Science, none seemed less able
to return than the followers of Indolence. The captives of Appetite and Passion
could often seize the moment when their tyrants were languid or asleep, to
escape from their enchantment; but the dominion of Indolence was constant and
unremitted; and seldom resisted, till resistance was in vain.

After contemplating these things, I turned my eyes toward the top of the
mountain, where the air was always pure and exhilirating, the path shaded with
laurels and ever-greens, and the effulgence which beamed from the face of
Science seemed to shed a glory round her votaries. Happy, said I, are they who
are permitted to ascend the mountain! -- But while I was pronouncing this
exclamation with uncommon ardour, I saw, standing beside me, a form of diviner
features, and a more benign radiance. "Happier," said she, "are they whom
Virtue conducts to the mansions of Content!" "What," said I, "does Virtue then
reside in the vale?" "I am found," said she, "in the vale, and I illuminate the
mountain. I cheer the cottager at his toil, and inspire the sage at his
meditation. I mingle in the crowd of cities, and bless the hermit in his cell.
I have a temple in every heart that owns my influence; and to him that wishes
for me, I am already present. Science may raise thee to eminence, but I alone
can guide thee to felicity!" -- While Virtue was thus speaking, I stretched out
my arms toward her, with a vehemence which broke my slumber. The chill dews
were falling around me, and the shades of evening stretched over the landscape.
I hastened homeward; and resigned the night to silence and meditation.

A^KIN. SECTION VII. The Journey of a day; a Picture of Human Life.
OBIDAH, the son of Abensina, left the caravansera early in the morning, and
pursued his journey through the plains of Indostan. He was fresh and vigorous
with rest; he was animated with hope; he was incited by desire; he walked
swiftly forward over the valleys, and saw the hills gradually rising before
him. As he passed along, his ears were delighted with the morning song of the
bird of paradise; he was fanned by the last flutters of the sinking breeze, and
sprinkled with dew by groves of spices. He sometimes contemplated the towering
height of the oak, monarch of the hills; and sometimes caught the gentle
fragrance of the primrose, eldest daughter of the spring: all his senses were
gratified, and all care was banished from his heart.

Thus he went on, till the sun approached his meridian, and the increasing heat
preyed upon his strength; he then looked round about him for some more
commodious path. He saw, on his right hand, a grove that seemed to wave its
shades as a sign of invitation; he entered it, and found the coolness and
verdure irresistably pleasant. He did not, however, forget whither he was
traveling; but found a narrow way bordered with flowers, which appeared to
have the same direction with the main road; and was pleased, that, by this
happy experiment, he had found means to unite pleasure with business, and to
gain the rewards of diligence without suffering its fatigues. He, therefore,
still continued to walk for a time, without the least remission of his ardour,
except that he was sometimes tempted to stop by the music of the birds, which
the heat had assembled in the shade; and sometimes amused himself with plucking
the flowers that covered the banks on either side, or the fruits that hung upon
the branches. At last, the green path began to decline from its first tendency,
and to wind among hills and thickets, cooled with fountains, and murmuring with
water-falls. Here Obidah paused for a time, and began to consider whether it
were longer safe to forsake the known and common track; but remembering that
the heat was now in its greatest violence, and that the plain was dusty and
uneven, he resolved to pursue the new path, which he supposed only to make a
few meanders, in compliance with the varieties of the ground, and to end at
last in the common road.

Having thus calmed his solicitude, he renewed his pace, though he suspected
that he was not gaining ground. This uneasiness of his mind inclined him to lay
hold on every new object, and give way to every sensation that might sooth or
divert him. He listened to every echo; he mounted every hill for a fresh
prospect; he turned aside to every cascade; and pleased himself with tracing
the course of a gentle river that rolled among the trees, and watered a large
region with innumerable circumvolutions. In these amusements, the hours passed
away unaccounted; his deviations had perplexed his memory, and he knew not
toward what point to travel. He stood pensive and confused, afraid to go
forward lest he should go wrong, yet conscious that the time of loitering was
now past. While he was thus tortured with uncertainty, the sky was overspread
with clouds; the day vanished from before him; and a sudden tempest gathered
round his head. He was now roused by his danger to a quick and painful
remembrance of his folly; he now saw how happiness is lost when ease is
consulted; he lamented the unmanly impatience that prompted him to seek shelter
in the grove; and despised the petty curiosity that led him on from trifle to
trifle. While he was thus reflecting, the air grew blacker, and a clap of
thunder broke his meditation.

He now resolved to do what yet remained in his power, to tread back the ground
which he had passed, and try to find some issue where the wood might open into
the plain. He prostrated himself on the ground, and commended his life to the
Lord of Nature. He rose with confidence and tranquillity, and pressed on with
resolution. The beasts of the desert were in motion, and on every hand were
heard the mingled howls of rage and fear, and ravage and expiration. All the
horrors of darkness and solitude surrounded him: the winds roared in the woods:
and the torrents tumbled from the hills.

Thus forlorn and distressed, he wandered through the wild, without knowing
whither he was going, or whether he was every moment drawing nearer to safety
or to destruction. At length, not fear, but labor began to overcome him; his
breath grew short, and his knees trembled; and he was on the point of lying
down in resignation to his fate, when he beheld, through the brambles, the
glimmer of a taper. He advanced toward the light; and finding that it
proceeded from the cottage of a hermit, he called humbly at the door, and
obtained admission. The ^^d man set before him such provisions as he had
collected for himself, on which Obidah sed with eagerness and gratitude.

When the repast was over, "Tell me," said the hermit, "by what chance thou
have been brought hither? I have been now twenty years an inhabitant of the
wilderness, in which I never saw a man before." -- Obidah then related the
occurrences of his journey, without any concealment or palliation.

"Son, said the hermit, "let the errors and follies, the dangers and escape of
this day, sink deep into thy heart. Remember, my son, that human life is the
journey of a day. We rise in the morning of youth, full of vigor and full of
expectation; we set forward with spirit and hope, with gaiety and with
diligence, and travel on a while in the direct road of piety toward the
mansions of rest. In a short time, we remit our fervor, and endeavor to find
some mitigation of our duty, and some more easy means of obtaining the same
end. We then relax our vigor, and resolve no longer to be terrified with
crimes at a distance; but rely upon our own constancy, and venture to approach
what we resolve never to touch. We thus enter the bowers of ease, and repose in
the shades of security. Here the heart softens, and vigilance subsides; we are
then willing to enquire whether another advance cannot be made, and whether we
may not, at least, turn our eyes upon the gardens of pleasure. We approach them
with scruple and hesitation; we enter them, but enter timorous and trembling;
and always hope to pass through them without losing the road of virtue, which,
for a while, we keep in our sight, and to which we purpose to return. But
temptation succeeds temptation, and one compliance prepares us for another; we
in time lose the happiness of innocence, and solace our disquiet with sensual
gratifications. By degrees, we let fall the remembrance of our original
intention, and quit the only adequate object of rational desire. We entangle
ourselves in business, immerge ourselves in luxury, and rove through the
labyrinths of inconstancy; till the darkness of old age begins to invade us,
and disease and anxiety obstruct our way. We then look back upon our lives with
horror, with sorrow, with repentance; and wish, but too often vainly wish, that
we had not forsaken the ways of virtue. Happy are they, my son, who shall learn
from thy example, not to despair; but shall remember, that, though the day is
past, and their strength is wasted, there yet remains one effort to be made:
that reformation is never hopeless, nor sincere endeavors ever unassisted:
that the wanderer may at length return after all his errors; and that he who
implores strength and courage from above, shall find danger and difficulty give
way before him. Go now, my son, to thy repose; commit thyself to the care of
Omnipotence; and when the morning calls again to toil, begin anew thy journey
and thy life."

DR. JOHNSON. CHAPTER III. DIDACTIC PIECES.
SECTION I. The Importance of a good Education.
I CONSIDER a human soul, without education, like marble in the quarry; which
shows none of its inherent beauties, until the skill of the polisher fetches
out the colors, makes the surface shine, and discovers every ornamental cloud,
spot, and vein, that runs through the body of it. Education, after the same
manner, when it works upon a noble mind, draws out to view every latent virtue
and perfection, which, without such helps, are never able to make their
appearance.

If my reader will give me leave to change the allusion so soon upon him, I
shall make use of the same instance to illustrate the force of education, which
Aristotle has brought to explain his doctrine of substantial forms, when he
tells us, that a statue lies hid in a block of marble; and that the art of the
statuary only clears away the superfluous matter, and removes the rubbish. The
figure is in the stone, and the sculptor only finds it. What sculpture is to a
block of marble, education is to a human soul. The philosopher, the saint, or
the hero, the wise, the good, or the great man, very often lies hid and
concealed in a plebeian, which a proper education might have disinterred, and
have brought to light. I am therefore much delighted with reading the accounts
of savage nations; and with contemplating those virtues which are wild and
uncultivated: to see courage exerting itself in fierceness, resolution in
obstinacy, wisdom in cunning, patience in sullenness and despair.

Men's passions operate variously, and appear in different kinds of actions,
according as they are more or less rectified and swayed by reason. When one
hears of negroes, who, upon the death of their masters, or upon changing their
service, hang themselves upon the next tree, as it sometimes happens in our
American plantations, who can forbear admiring their fidelity, though it
expresses itself in so dreadful a manner? What might not that savage greatness
of soul, which appears in these poor wretches on many occasions, be raised to,
were it rightly cultivated? And what color of excuse can there be, for the
contempt with which we treat this part of our species; that we should not put
them upon the common foot of humanity; that we should only set an insignificant
fine upon the man who murders them; nay, that we should, as much as in us lies,
cut them off from the prospects of happiness in another world, as well as in
this; and deny them that which we look upon as the proper means for attaining
it?

It is therefore an unspeakable blessing, to be born in those parts of the
world where wisdom and knowledge flourish; though, it must be confessed, there
are, even in these parts, several poor uninstructed persons, who are but little
above the inhabitants of those nations of which I have been here speaking; as
those who have had the advantages of a more liberal education, rise above one
another by several different degrees of perfection. For, to return to our
statue in the block of marble, we see it sometimes only begun to be chipped,
sometimes rough-hewn, and but just sketched into a human figure; sometimes, we
see the man appearing distinctly in all his limbs and featu^; sometimes, we
find the figure wrought up to great elegancy; but seldom meet with any to which
the hand of a Phidias or a Praxiteles could not give several nice touches and
finishings.

ADDISON. SECTION II. On Gratitude.
THERE is not a more pleasing exercise of the mind, than gratitude. It is
accompanied with such inward satisfaction, that the duty is sufficiently
rewarded by the performance. It is not, like the practice of many other
virtues, difficult and painful, but attended with so much pleasure, that were
there no positive command which enjoined it, nor any recompense laid up for it
hereafter, a generous mind would indulge in it, for the natural gratification
which it affords.

If gratitude is due from man to man, how much more from man to his Maker? --
The Supreme Being does not only confer upon us those bounties which proceed
more immediately from his hand, but even those benefits which are conveyed to
us by others. Every blessing we enjoy, by what means soever it may be derived
upon us, is the gift of Him who is the great Author of good, and the Father of
mercies.

If gratitude, when exerted toward one another, naturally produces a very
pleasing sensation in the mind of a grateful man, it exalts the soul into
rapture, when it is employed on this great object of gratitude; on this
beneficent Being, who has given us every thing we already possess, and from
whom we expect every thing we yet hope for.

ADDISON. SECTION III. On Forgiveness
THE most plain and natural sentiments of equity concur with divine authority,
to enforce the duty of forgiveness. Let him who has never in his life done
wrong, be allowed the privilege of remaining inexorable. But let such as are
conscious of frailties and crimes, consider forgiveness as a debt which they
owe to others. Common failings are the strongest lesson of mutual forbearance.
Were this virtue unknown among men, order and comfort, peace and repose, would
be strangers to human life. Injuries retaliated according to the exhorbitant
measure which passion prescribes, would excite resentment in return. The
injured person would become the injurer; and thus wrongs, reta^iations, and
fresh injuries, would circulate in endless succ^ssion, till the world was
rendered a field of blood. Of all the passions which invade the human breast,
revenge is the most direful. When allowed to reign with full dominion, it is
more than sufficient to poison the few pleasures which remain to man in his
present state. How much soever a person may suffer from injustice, he is always
in hazard of suffering more from the prosecution of revenge. The violence of an
enemy cannot inflict what is equal to the torment he creates to himself, by
means of the fierce and desperate passions which he allows to rage in his soul.

Those evil spirits who inhabit the regions of misery, are represented as
delighting in revenge and cruelty. But all that is great and good in the
universe is on the side of clemency and mercy. The almighty Ruler of the world,
though for ages offended by the unrigheousness, and insulted by the impiety of
men, is "long-suffering and slow to anger." His Son, when he appeared in our
nature, exhibited, both in his life, and his death, the most illustrious
example of forgiveness which the world ever beheld. If we look into the history
of mankind, we shall find that, in every age, they who have been respected as
worthy, or admired as great, have been distinguished for this virtue. Revenge
dwells in little minds. A noble and magnanimous spirit is always superior to
it. It suffers not from the injuries of men those severe shocks which others
feel. Collected within itself, it stands unmoved by their impotent assaults;
and with generous pity, rather than with anger, looks down on their unworthy
conduct. -- It has been truly said, that the greatest man on earth can no
sooner commit an injury, than a good man can make himself greater, by forgiving
it.

BLAIR. SECTION IV. Motives to the practice of Gentleness.
TO promote the virtue of gentleness, we ought to view our character with an
impartial eye; and to learn, from our own failings, to give that indulgence
which in our turn we claim. It is pride which fills the world with so much
harshness and severity. In the fullness of selfestimation, we forget what we
are. We claim attentions to which we are not entitled. We are rigorous to
offenses, as if we had never offended; unfeeling to distress, as if we knew not
what it was to suffer. From those airy regions of pride and folly, let us
descend to our proper level. Let us survey the natural equality on which
Providence has placed man with man, and reflect on the infirmities common to
all. If the reflection on natural equality and mutual offenses, be insufficient
to prompt humanity, let us at least remember what we are in the sight of our
Creator. Have we none of that forbearance to give one another, which we all so
earnestly entreat from heaven? Can we look for clemency or gentleness from our
Judge, when we are so backward to show it to our own brethren?

Let us also accustom ourselves, to reflect on the small moment of those
things, which are the usual incentives to violence and contention. In the
ruffled and angry hour, we view every appearance through a false medium. The
most inconsiderable point of interest, or honor, swells into a momentous
object; and the slightest attack seems to threaten immediate ruin. But after
passion or pride has subsided, we look around in vain for the mighty mischiefs
we dreaded. The fabric, which our disturbed imagination had reared, totally
disappears. But though the cause of contention has dwindled away, its
consequences remain. We have alienated a friend; we have embittered an enemy;
we have sown the seeds of future suspicion, malevolence, or disgust. -- Let us
suspend our violence for a moment, when causes of discord occur. Let us
anticipate that period of coolness, which, of itself, will soon arrive. Let us
reflect how little we have any prospect of gaining by fierce contention, but
how much of the true happiness of life we are certain of throwing away. Easily,
and from the smallest chink, the bitter waters of strife are let forth; but
their course cannot be foreseen; and he seldom fails of suffering most from
their poisonous effect, who first allowed them to flow.

BLAIR. SECTION V. A suspicious Temper the Source of Misery to its Possessor.
AS a suspicious spirit is the source of many crimes and calamities in the
world, so it is the spring of certain misery to the person who indulges it. His
friends will be few; and small will be his comfort in those whom he possesses.
Believing others to be his enemies, he will of course make them such. Let his
caution be ever so great, the asperity of his thoughts will often break out in
his behavior; and in return for suspecting and hating, he will incur suspicion
and hatred. Besides the external evils which he draws upon himself, arising
from alienated friendship, broken confidence, and open enmity, the suspicious
temper itself is one of the worst evils which any man can suffer. If "in all
fear there is torment," how miserable must be his state who, by living in
perpetual jealousy, lives in perpetual dread? Looking upon himself to be
surrounded with spies, enemies, and designing men, he is a stranger to reliance
and trust. He knows not to whom to open himself. He dresses his countenance in
forced smiles, while his heart throbs within from apprehensions of secret
treachery. Hence fretfulness and ill-humour, disgust at the world, and all the
painful sensations of an irritated and embittered mind.

So numerous and great are the evils arising from a suspicious disposition,
that, of the two extremes, it is more eligible to expose ourselves to
occasional disadvantage from thinking too well of others, than to suffer
continual misery by thinking always ill of them. It is better to be sometimes
imposed upon, than never to trust. Safety is purchased at ^oo dear a rate,
when, in order to secure it, we are obliged to be always clad in armor, and to
live in perpetual hostility with our fellows. This is, for the sake of living,
to deprive ou^^elves of the comfort of life. The man of candor enjoys his
situation, whatever it is, with cheerfulness and peace. Prudence directs his
intercourse with the world; but no black suspicions haunt his hours of rest.
Accustomed to view the characters of his neighbors in the most favorable
light, he is like one who dwells amidst those beautiful scenes of nature, on
which the eye rests with pleasure. Whereas the suspicious man, having his
imagination filled with all the shocking forms of human falsehood, deceit, and
treachery, resembles the traveller in the wilderness, who discerns no objects
around him but such as are either dreary or terrible; caverns that open,
serpents that hiss, and beasts of prey that howl.

BLAIR. SECTION VI. Comforts of Religion:
THERE are many who have passed the age of youth and beauty; who have resigned
the pleasures of that smiling season; who begin to decline into the vale of
years, impaired in their health, depressed in their fortunes, stripped of their
friends, their children, and perhaps still more tender connexions. What
resource can this world afford them? It presents a dark and dreary waste,
through which there does not issue a single ray of comfort. Every delusive
prospect of ambition is now at an end; long experience of mankind, an
experience very different from what the open and generous soul of youth had
fondly dreamt of has rendered the heart almost inaccessible to new friendships.
The principal sources of activity are taken away, when those for whom we labor
are cut off from us; those who animated, and those who sweetened all the toils
of life. Where then can the soul find refuge, but in the bosom of Religion?
There she is admitted to those prospects of Providence and futurity, which
alone can warm and fill the heart. I speak here of such as retain the feelings
of humanity; whom misfortunes have softened, and perhaps rendered more
delicately sensible: not of such as possess that stupid insensibility, which
some are pleased to dignify with the name of Philosophy.

It might therefore be expected, that those philosophers, who think they stand
in no need themselves of the assistance of religion to support their virtue,
and who never feel the want of its consolations, would yet have the humanity to
consider the very different situation of the rest of mankind; and not endeavor
to deprive them of what habit, at least, if they will not allow it to be
nature, has made necessary to their morals, and to their happiness. It might be
expected, that humanity would prevent them from breaking into the last retreat
of the unfortunate, who can no longer be objects of their envy or resentment;
and tearing from them their only remaining comfort. The attempt to ridicule
religion may be agreeable to some, by relieving them from restraint upon their
pleasures; and may render others very miserable, by making them doubt those
truths, in which they were most deeply interested; but it can convey real good
and happiness to no one individual.

GREGORY. SECTION VII. Diffidence of our Abilities, a Mark of Wisdom.
IT is a sure indication of good sense, to be diffident of it. We then, and not
till then, are growing wise, when we begin to discern how weak and unwise we
are. An absolute perfection of understanding, is impossible: he makes the
nearest approaches to it, who has the sense to discern, and the humility to
acknowledge, its imperfections. Modesty always sits gracefully upon youth; it
covers a multitude of faults, and doubles the luster of every virtue which it
seems to hide: the perfections of men being like those flowers which appear
more beautiful, when their leaves are a little contracted and folded up, than
when they are full blown, and display themselves, without any reserve, to the
view.

We are some of us very fond of knowledge, and apt to value ourselves upon any
proficiency in the sciences; one science, however, there is, worth more than
all the rest, and that is, the science of living well; which shall remain, when
"tongues shall cease," and, "knowledge shall vanish away." As to new notions,
and new doctrines, of which this age is very fruitful, the time will come, when
we shall have no pleasure in them: nay, the time shall come, when they shall be
exploded, and would have been forgotten, if they had not been preserved in
those excellent books, which contain a confutation of them; like insects
preserved for ages in amber, which otherwise would soon have returned to the
common mass of things. But a firm belief of Christianity, and a practice
suitable to it, will support and invigorate the mind to the last; and most of
all, at last, at that important hour, which must decide our hopes and
apprehensions: and the wisdom, which, like our Savior, comes from above,
will, through his merits, bring us thither. All our other studies and pursuits,
however different, ought to be subservient to, and center in, this grand point,
the pursuit of eternal happiness, by being good in ourselves, and useful to the
world.

SEED. SECTION VIII. On the importance of Order in the Distribution of our Time.
TIME we ought to consider as a sacred trust committed to us by God; of which
we are now the depositaries, and are to render account at the last. That
portion of it which he has allotted us, is intended partly for the concerns of
this world, partly for those of the next. Let each of these occupy, in the
distribution of our time, that space which properly belongs to it. Let not the
hours of hospitality and pleasure interfere with the discharge of our necessary
affairs; and let not what we call necessary affairs, encroach upon the time
which is due to devotion. To every thing there is a season, and a time for
every purpose under the heaven. If we delay till tomorrow what ought to be
done today, we overcharge the morrow with a burden which belongs not to it. We
load the wheels of time, and prevent them from carrying us along smoothly. He
who every morning plans the transactions of the day, and follows out that plan,
carries on a thread which will guide him through the labyrinth of the most busy
life. The orderly arrangement of his time is like a ray of light, which darts
itself through all his affairs. But, where no plan is laid, where the disposal
of time is surrendered merely to the chance of incidents, all things lie
huddled together in one chaos, which admits neither of distribution nor review.

The first requisite for introducing order into the management of time, is to
be impressed with a just sense of its value. Let us consider well how much
depends upon it, and how fast it flies away. The bulk of men are in nothing
more capricious and inconsistent, than in their appreciation of time. When they
think of it, as the measure of their continuance on earth, they highly prize
it, and with the greatest anxiety seek to lengthen it out. But when they view
it in separate parcels, they appear to hold it in contempt, and squander it
with inconsiderate profusion. While they complain that life is short, they are
often wishing its different periods at an end. Covetous of every other
possession, of time only they are prodigal. They allow every idle man to be
master of this property, and make every frivolous occupation welcome that can
help them to consume it. Among those who are so careless of time, it is not to
be expected that order should be observed in its distribution. But, by this
fatal neglect, how many materials of severe and lasting regret are they laying
up in store for themselves! The time which they suffer to pass away in the
midst of confusion, bitter repentance seeks afterward to recall. What was
omitted to be done at its proper moment, arises to be the torment of some
future season. Manhood is disgraced by the consequences of neglected youth. Old
age, oppressed by cares that belonged to a former period, labors under a
burden not its own. At the close of life, the dying man beholds with anguish
that his days are finishing, when his preparation for eternity is hardly
commenced. Such are the effects of a disorderly waste of time, through not
attending to its value. Every thing in the life of such persons is misplaced.
Nothing is performed aright, from not being performed in due season.

But he who is orderly in the distribution of his time, takes the proper method
of escaping those manifold evils. He is justly said to redeem the time. By
proper management, he prolongs it. He lives much in little space; more in a few
years than others do in many. He can live to God and his own soul, and at the
same time attend to all the lawful interests of the present world. He looks
back on the past, and provides for the future. He catches and arrests the hours
as they fly. They are marked down for useful purposes, and their memory
remains. Whereas those hours fleet by the man of confusion like a shadow. His
days and years are either blanks of which he has no remembrance, or they are
filled up with such a confused and irregular succession of unfinished
transactions, that though he remembers he has been busy, yet he can give no
account of the business which has employed him.

BLAIR. SECTION IX. The Dignity of Virtue amidst corrupt Examples.
THE most excellent and honorable character which can adorn a man and a
Christian, is acquired by resisting the torrent of vice, and adhering to the
cause of God and virtue against a corrupted multitude. It will be found to hold
in general, that all those, who, in any of the great lines of life, have
distinguished themselves for thinking profoundly, and acting nobly, have
despised popular prejudices; and departed, in several things, from the common
ways of the world. On no occasion is this more requisite for true honor, than
where religion and morality are concerned. In times of prevailing
licentiousness, to maintain unblemished virtue, and uncorrupted integrity; in a
public or a private cause, to stand firm by what is fair and just, amidst
discouragements and opposition; despising groundless censure and reproach;
disdaining all compliance with public manners, when they are vicious and
unlawful; and never ashamed of the punctual discharge of every duty toward God
and man; -- this is what shows true greatness of spirit, and will force
approbation even from the degenerate multitude themselves. "This is the man,"
(their conscience will oblige them to acknowledge,) "whom we are unable to bend
to mean condescensions. We see it in vain either to flatter or to threaten him;
he rests on a principle within, which we cannot shake. To this man we may, on
any occasion, safely commit our cause. He is incapable of betraying his trust,
or deserting his friend, or denying his faith."

It is, accordingly, this steady inflexible virtue, this regard to principle,
superior to all custom and opinion, which peculiarly marked the characters of
those in any age, who have shone with distinguished luster; and has consecrated
their memory to all posterity. It was this that obtained to ancient Enoch the
the most singular testimony of honor from heaven. He continued to "walk with
God," when the world apostised from him. He pleased God, and was beloved of
him; so that living among sinners, he was translated to heaven without seeing
death; "Yea, speedily was he taken away, lest wickedness should have altered
his understanding, or deceit beguiled his soul." When Sodom could not furnish
ten righteous men to save it, Lot remained unspotted amidst the contagion. He
lived like an angel among spirits of darkness; and the destroying flame was not
permitted to go forth, till the good man was called away by a heavenly
messenger from his devoted city. When "all flesh had corrupted their way upon
the earth," then lived Noah, a righteous man, and a preacher of righteousness.
He stood alone, and was scoffed by the profane crew But they by the deluge were
swept away; while on him, Providence conferred the immortal honor, of being
the restorer of a better race, and the father of a new world. Such examples as
these, an such honors conferred by God on them who withstood the multitude of
evil doers, should often be present to our minds. Let us oppose them to the
numbers of low and corrupt examples, which we behold around us; and when we are
in hazard of being swayed by such, let us fortify our virtue, by thinking of
those who, in former times, shone like stars in the midst of surrounding
darkness, and are now shining in the kingdom of heaven, as the brightness of
the firmament, for ever and ever.

BLAIR. SECTION X. The Mortifications of Vice greater than those of Virtue.
THOUGH no condition of human life is free from uneasiness, yet it must be
allowed, that the uneasiness belonging to a sinful course, is far greater, than
what attends a course of well-doing. If we are weary of the labors of virtue,
we may be assured, that the world, whenever we try the exchange, will lay upon
us a much heavier load. It is the outside, only, of a licentious life, which is
gay and smiling. Within, it conceals toil, and trouble, and deadly sorrow. For
vice poisons human happiness in the spring, by introducing disorder into the
heart. Those passions which it seems to indulge, it only feeds with imperfect
gratifications; and thereby strengthens them for ^ing, in the end, on their
unhappy victims.

It is a great mistake to imagine, that the pain of self-denial is confined to
virtue. He who follows the world, as much as he who follows Christ, must "take
up his cross;" and to him assuredly, it will prove a more oppressive burden.
Vice allows all our passions to range uncontrouled: and where each claims to be
superior, it is impossible to gratify all. The predominant desire can only be
indulged at the expense of its rival. No mortifications which virtue exacts,
are more severe than those, which ambition imposes upon the love of ease, pride
upon interest, and covetousness upon vanity. Self-denial, therefore, belongs,
in common, to vice and virtue; but with this remarkable difference, that the
passions which virtue requires us to mortify, it tends to weaken; whereas,
those which vice obliges us to deny, it, at the same time, strengthens. The one
diminishes the pain of self-denial, by moderating the demand of passion; the
other increases it, by rendering those demands imperious and violent. What
distresses, that occur in the calm life of virtue, can be compared to those
tortures, which remorse of conscience inflicts on the wicked; to those severe
humiliations, arising from guilt combined with misfortunes, which sink them to
the dust; to those violent agitations of shame and disappointment, which
sometimes drive them to the most fatal extremities, and make them abhor their
existence? How often, in the midst of those di^rous situations, into which
their crimes have brought them, have they execrated the seductions of vice;
and, with bitter regret, looked back to the day on which they first forsook the
path of innocence!

BLAIR* SECTION XI. On Contentment.
CONTENTMENT produces, in some measure (...) those effects which the alchymist
usually ascribes to that he calls the philosopher's stone; and if it does not
bring riches, it does the same thing by banishing the desire of them. If it
cannot remove the disquietudes arising from a man's mind, body, or fortune, it
makes him easy under them. It has indeed a kindly influence on the soul of man,
in respect of every being to whom he stands related. It extinguishes all
murmur, repining, and ingratitude, toward that Being who has allotted him his
part to act in this world. It destroys all inordinate ambition, and every
tendency to corruption, with regard to the community wherein he is placed. It
gives sweetness to his conversation, and a perpetual serenity to all his
thoughts.

Among the many methods which might be made use of for acquiring this virtue, I
shall mention only the two following. First of all, a man should always
consider how much he has more than he wants; and secondly, how much more
unhappy he might be than he really is.

First, a man should always consider how much he has more than he wants, I am
wonderfully pleased with the reply which Aristippus made to one, who condoled
him upon the loss of a farm: "Why," said he, "I have three farms still, and you
have but one; so that I ought rather to be afflicted for you than you for me."
On the contrary, foolish men are more apt to consider what they have lost, than
what they possess; and to fix their eyes upon those who are richer than
themselves, rather than on those who are under greater difficulties. All the
real pleasures and conveniences of life lie in a narrow compass; but it is the
humor of mankind to be always looking forward; and straining after one who has
got the start of them in wealth and honor. For this reason, as none can be
properly called rich, who have not more than they want, there are few rich men
in any of the politer nations, but among the middle sort of people, who keep
their wishes within their fortunes, and have more wealth than they know how to
enjoy. Persons of a higher rank live in a kind of splendid poverty; and are
perpetually wanting, because, instead of acquiescing in the solid pleasures of
life, they endeavor to outvie one another in shadows and appearances. Men of
sense have at all times beheld, with a great deal of mirth, this sily game that
is playing over their heads; and, by contracting their desires, enjoy all that
secret satisfaction which others are always in quest of. The truth is, this
ridiculous chase after imaginary pleasures, cannot be sufficienly exposed, as
it is the great source of those evils which generally undo a nation. Let a
man's estate be what it may, he is a poor man, if he does not live within it;
and naturally sets himself to sale to any one that can give him his price. When
Pittacus, after the death of his brother, who had left him a good estate, was
offered a great sum of money by the king of Lydia, he thanked him for his
kindness; but told him, he had already more by half than he knew what to do
with. In short, content is equivalent to wealth, and luxury to poverty; or, to
give the thought a more agreeable turn, "Content is natural wealth," says
Socrates; to which I shall add, Luxury is artificial poverty. I shall therefore
recommend to the consideration of those, who are always aiming at superfluous
and imaginary enjoyments, and who will not be at the trouble of contracting
their desires, an excellent saying of Bion the philosopher, namely, "That no
man has so much care, as he who endeavors after the most happiness."

In the second place, every one ought to reflect how much mure unhappy he might
be, than he really is. -- The former consideration took in all those, who (...)
sufficiently provided with the means to make themselves easy; this regards such
as actually lie under some pressure or misfortune. These may receive great
alleviation, from such a comparison as the unhappy person may make between
himself and others; or between the misfortunes which he suffers, and greater
misfortunes which might have befallen him.

I like the story of the honest Dutchman, who, upon breaking his leg by a fall
from the mainmast, told the standers by, it was a great mercy that it was not
his neck. To which, since I am got into quotations, give me leave to add the
saying of an old philosopher, who, after having invited some of his friends to
dine with him, was rufled by a person that came into the room in a passion, and
threw down the table that stood before them: "Every one," says he, "has his
calamity; and he is a happy man that has no greater than this." We find an
instance to the same purpose, in the life of Doctor Hammond, written by Bishop
Fell. As this good man was troubled with a complication of distempers, when he
had got the gout upon him, he used to thank God that it was not the stone; and
when he had the stone; that he had not both these distempers on him at the same
time.

I cannot conclude this essay without observing, that there never was any
system besides that of Christianity, which could effectually produce in the
mind of man the virtue I have been hitherto speaking of. In order to (...) us
contented with our condition, many of the pre^ philosophers tell us, that our
discontent only hurts ourselves, without being able to make any alteration in
(...) ^ircumstances; others, that whatever evil befalls us ^ed to us by a fatal
necessity, to which superior be^ themselves are subject; while others, very
gravely (...) man who is miserable, that it is necessary he should (...) to
keep up the harmony of the universe; and that (...) ^cheme of Providence would
be troubled and per^ed, were he otherwise. These, and the like consider^,
rather silence than satisfy a man. They may show (...) that his discontent is
unreasonable, but they are by no means sufficient to relieve it. They rather
give despair than consolation. In a word, a man might reply to one of these
comforters, as Augustus did to his friend, who advised him not to grieve for
the death of a person whom he loved, because his grief could not fetch him
again: "It is for that very reason," said the emperor, "that I grieve."

On the contrary, religion bears a more tender regard to human nature. It
prescribes to every miserable man the means of bettering his condition: nay, it
shows him, that bearing his afflictions as he ought to do, will naturally end
in the removal of them. It makes him easy here, because it can make him happy
hereafter.

ADDISON. SECTION XII. Rank and Riches afford no Ground for Envy.
Of all the grounds of envy among men, superiority in rank and fortune is the
most general. Hence, the malignity which the poor commonly bear to the rich, as
engrossing to themselves all the comforts of life. H^ the evil eye with which
persons of inferior station ^tinise those who are above them in rank; and if
they approach to that rank, their envy is generally strong^ against such as are
just one step higher than themselv^ Alas! my friends, all this envious
disquietude, which ^tates the world, arises from a deceitful figure which im^
on the public view. False colors are hung out: t^ (...) state of men is not
what it seems to be. The o^ society requires a distinction of ranks to take
place; (...) in point of happiness, all men come much nearer to eq^ty than is
commonly imagined; and the circumstan^ which form any material difference of
happiness among them, are not of that nature which render them grounds of envy.
The poor man possesses not, it is true, some of the conveniences and pleasures
of the rich; but, in return, he is free from many embarrassments to which they
are subject. By the simplicity and uniformity of his life, he is delivered from
that variety of cares, which perplex those who have great affairs to manage,
intricate plans to pursue, many enemies, perhaps, to encounter in the pursuit.
In the tranpuility of his small habitation, and private family, he enjoys a
peace which is often unknown at courts. The gratifications of nature, which are
always the most satisfactory, are possessed by him to their full extent; and if
he be a stranger to the refined pleasures of the wealthy, he is unacquainted
also with the desire of them, and by consequence, feels no want. His plain meal
satisfies his appetite, with a relish, probably, higher than that of the rich
man, who sits down to his luxurious banquet. His sleep is more sound; his
health more firm; he knows not what spleen, languor, and listlessness are. His
accustomed employments or labors are not more oppressive to him, than the
labor of attendance (...) courts and the great, the labors of dress, the
fatigue of amusements, the very weight of idleness, frequently are to the rich.
In the mean time, all the beauty of the (...) ^f nature, all the enjoyments of
domestic society, all t^ ^iety and cheerfulness of an easy mind, are as open to
him as to those of the highest rank. The splendor of retinue, the sound of
titles, the appearances of high respect, are indeed soothing, for a short time,
to the great. But, become familiar, they are soon forgotten. Custom effaces
their impression. They sink into the rank of th^se ordinary things, which daily
recur, without raising any sensation of joy. -- Let us cease, therefore, from
looking up with discontent and envy to those, whom birth or fortune has placed
above us. Let us adjust the balance of happiness fairly. When we think of the
enjoyments we want, we should think also of the troubles from which we are
free. If we allow their just value to the comforts we possess, we shall find
reason to rest satisfied, with a very moderate, though not an opulent and
splendid, condition of fortune. Often, did we know the whole, we should be
inclined to pity the state of those whom we now envy.

BLAIR. SECTION XIII. Patience under Provocations our Interest as well as Duty.
THE wide circle of human society is diversified by an endless variety of
characters, dispositions, and passions. Uniformity is, in no respect, the
genius of the world. Every man is marked by some peculiarity which
distinguishes him from another: and no where can two individuals be found, who
are exactly, and in all respects alike. Where so much diversity obtains, it
cannot but happen, that, in the intercourse which men are obliged to maintain,
their tempers shall often be ill adjusted to that intercourse: shall jar, and
interfere with each other. Hence, in every station, the highest as well as the
lowest, and in every condition of life, public, private, and domestic,
occasions of irritation frequently arise. We are provoked, sometimes, by the
folly and levity of those with whom we are connected; sometimes, by their
indifference or neglect; by the incivility of a friend, the haughtiness of a
superior, or the insolent behavior of one in lower station. Hardly a day
passes, without somewhat or other occurring, which serves to ruffle the man of
impatient spirit. Of course, such a man lives in a continual storm. He knows
not what it is to enjoy a train of good humor. Servants, neighbors, friends,
spouse, and children, all, through the unrestrained violence of his temper,
become sources of disturbance and vexation to him. In vain is affluence; in
vain are health and prosperity. The least trifle is sufficient to discompose
his mind, and poison his pleasures. His very amusements are mixed with
turbulence and passion.

I would beseech this man to consider, of what small moment the provocations
which he receives, or at least imagines himself to receive, are really in
themselves; but of what great moment he makes them, by suffering them to
deprive him of the possession of himself. I would beseech him, to consider, how
many hours of happiness he throws away, which a little more patience would
allow him to enjoy; and how much he puts it in the power of the most
insignificant persons to render him miserable. "But who can expect," we hear
him exclaim, "that he is to possess the insensibility of a stone? How is it
possible for human nature to endure so many repeated provocations? or to bear
calmly with such unreasonable behavior?" -- My brother! if thou can bear
with no instances of unreasonable behavior, withdraw thyself from the world.
Thou art no longer fit to live in it. Leave the intercourse of men. Retreat to
the mountain, and the desert; or shut thyself up in a cell. For here, in the
midst of society, offenses must come. We might as well expect, when we behold a
calm atmosphere, and a clear sky, that no clouds were ever to rise, and no
winds to blow, as that our life was long to proceed, without receiving
provocations from human frailty. The careless and the imprudent, the giddy and
the fickle, the ungrateful and the interested, every where meet us. They are
the bri^rs and thorns, with which the paths of human life are beset. He only,
who can hold his course among them with patience and equanimity, he who is
prepared to bear what he must expect to happen, is worthy the name of a man.

If we preserved ourselves composed but for a moment, we should perceive the
insignificancy of most of those provocations which we magnify so highl^* When a
few suns more have rolled over our heads* (...) storm will, of itself, have
subsided; the cause of our present impatience and disturbance will be utterly
forgotten. Can we not then, anticipate this hour of calmness to ourselves; and
begin to enjoy the peace which it will certainly bring? If others have behaved
improperly, let us leave them to their own folly, without becoming the victim
of their caprice, and punishing ourselves on their account -- Patience, in this
exercise of it, cannot be too much studied by all who wish their life to flow
in a smooth stream. It is the reason of a man, in opposition to the passion of
a child. It is the enjoyment of peace, in opposition to uproar and confusion.

BLAIR. SECTION XIV. Moderation in our Wis^^s recommended.
THE active mind of man seldom or never rests satisfied with is present
condition, how prosperous soever. Originally formed for a wider range of
objects, for a higher sphere of enjoyments, it finds itself, in every situation
of fortune, straitened and confined. Sensible of deficiency in its state, it is
ever sending forth the fond desire, the aspiring wish, after something beyond
what is enjoyed at present. Hence, that restlessness which prevails so
generally among mankind. Hence, that disgust of pleasures which they have
tried; that passion for novelty; that ambition of rising to some degree of
eminence or felicity, of which they have formed to themselves an indistinct
idea. All which may be considered as indications of a certain native, original
greatness in the human soul, swelling beyond the limits of its present
condition; and pointing at the higher objects for which it was made. Happy, if
these latent remains of our primitive state, served to direct our wishes
toward their proper destination, and to lead us into the path of true bliss!

But in this dark and bewildered state, the aspiring tendency of our nature
unfortunately takes an opposite direction, and feeds a very misplaced ambition.
The flattering appearances which here present themselves to sense; the
distinctions which fortune confers; the advantages and pleasures which we
imagine the world to be capable of bestowing, fill up the ultimate wish of most
men. These are the objects which engross their solitary musings, and stimulate
their active labors; which warm the breasts of the young, animate the industry
of the middle aged, and often keep alive the passions of the old, until the
very close of life.

Assuredly, there is nothing unlawful in our wishing to be freed from whatever
is disagreeable, and to obtain a fuller enjoyment of the comforts of life. But
when these wishes are not tempered by reason, they are in danger of
precipitating us into much extravagance and folly. Desires and wishes are the
first springs of action. When they become exorbitant, the whole character is
likely to be tainted. If we suffer our fancy to create to itself worlds of
ideal happiness, we shall discompose the peace and order of our minds, and
foment many hurtful passions. Here, then, let moderation begin its reign: by
bringing within reasonable bounds the wishes that we form. As soon as they
become extravagant, let us check them, by proper reflections on the fallacious
nature of those objects, which the world hangs out to allure desire.

You have strayed, my friends, from the road which conducts to felicity, you
have dishonored the native dignity of your souls, in allowing your wishes to
terminate on nothing higher than worldly ideas of greatness or happiness. Your
imagination roves in a land of shadows. Unreal forms deceive you. It is no more
than a phantom, an illusion of happiness, which attracts your fond admiration;
nay, an illusion of happiness, which often conceals much real misery.

Do you imagine, that all are happy, who have attained to those summits of
distinction, toward which your wishes aspire? Alas! how frequently has
experience shown, that where roses were supposed to bloom, nothing but briers
and thorns grew? Reputation, beauty, riches, grandeur, nay, royalty itself,
would, many a time, have been gladly exchanged by the possessors, for that more
quiet and humble station, with which you are now dissatisfied. With all that is
splendid and shining in the world, it is decreed that there should mix many
deep shades of woe. On the elevated situations of fortune, the great calamities
of life chiefly fall. There, the storm spends its violence, and there, the
thunder breaks; while, safe and unhurt, the inhabitant of the vale remains
below. -- Retreat, then, from those vain and pernicious excursions of
extravagant desire. Satisfy yourselves with what is rational and attainable.
Train your minds to moderate views of human life, and human happiness.
Remember, and admire, the wisdom of Agur's petition: "Remove far from me vanity
and lies. Give me neither poverty nor riches. Feed me with food convenient for
me: Lest I be full, and deny thee; and say, who is the Lord? or lest I be poor,
and steal; and take the name of my God in vain."

BLAIR. SECTION XV. Omniscience and Omnipresence of the DEITY, the Source of
Consolation to good Men.
I WAS yesterday, about sunset, walking in the open fields, till the night
insensibly fell upon me. I at first amused myself with all the richness and
variety of colors, which appeared in the western parts of heaven. In
proportion as they faded away and went out, several stars and planets appeared
one after another, till the whole firmament was in a glow. The blueness of the
either was exceedingly heightened and enlivened, by the season of the year, and
the rays of all those luminaries that passed through it. The galaxy appeared in
its most beautiful white. To complete the scene, the full-moon rose, at length,
in that clouded majesty, which Mi^ton takes notice of; and opened to the eye a
new picture of nature, which was more finely shaded, and disposed among softer
lights, than that which the sun had before discovered to us.

As I was surveying the moon walking in her brightness, and taking her progress
among the constellations, a thought arose in me, which I b^eve very often
perplexes and disturbs men of serious and contemplative natures. David himself
fell into it in that reflection: "When I consider the heavens, the work of thy
fingers; the moon and the stars which thou have ordained; what is man that thou
art mindful of him, and the son of man that thou regardest him!" In the same
manner, when I considered that infinite host of stars, or, to speak more
philosophically, of sins, which were then shining upon me; with those
innumerable sets of planets or worlds, which were moving round their respective
suns; when I still enlarged the idea, and supposed another heaven of suns and
worlds, rising still above this which we discovered; and these still
enlightened by a superior firmament of luminaries, which are planted at so
great a distance, that they may appear to the inhabitants of the former, as the
stars do to us; in short, while I pursued this thought, I could not but reflect
on that little insignificant figure, which I myself bore amidst the immensity
of God's works.

Were the sun, which enlightens this part of the creation, with all the host of
planetary worlds that move about him, utterly extinguished and annihilated,
they would not be missed, more than a grain of sand upon the seashore. The
space they possess is so exceedingly little in comparison of the whole, it
would scarcely make a blank in the creation. The chasm would be imperceptible
to an eye, that could take in the whole compass of nature, and pass from one
end of the creation to the other; as it is possible there may be such a sense
in ourselves hereafter, or in creatures which are at present more exalted than
ourselves. By the help of glassess, we see many stars, which we do not discover
with our naked eyes; and the finer our telescopes are, the more still are our
discoveries. Huygenius carries this thought so far, that he does not think it
impossible there may be stars, whose light has not yet traveled down to us,
since their first creation. There is no question that the universe has certain
bounds set to it; but when we consider that it is the work of infinite Power,
prompted by infinite Goodness, with an infinite space to exert itself in, how
can our imagination set any bounds to it?

To return, therefore, to my first thought, I could not but look upon myself
with secret horror, as a being that was not worth the smallest regard of one
who had so great a work under his care and superintendency. I was afraid of
being overlooked amidst the immensity of nature; and lost among that infinite
variety of creatures, which, in all probability, swarm through all these
immeasureable regions of matter.

In order to recover myself from this mortifying thought, I considered that it
took its rise from those narrow conceptions, which we are apt to entertain of
the Divine nature. We ourselves cannot attend to many different objects at the
same time. If we are careful to inspect some things, we must of course neglect
others. This imperfection which we observe in ourselves is an imperfection that
cleaves, in some degree, to creatures of the highest capacities, as they are
creatures, that is beings of finite and limited natures. The presence of every
created being is confined to a certain measure of space; and consequently his
observation is stinted to a certain number of objects. The sphere in which we
move, and act, and understand; is of a wider circumference to one creature,
than another, according a^ we rise one above another in the scale of existence.
But the widest of these our spheres has its circumference. When, therefore, we
reflect on the Divine nature, we are so used and accustomed to this
imperfection in ourselves, that we cannot forbear, in some measure, ascribing
it to HIM, in whom there is no shadow of imperfection. Our reason indeed
assures us, that his attributes are infinite; but the poorness of our
conceptions is such, that it cannot forbear setting bounds to every thing it
contemplates, till our reason comes again to our succor, and throws down all
those little prejudices, which rise in us unawares, and are natural to the mind
of man.

We shall therefore utterly extinguish this melancholy thought, of our being
overlooked by our Maker in the multiplicity of his works, and the infinity of
those objects among which he seems to be incessantly employed, if we consider,
in the first place, that he is omnipresent: and in the second, that he is
omniscient.

If we consider him in his omnipresence, his being passes through, actuates,
and supports, the whole frame of nature. His creation, and every part of it, is
full of him. There is nothing he has made, that is either so distant, so
little, or so inconsiderable, which he does not essentially inhabit. His
substance is within the substance of every being, whether material or
immaterial, and as intimately present to it, as that being is to itself. It
would be an imperfection in him, were he able to move out of one place into
another; or to withdraw himself from any thing he has created, or from any part
of that space which he diffused and spread abroad to infinity. In short, to
speak of him in the language of the old philosophers, he is a being whose
center is every where, and his circumference no where.

In the second place, he is omniscient as well as omnipresent. His omniscience
indeed necessarily and naturally flows from his omnipresence. He cannot but be
conscious of every motion that arises in the whole material world, which he
thus essentially pervades; and of every thought that is stirring in the
intellectual world, to every part of which he is thus intimately united. Were
the soul separate from the body, and with one glance of thought should start
beyond the bounds of the creation; should it, for millions of years, continue
its progress through infinite space, with the same activity, it would still
find itself within the embrace of its Creator, and encompassed by the immensity
of the Godhead.

In this consideration of the Almighty's omnipresence and omniscience, every
uncomfortable thought vanishes. He cannot but regard every thing that has
being, especially such of his creatures who fear they are not regarded by him.
He is privy to all their thoughts, and to that anxiety of heart in particular,
which is apt to trouble them on this occasion: for, as it is impossible he
should overlook any of his creatures, so we may be confident that he regards,
with an eye of mercy, those who endeavor to recommend themselves to his
notice; and, in unfeigned humility of heart, think themselves unworthy that he
should be mindful of them.

ADDISON. CHAPTER IV. ARGUMENTATIVE PIECES.
SECTION I. Happiness is founded in Rectitude of Conduct.
ALL men pursue good, and would be happy, if they knew how: not happy for
minutes, and miserable for hours; but happy, if possible, through every part of
their existence. Either, therefore, there is a good of this steady, durable
kind, or there is not. If not, then all good must be transient and uncertain;
and if so, an object of the lowest value, which can little deserve our
attention or inquiry. But if there be a better good, such a good as we are
seeking; like every other thing, it must be derived from some cause; and that
cause must either be external, internal, or mixed; in as much as, except these
three, there is no other possible. Now a steady, durable good, cannot be
derived from an external cause; since all derived from externals must fluctuate
as they fluctuate. By the same rule, it cannot be derived from a mixture of the
two; because the part which is external will proportionably destroy its
essence. What then remains but the cause internal? the very cause which we have
supposed, when we place the sovereign good in mind -- in rectitude of conduct.

HARRIS. SECTION II. Virtue Man's highest Interest.
I FIND myself existing upon a little spot, surrounded every way by an immense
unknown expansion. -- Where am I? What sort of place do I inhabit? Is it
exactly accommodated in every instance to my convenience? Is there no excess of
cold, none of heat, to offend me? Am I never annoyed by animals, either of my
own, or a different kind? Is every thing subservient to me, as though I had
ordered all myself? No -- nothing like it -- the farthest from it possible. The
world appears not, then, originally made for the private convenience of me
alone? -- It does not. But is it not possible so to accommodate it, by my own
particular industry? If to accommodate man and beast, heaven and earth, if this
be beyond me, it is not possible. What consequence then follows; or can there
be any other than this -- If I seek an interest of my own detached from that of
others, I seek an interest which is chimerical, and which can never have
existence.

How then must I determine? Have I no interest at all? If I have not, I am
stationed here to no purpose. But why no interest? Can I be contented with none
but one separate and detached! Is a social interest, joined with others, such
an absurdity as not to be admitted? The be, the beaver, and the tribes of
herding animals, are sufficient to convince me, that the thing is somewhere at
least possible. How, then, am I assured that it is not equally true of man?
Admit it; and what follows! If so, then honor and justice are my interest;
then the whole train of moral virtues are my interest; without some portion of
which, not even thieves can maintain society.

But, farther still -- I stop not here -- I pursue this social interest as far
as I can trace my several relations. I pass from my own stock, my own
neighborhood, my own nation, to the whole race of mankind, as dispersed
throughout the earth. Am I not related to them all, by the mutual aids of
commerce, by the general intercourse of arts and letters, by that common nature
which we all participate!

Again -- I must have food and clothing. Without a proper genial warmth, I
instantly perish. Am I not related, in this view, to the very earth itself? to
the distant sun, from whose beams I derive vigor? to that stupendous course
and order of the infinite host of heaven, by which the times and seasons ever
uniformly pass on? Were this order once confounded, I could not probably
survive a moment; so absolutely do I depend on this common general welfare.
What, then, have I to do, but to enlarge virtue into piety! Not only honor and
justice, and what I owe to man, is my interest; but gratitude also,
acquiescence, resignation, adoration, and all I owe to this great polity, and
its great Governor our common Parent.

SECTION III. The Injustice of an uncharitable Spirit.
A SUSPICIOUS, uncharitable spirit is not only inconsistent with all social
virtue and happiness, but it is also, unreasonable and unjust. In order to form
sound opinions concerning characters and actions, two things are especially
requisite, information and impartiality. But such as are most forward to decide
unfavourably, are commonly destitute of both. Instead of possessing, or even
requiring, full information, the grounds on which they proceed are frequently
the most slight and stivolous. A tale, perhaps, which the idle have invented,
the inquisitive have listened to, and the credulous have propagated; or a real
incident which rumor, in carrying it along, has exaggerated and disguised,
supplies them with materials of confident assertion, and decisive judgment.
From an action they presently look into the heart, and infer the motive. This
supposed motive they conclude to be the ruling principle; and pronounce at once
concerning the whole character.

Nothing can be more contrary both to equity and to sound reason, than such
precipitate judgments. Any man who attends to what passes within himself, may
easily discern what a complicated system the human character is; and what a
variety of circumstances must be taken into the account, in order to estimate
it truly. No single instance of conduct whatever, is sufficient to determine
it. As from one worthy action, it were credulity, not charity, to conclude a
person to be free from all vice; so from one which is censurable, it is
perfectly unjust to infer that the author of it is without conscience, and
without merit. If we knew all the attending circumstances, it might appear in
an excusable light; nay, perhaps, under a commendable form. The motives of the
actor may have been entirely different from those which we ascribe to him; and
where we suppose him impelled by bad design, he may have been prompted by
conscience and mistaken principle. Admitting the action to have been in every
view criminal, he may have been hurried into it through inadvertency and
surprise. He may have sincerely repented; and the virtuous principle may have
now regained its full vigor. Perhaps this was the corner of frailty; the
quarter on which he lay open to the incursions of temptation; while the other
avenues of his heart were firmly guarded by conscience.

It is therefore evident, that no part of the government of temper deserves
attention more, than to keep our minds pure from uncharitable prejudices, and
open to candor and humanity in judging of others. -- The worst consequences,
both to ourselves and to society, follow from the opposite spirit.

BLAIR. SECTION IV. The Misfortunes of Men mostly chargeable on themselves.
WE find man placed in a world, where he has by no means the disposal of the
events that happen. Calamities sometimes befall the worthiest and the best,
which it is not in their power to prevent, and where nothing is left them, but
to acknowledge and to submit to the high hand of Heaven. For such visitations
of trial, many good and wise reasons can be assigned, which the present subject
leads me not to discuss. But though those unavoidable calamities make a part,
yet they make not the chief part, of the vexations and sorrows that distress
human life. A multitude of evils beset us, for the source of which we must look
to another quarter. -- No sooner has any thing in the health, or in the
circumstances of men, gone cross to their wish, than they begin to talk of the
unequal distribution of the good things of this life; they envy the condition
of others; they repine at their own lot, and fret against the Ruler of the
world.

Full of these sentiments, one man pines under a broken constitution. But let
us ask him, whether he can, fairly and honestly, assign no cause for this but
the unknown decree of Heaven? Has he duly valued the blessing of health, and
always observed the rules of virtue and sobriety? Has he been moderate in his
life, and temperate in all his pleasures? If now he is only paying the price of
his former, perhaps his forgotten, indulgences, has he any title to complain,
as if he were suffering unjustly? Were we to survey the chambers of sickness
and distress, we should often find them peopled with the victims of
intemperance and sensuality, and with the children of vicious indolence and
sloth. Among the thousands who languish there, we should find the proportion of
innocent sufferers to be small. We should see faded youth, premature old age,
and the prospect of an untimely grave, to be the portion of multitudes who, in
one way or other, have brought those evils on themselves; while yet these
martyrs of vice and folly have the assurance to arraign the hard fate of man,
and "to fret against the Lord."

But you, perhaps, complain of hardships of another kind, of the injustice of
the world; of the poverty which you suffer, and the discouragements under which
you labor; of the crosses and disappointments of which your life has been
doomed to be full. -- Before you give too much scope to your discontent, let me
desire you to reflect impartially upon your past train of life. Have not sloth,
or pride, or ill temper, or sinful passions, misled you often from the path of
sound and wise conduct? Have you not been wanting to yourselves in improving
those opportunities which Providence offered you, for bettering and advancing
your state? If you have chosen to indulge your humor, or your taste, in the
gratifications of indolence or pleasure, can you complain because others, in
preference to you, have obtained those advantages which naturally belong to
useful labors, and honorable pursuits? Have not the consequences of some
false steps, into which your passions, or your pleasures, have betrayed you,
pursued you through much of your life; tainted, perhaps, your characters,
involved you in embarrassments, or sunk you into neglect? -- It is an old
saying, that every man is the artificer of his own fortune in the world. It is
certain, that the world seldom turns wholly against a man, unless through his
own fault. "Religion is," in general, "profitable unto all things." Virtue,
diligence, and industry, joined with good temper and prudence, have ever been
found the surest road to prosperity; and where men fail of attaining it, their
want of success is far oftener owing to their having deviated from that road,
than to their having encountered insuperable bars in it. Some, by being too
artful, forfeit the reputation of probity. Some, by being too open, are
accounted to fail in prudence. Others, by being fickle and changeable, are
distrusted by all. -- The case commonly is, that men seek, to ascribe their
disappointments to any cause, rather than to their own misconduct; and when
they can devise no other cause, they lay them to the charge of Providence.
Their folly leads them into vices: their vices into misfortunes; and in their
misfortunes they "murmur against Providence." They are doubly unjust toward
their Creator. In their prosperity, they are apt to ascribe their success to
their own diligence, rather than to his blessing; and in their adversity, they
impute their distresses to his providence, not to their own misbehaviour.
Whereas, the truth is the very reverse of this. "Every good and perfect gift
comes from above;" and of evil and misery, man is the author to himself.

When, from the condition of individuals, we look abroad to the public state of
the world, we meet with more proofs of the truth of this assertion. We see
great societies of men torn in pieces by intestine dissensions, tumults, and
civil commotions. We see mighty armies going forth, in formidable array,
against each other, to cover the earth with blood, and to fill the air with the
cries of widows and orphans. Sad evils these are, to which this miserable world
is exposed. -- But are these evils, I beseech you, to be imputed to God? Was it
he who sent forth slaughtering armies into the field, or who filled the
peaceful cities with massacres and blood? Are these miseries any other, than
the bitter fruit of men's violent and disorderly passions? Are they not clearly
to be traced to the ambition and vices of princes, to the quarrels of the
great, and the turbulence of the people? -- Let us lay them entirely out of the
account, in thinking of Providence; and let us think only of the "foolishness
of man." Did man control his passions, and form his conduct according to the
dictates of wisdom, humanity, and virtue, the earth would no longer be
desolated by cruelty; and human societies would live in order, harmony, and
peace. In those scenes of mischief and violence which fill the world, let man
behold, with shame, the picture of his vices, his ignorance, and folly. Let him
be humbled by the mortifying view of his own perverseness; but let not his
"heart fret against the Lord."

BLAIR. SECTION V. On Disinterested Friendship.
I AM informed that certain Greek writers (philosophers, it seems, in the
opinion of their countrymen) have advanced some very extraordinary positions
relating to friendship; as, indeed, what subject is there, which these subtle
geniusses have not tortured with their sophistry?

The authors to whom I refer, dissuade their disciples from entering into any
strong attachments, as unavoidably creating supernumerary disquietudes to those
who engage in them; and, as every man has more than sufficient to call forth
his solicitude, in the course of his own affairs, it is a weakness, they
contend, anxiously to involve himself in the concerns of others. They recommend
it also, in all connexions of this kind, to hold the hands of union extremely
loose; so as always to have it in one's power to straiten or relax them, as
circumstances and situ^^ions shall render most expedient. They add, as a
capital article of their doctrine, that, "to live exempt from cares, is an
essential ingredient to constitute human happiness: but an ingredient, however,
which he, who voluntarily distresses himself with cares, in which he has no
necessary and personal interest, must never hope to possess."

I have been told likewise, that there is another set of pretended
philosophers, of the same country, whose tenets, concerning this subject, are
of a still more illiberal and ungenerous cast.

The proposition they attempt to establish, is, that "friendship is an affair
of self-interest entirely; and that the proper motive for engaging in it, is,
not in order to gratify the kind and benevo^ent affections, but for the benefit
of that assistance and support which is to be derived from the connection."
Accordingly they assert, that those persons are most disposed to have recourse
to auxiliary alliances of this kind, who are least qualified by nature, or
fortune, to depend upon their own strength and powers: the weaker sex, for
instance, being generally more inclined to engage in friendships, than the male
part of our species; and those who are depressed by indigence, or laboring
under misfortunes, than the wealthy and the prosperous.

Excellent and obliging sages, these, undoubtedly! To strike out the friendly
affections from the moral world, would be like extinguishing the sun in the
natural: each of them being the source of the best and most grateful
satisfactions, that Heaven has conferred on the sons of men. But I should be
glad to know, what the real value of this boasted exemption from care, which
they promise their disciples, justly amounts to? an exemption flattering to
self-love, I confess; but which, upon many occurrences in human life, should be
rejected with the utmost disdain^ for nothing, surely, can be more inconsistent
with a well-poised and manly spirit, than to decline engaging in any laudable
action, or to be discouraged from persevering in it, by an apprehension of the
trouble and solicitude, with which it may probably be attended. Virtue herself,
indeed, ought to be totally renounced, if it be right to avoid every possible
means that may be productive of uneasiness: for who, that is actuated by her
principles, can observe the conduct of an opposite character, without being
affected with some degree of secret dissatisfaction? Are not the just, the
brave, and the good, necessarily exposed to the disagreeable emotions of
dislike and aversion, when they respectively meet with instances of fraud, of
cowardice, or of villainy? It is an essential property of every
well-constituted mind, to be affected with pain, or pleasure, according to the
nature of those moral appearances that present themselves to observation.

If sensibility, therefore, be not incompatible with true wisdom, (and it
surely is not, unless we suppose that philosophy deadens every finer feeling of
our nature,) what just reason can be assigned, why the sympathetic sufferings
which may result from friendship, should be a sufficient inducement for
banishing that generous affection from the human breast? Extinguish all
emotions of the heart, and what difference will remain, I do not say between
man and brute, but between man and a mere ^nanimate clod? Away then with those
austere philosophers, who represent virtue as hardening the soul against all
the softer impressions of humanity! The fact, certainly, is much otherwise. A
truly good man is, upon many occasions, extremely susceptible of tender
sentiments; and his heart expands with joy, or shrinks with sorrow, as good or
ill fortune accompanies his friend. Upon the whole, then, it may fairly be
concluded, that, as in the case of virtue, so in that of friendship, those
painful sensations, which may sometimes be produced by the one, as well as by
the other, are equally insufficient grounds for excluding either of them from
taking posession of our bosoms.

They who insist that "utility is the first and prevailing motive, which
induces mankind to enter into particular friendships," appear to me to divest
the association of its most amiable and engaging principle. For, to a mind
rightly disposed, it is not so much the benefits received, as the affectionate
zeal from which they flow, that gives them their best and most valuable
recommendation. It is so far indeed from being verified by fact, that a sense
of our wants is the original cause of forming these amicable alliances; that,
on the contrary, it is observable, that none have been more distinguished in
their friendships than those, whose power and opulence, but, above all, whose
superior virtue (a much firmer support) have raised them above every necessity
of having recourse to the assistance of others.

The true distinction, then, in this question is, that "although friendship is
certainly productive of utility, yet utility is not the primary motive of
friendship." -- Those selfish sensualists, therefore, who, lulled in the lap of
luxury, presume to maintain the reverse, have surely no claim to attention; as
they are neither qualified by reflection, nor experience, to be competent
judges of the subject.

Is there a man upon the face of the earth, who would deliberately accept of
all the wealth, and all the affluence this world can bestow, if offered to him
upon the severe terms of his being unconnected with a single mortal whom he
could love, or by whom he should be beloved? This would be to lead the wretched
life of a detested tyrant, who, amidst perpetual suspicions and alarms, passes
his miserable days a stranger to every tender sentiment; and utterly precluded
from the heartfelt satisfaction of friendship.

Melmoth's Translation of Cicero's Laelius. SECTION VI. On the Immortality of
the Soul.
I WAS yesterday walking alone in one of my friend's woods; and lost myself in
it very agreeably, as I was running over, in my mind, the several arguments
that establish this great point; which is the basis of morality, and the source
of all the pleasing hopes and secret joys, that can arise in the heart of a
reasonable creature. I considered those several proofs drawn.

First, from the nature of the soul itself, and particularly its immateriality;
which, though not absolutely necessary to the eternity of its duration, has, I
think, been evinced to almost a demonstration.

Secondly, from its passions and sentiments; as, particularly, from its love of
existence; its horror of annihilation; and its hopes of immortality; with that
secret satisfaction which it finds in the practice of virtue: and that
uneasiness which follows upon the commission of vice.

Thirdly, from the nature of the Supreme Being, whose justice, goodness,
wisdom, and veracity, are all concerned in this point.

But among these, and other excellent arguments for the immortality of the
soul, there is one drawn from the perpetual progress of the soul to its
perfection, without a possibility of ever arriving at it; which is a hint that
I do not remember to have seen opened and improved by others, who have written
on this subject, though it seems to me to carry a very great weight with it.
How can it enter into the thoughts of man, that the soul, which is capable of
such immense perfections, and of receiving new improvements to all eternity,
shall fall away into nothing, almost as soon as it is created? Are such
abilities made for no purpose? A brute arrives at a point of perfection, that
he can never pass: in a few years he has all the endowments he is capable of;
and were he to live ten thousand more, would be the same thing he is at
present. Where a human soul thus at a stand in her accomplishments; were her
faculties to be full blown, and incapable of farther enlargements; I could
imagine she might fall away insensibly, and drop at once into a state of
annihilation. But can we believe a thinking being, that is in a perpetual
progress of improvements, and traveling on from perfection, to perfection,
after having just looked abroad into the works of its Creator, and made a few
discoveries of his infinite goodness, wisdom, and power, must perish at her
first setting out, and in the very beginning of her inquiries?

A man, considered only in his present state, seems sent into the world merely
to propagate his kind. He provides himself with a successor; and immediately
quits his post to make room for him. He does not seem born to enjoy life, but
to deliver it down to others. This is not surprising to consider in animals,
which are formed for our use, and can finish their business in a short life.
The silkworm, after having spun her task, lays her eggs and dies. But a man
cannot take in his full measure of knowledge, has not time to subdue his
passions, establish his soul in virtue, and come up to the perfection of his
nature, before he is hurried off the stage. Would an infinitely wise Being make
such glorious creatures for so mean a purpose? Can he delight in the production
of such abortive intelligences, such short-lived reasonable beings? Would he
give us talents that are not to be exerted? capacities that are never to be
gratified? How can we find that wisdom which shines through all his works, in
the formation of man, without looking on this world as only a nursery for the
next; and without believing that the several generations of rational creatures,
which rise up and disappear in such quick successions, are only to receive
their first rudiments of existence here, and afterward to be transplanted into
a more friendly climate, where they may spread and flourish to all eternity?

There is not, in my opinion, a more pleasing and triumphant consideration in
religion, than this of the perpetual progress, which the soul makes toward the
perfection of its nature, without ever arriving at a period in it. To look upon
the soul as going on from strength to strength; to consider that she is to
shine for ever with new accessions of glory, and brighten to all eternity; that
she will adding virtue to virtue and knowledge to knowledge; carries in it
something wonderfully agreeable to that ambition, which is natural to the mind
of man. Nay, it must be a prospect pleasing to God himself, to see his creation
for ever beautifying in his eyes; and drawing nearer to him, by greater degrees
of resemblance.

Methinks this single consideration, of the progress of a finite spirit to
perfection, will be sufficient to extinguish all envy in inferior natures, and
all contempt in superor. That cherub, which now appears as a god to a human
soul, knows very well, that the period will come about in eternity, when the
human soul shall be as perfect as he himself now is: nay, when she shall look
down upon that degree of perfection as much as she now falls short of it. It is
true, the higher nature still advances, and by that means preserves his
distance and superiority in the scale of being; but he knows that, how high
soever the station is of which he stands possessed at present, the inferior
nature will at length mount up to it; and shine forth in the same degree of
glory.

With what astonishment and veneration, may we look into our own souls, where
there are such hidden stores of virtue and knowledge, such inexhausted sources
of perfection! We know not yet what we shall be; nor will it ever enter into
the heart of man, to conceive the glory that will be always in reserve for him.
The soul, considered with its Creator, is like one of those mathematical lines,
that may draw nearer to another for all eternity, without a possibility of
touching it: and can there be a thought so transporting, as to consider
ourselves in these perpetual approaches to HIM, who is the standard not only of
perfection, but of happiness!

ADDISON. CHAPTER V. DESCRIPTIVE PIECES.
SECTION I. The Seasons.
AMONG the great blessings and wonders of the creation, may be classed the
regularities of times and seasons. Immediately after the flood, the sacred
promise was made to man, that seed-time and harvest, cold and heat, summer and
winter, day and night, should continue to the very end of all things.
Accordingly, in obedience to that promise, the rotation is constantly
presenting us with some useful and agreeable alteration; and all the pleasing
novelty of life arises from these natural changes; nor are we less indebted to
them for many of its solid comforts. It has been frequently the task of the
moralist and poet, to mark, in polished periods, the particular charms and
conveniences of every change; and, indeed, such discriminate observations upon
natural variety, cannot be undelightful; since the blessing, which every month
brings along with it, is a fresh instance of the wisdom and bounty of that
Providence, which regulates the glories of the year. We glow as we contemplate;
we feel a propensity to adore, whilst we enjoy. In the time of seed-sowing, it
is the season of confidence: the grain which the husbandman trusts to the bosom
of earth, shall, happly, yield its sevenfold rewards. Spring presents us with
a scene of lively expectation. That which was before sown begins now to
discover signs of successful vegetation. The labourer observes the change, and
anticipates the harvest: he watches the progress of nature, and smiles at her
influence; while the man of contemplation walks forth with the evening, amidst
the fragrance of flowers, and promises of plenty; nor returns to his cottage
till darkness closes the scene upon his eye. Then comes the harvest, when the
large wish is satisfied, and the granaries of nature are loaded with the means
of life, even to a luxury of abundance. The powers of language are unequal to
the description of this happy season. It is the carnival of nature: sun and
shade coolness and quietude, cheerfulness and melody, love and gratitude, unite
to render every scene of summer delightful. -- The division of light and
darkness is one of kindest efforts of Omnipotent Wisdom. Day and night yield us
contrary blessings; and, at the same time, assist each other; by giving fresh
luster to the delights of both. Amidst the glare of day, and bustle of life,
how could we sleep? Amidst the gloom of darkness, how could we labor?

How wise, how benignant, then, is the proper division! The hours of light are
adapted to activity; and those of darkness to rest. Ere the day is passed,
exercise and nature prepare us for the pillow; and by the time that the morning
returns, we are again able to meet it with a smile. Thus, every season has a
charm peculiar to itself; and every moment affords some interesting innovation.

MELMOTH. SECTION II. The Cataract of Niagara, in Canada, North America.
THIS amazing fall of water is made by the River St. Lawrence, in its passage
from lake Erie into the lake Ontario. The St. Lawrence is one of the largest
rivers in the world; and yet the whole of its waters is discharged in this
place, by a fall of a hundred and fifty feet perpendicular. It is not easy to
bring the imagination to correspond to the greatness of the scene. A river
extremely deep and rapid, and that serves to drain the waters of almost all
North America into the Atlantic Ocean, is here poured precipitately down a
ledge of rocks, that rises, like a wall, across the whole bed of its stream.
The river, a little above, is near three quarters of a mile broad; and the
rocks, where it grows narrower, are four hundred yards over. Their direction is
not straight across, but hollowing inwards like a horse-shoe: so that the
cataract, which bends to the shape of the obstacle, rounding inwards, presents
a kind of theater the most tremendous in nature. Just in the middle of this
circular wall of waters, a little island, that has braved the fury of the
current, presents one of its points, and divides the stream at top into two
parts; but they unite again long before they reach the bottom. The noise of the
fall is heard at the distance of several leagues; and the fury of the waters,
at the termination of their fall, is inconceivable. The dashing produces a mist
that rises to the very clouds; and which forms a most beautiful rainbow, when
the sun shines. It will readily be supposed, that such a cataract entirely
destroys the navigation of the stream; and yet some Indians in their canoes, as
it is said, have ventured down it with safety.

GOLDSMITH. SECTION III. The Grotto of Antiparos.
OF all the subterraneous caverns now known, the grotto of Antiparos is the
most remarkable, as well for its extent, as for the beauty of its sparry
incrustations. This celebrated cavern was first explored by one Magni, an
Italian traveller, about a hundred years ago, at Antiparos, an inconsiderable
island of the Archipelago. "Having been informed," says he, "by the natives of
Pa^ros, that, in the little island of Antiparos, which lies about two miles
from the former, a gigantic statue was to be seen at the mouth of a cavern in
that place, it was resolved that we (the French Consul and himself) should pay
it a visit. In pursuance of this resolution, after we had landed on the island,
and walked about four miles through the midst of beautiful plains, and sloping
woodlands, we at length came to a little hill, on the side of which yawned a
most horrid cavern, that by its gloom at first struck us with terror, and
almost repressed curiosity. Recovering the first surprise, however, we entered
boldly; and had not proceeded above twenty paces, when the supposed statue of
the giant presented itself to our view. We quickly perceived, that what the
ignorant natives had been terrified at as a giant, was nothing more than a
sparry concretion, formed by the water dropping from the roof of the cave, and
by degrees hardening into a figure, which their fears had formed into a
monster. Incited by this extraordinary appearance, we were induced to proceed
still further, in quest of new adventures in this subterranean abode. As we
proceeded, new wonders offered themselves; the spars, formed into trees and
shrubs, presented a kind of petrified grove; some white, some green; and all
receding in due perspective. They struck us with the more amazement, as we knew
them to be mere productions of Nature, who, hitherto in solitude, had, in her
playful moments, dressed the scene, as if for her own amusement."

"We had as yet seen but a few of the wonders of the place; and we were
introduced only into the portico of this amazing temple. In one corner of this
half illuminated recess, there appeared an opening of about three feet wide,
which seemed to lead to a place totally dark, and which one of the natives
assured us contained nothing more than a reservoir of water. Upon this
information, we made an experiment, by throwing down some stones, which
rumbling along the sides of the descent for some time, the sound seemed at last
quashed in a bed of water. In order, however, to be more certain, we sent in a
Levantine mariner, who, by the promise of a good reward, with a flambeau in his
hand, ventured into this narrow aperture. After continuing within it for about
a quarter of an hour, he returned, bearing in his hand, some beautiful pieces
of white spar, which art could neither equal nor imitate. Upon being informed
by him that the place was full of these beautiful incrustations, I ventured in
once more with him, about fifty paces, anxiously and cautiously descending, by
a steep and dangerous way. Finding, however, that we came to a precipice which
led into a spacious amphitheatre, (if I may so call it) still deeper than any
other part, we returned, and being provided with a ladder, flambeau, and other
things to expedite our descent, our whole company, man by man, ventured into
the same opening; and descending one after another, we at last saw ourselves
all together in the most magnificent part of the cavern."

SECTION IV. The Grotto of Artiparos continued.
"OUR candles being now all lighted up, and the whole place completely
illuminated, never could the eye be presented with a more glittering, or a more
magnificent scene. The whole roof hung with solid isicles, transparent as
glass, yet solid as marble. The eye could scarcely reach the lofty and noble
ceiling; the sides were regularly formed with spars; and the whole presented
the idea of a magnificient theater, illuminated with an immense profusion of
lights. The floor consisted of solid marble: and, in several places,
magnificent columns, thrones, altars, and other objects, appeared, as if nature
had designed to mock the curiosities of art. Our voices, upon speaking or
singing, were redoubled to an astonishing loudness; and upon the firing of a
gun, the noise and reverberations were almost deafening. In the midst of this
grand amphitheatre rose a concretion of about fifteen feet high, that, in some
measure, resembled an altar; from which, taking the hint, we caused mass to be
celebrated there. The beautiful columns that shot up round the altar, appeared
like candlesticks; and many other natural objects represented the customary
ornaments of this rite."

"Below even this spacious grotto there seemed another cavern; down which I
ventured with my former mariner, and descended about fifty paces by means of a
rope. I at last arrived at a small spot of level ground, where the bottom
appeared different from that of the amphitheatre, being composed of soft clay,
yielding to the pressure, and and in which I thrust a stick to the depth of six
feet. In this, however, as above, numbers of the most beautiful crystals were
formed; one of which, particularly, resembled a table. Upon our egress from
this amazing cavern, we perceived a Greek inscription upon a rock at the mouth,
but so obliterated by time, that we could not read it distinctly. It seemed to
import that one Antipater, in the time of Alexander, had come hither; but
whether he penetrated into the depths of the cavern, he does not think fit to
inform us." This account of so beautiful and striking a scene, may serve to
give us some idea of the subterraneous wonders of nature*

GOLDSMITH. SECTION V. Earthquake at Catanea.
ONE of the earthquakes most particularly described in history, is that which
happened in the year 1693; the damages of which were chiefly felt in Sicily,
but its motion was perceived in Germany, France, and England. It extended to a
circumference of two thousand six hundred leagues; chiefly affecting the
seacoasts, and great rivers; more perceivable also upon the mountains than in
the valleys. Its motions were so rapid, that persons who lay at their length,
were tossed from side to side, as upon a rolling billow. The walls were dashed
from their foundations; and no fewer than fifty-four cities, with an incredible
number of villages, were either destroyed or greatly damaged. The city of
Catanea, in particular, was utterly overthrown. A traveller, who was on his way
thither, perceived, at the distance of some miles, a black cloud, like night,
hanging over the place. The sea, all of a sudden, began to roar; Mount Aetna to
send forth great spires of flame; and soon after a shock ensued, with a noise
as if all the artillery in the world had been at once discharged. Our
traveller, being obliged to alight instantly, felt himself raised a foot from
the ground; and turning his eyes to the city, he with amazement saw nothing but
a thick cloud of dust in the air. The birds flew about astonished; the sun was
darkened; the beasts ran howling from the hills; and although the shock did not
continue above three minutes, yet near nineteen thousand of the inhabitants of
Sicily perished in the ruins. Catanea, to which city the describer was
traveling, seemed the principal scene of ruin; its place only was to be found;
and not a footstep of its former magnificence was to be seen remaining.

GOLDSMITH. SECTION VI. Creation.
IN the progress of the Divine works and government, there arrived a period, in
which this earth was to be called into existence. When the signal moment,
predestined from all eternity, was come, the Deity arose in his might: and with
a word created the world. -- What an illustrious moment was that, when, from
nonexistence, there sprang at once into being, this mighty globe, on which so
many millions of creatures now dwel^ -- No preparatory measures were required.
No long circuit of means was employed. "He spoke; and it was done: He
commanded; and it stood fast. The earth was at first without form, and void;
and darkness was on the face of the deep." The Almighty surveyed the dark
abyss; and fixed bounds to the several divisions of nature. He said, "Let there
be light; and there was light." Then appeared the sea, and the dry land. The
mountains rose; and the rivers flowed. The sun and moon began their course in
the skies. Herbs and plants clothed the ground. The air, the earth, and the
waters, were stored with their respective inhabitants. At last, man was made
after the image of God. He appeared, walking with countenance erect; and
received his Creator's benediction, as the Lord of this new world. The Almighty
beheld his work when it was finished; and pronounced it GOOD. Superior beings
saw with wonder this new accession to existence. "The morning stars sang
together; and all the sons of God shouted for joy."

BLAIR. SECTION VII. On Charity.
CHARITY is the same with benevolence or love; and is the term uniformly
employed in the New Testament, to denote all the good affections which we ought
to bear toward one another. It consists not in speculative ideas of general
benevolence, floating in the head, and leaving the heart, as speculations too
often do, untouched and cold. Neither is it confined to that indolent good
nature, which makes us rest satisfied with being free from inveterate malice,
or ill will to our fellow creatures, without prompting us to be of service to
any. True charity is an active principle. It is not properly a single virtue;
but a disposition residing in the heart, as a fountain whence all the virtues
of benignity, candor, forberance, generosity, compassion, and liberality,
flow, as so many native streams. From general good will to all, it extends its
influence particularly to those with whom we stand in nearest connection, and
who are directly within the sphere of our good offices. From the country or
community to which we belong, it descends to the smaller associations of
neighborhood, relations, and friends; and spreads itself over the whole circle
of social and domestic life. I mean not that it imports a promiscuous
undistinguishing affection, which gives every man an equal title to our love,
Charity, if we should endeavor to carry it so far, would be rendered an
impracticable virtue; and would resolve itself into mere words, without
affecting the heart. True charity attempts not to shut our eyes to the
distinction between good and bad men; nor to warm our hearts equally to those
who befriend, and those who injure us. It reserves our esteem for good men, and
our complacency for our friends. Toward our enemies it inspires forgiveness,
humanity, and a solicitude for their welfare. It breaths universal candor, and
liberality of sentiment. It forms gentleness of temper, and dictates affability
of manners. It prompts corresponding sympathies with them who rejoice, and them
who weep. It teaches us to slight and despise no man. Charity is the comforter
of the afflicted, the protector of the oppressed, the reconciler of
differences, the intercessor for offenders. It is faithfulness in the friend,
public spirit in the magistrate, equity and patience in the judge, moderation
in the sovereign, and loyalty in the subject. In parents, it is a care and
attention; in children, it is reverence and submission. In a word, it is the
soul of social life. It is the sun that enlivens and cheers the abodes of men.
It is "like the dew of Hermon," says the Psalmist, "and the dew that descends
on the mountains of Zion, where the Lord commanded the blessing, even life for
ever more."

BLAIR. SECTION VIII. Prosperity is redoubled to a good Man.
None but the temperate, the regular, and the virtuous, know how to enjoy
prosperity. They bring to its comforts the manly relish of a sound uncorrupted
mind. They stop at the proper point, before enjoyment degenerates into disgust,
and pleasure is converted into pain. They are strangers to those complaints
which flow from spleen, caprice, and all the fantastical distresses of a
vitiated mind. While riotous indulgence enervates both the body and the mind,
purity and virtue heighten all the powers of human fruition.

Feeble are all pleasures in which the heart has no share. The selfish
gratifications of the bad, are both nar-now in their circle, and short in their
duration. But prosperity is redoubled to a good man, by his generous use of it.
It is reflected back upon him from every one whom he makes happy. In the
intercourse of domestic affection, in the attachment of friends, the gratitude
of dependents, the esteem and good will of all who know him, he sees blessings
multiplied round him, on every side. "When the ear heard me, then it blessed
me; and when the eye saw me, it gave witness to me: Because I delivered the
poor that cried, the fatherless, and him that had none to help him. The
blessing of him that was ready to perish came upon me, and I caused the widow's
heart to sing with joy. I was eyes to the blind, and feet was I to the lame: I
was a father to the poor; and the cause which I knew not, I searched out." --
Thus, while the righteous man flourishes like a tree planted by the rivers of
water, he brings forth also his fruit in its season: And that fruit he brings
forth, not for himself alone. He flourishes, not like a tree in some solitary
desert, which scatters its blossoms to the wind, and communicates neither fruit
nor shade to any living thing: but like a tree in the midst of an inhabited
country, which to some fantastical affords friendly shelter, to others, fruit;
which is not only admired by all for its beauty; but blessed by the traveller
for the shade, and by the hungry, for the sustenance it has given.

BLAIR. SECTION IX. On the beauties of the Psalms.
GREATNESS confers no exemption from the cares and sorrows of life: its share
of them frequently bears a melancholy proportion to its exultation. This the
monarch of Israel experienced. He sought in piety, that peace which he could
not find in empire; and alleviated the disquietudes of state, with the
exercises of devotion. His invaluable Psalms convey those comforts to others,
which they afforded to himself. Composed upon particular occasions, yet
designed for general use; delivered out as services for Israelites under the
Law, yet no less adapted to the circumstances of Christians under the Gospel;
they present religion to us in the most engaging dress; communicating truths
which philosophy could never investigate, in a style which poetry can never
equal; while history is made the vehicle of prophecy, and creation lends all
its charms to paint the glories of redemption. Calculated alike to profit and
to please, they inform the understanding, elevate the affections, and entertain
the imagenation. Indicted under the influence of HIM, to whom all hearts are
known, and all events foreknown, they suit mankind in all situations; grateful
as the manna which descended from above, and conformed itself to every palate.

The fairest productions of human wit, after a few perusals, like gathered
flowers, wither in our hands, and lose their fragrancy: but these unfading
plants of paradise become, as we are accustomed to them, still more and more
beautiful; their bloom appears to be daily heightened; fresh odours are
emitted, and new sweets extracted from them. He who has once tasted their
e^cellencies, will desire to taste them again; and he who tastes them oftenest,
will relish them best.

And now, could the Author flatter himself, that any one would take half the
pleasure in reading his work, which he has taken in writing it, he would not
fear the loss of his labor. The employment detached him from the bustle and
hurry of life, the din of politics, and the noise of folly. Vanity and vexation
flew away for a season; care and disquietude came not near his dwelling. He
arose, fresh as the morning, to his task; the silence of the night invited him
to pursue it; and he can truly say, that food and rest were not preferred
before it. Every psalm improved infinitely upon his acquaintance with it, and
no one gave him uneasiness but the last: for then he grieved that his work was
done. Happier hours than those which have been spent in these meditations on
the songs of Sion, he never expects to see in this world. Very pleasantly did
they pass; they moved smoothly and swiftly along: for when thus engaged, he
counted no time. They are gone, but they have left a relish and a fragrance
upon the mind; and the remembrance of them is sweet.

HORN. SECTION X. Character of ALFRED, King of England.
THE merit of this prince, both in private and public life, may, with
advantage, be set in opposition to that of any monarch or citizen, which the
annals of any age, or any nation, can present to us. He seems, indeed, to be
the complete model of that perfect character, which, under the denomination of
a sage or wise man, the philosophers have been fond of delineating, rather as a
fiction of their imagination, than in hopes of ever seeing it reduced to
practice: so happily were all his virtues tempered together; so justly were
they blended; and so powerfully did each prevent the other from exceeding its
proper bounds.

He knew how to conciliate the most enterprising spirit with the coolest
moderation; the most obstinate perseverance, with the easiest flexibility; the
most severe justice, with the greatest lenity; the greatest rigor in command;
the greatest affability of deportment; the highest capacity and inclination for
science, with the most shining talents for action.

Nature also, as if desirous that so bright a production of her skill should be
set in the fairest light, had bestowed on him all bodily accomplishments;
vigor of limbs, dignity of shape and air, and a pleasant, engaging, and open
countenance. By living in that barbarous age, he was deprived of historians
worthy to transmit his fame to posterity; and we wish to see him delincated in
more lively colors, and with more particul^r ^ro^e^, that we might at least
perceive some of those small specks and blemishes, from which, as a man, it is
imposible he could be entirely exempted.

HUME. SECTION XI. Character of QUEEN ELIZABETH.
THERE are few personages in history, who have been more exposed to the calumny
of enemies, and the adulation of friends, than Queen Elizabeth; and yet there
scarcely is any, whose reputation has been more certainly determined by the
unanimous consent of posterity. The unusual length of her administration, and
the strong features of her character, were able to overcome all prejudices; and
obliging her detractors to abate much of their invectives, and her admirers
somewhat of their panegyrics, have, at last, in spite of political factions,
and what is more, of religious animosities, produced a uniform judgment with
regard to her conduct. Her vigor, her constancy, her magnanimity, her
penetration, vigilance, and address, are allowed to merit the highest praises;
and appear not to have surpassed by any person who ever fil^ed a throne: a
conduct less rigorous, less imperious, more sincere, more indulgent to her
people, would have been requisite to form a perfect character. By the force of
her mind, she controlled all her more active and stronger qualities; and
prevented them from running into exc^ss. Her heroism was exempted from all
temerity; her frugality from avarice; her friendship from partiality; ^er
enterprise from turbulency and a vain ambition. She guarded not herself, with
equal care, or equal success, from less infirmities; the rivalship of beauty,
the desire of admiration, the jealousy of love, and the sallies of anger.

Her singular talents for government were founded equally on her temper and on
her capacity. Endowed with a great command over herself, she soon obtained an
uncontrolled ascendant over the people. Few sovereigns of England succeeded to
the throne in more difficult circumstances; and none ever conducted the
government with such uniform success and felicity. -- Though unacquainted with
the practice of toleration, the true secret for manging religious factions, she
preserved her people by her superior prudence, from those confusions in which
theological controversy had involved all the neighboring nations: and though
her enemies were the most powerful princes of Europe, the most active, the most
enterprising, the least scrupulous, she was able, by her vigor, to make deep
impressions on their state; her own greatness meanwhile ^emaining untouched and
unimpaired.

The wise ministers and brave men who flourished during her reign, share the
praise of her success; but, instead of lessening the applause due to her, they
make great addition to it. They owed, all of them, their advancement to her
choice; they were supported by her constancy; and, with all their ability, they
were never able to acquire an undue ascendant over her. In her family, in her
court, in her kingdom, she remained equally mistress. The force of the tender
passions was great over her, but the force of her mind was still superior: and
the combat which her victory visibly cost her, serves only to display the
firmness of her resolution, and the loftiness of her ambitious sentiments.

The fame of this princess, though it has surmounted the prejudices both of
faction and of bigotry, yet lies still exposed to another prejudice, which is
more durable, because more natural; and which, according to the different views
in which we survey her, is capable either of exalting beyond measure, or
diminishing, the luster of her character. This prejudice is founded on the
consideration of her sex. When we contemplate her as a woman, we are apt to be
struck with the highest admiration of her qualities and extensive capacity, but
we are also apt to require some more softness of disposition, some greater
lenity of temper, some of those amiable weaknesses by which her sex is
distinguished. But the true method of estimating her merit, is, to lay aside
all these considerations, and to consider her merely as a rational being,
placed in authority, and entrusted with the government of mankind.

HUME. SECTION XII. On the Slavery of Vice.
THE slavery produced by vice appears in the dependence under which it brings
the sinner, to circumstances of extern^^ fortune. One of the favorite
characters of liberty, is the independence it bestows. He who is truly a
freeman is above all servile compliances, and abject subjec^ion. He is able to
rest upon himself; (...) while he regards his superiors with proper deference,
neither debases himself by cringing to them, nor is tempted to purchase their
favor by dishonorable means. But the sinner has forfeited every privilege of
this nature. His passions and habits render him an absolute dependent on the
world, and the world's favor; on the uncertain goods of fortune, and the
fickle humors of men. For it is by these he subsists, and among these his
happiness is sought; according as his passions determine him to pursue
pleasures, riches, or preferments. Having no fund within himself whence to draw
enjoyment, his only resource is in things without. His hopes and fears all hang
upon the world. He partakes in all its vicissitudes; and is moved and shaken by
every wind of fortune. This is to be in the strictest sense a slave to the
world.

Religion and virtue, on the other hand, confer on the mind principles of noble
independence. "The upright man is satisfied from himself." He despises not the
advantages of fortune, but he centres not his happiness in them. With a
moderate share of them he can be contented; and contentment is felicity. Happy
in his own integrity, conscious of the esteem of good men, reposing firm trust
in the providence, and the promises of God, he is exempted from servile
dependence on other things. He can wrap himself up in a good conscience, and
look forward, without terror, to the change of the world. Let all things shift
around him as they please, he believes that, by the Divine ordination, they
shall be made to work together in the issue for his good: And therefore, having
much to hope from God, and little to fear from the world, he can be easy in
every state. One who possesses within himself such an establishment of mind, is
truly free. But shall I call that man free, who has nothing that is his own, no
property assured; whose very heart is not his own, but rendered the appendage
of external things, and the sport of fortune? Is that man free, let his outward
condition be ever so splendid, whom his imperious passions detain at their
call, whom they send forth at their pleasure, to drudge and toil, and to beg
his only enjoyment from the casualties of the world? Is he free, who must
flatter and lie to compass his ends; who must bear with this man's caprice, and
that man's scorn; must profess friendship where he hates, and respect where he
contemns; who is not at liberty to appear in his own colors, nor to speak his
own sentiments; who dares not be honest, lest he should be poor? -- Believe it,
no chains bind so hard, no fetters are so heavy, as those which fasten the
corrupted heart to this treacherous world; no dependence is more contemptible
than that under which the voluptuous, the covetous, or the ambitious man, lies
to the means of pleasure, gain, or power. Yet this is the boasted liberty,
which vice promises, as the recompense of setting us free from the salutary
restraints of virtue.

BLAIR. SECTION XIII. The Man of Integrity.
IT will not take much time to delineate the character of the man of integrity,
as by its nature it is a plain one, and easily understood. He is one, who makes
it his constant rule to follow the road of duty, according as the word of God,
and the voice of his conscience, point it out to him. He is not guided merely
by affections, which may sometimes give the color of virtue to a loose and
unstable character. The upright man is guided by a fixed principle of mind,
which determines him to esteem nothing but what is honorable; and to abhor
whatever is base and unworthy, in moral conduct. Hence we find him ever the
same; at all times, the trusty friend, the affectionate relation, the
conscientious man of business, the pious worshipper, the public spirited
citizen. He assumes no borrowed appearance. He seeks no mask to cover him; for
he acts no studied part; but he is indeed what he appears to be, full of truth,
candor, and humanity. In all his pursuits, he knows no path but the fair and
direct one; and would much rather fail of success, than attain it by
reproachful means. He never shows us a smiling countenance, while he meditates
evil against us in his heart. He never praises us among our friends; and then
joins in traducing us among our enemies. We shall never find one part of his
character at variance with another. In his manners, he is simple and
unaffected; in all his proceedings, open and consistent.

BLAIR. SECTION XIV. On Gentleness.
I begin with distinguishing true gentleness from passive tameness of spirit,
and from unlimited compliance with the manners of others. That passive
tameness, which submits, without opposition, to every encroachment of the
violent and assuming, forms no part of Christian duty; but, on the contrary, is
destructive of general happiness and order. That unlimited complaisance, which,
on every occasion, falls in with the opinions and manners of others, is so far
from being a virtue, that it is itself a vice, and the parent of many vices. It
overthrows all steadiness of principle; and produces that sinful conformity
with the world, which taints the whole character. In the present corrupted
state of human manners, always to assent and to comply, is the very worst maxim
we can adopt. It is impossible to support the purity and dignity of Christian
morals, without opposing the world on various occasions, even though we should
stand alone. That gentleness therefore which belongs to virtue, is to be
carefully distinguished from the mean spirit of cowards, and the fawning assent
of sycophants. It renounces no just right from fear. It gives up no important
truth from flattery. It is indeed not only consistent with a firm mind, but it
necessarily requires a manly spirit, and a fixed principle, in order to give it
any real value. Upon this solid ground only, the polish of gentleness can with
advantage be superinduced.

It stands opposed, not to the most determined regard for virtue and truth, but
to harshness and severity, to pride and arogance, to violence and oppression.
It is, properly, that part of the great virtue of charity, which makes us
unwilling to give pain to any of our brethren. Compassion prompts us to relieve
their wants. Forbearance prevents us from retaliating their injuries. Meekness
restrains our angry passions; candor, our severe judgments. Gentleness
corrects whatever is offensive in our manners; and, by a constant train of
humane attentions, studies to alleviate the burden of common misery. Its
office, therefore, is extensive. It is not, like some other virtues, called
forth only on peculiar emergencies; but it is continually in action, when we
are engaged in intercourse with men. It ought to form our address, to regulate
our speech, and to diffuse itself over our whole behavior.

We must not, however, confound this gentle "wisdom which is from above," with
that artificial courtesy, that studied smoothness of manners, which is learned
in the school of the world. Such accomplishments, the most frivolous and empty
may possess. Too often they are employed by the artful, as a snare; too often
affected by the hard and unfeeling, as a cover to the baseness of their minds.
We cannot, at the same time, avoid observing the homage, which, even in such
instances, the world is constrained to pay to virtue. In order to render
society agreeable, it is found necessary to assume somewhat, that may at least
carry its appearance. Virtue is the universal charm. Even its shadow is
courted, when the substance is wanting. The imitation of its form has been
reduced into an art; and, in the commerce of life, the first study of all who
would either gain the esteem, or win the hearts of others, is to learn the
speech, and to adopt the manners, of candor, gentleness, and humanity. But
that gentleness which is the characteristic of a good man, has, like every
other virtue, its seat in the heart; and let me add, nothing except what flows
from the heart, can render even external manners truly pleasing. For no assumed
behavior can at all times hide the real character. In that unaffectd civility
which springs from a gentle mind, there is a charm infinitely more powerful,
than in all the studied manners of the most finished courtier.

True gentleness is founded on a sense of what we owe to HIM who made us, and
to the common nature of which we all share. It arises from reflection on our
own failings and wants; and from just views of the condition, and the duty of
man. It is native feeling, heightened and improved by principle. It is the
heart which easily relents; which feels for every thing that is human; and is
backward and slow to inflict the least wound. It is affable in its address, and
mild in its demeanor; ever ready to oblige, and willing to de obliged by
others: breathing habitual kindness toward friends, courtesy to strangers,
long-suffering to enemies. It exercises authority with moderation; administers
reproof with tenderness; confers favors with ease and modesty. It is
unassuming in opinion, and temperate in zeal. It contends not eagerly about
trifles; slow to contradict, and still slower to blame; but prompt to allay
dissension, and to restore peace. It neither intermeddles unnecessarily with
the affairs, nor pries inquisitively into the secrets of others. It delights
above all things to alleviate distress; and, if it cannot dry up the falling
tear, to sooth at least the grieving heart. Where it has not the power of being
useful, it is never burdensome. It seeks to please, rather than to shine and
dazzle; and conceals with care that superiority, either of talents, or of rank,
which is oppressive to those who are beneath it. In a word, it is that spirit
and that tenor of manners, which the gospel of Christ enjoins, when it
commands us "to bear one onother's burdens; to rejoice with those who rejoice,
and to weep with those who weep; to please every one his neighbor for his
good; to be kind and tenderhearted; to be pitiful and courteous; to support
the weak, and to be patient toward all men"

BLAIR. CHAPTER VI. PATHETIC PIECES.
SECTION I. Trial and Execution of the EARL of STRAFFORD, who fell a Sacrifice
to the Violence of the Times, in the Reign of CHARLES the First.
THE Earl of Strafford defended himself against the accusations of the house of
Commons, with all the presence of mind, judgment, and sagacity, that could be
expected from innocence and ability. His children were placed beside him, as he
was thus defending his life, and the cause of his royal master. After he had,
in a long and eloquent sqeech, delivered without pre-meditation, confuted all
the accusations of his enemies, he thus drew to a conclusion. "But my Lords, I
have troubled you too long: longer than I should have done, but for the sake of
these dear pledges, which a saint in heaven has left me." -- Upon this he
paused; dropped a tear; looked upon his children; and proceeded. -- "What I
forfeit for myself is a triflle: that my indiscretions should reach my
posterity, wounds me to the heart. Pardon my infirmity. -- Something I should
have added, but I am not able; and therefore I let it pass. And now, my lords,
for myself, I have long been taught, that the afflictions of this life are
overpaid by that eternal weight of glory, which awaits the innocent. And so, my
Lords, even so, with the utmost tranquillity, I submit myself to your judgment,
whether that judgment be life or death: not my will, but thine, O God, be done!"

His eloquence and innocence induced those judges to pity, who were the most
zealous to condemn him. The King himself went to the House of Lords, and spoke
for some time in his defense; but the spirit of vengeance, which had been
chained for eleven years, was now roused; and nothing but his blood could give
the people satisfaction. He was condemned by both Houses of Parliament; and
nothing remained but for the King to give his consent to the bill of attainder.
But in the present commotions, the consent of the King would very easily be
dispensed with; and imminent danger might attend his refusal. Charles, however,
who loved Strafford tenderly, hesitated, and seemed reluctant; trying every
expedient to put off so dreadful an office, as that of signing the warrant for
his execution. While he continued in this agitation of mind, and state of
suspense, his doubts were at last silenced by an act of great magnanimity in
the condemned Lord. He received a letter from that unfortunate nobleman,
desiring that his life might be made a sacrifice to obtain reconciliation
between the King and his people: adding, that he was prepared to die; and that
to a willing mind there could be no injury. This instance of noble generosity
was but ill repaid by his master, who complied with his request. He consented
to sign the fatal bill by commission; and Strafford was beheaded on Tower Hill;
behaving with all that composed dignity of resolution, which was expected from
his character.

GOLDSMITH. SECTION II. An eminent Instance of true Fortitude of Mind.
ALL who have been distinguished as servants of God, or benefactors of men; all
who, in perilous situations, have acted their part with such honor as to ren^
their names illustrious through succeeding ages, have been eminent for
fortitude of mind. Of this we have one conspicuous example in the Apostle Paul,
whom it will be instructive for us to view in a remarkable occurrence of his
life. After having long acted as the apostle of the Gentiles, his mission
called him to go to Jerusalem, where he knew that he was to encounter the
utmost violence of his enemies. Just before he set sail, he called together the
elders of his favorite church at Ephesus; and, in a pathetic speech, which
does great honor to his character, gave them his last farewell. Deeply
affected by their knowledge of the certain dangers to which he was exposing
himself, all the assembly were filled with distress, and melted into tears. The
cirmstances were such, as might have conveyed dejection even into a resolute
mind; and would have totally overwhelmed the feeble. "They all wept sore, and
^ell on Paul's neck, and kissed him; sorrowing most of all for the words which
he spoke, that they should see his face no more." -- What were then the
sentiments, what was the language, of this great and good man? Hear the words
which spoke his firm and undaunted mind. "Behold, I go bound in the spirit, to
Jerusalem, not knowing the things that shall befall me there; save that the
Holy Spirit witnesses in every city, saying, that bonds and afflictions abide
me. But none of these things move me; neither count I my life dear to myself,
so that I might finish my course with joy, and the ministry which I have
received of the Lord Jesus, to testify the gospel of the grace of God." There
was uttered the voice, there breathed the spirit, of a brave and a virtuous
man. Such a man knows not what it is to shrink from danger, when conscience
points out his path. In that path he is determined to walk; let the
consequences be what they may.

This was the magnanimous behavior of that great Apostle, when he had
persecution and distress full in view. Attend now to the sentiments of the same
excellent man, when the time of his last suffering approached; and remark the
majesty, and the ease, with which he looked on death. "I am now ready to be
offered, and the time of my departure is at hand. I have fought the good fight.
I have finished my course. I have kept the faith. Henceforth there is laid up
for me a crown of righteousness." How many years of life does such a dying
moment over-balance? Who would not choose, in this manner, to go off the stage,
with such a song of triumph in his mouth, rathar than prolong his existence
through a wretched old age, stained with sin and shame?

BLAIR. SECTION III. The good Man's comfort in Affliction.
THE religion of Christ not only arms us with fortitude against the approach of
evil; but, supposing evils to fall upon us with their heaviest pressure, it
lightens the load by many consolations to which others are strangers. While bad
men trace, in the calamities with which they are visited, the hand of an
offended sovereign, Christians are taught to view them as the well-intended
chastisements of a merciful Father. They hear amidst them, that still voice
which a good conscience brings to their ear: "Fear not, for I am with thee; be
not dismayed, for I am thy God." They apply to themselves the comfortable
promises with which the gospel abounds. They discover in these the happy issue
decreed to their troubles; and wait with patience till Providence shall have
accomplished its great and good designs. In the mean time, Devotion opens to
them its blessed and holy sanctuary: That sanctuary in which the wounded heart
is healed, and the weary mind is at rest; where the cares of the world are
forgotten, where its tumults are hushed, and its miseries disappear; where
greater objects open to our view than any which the world presents; where a
more serene sky shines, and a sweeter and calmer light beams on the afflicted
heart. In those moments of devotion, a pious man pouring out his wants and
sorrows to an almighty Supporter, feels that he is not left solitary and
forsaken in a vale of woe. God is with him; Christ and the Holy Spirit are with
him; and, though he should be bereaved of every friend on earth, he can look up
in heaven to a Friend that will never desert him.

BLAIR. SECTION IV. The Close of Life.
WHEN we contemplate the close of life; the termination of man's designs and
hopes; the silence that now reigns among those who, a little while ago, were so
busy, or so gay; who can avoid being touched with sensations at once awful and
tender? What heart but then warms with the glow of humanity? In whose eye does
not the tear gather, on revolving the fate of passing and short-lived man?

Behold the poor man who lays down at last the burden of his wearisome life. No
more shall he groan under the load of poverty and toil. No more shall he hear
the insolent calls of the master, from whom he received his scanty wages. No
more shall he be raised from needful slumber on his bed of straw, nor be
hurried away from his homely meal, to undergo the repeated labors of the day.
While his humble grave is preparing, and a few poor and decayed neighbors are
carrying him thither, it is good for us to think, that this man too was our
brother; that for him the aged and destitute wife, and the needy children, now
weep; that, neglected as he was by the world, he possessed perhaps both a sound
understanding, and a worthy heart; and is now carried by angels to rest in
Abraham's bosom. -- At no great distance from him, the grave is opened to
receive the rich and proud man. For, as it is said with emphasis in the
parable, "the rich man also died, and was buried." He also died. His riches
prevented not his sharing the same fate with the po^^ man; perhaps, through
luxury, they accelerated his doom Then, indeed, "the mourners go about the
streets," and while, in all the pomp and magnificence of woe, his funeral is
preparing, his heirs, impatient to examine his will, are looking on one another
with jealous eyes, and already beginning to dispute about the division of his
substance. -- One day, we see carried along the coffin of the smiling infant;
the flower just nipped as it began to blossom in the parent's view: and the
next day, we behold the young man, or young woman, of bloo^ing form and
promising hopes, laid in an untimely grave. While the funeral is attended by a
numerous unconcerned company, who are discoursing to one another about the news
of the day, or the ordinary affairs of life, let our thoughts rather follow to
the house of mourning, and represent to themselves what is passing there. There
we should see a disconsolate family, sitting in silent grief, thinking of the
sad breach that is made in their little society; and, with tears in their eyes,
looking to the chamber that is now left vacant, and to every memorial that
presents itself of their departed friend. By such attention to the woes of
others, the selfish hardness of our hearts will be gradually softened, and
melted down into humanity.

Another day, we follow to the grave, one who, in old age, and after a long
career of life, has in full maturity sunk at last into rest. As we are going
along to the mansion of the dead, it is natural for us to think, and to
discourse, of all the changes which such a person has seen during the course of
his life. He has passed, it is likely, through varieties of fortune. He has
experienced prosperity, and adversity. He has seen families and kindreds rise
and fall. He has seen peace and war succeeding in their turns; the face of his
country undergoing many alterations; and the very city in which he dwelt
rising, in a manner, new around him. After all he has beheld, his eyes are now
closed for ever. He was becoming a stranger in the midst of a new succession of
men. A race who knew him not, had arisen to fill the earth. Thus passes the
world away. Throughout all ranks and conditions, "one generation passes, and
another generation comes;" and this great inn is by turns evacuated, and
replenished, by troops of succeeding pilgrims. -- O vain and inconstant world!
O fleeting and transient life! When will the sons of men learn to think of
thee, as they ought? When will they learn humanity from the afflictions of
their brethren; or moderation and wisdom, from the sense of their own fugitive
state.

BLAIR. SECTION V. Exalted Society, and the Renewal of virtuous Connexions, two
Sources of future Felicity.
BESIDES the felicity which springs from perfect love, there are two
circumstances which particularly enhance the blessedness of that "multitude who
stand before the throne;" these are, access to the most exalted society, and
renewal of the most tender connexions. The former is pointed out in the
Scriptures, by "joining the innumerable company of angels, and the general
assembly and church of the firstborn; by sitting down with Abraham, and Isaac,
and Jacob, in the kingdom of heaven;" a promise which opens the sublimest
prospects to the human mind. It allows good men to entertain the hope, that,
separated from all the dregs of the human mass, from that mixed and polluted
crowd in the midst of which they now dwell, they shall be permitted to mingle
with prophets, patriarchs, and apostles, with all those great and illustrious
spirits, who have shone in former ages as the servants of God, or the
benefactors of men; whose deeds we are accustomed to celebrate; whose steps we
now follow at a distance; and whose names we pronounce with veneration.

United to this high assembly, the blessed, at the same time, renew those
ancient connexions with virtuous friends, which had been dissolved by death.
The prospect of this awakens in the heart, the most pleasing and tender
sentiment that perhaps can fill it, in this mortal state. For of all the
sorrows which we are here doomed to endure, none is so bitter as that
occasioned by the fatal stroke which separates us, in appearance for ever, from
those to whom either nature or friendship had intimately joined our hearts.
Memory, from time to time, renews the anguish; opens the wound which seemed
once to have been closed; and, by recalling joys that are past and gone,
touches every spring of painful sensibility. In these agonizing moments, how
relieving the thought, that the separation is only temporary, not eternal; that
there is a time to come of reunion with those with whom our happiest days were
spent; whose joys and sorrow once were ours; whose piety and virtue, cheered
and encouraged us; and from whom, after we shall have landed on the peaceful
shore where they dwell, no revolutions of nature shall ever be able to part us
more! Such is the society of the blessed above. Of such are the multitude
composed, who "stand before the throne."

BLAIR. SECTION VI. The Clemency and amiable Character of the Patriarch JOSEPH.
NO human character exhibited in the records of Scripture, is more remarkable
or instructive than that of the patriarch Joseph. He is one whom we behold
tried in all the vicissitudes of fortune; from the condition of a slave, rising
to be ruler of the land of Egypt; and in every station acquiring, by his virtue
and wisdom, favor with God and man. When overseer of Potiphar's house, his
fidelity was proved by strong temptations, which he honorably resisted. When
thrown into prison by the artifice of a false woman, his integrity and prudence
soon rendered him conspicuous, even in that dark mansion. When called into the
presence of Pharaoh, the wise and and extensive plan which he formed for saving
the kingdom from the miseries of impending famine, justly raised him to a high
station, wherein his abilities were eminently displayed in the public service.
But in his whole history, there is no circumstance so striking and interesting,
as his behavior to his brethren who had sold him into slavery. The moment in
which he made himself known to them, was the must critical one of his life, and
the most decisive of his character. It is such as rarely occu^s in the course
of human events; and is calculated to draw the highest attention of all who are
endowed with any degree of sensibility of heart.

From the whole tenor of the narration it appears, that though Joseph, upon
the arrival of his brethren in Egypt, made himself strange to them, yet from
the beginning he intended to discover himself; and studied so to conduct the
discovery, as might render the surprise of joy complete. For this end, by
affected severity, he took measures for bringing down into Egypt all his
father's children. They were now arrived there; and Benjamin among the rest,
who was his younger brother by the same mother, and was particularly beloved by
Joseph. Him he threatened to detain; and seemed willing to allow the rest to
depart. This incident renewed their distress. They all knew their father's
extreme anxiety about the safety of Benjamin, and with what difficulty he had
yielded to his undertaking this journey. Should he be prevented from returning,
they dreaded that grief would overpower the old man's spirits, and prove fatal
to his life. Judah, therefore, who had particularly urged the necessity of
Benjamin's accompanying his brothers, and had solemnly pledged himself to their
father for his safe return, craved, upon this occasion, an audience of the
governor; and gave him a full account of the circumstances of Jacob's family.

Nothing can be more interesting and pathetic than this discourse of Judah.
Little knowing to whom he spoke, he paints in all the colors of simple and
natural eloquence, the distressed situation of the aged patriarch, hastening to
the close of life; long afflicted for the loss of a favorite son, whom he
supposed to have been torn in pieces by a beast of prey; laboring now under
anxious concern about his youngest son, the child of his old age, who alone was
left alive of his mother, and whom nothing but the calamities of severe famine
could have moved a tender father to send from home, and expose to the dangers
of a foreign land. "If we bring him not back with us, we shall bring down the
gray hairs of thy servant, our father, with sorrow, to the grave. I pray thee
therefore let thy servant abide, instead of the young man, a bondsman to our
lord. For how shall I go up to my father, and Benjamin not with me? lest I see
the evil that shall come on my father."

Upon this relation, Joseph could no longer restrain himself. The tender ideas
of his father and his father's house, of his ancient home, his country and his
kindred, of the distress of his family, and his own exaltation, all rushed too
strongly upon his mind to bear any farther concealment. "He cried, cause every
man to go out from me; and he wept aloud." The tears which he shed were not the
tears of grief. They were the burst of affection. They were the effusions of a
heart overflowing with all the tender sensibilites of nature. Formerly he had
been moved in the same manner, when he first saw his brethren before him. "His
bowels yearned upon them; he sought for a place where to weep. He went into his
chamber; and then washed his face and returned to them." At that period his
generous plans were not completed. But now, when there was no farther occasion
for constraining himself, he gave free vent to the strong emotions of his
heart. The first minister to the king of Egypt was not ashamed to show, that he
felt as a man, and a brother. "He wept aloud; and the Egyptians, and the house
of Pharaoh heard him."

The first words which his swelling heart allowed him to pronounce, are the
most suitable to such an affecting situation that were ever uttered; -- "I am
Joseph; does my father yet live?" -- What could he, what ought he, in that
impassionate moment, to have said more? This is the voice of Nature herself,
speaking her own language; and it penetrates the heart: No pomp of expression;
no parade of kindness, but strong affection hastening to utter what it strongly
felt. "His brethren could not answer him; for they were troubled at his
presence." Their silence is as expressive of those emotions of repentance and
shame, which, on this amazing discovery, filled their breasts, and stopped
their utterance, as the few words which Joseph speaks, are expressive of the
generous agitations which struggled for vent within him. No painter could seize
a more striking moment for displaying the characteristical features of the
human heart, than what is here presented. Never was there a situation of more
tender and virtuous joy, on the one hand; nor, on the other, of more
overwhelming confusion and conscious guilt. In the simple narration of the
sacred historian, it is set before us with the greater energy and higher
effect, than if it had been wrought up with all the coloring of the most
admired modern eloquence.

BLAIR. SECTION VII. ALTAMONT. The following account of an affecting exit is
related by Dr. Young, who was present at the melancholy scene.
THE sad evening before the death of that noble youth, whose last hours
suggested these thoughts, I was with him. No one was there, but his physician,
and an intimate whom he loved, and whom he had ruined. At my coming in, he
said, -- "you and the physician are come too late. -- I have neither life nor
hope. You both aim at miracles. You would raise the dead!"

Heaven, I said, was merciful -- "Or," exclaimed he, -- "I could not have been
thus guilty. What has it not done to bless, and to save me? -- I have been too
strong for omnipotence! I have plucked down ruin." -- I said, the blessed
Redeemer* -- "Hold! hold! you wound me! -- That is the rock on which I split --
I denied his name!"

Refusing to hear any thing from me, or take any thing from the physician, he
lay silent, as far as sudden darts of pain would permit, till the clock struck:
Then with vehemence; -- "Oh! time! time! it is fit thou should thus strike
thy murderer to the heart! -- How art thou fled forever! -- A month! -- Oh, for
a single week! I ask not for years; though an age were too little for the much
I have to do."

On my saying, we could not do too much: that heaven was a blessed place --

"So much the worse. -- It Is lost! it is lost! -- Heaven is to me the severest
part of hell!"

Soon after I proposed prayer. "Pray you that can. I never prayed. I cannot
pray: -- Nor need I. Is not Heaven on my side already? It closes with my
conscience. Its severest strokes but second my own."

His friend being much touched, even to tears at this -- (who could forbear? I
could not) -- with a most affectionate look, he said, "Keep those tears for
thyself. I have undone thee. -- Do weep for me? that is cruel. What can pain
me more?"

Here his friend too much affected, would have left him. -- "No, stay -- thou
still may hope; -- therefore hear me. How madly have I talked! How madly have
thou listened, and believed! but look on my present state, as a full answer to
thee, and to myself. This body is all weakness and pain; but my soul, as if
stung up by torment to greater strength and spirit, is full powerful to reason;
full mighty to suffer. And that, which thus triumphs within the jaws of
immortality, is, doubtless, immortal -- And, as for a Deity, nothing less than
an Almighty could inflict what I feel."

I was about to congratulate this passive, involuntary confessor, on his
asserting the two prime articles of his creed, extorted by the rack of nature,
when he thus, very passionately: -- "No, no! let me speak on. I have not long
to speak. -- My much injured friend! my soul, as my body, lies in ruins; in
scattered fragments of broken thought -- Remorse for the past, throws my
thought on the future. Worse dread of the future, strikes it back on the past.
I turn, and turn, and find no ray. Did thou feel half the mountain that is on
me, thou would struggle with the martyr for his stake; and bless Heaven for
the flames! -- that is not an everlasting flame; that is not an unquenchable
fire."

How were we struck! yet, soon after, still more. With what an eye of
distraction, what a face of despair! he cried out: -- "My principles have
poisoned my friend; my extravagance has beggared my boy! my unkindness has
murdered my wife! -- And is there another hell? -- Oh! thou blasphemed, yet
indulgent LORD GOD! Hell itself is a refuge, if it hide me from thy frown!"

Soon after his understanding failed. His terrified imagination uttered horrors
not to be repeated, or ever forgotten. And ere the sun (which, I hope, has
seen, few like him) arose, the gay, young, noble, ingenious, accomplished, and
most wretched Altamont, expired!

If this is a man of pleasure, what is a man of pain? How quick, how total, is
their transit! In what a dismal gloom they set for ever! How short, alas! the
day of their rejoicing! -- For a moment they glitter -- they dazzle. In a
moment, where are they? Oblivion covers their memories. Ah! would it did!
Infamy snatches them from oblivion. In the long-living annals of infamy their
triumphs are recorded. Thy sufferings still bleed in the bosom, poor Altamont!
of the heart-stricken friend -- for Altamont had a friend. He might have had
many. His transient morning might have been the dawn of an immortal day. His
name might have been gloriously enrolled in the records of eternity. His memory
might have left a sweet fragrance behind it, grateful to the surviving friend,
salutary to the succeeding generation. With what capacities was he endowed!
with what advantages, for being greatly good! But with the talents of an angel,
a man may be a fool. If he judges amiss in the supreme point, judging right in
all else, but aggravates his folly; as it shows him wrong, though blessed with
the best capacity of being right.

DR. YOUNG. CHAPTER VII. DIALOGUES.
SECTION I. DEMOCRITUS AND HERACLITUS Democritus and Heraclitus were two
ancient philosophers, the former of whom laughed, and the latter wept, at the
errors and follies of mankind.
. The Vices and Follies of Men should excite Compassion rather than Ridicule.
DEMOCRITUS. I FIND it impossible to reconcile myself to a melancholy
philosophy.


HERACLITUS. And I am equally unable to approve of that vain philosophy, which
teaches men to despise and ridicule one another. To a wise and feeling mind,
the world appears in a wretched and painful light.


DEMOCRITUS. Thou art too much affected with the state of things; and this is a
source of misery to thee.


HERACLITUS. And I think that thou art too little moved by it. Thy mirth and
ridicule bespeak the buffoon, rather than the philosopher. Does it not excite
thy compassion, to see mankind so frail, so blind, so far departed from the
rules of virtue?


DEMOCRITUS. I an excited to laughter, when I see so much impertinence and
folly.


HERACLITUS. And yet, after all, they, who are the objects of thy ridicule,
include, not only mankind in general, but the persons with whom thou live,
thy friends, thy family, nay even thyself.


DEMOCRITUS. I care very little for all the silly persons I meet with; and
think I am justifiable in diverting myself with their folly.


HERACLITUS. If they are weak and foolish, it marks neither wisdom nor
humanity, to insult rather than pity them. But is it certain, that thou art not
as extravagant as they are!


DEMOCRITUS. I presume that I am not; since, in every point, my sentiments are
the very reverse of theirs.


HERACLITUS. There are follies of different kinds. By constantly amusing
thyself with the errors and misconduct of others, thou may render thyself
equally ridiculous and culpable.


DEMOCRITUS. Thou art at liberty to indulge such sentiments; and to weep over
me too, if thou have any tears to spare. For my part, I cannot refrain from
pleasing myself with the levities and ill conduct of the world about me. Are
not all men foolish or irregular in their lives?


HERACLITUS. Alas! there is but too much reason to believe, they are so: and on
this ground, I pity and deplore their condition. We agree in this point, that
men do not conduct themselves according to reasonable and just principles: but
I, who do not suffer myself to act as they do, must yet regard the dictates of
my understanding and feelings, which compel me to love them; and that love
fills me with compassion for their mistakes and irregularities. Can thou
condemn me for pitying my own species, my brethren, persons ^orn in the same
condition of life, and destined to the same hopes and privileges? If thou
should enter a hospital, where sick and wounded persons reside, would their
wounds and distresses excite thy mirth? And yet, the evils of the body bear no
comparison with those of the mind. Thou would certainly blush at thy
barbarity, if thou had been so unfeeling, as to laugh at, or despise a poor
miserable being who had lost one of his legs: and yet thou art so destitute of
humanity, as to ridicule those, who appear to be deprived of the noble powers
of the understanding, by the little regard which they pay to its dictates.


DEMOCRITUS. He who has lost a leg is to be pitied, because the loss (...) not
to be imputed to himself: but he who rejects the dictates of reason and
conscience, voluntarily deprives himself of their aid. The loss originates in
his own folly.


HERACLITUS. Ah! so much the more is he to be pitied! A furious maniac, who
should pluck out his own eyes, would deserve more compassion than an ordinary
blind man.


DEMOCRITUS. Come, let us accommodate the business. There is something to be
said on each side of the question. There is every where reason for laughing,
and reason for weeping. The world is ridiculous, and I laugh at it: it is
deplorable, and thou lamentest over it. Every person views it in his own way,
and according to his own temper. One point is unquestionable, that mankind are
preposterous: to think right, and to act well, we must think and act
differently from them. To submit to the authority, and follow the example of
the greater part of men, would render us foolish and miserable.


HERACLITUS. All this is, indeed, true; but then thou have no real love or
feeling for thy species. The calamities of mankind excite thy mirth: and this
proves that thou have no regard for men, nor any true respect for the virtues
which they have unhappily abandoned.


FENELON, Archbishop of Cambray. SECTION II. DYONYSIUS, PYTHIAS, AND DAMON.
Genuine Virtue commands respect, even from the Bad.
DIONYSIUS. AMAZING! What do I see? It is Pithias just arrived. -- It is indeed
Pithias. I did not think it possible. He is come to die, and to redeem his
friend!


PYTHIAS. Yes, it is Pythias. I left the place of my confinement, with no other
views, than to pay to Heaven the vows I had made; to settle my family concerns
according to the rules of justice; and to bid adieu to my children, that I
might die tranquil and satisfied.


DIONYSIUS. But why do thou return? Have thou no fear of death? Is it not the
character of a madman, to seek it thus voluntarily?


PYTHIAS. I return to suffer, though I have not deserved death. Every principle
of honor and goodness, forbids me to allow my friend to die for me.


DIONYSIUS. Do thou, then, love him better than thyself?


PYTHIAS. No; I love him as myself. But I am persuaded that I ought to suffer
death, rather than my friend; since it was me whom thou had decreed to die.
It were not just that he should suffer, to deliver me from the death which was
designed, not for him, but for me only.


DIONYSIUS. But thou supposest, that it is as unjust to inflict death upon
thee, as upon thy friend.


PYTHIAS. Very true; we are both entirely innocent: and it is equally unjust to
make either of us suffer.


DIONYSIUS. Why do thou then assert, that it were injustice to put him to
death, instead of thee?


PYTHIAS. It is unjust, in the same degree, to inflict death either on Damon or
on myself; but Pythias were highly culpable to let Damon suffer that death,
which the tyrant had prepared for Pythias only.


DIONYSIUS. Do thou then return hither, on the day appointed, with no other
view, than to save the life of a friend, by losing thy own?


PYTHIAS. I return, in regard to thee, to suffer an act of injustice which is
common for tyrants to inflict; and, with respect to Damon, to perform my duty,
by rescuing him from the danger he incurred by his generosity to me.


DIONYSIUS. And now, Damon, let me address myself to thee: Did thou not
really fear, that Pythias would never return; and that thou would be put to
death on his account?


DAMON. I was but too well assured, that Pythias would punctually return; and
that he would be more solicitous to keep his promise, than to preserve his
life. Would to heaven, that his relations and friends had forcibly detained
him! He would then have lived for the comfort and benefit of good men; and I
should have the satisfaction of dying for him!


DIONYSIUS. What! Does life displease thee?


DAMON. Yes; it displeases me when I see and feel the power of a tyrant.


DIONYSIUS. It is well! Thou shall see him no more. I will order thee to be put
to death immediately.


PYTHIAS. Pardon the feelings of a man who sympathizes with his dying friend.
But remember it was Pythias who was devoted by thee to destruction. I come to
submit to it, that I may redeem my friend. Do not refuse me this consolation in
my last hour.


DIONYSIUS. I cannot endure men, who despise death, and set my power at
defiance.


DAMON. Thou can not, then, endure virtue.


DIONYSIUS. No; I cannot endure that proud, disdainful virtue which contemns
life; which dreads no punishment; and which is insensible to the charms of
riches and pleasure.


DAMON. Thou see, however, that it is a virtue, which is not insensible to
the dictates of honor, justice, and friendship.


DIONYSIUS. Guards, take Pythias to execution. We shall see whether Damon will
continue to despise my authority.


DAMON. Pythias, by returning to submit himself to thy pleasure, has merited
his life, and deserved thy favor; but I have excited thy indignation, by
resigning myself to thy power, in order to save him: Be satisfied, then, with
this sacrifice, and put me to death.


PYTHIAS. Hold, Dionysius! remember, it was Pythias alone who offended thee:
Damon could not --


DIONYSIUS. Alas! what do I see and hear! where am I? How miserable; and how
worthy to be so! I have hitherto known nothing of true virtue. I have spent my
life in darkness and error. All my power and honors are insufficient to
produce love. I cannot boast of having acquired a single friend, in the course
of a reign of thirty years. And yet these two persons, in a private condition,
love one another tenderly, unreservedly confide in each other, are mutually
happy, and ready to die for each other's preservation.


PYTHIAS. How could thou, who have never loved any person, expect to have
friends? If thou had loved and respected men, thou would have secured their
love and respect. Thou have feared mankind; and they fear thee; they detest
thee.


DIONYSIUS. Damon, Pythias, condescend to admit me as a third friend, in a
connection so perfect. I give you your lives; and I will load you with riches.


DAMON. We have no desire to be enriched by thee; and, in regard to thy
friendship, we cannot accept or enjoy it till thou become good and just.
Without these qualities, thou can be connected with none but trembling
slaves, and base flatterers. To be loved and esteemed by men of free and
generous minds, thou must be virtuous; affectionate, disinterested beneficent;
and know how to live in a sort of equality with those who share and deserve thy
friendship.


FENELON, Archbishop of Cambray. SECTION III. LOCK AND BAIL. Christianity
defended against the Cavils of Skepticism.
BAIL. YES, we both were philosophers; but my philosophy was the deepest. You
dogmatized: I doubted.


LOCK. Do you make doubting a proof of depth in philosophy? It may be a good
beginning of it; but it is a bad end.


BAIL. No: -- the more profound our searches are into the nature of things,
the more uncertainty we shall find; and the most subtle minds see objections
and difficulties in every system, which are overlooked or undiscoverable by
ordinary understandings.


LOCK. It would be better then to be no philosopher, and to continue in the
vulgar herd of mankind, that one may have the convenience of thinking that one
knows something. I find that the eyes which nature has given me, see many
things very clearly, though some are out of their reach, or discerned but
dimly. What opinion ought I to have of a physician, who should offer me an
eye-water, the use of which would at first so sharpen my sight, as to ^^rry it
farther than ordinary visions but would in the end put them out? Your
philosophy is to the eyes of the mind, what I have supposed the doctor's
nostrum ^o be to those of the body. It actually brought your own excellent
understanding, which was by nature quick-sighted, and rendered more so by art
and a subtilty of logic peculiar to yourself -- it brought, I say, your very
acute understanding to see nothing clearly; and enveloped all the great truths
of reason and religion in mists of doubt.


BAIL. I own it did; -- but your comparison is not just. I did not see well,
before I used my philosophic eye-water: I only supposed I saw well; but I was
in an errror, with all the rest of mankind. The blindness was real, the
perceptions were imaginary. I cured myself first of those false imaginations,
and then I laudably endeavored to cure other men.


LOCK. A great cure indeed! and don't you think that, in return for the
service you did them, they ought to erect you a statue?


BAIL. Yes; it is good for human nature to know its own weakness. When we
arrogantly presume on a strength we have not, we are always in great danger of
hurting ourselves, or at least of deserving ridicule and contempt by vain and
idle efforts.


LOCK. I agree with you, that human nature should know its own weakness; but
it should also feel its strength and try to improve it. This was my employment
as a philosopher. I endeavored to discover the real powers of the mind, to see
what it could do, and what it could not; to restrain it from efforts beyond its
ability; but to teach it how to advance as far as the faculties given to it by
nature, with the utmost exertion and most proper culture of them, would allow
it to go. In the vast ocean of philosophy, I had the line and the plummet
always in my hands. Many of its depths I found myself unable to fathom; but, by
caution in sounding, and the careful observations I made in the course of my
voyage, I found out some truths of so much use to mankind, that they
acknowledge me to have been their benefactor.


BAIL. Their ignorance makes them think so. Some other philosopher will come
hereafter, and show those truths to be falsehoods. He will pretend to discover
other truths of equal importance. A later sage will arise, perhaps among men
now barbarous and unlearned, whose sagacious discoveries will discredit the
opinions of his admired predecessor. In philosophy, as in nature, all changes
its form, and one thing exists by the destruction of another.


LOCK. Opinions taken up without a patient investigation, depending on terms
not accurately defined, and principles begged without proof, like theories to
explain the phenomenon of nature, built on suppositions instead of experiments,
must perpetually change and destroy one another. But some opinions there are,
even in matters not obvious to the common sense of mankind, which the mind has
received on such rational grounds of assent, that they are as immovable as the
pillars of heaven; or (to speak philosophically) as the great laws of Nature,
by which, under God, the universe is sustained. Can you seriously think, that,
because the hypothesis of your countryman Descartes, which was nothing but an
ingenious, well-imagined romance, has been lately exploded, the system of
Newton, which is built on experiments and geometry, the two most certain
methods of discovering truth, will ever fail; or that, because the whims of
fanatics and the divinity of the schoolmen, cannot now be supported, the
doctrines of that religion, which I, the declared enemy of all enthusiasm and
false reasoning, firmly believed and maintained, will ever be shaken?


BAIL. If you had asked Descartes, while he was in the height of his vogue,
whether his system would ever be confuted by any other philosophers, as that of
Aristotle had been by his, what answer do you suppose he would have returned?


LOCK. Come, come, you yourself know the difference between the foundations on
which the credit of those systems, and that of Newton is placed. Your
skepticism is more affected than real. You found it a shorter way to a great
reputation, (the only wish of your heart,) to object, than to defend; to pull
down, than, to set up. And your talents were admirable for that kind of work.
Then your huddling together in a Critical Dictionary, a pleasant tale, or
obscene jest, and a grave argument against the Christian religion, a witty
confutation of some absurd author, and an artful sophism to impeach some
respectable truth, was particularly commodious to all our young smarts and
smatterers in free-thinking. But what mischief have you not done to human
society? You have endeavored, and with some degree of success, to shake th^se
foundations, on which the whole moral world, and the great fabric of social
happiness, entirely rest. How could you, as a philosopher, in the sober hours
of reflection, answer for this to your conscience, even supposing you had
doubts of the truth of a system, which gives to virtue its sweetest hopes, to
impenitent vice its greatest fears, and to true penitence its best
consolations; which restrains even the least approaches to guilt, and yet makes
those allowances for the infirmities of our nature, which the Stoic pride
denied to it, but which its real imperfection, and the goodness of its
infinitely benevolent Creator, so evidently require?


BAIL. The mind is free; and it loves to exert its freedom Any restraint upon
it is a violence done to its nature, and a tyranny, against which it has a
right to rebel.


LOCK. The mind, though free, has a governor within itself, which may and
ought to limit the exercise of its freedom That governor is Reason.


BAIL. Yes: -- but Reason, like other governors, has a policy more dependent
upon uncertain caprice, than upon any fixed laws. And if that reason, which
rules my mind or yours, has happened to set up a favorite notion, it not only
submits implicitly to it, but desires that the same respect should be paid to
it by all the rest of mankind. Now I hold that any man may lawfully oppose this
desire in another; and that if he is wise, he will do his utmost endeavors to
check it in himself.


LOCK. Is there not also a weakness of a contrary nature to this you now are
ridiculing? do we not often take a pleasure to show our own power, and gratify
our own pride, by degrading the notions set up by other men, and generally
respected?


BAIL. I believe we do; and by this means it often happens that, if one man
build and consecrate a temple to Folly, another pulls it down.


LOCK. Do you think it beneficial to human society, to have all temples pulled
down?


BAIL. I cannot say that I do.


LOCK. Yet I find not in your writings any mark of distinction, to show us
which you mean to save.


BAIL. A true philosopher, like an impartial historian, must be of no sect.


LOCK. Is there no medium between the blind zeal of a sectary, and a total
indifference to all religion?


BAIL. With regard to morality, I was not indifferent.


LOCK. How could you then be indifferent with regard to the sanctions religion
gives to morality? how could you publish what tends so directly and apparently
to weaken in mankind the belief of those sanctions? was not this sacrificing
the great interests of virtue to the little motives of vanity?


BAIL. A man may act indiscreetly, but he cannot do wrong, by declaring that,
which, on a full discussion of the question, he sincerely thinks to be true.


LOCK. An enthusiast, who advances doctrins prejudicial to society, or opposes
any that are useful to it, has the strength of opinion, and the heat of a
disturbed imagination, to plead in alleviation of his fault. But your cool
head, and found judgment, can have no such excuse. I know very well there are
passages in all your works, and those not sew, where you talk like a rigid
moralist. I have also heard that your character was irreproachably good. But
when, in the most labored parts of your writings, you sap the surest
foundations of all moral duties; what avails it that in others, or in the
conduct of your life, you appeared to respect them? How many, who have stronger
passions than you had, and are desirous to get rid of the curb that restrains
them, will lay hold of your sceptism, to set themselves loose from all
obligations of virtue! What a misfortune is it to have made such a use of such
talents! It would have been better for you and for mankind, if you had been one
of the dullest Dutch theologians, or the most credulous monk in a Portuguese
convent. The riches of the mind, like those of fortune, may be employed so
perversey, as to become a nuisance and pest, instead of an ornament and
support, to society.


BAIL. You are very severe upon me. -- But do you count it no merit, no
service to mankind, to deliver them from the frauds and fetters of priestcraft,
from the deliriums of fanaticism, and from the terrors and follies of
superstition? Consider how much mischief these have done to the world! Even in
the last age, what massacres, what civil wars, what convulsions of government,
what confusion in society, did they produce! Nay, in that we both lived in,
though much more enlightened than the former, did I not see them occasion a
violent persecution in my own country? and can you blame me for striking at the
root of these evils?


LOCK. The root of these evils, you well know, was false religion; but you
struck at the true. Heaven and hell are not more different, than the system of
faith I defended, and that which produced the horrors of which you speak. Why
would you so fallaciously confound them together in some of your writings, that
it requires much more judgment, and a more diligent attention, than ordinary
readers have, to separate them again, and to make the proper distinctions?
This, indeed, is the great art of the most celebrated free-thinkers. They
recommend themselves to warm and ingenuous minds, by lively strokes of wit, and
by arguments really strong, against superstition, enthusiasm, and priestcraft.
But, at the same time, they insiduously throw the colors of these upon the
fair face of true religion; and dress her out in their garb, with a malignant
intention to render her odious or despicable, to those who have not penetration
enough to discern the impious fraud. Some of them may have thus deceived
themselves, as well as others. Yet it is certain, no book, that ever was
written by the most acute of these gentlemen, is so repugnant to priestcraft,
to spiritual tyranny, to all absurd superstitions, to all that tend to disturb
or injure society, as that gospel they so much affect to despise.


BAIL. Mankind are so made, that, when they have been overheated, they cannot
be brought to a proper temper again, till they have been over-cooled. My
skepticism might be necessary, to abate the fever and phrensy of false religion.


LOCK. A wise prescription, indeed, to bring on a paralytical state of the
mind, (for such a skepticism as yours is a palsy, which deprives the mind of
all vigor, and deadens its natural and vital powers,) in order to take off a
fever, which temperance, and the milk of the evangelical doctrines, would
probably cure!


BAIL. I acknowledge that those medicines have a great power. But few doctors
apply them untainted with the mixture of some harsher drugs, or some unsafe and
ridiculous nostrums of their own.


LOCK. What you now say is too true. -- God has given us a most excellent
physic for the soul, in all its diseases; but bad and interested physicians, or
ignorant and conceited quacks, administer it so ill to the rest of mankind,
that much of the benefit of it is unhappily lost.


LORD LYTTELTON CHAPTER VIII. PUBLIC SPEECHES.
SECTION I. CICERO against VERRES.
THE time is come, Fathers, when that which has long been wished for, toward
allaying the envy your order has been subject to, and removing the imputations
against trials, is effectually put in your power. An opinion has long
prevailed, not only here at home, but likewise in foreign countries, both
dangerous to you, and pernicious to the state, --, that, in prosecutions, men
of wealth are always safe, however clearly convicted. There is now to be
brought upon his trial before you, to the confusion, I hope, of the propagators
of this slanderous imputation, one whose life and actions condemn him in the
opinion of all impartial persons; but who, according to his own reckoning and
declared dependence upon his riches, is already acquitted; I mean Caius Verres.
I demand justice of you, Fathers, upon the robber of the public treasury, the
oppressor of Asia Minor and Pamphylia, the invader of the rights and privileges
of Romans, the scourge and curse of Sicily. If that sentence is passed upon him
which his crimes deserve, your authority, Fathers, will be venerable and sacred
in the eyes of the public; but if his great riches should bias you in his
favor, I shall still gain one point, -- to make it apparent to all the world,
that what was wanting in this case, was not a criminal nor a prosecutor, but
justice and adequate punishment.

To pass over the shameful irregularities of his youth, what does his
quaestorship, the first public employment he held, what does it exhibit, but
one continued scene of villainies? Cneius Carbo plundered of the public money by
his own treasurer, a consul stripped and betrayed, an army deserted and reduced
to want, a province robbed, the civil and religious rights of a people
violated. The employment he held in Asia Minor and Pamphylia, what did it
produce but the ruin of those countries? in which, houses, cities, and temples
were robbed by him. What was his conduct in his praetorship here at home? Let
the plundered temples, and public works neglected, that he might embezz^e the
money intended for carrying them on, bear witness. How did he discharge the
office of a judge? Let those who suffered by his injustice answer. But his
praetorship in Sicily crowns all his works of wickedness, and finishes a
lasting monument to his infamy. The mischiefs done by him in that unhappy
country, during the three years of his iniquitous administration, are such,
that many years, under the wisest and best of praetors, will not be sufficient
to restore things to the condition in which he found them: for it is notorious,
that, during the time of his tyranny, the Sicilians neither enjoyed the
protection of their own original laws; of the regulations made for their
benefit by the Roman senate, upon their coming under the protection of the
commonwealth; nor of the natural and unalienable rights of men. His nod has
decided all causes in Sicily for these three years. And his decisions have
broken all law, all precedent, all right. The sums he has, by arbitrary taxes
and unheard of impositions, extorted from the industrious poor, are not to be
computed. The most faithful allies of the commonwealth have been treated as
enemies. Roman citizens have, like slaves, been put to death with tortures. The
most atrocious criminals, for money, have been exempted from the deserved
punishments; and men of the most unexceptionable characters, condemned and
banished unheard. The harbors, though sufficiently fortified, and the gates of
strong towns, have been opened to pirates and ravagers. The soldiery and
sailors, belonging to a province under the protection of the commonwealth, have
been starved to death. Whole fleets, to the great detriment of the province,
suffered to perish. The ancient monuments of either Sicilian or Roman
greatness, the statues of heroes and princes have been carried off; and the
temples stripped of the images. -- Having, by his iniquitous sentences, filled
the prisons with the most industrious and deserving of the people, he then
proceeded to order numbers of Roman citizens to be strangled in the gaols: so
that the exclamation, "I am a citizen of Rome!" which has often, in the most
distant regions, and among the most barbarous people, been a protection, was of
no service to them; but, on the contrary, brought a speedier and more severe
punishment upon them.

I ask now, Verres, what thou have to advance against this charge? Will thou
pretend to deny it? Will thou pretend, that any thing false, that even any
thing aggravated, is alleged against thee? Had any prince, or any state,
committed the same outrage against the privilege of Roman citizens, should we
not think we had sufficient ground for demanding satisfaction? What punishment
ought, then, to be inflicted upon a tyrannical and wicked praetor, who dared,
at no greater distance than Sicily, within sight of the Italian coast, to put
to the infamous death of crucifixion, that unfortunate and innocent citizen,
Publius Gavius Cosanus, only for his having asserted his privilege of
citizenship, and declared his intention of appealing to the justice of his
country, against a cruel oppressor, who had unjustly confined him in prison at
Syracuse, whence he had just made his escape? The unhappy man, arrested as he
was going to embark for his native country, is brought before the wicked
praetor. With eyes darting fury, and a countenance distorted with cruelty, he
orders the helpless victim of his rage to be stripped, and rods to be brought;
accusing him, but without the least shadow of evidence, or even of suspicion,
of having come to Sicily as a spy. It was in vain that the unhappy man cried
out, "I am a Roman citizen: I have served under Lucius Pretius, who is now at
Panoramus, and will attest my innocence." The blood-thirsty praetor, deaf to
all he could urge in his own defense, ordered the infamous punishment to be
inflicted. Thus, Fathers, was an innocent Roman citizen publicly mangled with
scourging; whilst the only words he uttered, amidst his cruel sufferings, were,
"I am a Roman citizen!" With these he hoped to defend himself from violence and
infamy. But of so little service was this privilege to him, that, while he was
thus asserting his citizenship, the order was given for his execution, -- for
his execution upon the cross! --

O liberty! -- O sound once delightful to every Roman ear! -- O sacred
privilege of Roman citizenship! -- once sacred! -- how trampled upon! -- But
what then! Is it come to this? Shall an inferior magistrate, a governor, who
holds his whole power of the Roman people, in a Roman province, within sight of
Italy, bind, scourge, torture with fire and red hot plates of iron, and at last
put to the infamous death of the cross, a Roman citizen? Shall neither the
cries of innocence expiring in agony, nor the tears of pitying spectators, nor
the majesty of the Roman commonwealth, nor the fear of the justice of his
country, restrain the licentious and wanton cruelty of a monster, who, in
confidence of his riches, strikes at the root of liberty, and sets mankind at
defiance.

I conclude with expressing my hopes, that your wisdom and justice, Fathers,
will not, by suffering the atrocious and unexampled insolence of Caius Verres
to escape due punishment, leave room to apprehend the danger of a total
subversion of authority, and the introduction of general anarchy and confusion.

CICERO'S ORATIONS. SECTION II. Speech of ADHERBAL to the Roman Senate,
imploring their protection against JUGURTHA.
FATHERS!
IT is known to you, that king Micipsa, my father, on his death bed, left in
charge to Jugurtha, his adopted son, conjunctly with my unfortunate brother
Hiempsal and myself, the children of his own body, the administration of the
kingdom of Numidia, directing us to consider the senate and people of Rome
proprietors of it. He charged us to use our best endeavors to be serviceable
to the Roman commonwealth; assuring us, that your protection would prove a
defense against all enemies; and would be instead of armies, fortifications,
and treasures.

While my brother and I were thinking of nothing but how to regulate ourselves
according to the directions of our deceased father -- Jugurtha -- the most
infamous of mankind! -- breaking through all ties of gratitude and of common
humanity, and trampling on the authority of the Roman commonwealth, procured
the murder of my unfortunate brother; and has driven me from my throne and
native country, though he knows I inherit, from my grandfather Massinissa, and
my father Micipsa, the friendship and alliance of the Romans.

For a prince to be reduced, by villainy, to my distressful circumstances, is
calamity enough; but my misfortunes are heightened by the consideration -- that
I find myself obliged to solicit your assistance, Fathers, for the services
done you by my ancestors, not for any I have been able to render you in my own
person. Jugurtha has put it out of my power to deserve any thing at your hands;
and has forced me to be burdensome, before I could be useful to you. And yet,
if I had no plea, but my undeserved misery -- a once powerful prince, the
des^endant of a race of illustrious monarchs, now, without any fault of my own,
destitute of every support, and reduced to the necessity of begging foreign
assistance, against an enemy who has seized my throne and my kingdom -- if my
unequalled distresses were all I had to plead -- it would become the greatness
of the Roman commonwealth, to protect the injured, and to check the triumph of
daring wickedness over helpless innocence. But, to provoke your resentment to
the utmost, Jugurtha has driven me from the very dominions, which the senate
and people of Rome gave to my ancestors; and, from which my grandfather, and my
father, under your umbrage expelled Syphax and the Carthaginians. Thus,
Fathers, your kindness to our family is defeated; and Jugurtha, in injuring me,
throws contempt upon you.

O wretched prince! Oh cruel reverse of fortune! Oh father Micipsa! is this the
consequence of thy generosity; that he, whom thy goodness raised to an equality
with thy own children, should be the murderer of thy children? Must, then, the
royal house of Numidia always be a scene of havoc and blood? While Carthage
remained, we suffered, as was to be expected, all sorts of hardships from their
hostile attacks; our enemy near; our only powerful ally, the Roman
commonwealth, at a distance. When that scourge of Africa was no more, we
congratulated ourselves on the prospect of established peace. But, instead of
peace, behold the kingdom of Numidia drenched with royal blood! and the only
surviving son of its late king, flying from an adopted murderer, and seeking
that safety in foreign parts, which he cannot command in his own kingdom.

Whither -- Oh! whither shall I fly? If I return to the royal palace of my
ancestors, my father's throne is seized by the murderer of my brother. What can
I there expect, but that Jugurtha should hasten to imbrue, in my blood, those
hands which are now reeking with my brother's? If I were to fly for refuge, or
for assistance, to any other court, from what prince can I hope for protection,
if the Roman commonwealth give me up? From my own family o^ friends I have no
expectations. My royal father is no more. He is beyond the reach of violence,
and out of hearing of the complaints of his unhappy son. Were my brother alive,
our mutual sympathy would be some alleviation. But he is hurried out of life,
in his early youth, by the very hand which should have been the last to injure
any of the royal family of Numidia. The bloody Jugurtha has butchered all whom
he suspected to be in my interest. Some have been destroyed by the lingering
torment of the cross. Others have been given a prey to wild beasts; and their
anguish made the sport of men more cruel than wild beasts. If there be any yet
alive, they are shut up in dungeons, there to drag out a life more intolerable
than death itself.

Look down, illustrious senators of Rome! from that height of power to which
you are raised, on the unexampled distresses of a prince, who is, by the
cruelty of a wicked intruder, become an outcast from all mankind. Let no^ the
crafty insinuations of him who returns murder for adoption, prejudice your
judgment. Do not listen to the wretch who has butchered the son and relations
of a king, who gave him power to sit on the same throne with his own sons. -- I
have been informed, that he labors by his emissaries to prevent your
determining any thing against him in his absence; pretending that I magnify my
distress, and might, for him, have staid in peace in my own kingdom. But, if
ever the time comes, when the due vengeance from above shall overtake him, he
will then dissemble as I do. Then he, who now, har^^ned in wickedness, triumphs
over those whom his violence has laid low, will, in his turn, feel distress,
and suffer for his impious ingratitude to my father, and his blood-thirsty
cruelty to my brother.

Oh murdered, butchered brother! Oh dearest to my heart -- now gone forever
from my sight! -- but why should I lament his death? He is, indeed, deprived of
the blessed light of heaven, of life, and kingdom, at once, by the very person
who ought to have been the first to hazard his own life, in defense of any one
of Micipsa's family. But, as things are, my brother is not so much deprived of
these comforts, as delivered from terror, from flight, from exile, and the
endless train of miseries which render life to me a burden. He lies full low,
gored with wounds, and festering in his own blood. But he lies in peace. He
feels none of the miseries which rend my soul with agony and distraction, while
I am set up a spectacle to all mankind, of the uncertainty of human affairs. So
far from having it in my power to punish his murderer, I am not master of the
means of securing my own life. So far from being in a condition to defend my
kingdom from the violence of the usurper, I am obliged to apply for foreign
protection for my own person.

Fathers! Senatars of Rome! the arbiters of nations! to you I fly for refuge
from the murderous fury of Jugurtha. -- By your affection for your children; by
your love for your country; by your own virtues; by the majesty of the Roman
commonwealth; by all that is sacred, and all that is dear to you -- deliver a
wretched prince from undeserved, unprovoked injury; and save the kingdom of
Numidia, which is your own property, from being the prey of violence,
usurpation, and cruelty!

SALLUST. SECTION III. The APOSTLE PAUL's noble defense before FESTUS and
AGRIPPA.
AGRIPPA said unto Paul, thou art permitted to speak for thyself. Then Paul
stretched forth the hand, and answered for himself.

I think myself happy, king Agrippa, because I shall answer for myself this day
before thee, concerning all the things whereof I am accused by the Jews:
especially, as I know thee to be expert in all customs and questions which are
among the Jews. Wherefore I beseech thee to hear me patiently.

My manner of life from my youth, which was at the first among my own nation at
Jerusalem, know all the Jews; who knew me from the beginning, (if they would
testify,) that after the straitest sect of our religion, I lived a Pharisee.
And now I stand and am judged for the hope of the promise made by God to our
fathers: to which promise, our twelve tribes, continually serving God day and
night, hope to come: and, for this hope's sake, king Agrippa, I am accused by
the Jews.

Why should it be thought a thing incredible with you, that God should raise
the dead? I verily thought with myself, that I ought to do many things contrary
to the name of Jesus of Nazareth: and this I did in Jerusalem. Many of the
saints I shut up in prison, having received authority from the chief priests,
and when they were put to death, I gave my voice against them. And I often
punished them in every synagogue, and compelled them to blaspheme; and being
exceedingly mad against them, I persecuted them even unto strange cities. But
as I went to Damascus, with authority and commission from the chief priests, at
midday, O king! I saw in the way a light from heaven, above the brightness of
the sun, shining round about me, and them who journeyed with me. And when we
were all fallen to the earth, I heard a voice speaking to me, and saying in the
Hebrew tongue, Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? It is hard for thee to kick
against the pricks. And I said, who art thou, Lord? And he replied, I am Jesus
whom thou persecutest. But rise, and stand upon thy feet: for I have appeared
to thee for this purpose, to make thee a minister, and a witness both of these
things, which thou have seen, and of those things in which I will appear to
thee; delivering thee from the people, and from the Gentiles, to whom I now
send thee, to open their eyes, and to turn them from darkness to light, and
from the power of Satan to God; that they may receive forgiveness of sins, and
inheritance amongst them who are sanctified by faith that is in me.

Whereupon, O king Agrippa! I was not disobedient to the heavenly vision: but
showed first to them of Damascus, and at Jerusalem, and through all the coasts
of Judea, and then to the Gentiles, that they should repent, and turn to God,
and do works meet for repentance. For these causes, the Jews caught me in the
temple; and went about to kill me. Having, however, obtained help from God, I
continue, to this day, witnessing both to small and great, saying no other
things than those which the prophets and Moses declared should come: that
Christ should suffer; that he would be the first who should rise from the dead;
and he would show light to the people, and to the Gentiles.

And as he thus spoke for himself, Festus said, with a loud voice, "Paul, thou
art beside thyself; much learning has made thee mad." But he replied, I am not
mad, most noble Festus; but speak the words of truth and soberness. For the
king knows these things, before whom also I speak freely. I am persuaded that
none of these things are hidden from him: for this thing was not done in a
corner. King Agrippa, believe thou the prophets? I know that thou believe.
Then Agrippa said to Paul, "almost thou persuadest me to be a Christian." And
Paul replied, "I would to God, that not only thou, but also all that hear me
this day, were both almost, and altogether such as I am, except these bonds."
How happy was this great Apostle, even in the most perilous circumstances!
Though under bonds and oppression, his mind was free, and raised above every
fear of man. With what dignity and composure does he defend himself, and the
noble cause he had espoused; whilst he displays the most compassionate and
generous feelings, for those who were strangers to the sublime religion by
which he was animated!


ACTS XXVI. SECTION IV. LORD MANSFIELD's Speech in the House of Peers, 1770, on
the Bill of preventing the Delays of Justice, by claiming the Privilege of
Parliament.
MY LORDS,
WHEN I consider the importance of this bill to your Lordships, I am not
surprised it has taken up so much of your consideration. It is a bill, indeed,
of no common magnitude; it is no less than to take away from two thirds of the
legislative body of this great kingdom, certain privileges and immunities of
which they have been long possessed. Perhaps there is no situation the human
mind can be placed in, that is so difficult and so trying, as when it is made a
judge in its own cause. There is something implanted in the breast of man so
attached to self, so tenacious of privileges once obtained, that in such a
situation, either to discuss with impartiality, or decide with justice, has
ever been held the summit of all human virtue. The bill now in question puts
your Lordships in this very predicament; and I doubt not but the wisdom of your
decision will convince the world, that where self-interest and justice are in
opposite scales, the latter will ever preponderate with your Lordships.

Privileges have been granted to legislators in all ages, and in all countries.
The practice is founded in wisdom; and, indeed, it is peculiarly essential to
the constitution of this country, that the members of both Houses should be
free in their persons, in cases of civil suits: for there may come a time when
the safety and welfare of this whole empire, may depend upon their attendance
in parliament. I am far from advising any measure that would in future endanger
the state: but the bill before your Lordships has, I am confident, no such
tendency; for it expressly secures the persons of members of either House in
all civil suits. This being the case, I confess, when I see many noble Lords,
for whose judgment I have a very great respect, standing up to oppose a bill
which is calculated merely to facilitate the recovery of just and legal debts,
I am astonished and amazed. They, I doubt not, oppose the bill upon public
principles: I would not wish to insinuate, that private interest had the least
weight in their determination.

The bill has been frequently proposed, and as frequently has miscarried: but
it was always lost in the lower House. Little did I think, when it had passed
the Commons, that it possibly could have met with such opposition here. Shall
it be said, that you, my Lords, the grand council of the nation, the highest
judicial and legislative body of the realm, endeavor to evade, by privilege,
those very laws which you enforce on your fellow subjects? Forbid it justice!
-- I am sure, were the noble Lords as well acquainted as I am, with but half
the difficulties and delays occasioned in the courts of justice, under pretense
of privilege, they would not, nay they could not, oppose this bill.

I have waited with patience to hear what arguments might be urged against the
bill; but I have waited in vain: the truth is, there is no argument that can
weigh against it. The justice and expediency of the bill are such as render it
self-evident. It is a proposition of that nature, that can neither be weakened
by argument, nor entangled with sophistry. Much, indeed, has been said by some
noble Lords, on the wisdom of our ancestors, and how differently they thought
from us. They not only decreed, that privilege should prevent all civil suits
from proceeding during the sitting of parliament, but likewise granted
protection to the very servants of members. I shall say nothing on the wisdom
of our ancestors; it might perhaps appear invidious: that is not necessary in
the present case. I shall only say, that the noble Lords who flatter themselves
with the weight of that reflection, should remember, that as circumstances
alter, things themselves should alter. Formerly, it was not so fashionable
either for masters or servants to run in debt, as it is at present. Formerly,
we were not that great commercial nation we are at present; nor formerly were
merchants and manufacturers members parliament, as at present. The case is now
very different: both merchants and manufacturers are, with great propriety,
elected members of the Lower House. Commerce having thus got into the
legislative body of the kingdom, privilege must be done away. We all know, that
the very soul and essence of trade are regular payments; and sad experience
teaches us, that there are men, who will not make their regular payments
without the compulsive power of the laws. The law then ought to be equally open
to all. Any exemption to particular men, or particular ranks of men, is, in a
free and commercial country, a solecism of the grossest nature.

But I will not trouble your Lordships with arguments for that, which is
sufficiently evident without any. I shall only say a few words to some noble
Lords, who forsee much inconveniency, from the persons of their servants being
liable to be arrested. One noble lord observes, That the coachman of a peer may
be arrested, while he is driving his master to the House, and, that
consequently, he will not be able to attend his duty in parliament. If this
were actually to happen, there are so many methods by which the member might
still get to the House, that I can hardly think the noble lord is serious in
his objection. Another noble peer said, That, by this bill, one might lose his
most valuable and honest servants. This I hold to be a contradiction in terms:
for he can neither be a valuable servant, nor an honest man, who gets into debt
which he is neither able nor willing to pay, till compelled by the law. If my
servant, by unforeseen accidents, has got into debt, and I still wish to retain
him, I certainly would pay the demand. But upon no principle of liberal
legislation whatever, can my servant have a title to set his creditors at
defiance, while, for forty shillings only, the honest tradesman may be torn
from his family, and locked up in a gaol. It is monstrous injustice! I flatter
myself, however, the determination of this day will entirely put an end to all
such partial proceedings for the future, by passing into a law the bill now
under your Lordships' consideration.

I come now to speak, upon what, indeed, I would have gladly avoided, had I not
been particularly pointed at, for the part I have taken in this bill. It has
been said, by a noble lord on my left hand, that I likewise am running the race
of popularity. If the noble lord means by popularity, that applause bestowed by
after-ages on good and virtuous actions, I have long been struggling in that
race: to what purpose, all-trying Time can alone determine. But if the noble
lord means that mushroom popularity, which is raised without merit, and lost
without a crime, he is much mistaken in his opinion. I defy the noble Lord to
point out a single action of my life, in which the popularity of the times ever
had the smallest influence on my determinations. I thank God I have a more
permanent and steady rule for my conduct, -- the dictates of my own breast.
They who have foregone that pleasing adviser, and given up their mind to be the
slave of every popular impulse, I sincerely pity: I pity them still more, if
their vanity leads them to mistake the shouts of a mob, for the trumpet of
Fame. Experience might inform them, that many, who have been saluted with the
huzzas of a crowd one day, have received their execrations the next; and many,
who, by the popularity of their times, have been held up as spotless patriots,
have, nevertheless, appeared upon the historian's page, when truth has
triumphed over delusion, the assassins of liberty. Why then the noble lord can
think I am ambitious of present popularity, that echo of folly, and shadow of
renown, I am at a loss to determine. Besides, I do not know that the bill now
before your Lordships will be popular: it depends much upon the cap^ice of the
day. It may not be popular to compel people to pay their debts; and, in that
case, the present must be a very unpopular bill. It may not be popular neither
to take away any of the privileges of parliament; for I very well remember, and
many of your Lordships may remember, that, not long ago, the popular cry was
for the extension of privilege; and so far did they carry it at that time, that
it was said, the privilege protected members even in criminal actions; nay,
such was the power of popular prejudices over weak minds, that the very
decisions of some of the courts were tinctured with that doctrine. It was
undoubtedly an abominable doctrine; I thought so then, I think so still; but,
nevertheless, it was a popular doctrine, and came immediately from those who
are called the friends of liberty; how deservedly, time will show. True
liberty, in my opinion, can only exist when justice is equally administered to
all; to the king and to the beggar. Where is the justice then, or where is the
law that protects a member of parliament more than any other man, from the
punishment due to his crimes? The laws of this country allow of no place, nor
any employment, to be a sanctuary for crimes; and where I have the honor to
sit as judge, neither royal favor, nor popular applause, shall ever protect
the guilty.

I have now only to beg pardon for having employed so much of your Lordships'
time; and I am sorry a bill, frought with so many good consequences, has not
met with an abler advocate: but I doubt not your Lordships' determination will
convince the world, that a bill, calculated to contribute so much to the equal
distribution of justice as the present, requires with your Lordships but very
little support.

SECTION V. An Address to young Persons.
I INTEND, in this address, to show you the importance of beginning early to
give serious attention to your conduct. As soon as you are capable of
reflection, you must perceive that there is a right and a wrong, in human
ac^ions. You see, that those who are born with the same advantages of fortune,
are not all equally prosperous in the course of life. While some of them, by
wise and steady conduct, attain distinction in the world, and pass their days
with comfort and honor; others, of the same rank, by mean and vicious
behavior, forfeit the advantages of their birth; involve themselves in much
misery; and end in being a disgrace to their friends, and a burden on society.
Early, then, may you learn, that it is not on the external condition in which
you find yourselves placed, but on the part which you are to act, that your
welfare or unhappiness, your honor or infamy, depends. Now, when beginning to
act that part, what can be of greater moment, than to regulate your plan of
conduct with the most serious attention, before you have yet committed any
fatal or irretrievable errors? If, instead of exerting reflection for this
valuable purpose, you deliver yourselves up, at so critical a time, to sloth
and pleasure; if you refuse to listen to any counselor but humor, or to
attend to any pursuit except that of amusement; if you allow yourselves to
float loose and careless on the tide of life, ready to receive any direction
which the current of fashion may chance to give you; what can you expect to
follow from such beginnings? While so many around you are undergoing the sad
consequences of a like indiscretion, for what reason shall not those
consequences extend to you? Shall you attain success without that preparation,
and escape dangers without that precaution, which is required of others? Shall
happiness grow up to you, of its own accord, and solicit your acceptance, when,
to the rest of mankind, it is the fruit of long cultivation, and the
acquisition of labor and care? -- Deceive not yourselves with such arrogant
hopes. Whatever be your rank, Providence will not, for your sake, rever^^ts
established order. The Author of your being (...) enjoined you to "take heed to
your ways; to ponder the paths of your feet; to remember your Creator in the
days of your youth." He has decreed, that they only "who seek after wisdom,
shall find it; that fools shall be afflicted, because of their transgressions;
and that whoever refuses instruction, shall destroy his own foul." By
listening to these admonitions, and tempering the vivacity of youth with a
proper mixture of serious thought, you may ensure cheerfulness for the rest of
life; but by delivering yourselves up at present to giddiness and levity, you
lay the foundation of lasting heaviness of heart.

When you look forward to those plans of life, which either your circumstances
have suggested, or your friends have proposed, you will not hesitate to
acknowledge, that in order to pursue them with advantage some previous
discipline is requisite. Be assured, that whatever is to be your profession, no
education is more necessary to your success, than the acquirement of virtuous
dispositions and habits. This is the universal preparation for every character,
and every station in life. Bad as the world is, respect is always paid to
virtue. In the usual course of human affairs, it will be found, that a plain
understanding, joined with acknowledged worth, contributes more to prosperity,
than the brightest parts without probity or honor. Whether science or
business, or public life, be your aim, virtue still enters, for a principal
share, into all these great departments of society. It is connected with
eminence, in every liberal art; with reputation, in every branch of fair and
useful business; with distinction, in every public station. The vigor which it
gives the mind, and the weight which it adds to character; the generous
sentiments which it breathes; the undaunted spirit which it inspires; the
ardour of diligence which it quickens; the freedom which it procures from
pernicious and dishonorable avocations; are the foundations of all that is
highly honorable, or greatly successful among men.

Whatever ornamental or engaging endowments you now possess, virtue is a
necessary requisite, in order to their shining with proper lustre^^ Feeble are
the attractions of the fairest form, if it be suspected that nothing within
corresponds to the pleasing appearance without. Short are the triumphs of wit,
when it is supposed to be the vehicle of malice. By whatever means you may at
first attract the attention, you can hold the esteem, and secure the hearts of
others, only by amiable dispositions, and the accomplishments of the mind.
These are the qualities whose influence will last, when the luster of all that
once sparkled and dazzled has passed away.

Let not then the season of youth be barren of improvements, so essential to
you^ future felicity and honor. Now is the seed-time of life; and according to
"what you sow, you shall reap." Your character is now, under Divine assistance,
of your own forming; your fate is, in some measure, put into your own hands.
Your nature is as yet pliant and soft. Habits have not established their
dominion. Prejudices have not pre-occupied your understanding. The world has
not had time to contract and debase your affections. All your powers are more
vigorous, disembarrassed, and free, than they will be at any ^ure period.
Whatever impulse you now give to your desires and passions, the direction is
likely to continue. It will form the channel in which your life is to run; nay,
it may determine is everlasting issue. Consider then the employment of this
important period, as the highest trust which shall ever be committed to you; as
in a great measure, decisive of your happiness, in time, and in eternity. As in
the succession of the seasons, each, by the invariable laws of Nature, affects
the productions of what is next in course; so, in human life, every period of
our age, according as it is well or ill spent, influences the happiness of that
which is to follow. Virtuous youth gradually brings forward accomplished and
flourishing manhood; and such manhood passes of itself, without uneasiness,
into respectable and tranquil old age. But when nature is turned out of its
regular course, disorder takes place in the moral, just as in the vegetable
world. If the Spring put forth no blossoms, in Summer there will be no beauty,
and in Autumn, no fruit. So, if youth be trifled away without improvement,
manhood will probably be contemptible, and old age miserable. If the beginnings
of life have been "vanity," its latter end can ^carcely be any other than
"vexation of spirit."

I shall finish this address, with calling your attention to that dependence on
the blessing of Heaven, which, amidst all your endeavors after improvement,
you ought continually to preserve. It is too common with the young, even when
they resolve to tread the path of virtue and honor, to set out with
presumptuous confidence in themselves. Trusting to their own abilities for
carrying them successfully through life, they are careless of applying to God,
or of deriving any assistance from what they are apt to reckon the gloomy
discipline of religion. Alas! how little do they know the dangers which await
them? Neither human wisdom, nor human virtue, unsupported by religion, is equal
to the trying situations which often occur in life. By the shock of temptation,
how frequently have the most virtuous intentions been overthrown? Under the
pressure of disaster, how often has the greatest constancy sunk? "every good,
and every perfect gift, is from above." Wisdom and virtue, as well as "riches
and honor, come from God." Destitute of his favor, you are in no better
situation, with all your boasted abilities, than orphans left to wander in a
trackless desert, without any guide to conduct them, or any shelter to cover
them from the gathering storm. Correct, then, this ill-founded arrogance.
Expect not, that your happiness can be independent of him who made youth. By
faith and repentance, apply to the Redeemer of the world. By piety and prayer,
seek the protection of the God of heaven. I conclude with the solemn words, in
which a great prince delivered his dying charge to his son; words, which every
young person ought to consider as addressed to himself, and to engrave deeply
on his heart: "Solomon, my son, know thou the God of thy fathers; and serve him
with a perfect heart, and with a willing mind. For the Lord searches all
hearts, and understands all the imaginations of the thoughts. If thou seek
him, he will be found of thee; but if thou forsake him, he will cast thee off
for ever."

BLAIR. CHAPTER IX. PROMISCUOUS AND MIXED PIECES.
SECTION I. Earthquake at Calabria, in the year 1638.
AN account of this dreadful earthquake, is given by the celebrated Father
Kircher. It happened whilst he was on his journey to visit Mount Aetna, and the
rest of the wonders that lie toward the south of Italy. Kircher is considered,
by scholars, as one of the greatest prodigies of learning.

"Having hired a boat, in company with four more, (two friars of the order of
St. Francis, and two seculars,) we launched, from the harbor of Messina, in
Sicily; and arrived, the same day, at the promontory of Pelorus. Our
destination was for the city of Euphaemia, in Calabria; where we had some
business to transact; and where we designed to tarry for some time. However,
Providence seemed willing to cross our design; for we were obliged to continue
three days at Pelorus, on account of the weather; and though we often put out
to sea, yet we were as often driven back. At length, wearied with the delay, we
resolved to prosecute our voyage; and, although the sea seemed more than
usually agitated, we ventured forward. The gulf of Charybdis, which we
approached, seemed whi^led round in such a manner, as to form a vast hollow,
verging to a point in the center. Procceding onward, and turning my eyes to
Aetna, I saw it cast forth large volumes of smoke, of mountainous sizes, which
entirely covered the island, and blotted out the very shores from my view.
This, together with the dreadful noise, and the fulphurous stench which was
strongly perceived, filled me with apprehensions, that some more dreadful
calamity was impending. The sea itself seemed to wear a very unusual
appearance: they who have seen a lake in a violent shower of rain, covered all
over with bubbles, will conceive some idea of its agitations. My surprise was
still increased, by the calmness and serenity of the weather; not a breeze, not
a cloud, which might be supposed to put all nature thus into motion. I
therefore warned my companions, that an earthquake was approaching; and, after
some time, making for the shore with all possible diligence, we landed at
Tropaea, happy and thankful for having escaped the threatening dangers of the
sea."

"But our triumphs at land were of short duration; for we had scarcely arrived
at the Jesuits' College, in that City, when our ears were stunned with a horrid
sound, resembling that of an infinite number of chariots, driven fiercely
forward; the wheels rattling, and the thongs cracking. Soon after this, a most
dreadful earthquake ensued; so that the whole tract upon which we stood, seemed
to vibrate, as if we were in the scale of a balance, that continued wavering.
This motion, however, soon grew more violent; and being no longer able to keep
my legs, I was thrown prostrate upon the ground. In the mean time, the
universal ruin round me redoubled my amazment. The crash of falling houses, the
tot^ering of towers, and the groans of the dying, all contributed to raise my
terror and despair. On every side of me, I saw nothing but a scene of ruin; and
danger threatening wherever I should fly. I commend myself to God, as my last
great refuge. At that hour, O how vain was every sublunary happiness! Wealth,
honor, empire, wisdom, all mere useless sounds, and as empty as the bubbles in
the deep! Just standing on the threshold of eternity, nothing but God was my
pleasure; and the nearer I approached, I only loved him the more. After some
time, however, finding that I remained unhurt, amidst the general concussion, I
resolved to venture for safety; and running as fast as I could, I reached the
shore, but almost terrified out of my reason. I did not search long here, till
I found the boat in which I had landed; and my companions also, whose terrors
were even greater than mine. Our meeting was not of that kind, where every one
is desirous of telling his own happy escape: it was all silence, and a gloomy
dread of impending terrors."

"Leaving this seat of desolation, we prosecuted our voyage along the coast;
and the next day came to Rochetta, where we landed, although the earth still
continued in violent agitations. But we had scarcely arrived at our inn, when
we were once more obliged to return to the boat; and, in about half an hour, we
saw the greater part of the town, and the inn at which we had set up, dashed to
the ground, and burying the inhabitants beneath the ruins."

"In this manner, proceeding onward in our little vessel, finding no safety at
land, and yet, from the smallness of our boat, having but a very dangerous
continuance at sea, we at length landed at Lopizium, a castle midway between
Tropaea and Euphaemia, the city to which, as I said before, we were bound.
Here, wherever I turned my eyes, nothing but scenes of ruin and horror
appeared; towns and castles levelled to the ground; Strombalo, though at sixty
miles distance, belching forth flames in an unusual manner, and with a noise
which I could distinctly hear. But my attention was quickly turned from more
remote, to contiguous danger. The rumbling sound of an approaching earthquake,
which we by this time were grown acquainted with, alarmed us for the
consequences; it every moment seemed to grow louder, and to approach nearer.
The place on which we stood now began to shake most dreadfully; so that being
unable to stand, my companions and I caught hold of whatever shrub grew next to
us, and supported ourselves in that manner."

"After some time, this violent paroxysm ceasing, we again stood up, in order
to prosecute our voyage to Euphaemia, which lay within sight. In the mean time,
while we were preparing for this purpose, I turned my eyes toward the city,
but could see only a frightful dark cloud, that seemed to rest upon the place.
This the more surprised us, as the weather was so very serene. We waited,
therefore, till the cloud had passed away: then turning to look for the city,
it was totally sunk. Wonderful to tell! nothing but a dismal and putrid lake
was seen where it stood. We looked about to find some one that could tell us of
its sad catastrophe, but could see no person. All was become a melancholy
solitude; a scene of hideous desolation. Thus proceeding pensively along, in
quest of some human being that could give us a little information, we at length
saw a boy sitting by the shore, and appearing stupefied with terror. Of him,
therefore, we enquired concerning the fate of the city; but he could not be
prevailed on to give us an answer. We entreated him, with every expression of
tenderness and pity, to tell us; but his senses were quite wrapped up in the
contemplation of the danger he had escaped. We offered him some victuals, but
he seemed to loath the sight. We still persisted in our offices of kindness;
but he only pointed to the place of the city, like one out of his senses; and
then running up into the woods, was never heard of after. Such was the fate of
the city of Euphaemia: and as we continued our melancholy course along the
shore, the whole coast, for the space of two hundred miles, presented nothing
but the remains of cities; and men scattered, without a habitation, over the
fields. Proceeding thus along, we at length ended our distressful voyage, by
arriving at Naples, after having escaped a thousand dangers both at sea and
land."

GOLDSMITH. SECTION II. Letter from PLINY to GEMINUS.
DO WE not sometimes observe a sort of people, who though they are themselves
under the abject dominion of every vice, show a kind of malicious resentment
against the errors of others; and are most severe upon those whom they most
resemble? yet, surely a lenity of disposition, even in persons who have the
least occasion for clemency themselves, is of all virtues the most becoming.
The highest of all characters, in my estimation, is his, who is as ready to
pardon the errors of mankind, as if he were every day guilty of some himself;
and, at the same time, as cautious of committing a fault, as if he never
forgave one. It is a rule then which we should, upon all occasions, both
private and public, most religiously observe; "to be inexorable to our own
failings, while we treat those of the rest of the world with tenderness, not
excepting even such as forgive none but themselves."

I shall, perhaps, be asked, who it is that has given occasion to these
reflections. Know then that a certain person lately -- but of that when we meet
-- though, upon second thoughts, not even then; lest, whilst I condemn and
expose his conduct, I should act counter to that maxim I particularly
recommend. Whoever therefore, and whatever he is, shall remain in silence: for
though there may be some use, perhaps, in setting a mark upon the man, for the
sake of example, there will be more, however, in sparing him, for the sake of
humanity. Farewell.

MELMOTH'S PLINY. SECTION III. Letter from PLINY to MARCELLINUS, on the death
of an amiable young woman.
I WRITE this under the utmost oppression of sorrow: the youngest daughter of
my friend Fundamus is dead! Never surely was there a more agreeable, and more
amiable young person; or one who better deserved to have enjoyed a long, I had
almost said, an immortal life! She had all the wisdom of age, and discretion of
a matron, joined with youthful sweetness and virgin modesty. With what an
engaging fondness did she behave to her father! How kindly and respectfully
receive his friends! How affectionately treat all those who, in their
respective offices, had the care and education of her! She employed much of her
time in reading, in which she discovered great strength of judgment; she
indulged herself in few diversions, and those with much caution. With what
forbearance, with what patience, with what courage did she endure her last
illness! She complied with all the directions of her physicians: she encouraged
her sister, and her father; and, when all her strength of body was exhausted,
supported herself by the single vigor of her mind. That, indeed, continued,
even to her last moments, unbroken by the pain of a long illness, or the
terrors of approaching death; and it is a reflection which makes the loss of
her so much the more to be lamented. A loss infinitely severe! and more severe
by the particu^^r conjuncture in which it happened! She was contracted to a
most worthy youth; the wedding day was fixed, and we were all invited. -- How
sad a change from the highest joy, to the deepest sorrow! How shall I express
the wound that pierced my heart, when I heard Fundamus himself, (as grief is
ever finding out circumstances to aggravate its affliction,) ordering the money
he had designed to lay out upon clothes and jewels for her marriage, to be
employed in myrrh and spices for her funeral? ^e is a man of great learning and
good sense, who has applied himself, from his earliest youth, to the noblest
and most elevated studies; but all the maxims of fortitude, which he has
received from books, or advanced himself, he now absolutely rejects; and every
other virtue of his heart gives place to all a parent's tenderness. We shall
excuse, we shall even approve his sorrow, when we consider what he has lost. He
has lost a daughter who resembled him in his manners, as well as his person;
and exactly copied out all her father. If his friend Marcellinus shall think
proper to write to him, upon the subject of so reasonable a grief, let me
remind him not to use the rougher arguments of consolation, and such as seem to
carry a sort of reproof with them; but those of kind and sympathising humanity.
Time will render him more open to the dictates of reason: for as a fresh wound
shrinks back from the hand of the surgeon, but by degr^es submits to, and even
requires the means of its cure; so a mind, under the first impressions of a
misfortune, shuns and rejects all arguments (...) consolation; but at length,
if applied with tenderness, calmly and willingly acquiesces in them. Farewell.

MELMOTH'S PLINY. SECTION IV. On Discretion.
I HAVE often thought, if the minds of men were laid open, we should see but
little difference between that of the wise man, and that of the fool.

There are infinite reveries, numberless extravagances, and a succession of
vanities, which pass through both. The great difference is, that the first
knows how to pick and cull his thoughts for conversation, by suppressing some,
and communicating others; whereas the other lets them all indifferently fly out
in words. This sort of discretion, however, has no place in private
conversation between intimate friends. On such occasions, the wisest men very
often talk like the weakest; for indeed talking with a friend is nothing else
than thinking aloud.

Tully has therefore very justly exposed a precept, delivered by some ancient
writers, That a man should live with his enemy in such a manner, as might leave
him room to become his friend; and with his friend, in such a manner, that, if
he became his enemy, it should not be in his power to hurt him. The first part
of this rule, which regards our behavior toward an enemy, is indeed very
reasonable, as well as very prudential; but the latter part of it, which
regards our behavior toward a friend, favors more of cunning than of
discretion; and would cut a man off from the greatest pleasures of life, which
are the freedoms of conversation with a bosom friend. Besides that, when a
friend is turned into an enemy, the world is just enough to accuse the
perfidiousness of the friend, rather than the indiscretion of the person who
confided in him.

Discretion does not only show itself in words, but in all the circumstances of
action; and is like an under-agent of Providence, to guide and direct us in the
ordinary concerns of life.

There are many more shining qualities in the mind of man, but there is none so
useful as discretion. It is this, indeed, which gives a value to all the rest;
which sets them at work in their proper times and places; and turns them to the
advantage of the person who is possessed of them. Without it, learning is
pedantry, and wit imperinence; virtue itself looks like weakness; the best
parts only qualify a man to be more sprightly in errors, and active to his own
prejudice.

Discretion does not only make a man the master of his own parts, but of other
men's. The discreet man finds out the talents of those he converses with; and
knows how to apply them to proper uses. Accordingly, if we look into particular
communities and divisions of men, we may observe, that it is the discreet man,
not the witty, nor the learned, nor the brave, who guides the conversation, and
gives measures to the society. A man with great talents, but void of
discretion, is like Polyphemus in the fable, strong and blind; endued with an
irresistible force, which, for want of sight, is of no use to him.

Though a man have all other perfections, and want discretion, he will be of no
great consequence in the world; but if he have this single talent in
perfection, and but a common share of others, he may do what he pleases in his
particular station of life.

At the same time that I think discretion the most useful talent a man can be
master of, I look upon cunning to be the accomplishment of little, mean,
ungenerous minds. Discretion points out the noblest ends to us; and pursues the
most proper and laudable methods of attaining them: cunning has only private
selfish aims; and sticks at nothing which may make them succeed. Discretion has
large and extended views; and, like a well formed eye, commands a whole
horizon: cunning is a kind of short-sightedness, that discovers the minutest
objects which are near at hand, but is not able to discern things at a
distance. Discretion, the more it is discovered, gives a greater authority to
the person who possesses it: cunning, when it is once detected, loses its
force, and makes a man incapable of bringing about even those events which he
might have done, had he passed only for a plain man. Discretion is the
perfection of reason; and a guide to us in all the duties of life: cunning is a
kind of instinct, that only looks out after our immediate interest and welfare.
Discretion is only found in men of strong sense and good understandings:
cunning is often to be met with in brutes themselves; and in persons who are
but the fewest removes from them. In short, cunning is only the mimic of
discretion; and it may pass upon weak men, in the same manner as vivacity is
often mistaken for wit, and gravity for wisdom.

The cast of mind which is natural to a discreet man, makes him look forward
into futurity, and consider what will be his condition millions of ages hence,
as well as what it is at present. He knows that the misery or happiness which
is reserved for him in another world, loses nothing of its reality by being
placed at so great a distance from him. The objects do not appear little to him
because they are remote. He considers, that those pleasures and pains which lie
hid in eternity, approach nearer to him every moment; and will be present with
him in their full weight and measure, as much as those pains and pleasures
which he feels at this very instant. For this reason, he is careful to secure
to himself that which is the proper happiness of his nature, and the ultimate
design of his being. He carries his thoughts to the end of every action; and
considers the most distant, as well as the most immediate effects of it. He
supersedes every little prospect of gain and advantage which offers itself
here, if he does not find it consistent with his views of an hereafter. In a
word, his hopes are full of immortality; his schemes are large and glorious;
and his conduct suitable to one who knows his true interest, and how to pursue
it by proper methods.

ADDISON. SECTION V. On the government of our Thoughts.
A MULTITUDE of cases occur, in which we are no less accountable for what we
think, than for what we do.

As, first, when the introduction of any train of thought depends upon
ourselves, and is our voluntary act; by turning our attention toward such
objects, awakening such passions, or engaging in such employments, as we know
must give a peculiar determination to our thoughts. Next, when thoughts, by
whatever accident they may have been originally suggested, are indulged with
deliberation and complacency. Though the mind has been passive in their
reception, and, therefore, free from blame; yet, if it be active in their
continuance, the guilt becomes its own. They may have intruded at first, like
unbidden guests; but if when entered, they are made welcome, and kindly
entertained, the case is the same as if they had been invited from the
beginning. If we be thus accountable to God for thoughts either voluntarily
introduced, or deliberately indulged, we are no less so, in the last place, for
those which find admittance into our hearts from supine negligence, from total
relaxation of attention, from allowing our imagination to rove with entire
license, "like the eyes of the fool, toward the ends of the earth." Our minds
are, in this case, thrown open to folly and vanity. They are prostituted to
every evil thing which pleases to take possession. The consequences must all be
charged to our account; and in vain we plead excuse from human infirmity. Hence
it appears, that the great object at which we are to aim in governing our
thoughts, is, to take the most effectual measures for preventing the
introduction of such as are sinful, and for hastening their expulsion, if they
shall have introduced themselves without consent of the will.

But when we descend into our breasts, and examine how far we have studied to
keep this object in view, who can tell, "how often he has offended?" In no
article of religion or morals are men more culpably remiss, than in the
unrestrained indulgence they give to fancy; and that too, for the most part,
without remorse. Since the time that Reason began to exert her powers, Thought,
during our waking hours, has been active in every breast, without a moments
suspension or pause. The current of ideas has been always flowing. The wheels
of the spiritual engine have circulated with perpetual motion. Let me ask, what
has been the fruit of this incessant activity with the greater part of mankind?
Of the innumerable hours that have been employed in thought, how few are marked
with any permanent or useful effect? How many have either passed away in idle
dreams: or have been abandoned to anxious discontented musings, to unsocial and
malignant passions, or to irregular and criminal desires? Had I power to lay
open that storehouse of iniquity which the hearts of too many conceal; could I
draw out and read to them a list of all the imaginations they have devised, and
all the passions they have indulged in secret; what a picture of men should I
present to themselves! What crimes would they appear to have perpetrated in
secrecy, which to their most intimate companions they durst not reveal!

Even when men imagine their thoughts to be innocently employed they too
commonly suffer them to run out into extravagant imaginations, and chimerical
plans of what they would wish to attain, or choose to be, if they could frame
the course of things according to their desire. Though such employments of
fancy come not under the same description with those which are plainly
criminal, yet wholly unblamable they seldom are. Besides the waste of time
which they occasion, and the misapplication which they indicate of those
intellectual powers that were given to us for much nobler purposes, such
romantic speculations lead us always into the neighborhood of forbidden
regions. They place us on dangerous ground. They are for the most part
connected with some one bad passion; and they always nourish a giddy and
frivolous turn of thought. They unfit the mind for applying with vigor to
rational pursuits, or for acquiescing in sober plans of conduct. From that
ideal world in which it allows itself to dwell, it returns to the commerce of
men, unbent and relaxed, sickly and tainted, averse from discharging the
duties, and sometimes disqualified even for relishing the pleasures, of
ordinary life.

BLAIR. SECTION VI. On the Evils which flow from unrestrained Passions.
WHEN man revolted from his Maker, his passions rebelled against himself; and,
from being originally the ministers of reason, have become the tyrants of the
soul. Hence, in treating of this subject, two things may be assumed as
principles: first, that through the present weakness of the understanding, our
passions are often directed toward improper objects; and next, that even when
their direction is just, and their objects are innocent, they perpetually tend
to run into excess; they always hurry us toward their gratification, with a
blind and dangerous impetuosity. On these two points then turns the whole
government of our passions: first, to ascertain the proper objects of their
pursuit; and next, to restrain them in that pursuit, when they would carry us
beyond the bounds of reason. If there be any passion which intrudes itself
unseasonably into our mind, which darkens and troubles our judgment, or
habitually discomposes our temper; which unfits us for properly discharging the
duties, or disqualifies us for cheerfully enjoying the comforts of life, we may
certainly conclude it to have gained a dangerous ascendant. The great object
which we ought to propose to ourselves is, to acquire a firm and steadfast mind,
which the infatuation of passion shall not seduce, nor its violence shake;
which, resting on fixed principles, shall, in the midst of contending emotions,
remain free, and master of itself; able to listen calmly to the voice of
conscience, and prepared to obey its dictates without hesitation.

To obtain, if possible, such command of passion, is one of the highest
seize of the rational nature. Arguments to show its importance crowd upon
us from every quarter. If there be any fertile source of mischief to human
life, it is, beyond doubt, the misrule of passion. It is this which poisons the
enjoyment of individuals, overturns the order of society, and strews the path
of life with so many miseries, as to render it indeed the vale of tears. All
those great scenes of public calamity, which we behold with astonishment and
horror, have originated from the source of violent passions. These have
overspread the earth with bloodshed. These have pointed the assassin's dagger,
and filled the poisoned bowl. These, in every age, have furnished too copious
materials for the orator's pathetic declamation, and for the poet's tragical
song.

When from public life we descend to private conduct, though passion operates
not there in such a wide and destructive sphere, we shall find its influence to
be no less baneful. I need not mention the black and fierce passions, such as
envy, jealousy, and revenge, whose effects are obviously noxious, and whose
agitations are immediate misery. But take any of the licentious and sensual
kind. Suppose it to have unlimitted scope; trace it throughout its course: and
we shall find that gradually, as it rises, it taints the soundness, and
troubles the peace of his mind over whom it reigns; that, in its progress, it
engages him in pursuits which are marked either with danger or with shame;
that, in the end, it wastes his fortune, destroys his health, or debases his
character; and aggravates all the miseries in which it has involved him, with
the concluding pangs of bitter remorse. Through all the stages of this fatal
course, how many have heretofore run? What multitudes do we daily behold
pursuing it, with blind and headlong steps?

BLAIR. SECTION VII. On the proper State of our Temper, with respect to one
another.
IT is evident, in the general, that if we consult either public welfare or
private happiness, Christian charity ought to regulate our disposition in
mutual intercourse. But as this great principle admits of several diversified
appearances, let us consider some of the chief forms under which it ought to
show itself in the usual tenor of life.

What, first, presents itself to be recommended, is a peaceable temper; a
disposition averse to give offense, and desirous of cultivating harmony, and
amicable intercourse in society. This supposes yielding and condescending
manners, unwillingness to contend with others about trifles, and, in contests
that are unavoidable, proper moderation of spirit. Such a temper is the first
principle of self-enjoyment. It is the basis of all order and happiness among
mankind. The positive and contentious, the rude and quarrelsome, are the bane
of society. They seem destined to blast the small share of comfort which nature
has here allotted to man. But they cannot disturb the peace of others, more
than they break their own. The hurricane rages first in their own bosom, before
it is let forth upon the world. In the tempests which they raise, they are
always tossed; and frequently it is their lot to perish.

A peaceable temper must be supported by a candid one, or a disposition to view
the conduct of others with fairness and impartiality. This stands opposed to a
jealous and suspicious temper, which ascribes every action to the worst motive,
and throws a black shade over every character. If we would be happy in
ourselves, or in our connexions with others, let us guard against this
malignant spirit. Let us study that charity "which thinks no evil;" that
temper which, without degenerating into credulity, will dispose us to be just;
and which can allow us to observe an error, without imputing it as a crime.
Thus we shall be kept free from that continual irritation, which imaginary
injuries raise in a suspicious breast; and shall walk among men as our
brethren, not as our enemies.

But to be peaceable, and to be candid, is not all that is required of a good
man. He must cultivate a kind, generous, and sympathizing temper, which feels
for distress, wherever it is beheld; which enters into the concerns of his
friends with ardour; and to all with whom he has intercourse, is gentle,
obliging, and humane. How amiable appears such a disposition, when contrasted
with a malicious or envious temper, which wraps itself up in its own narrow
interest, looks with an evil eye on the success of others, and with an
unnatural satisfaction, feeds on their disappointments or miseries! How little
does he know of the true happiness of life, who is a stranger to that
intercourse of good offices and kind affections, which, by a pleasing charm,
attaches men to one another, and circulates joy from heart to heart!

We are not to imagine, that a benevolent temper finds no exercise, unless when
opportunities offer of performing actions of high generosity, or of extensive
utility. These may seldom occur. The condition of the greater part of mankind,
in a good measure, precludes them. But, in the ordinary round of human affairs,
many occasions daily present themselves of mitigating the vexations which
others suffer: of soothing their minds; of aiding their interest; of promoting
their cheerfulness, or ease. Such occasions may relate to the smaller incidents
of life. But let us remember, that of small incidents the system of human life
is chiefly composed. The attentions which respect these, when suggested by real
benignity of temper, are often more material to the happiness of those around
us, than actions which carry the appearance of greater dignity and splendor.
No wise or good man ought to account any rules of behavior as below his
regard, which tend to cement the great brotherhood of mankind in comfortable
union.

Particularly amidst that familiar intercourse which belongs to domestic life,
all the virtues of temper find an ample range. It is very unfortunate, that
within that circle, men too often think themselves at liberty, to give
unrestrained vent to the caprice of passion and humor. Whereas there, on the
contrary, more than any where, it concerns them to attend to the government of
their heart; to check what is violent in their tempers, and to soften what is
harsh in their manners. For there the temper is formed. There, the real
character displays itself. The forms of the world disguise men when abroad. But
within his own family, every man is known to be what he truly is. -- In all our
intercourse then with others, particularly in that which is closest and most
intimate, let us cultivate a peaceable, a candid, a gentle and friendly temper.
This is the temper to which, by repeated injunctions, our holy religion seeks
to form us. This was the temper of Christ. This is the temper of Heaven.

BLAIR. SECTION VIII. Excellence of the Christian Religion.
IS it bigotry to believe the sublime truth of the gospel, with full assurance
of faith? I glory in such bigotry. I would not part with it for a thousand
worlds. I congratulate the man who is possessed of it: for, amidst all the
vicissitudes and calamities of the present state, that man enjoys an
inexhaustible fund of consolation, of which it it is not in the power of
fortune to deprive him.

There is not a book on earth, so favorable to all the kind, and all the
sublime affections; or so unfriendly to hatred and persecution, to tyranny,
injustice, and every sort of malevolence, as the Gospel. It breathes nothing
throughout, but mercy, benevolence, and peace.

Poetry is sublime, when it awakens in the mind any great and good affection,
as piety, or patriotism. This is one of the noblest effects of the heart. The
Psalms are remarkable, beyond all other writings, for their power of inspiring
devout emotions. But it is not in this respect only, that they are sublime. Of
the Divine nature, they contain the most magnificent descriptions, that the
soul of man can comprehend. The hundred and fourth Psalm, in particular,
displays the power and goodness of Providence, in creating and preserving the
world, and the various tribes of animals in it, with such majestic brevity and
beauty, as it is vain to look for in any human composition.

Such of the doctrines of the Gospel as are level to human capacity, appear to
be agreeable to the purest truth, and the soundest morality. All the genius and
learning of the Heathen world; all the penetration of Pythagoras, Socrates, and
Aristotle, had never been able to produce such a system of moral duty, and so
rational an account of Providence and of man, as are to be found in the New
Testament. Compared, indeed, with this, all other moral and theological wisdom
Loses, discountenanced, and like folly shows.

BEATTIE. SECTION IX. Reflections occasioned by a Review of the Blessings,
pronounced by Christ on his Disciples, in his Sermon on the Mount.
WHAT abundant reason have we to thank God, that this large and instructive
discourse of our blessed Redeemer, is so particularly recorded by the sacred
historian. Let every one that "has ears to hear" attend to it: for surely no
man ever spoke as our Lord did on this occasion. Let us fix our minds in a
posture of humble attention, that we may "receive the law from his mouth."

He opened it with blessings, repeated and most important blessings. But on
whom are they pronounced? and whom are we taught to think the happiest of
mankind? The meek and the humble; the penitent and the merciful; the peaceful
and the pure; those that hunger and thirst after righteousness; those that
labor, but faint not, under persecution! Lord! how different are thy maxims
from those of the children of this world! They call the proud happy; and admire
the gay, the rich, the powerful, and the victorious. But let a vain world take
its gaudy trifles, and dress up the foolish creatures that pursue them. May our
souls share in that happiness which the Son of God came to recommend and to
procure! May we obtain mercy of the Lord; may we be owned as his children;
enjoy his presence; and inherit his kingdom! With these enjoyments, and these
hopes, we will cheerfully welcome the lowest, or the most painful circumstances.

Let us be animated to cultivate those amiable virtues, which are here
recommended to us; this humility and meekness; this penitent sense of sin; this
ardent desire after righteousness; this compassion and purity; this
peacefulness and fortitude of soul; and, in a word, this universal goodness
which becomes us, as we sustain the character of "the salt of the earth," and
"the light of the world."

Is there not reason to lament, that we answer the character no better? Is
there not reason to exclaim, with a good man in former times, "Blessed Lord!
either these are not thy words, or we are not christians!" Oh, season our
hearts more effectually with thy grace! Pour forth that divine oil on our
lamps! Then shall the flame brighten; then shall the ancient honors of thy
religion be revived; and multitudes be awakened and animated, by the luster of
it, "to glorify our Father in heaven."

DODDRIDGE. SECTION X. Schemes of Life often illusory.
OMAR, the son of Hufsan, had passed seventy-five years, in honor and
prosperity. The favor of three successive califs had filled his house with
gold and silver; and whenever he appeared, the benedictions of the people
proclaimed his passage.

Terrestrial happiness is of short continuance. The brightness of the flame is
wasting its fuel; the fragrant flower is passing away in its own odours. The
vigor of Omar began to fail; the curls of beauty fell from his head; strength
departed from his hands; and agility from his feet. He gave back to the calif
the keys of trust, and the seals of secrecy; and sought no other pleasure for
the remains of life, than the converse of the wise, and the gratitude of the
good^

The powers of his mind were yet unimpaired. His chamber was filled by
visitants, eager to catch the dictates of experience, and officious to pay the
tribute of admiration. Caled, the son of the viceroy of Egypt, entered every
day early, and retired late. He was beautiful and eloquent: Omar admired his
wit, and loved his docility. "Tell me," said Caled, "thou to whose voice
nations have listened, and whose wisdom is known to the extremities of Asia,
tell me how I may resemble Omar the prudent. The arts by which thou have gained
power and preserved it, are to thee no longer necessary or useful: impart to me
the secret of thy conduct, and teach me the plan upon which thy wisdom has
built thy fortune."

"Young man," said Omar, "it is of little use to form plans of life. When I
took my first survey of the world, in my twentieth year, having considered the
various conditions of mankind, in the hour of solitude I said thus to myself,
leaning against a cedar, which spread its branches over my head: 'Seventy years
are allowed to man: I have yet fifty remaining. Ten years I will allot to the
attainment of knowledge, and ten I will pass in foreign countries; I shall be
learned, and therefore shall be honored; every city will shout at my arrival,
and every student will solicit my friendship. Twenty years thus passed, will
store my mind with images, which I shall be busy, through the rest of my life,
in combining and comparing. I shall revel in inexhaustable accumulations of
intellectual riches; I shall find new pleasures for every moment; and shall
never more be weary of myself. I will not, however, deviate too far from the
beaten track of life; but will try what can be found in female delicacy. I will
marry a wife beautiful as the Houries, and wise as Zobeide: with her I will
live twenty years within the suburbs of Bagdat, in every pleasure that wealth
can purchase, and fancy can invent. I will then retire to a rural dwelling;
pass my days in obscurity and contemplation; and lie silently down on the bed
of death. Through my life it shall be my settled resolution, that I will never
depend upon the smile of princes; that I will never stand exposed to the
artifices of courts; I will never pant for public honors, nor disturb my quiet
with the affairs of state.' Such was my scheme of life, which I impressed
indelibly upon my memory."

"The first part of my ensuing time was to be spent in search of knowledge, and
I know not how I was diverted from my design. I had no visible impediments
without, nor any ungovernable passions within. I regarded knowledge as the
highest honor, and the most engaging pleasure; yet day stole upon day, and
month gilded after month, till I found that seven years of the first ten had
vanished, and left nothing behind them. I now postponed my purpose of
traveling; for why should I go abroad, while so much remain to be learned at
home? I immured myself for four years, and studied the laws of the empire. The
fame of my skill reached the judges: I was found able to speak upon doubtful
questions; and was commanded to stand at the footstool of the calif. I was
heard with attention; I was consulted with confidence; and the love of praise
fastened on my heart."

"I still wished to see distant countries; listened with rapture to the
relations of travelers; and resolved some time to ask my dismission, that I
might feast my soul with novelty: but my presence was always necessary; and the
stream of business hurried me along. Sometimes I was afraid lest I should be
charged with ingratitude; but I still proposed to travel, and therefore would
not confine myself by marriage."

"In my fiftieth year, I began to suspect that the time of traveling was past;
and thought it best to lay hold on the felicity yet in my power, and indulge
myself in domestic pleasures. But at fifty no man easily finds a woman
beautiful as the Houries, and wise as Zobeide. I inquired and rejected,
consulted and deliberated, till the sixty-second year made me ashamed of
wishing to marry. I had now nothing left but retirement; and for retirement I
never found a time, till disease forced me from public employment."

"Such was my scheme, and such has been its consequence. With an insatiable
thirst for knowledge, I trifled away the years of improvement; with a restless
desire of seeing different countries, I have always resided in the same city;
with the highest expectation of connubial felicity, I have lived unmarried; and
with unalterable resolutions of contemplative retirement, I am going to die
within the walls of Bagdat."

DR. JOHNSON. SECTION XI. The Pleasures of virtuous Sensibility.
THE good effects of true sensibility on general virtue and happiness, admit of
no dispute. Let us consider its effect on the happiness of him who possesses
it, and the various pleasures to which it gives him access. If he is master of
riches or influence, it affords him the means of increasing his own enjoyment,
by relieving the wants, or increasing the comforts of others. If he command not
these advantages, yet all the comforts, which he sees in the possession of the
deserving, become in some sort his, by his rejoicing in the good which they
enjoy. Even the face of nature yields a satisfaction to him, which the
insensible can never know. The profusion of goodness which he beholds poured
forth on the universe, dilates his heart with the thought, that innumerable
multitudes around him are blessed and happy. When he sees the labors of men
appearing to prosper, and views a country flourishing in wealth and industry;
when he beholds the spring coming forth in its beauty; and reviving the decayed
face of nature; or in autumn beholds the fields loaded with plenty, and the
year crowned with all its fruits; he lifts his affections with gratitude to the
great Father of all, and rejoices in the general felicity and joy.

It may indeed be objected, that the same sensibility lays open the heart to be
pierced with many wounds, from the distresses which abound in the world;
exposes us to frequent suffering from the participation which it communicates
of the sorrows, as well as of the joys, of friendship. But let it be
considered, that the tender melancholy of sympathy, is accompanied with a
sensation, which they who feel it would not exchange for the gratifications of
the selfish. When the heart is strongly moved by any of the kind affections,
even when it pours itself forth in virtuous sorrow, a secret attractive charm
mingles with the painful emotion; there is a joy in the midst of grief. Let it
be farther considered, that the griefs which sensibility introduces, are
counterbalanced by pleasures which flow from the same source. Sensibility
heightens in general the human powers, and is connected with acuteness in all
our feelings. If it makes us more alive to some painful sensations, in return,
it renders the pleasing ones more vivid and animated. The selfish man
languishes in his narrow circle of pleasures. They are confined to what affects
his own interest. He is obliged to repeat the same gratifications, till they
become insipid. But the man of virtuous sensibility moves in a wider sphere of
felicity. His powers are much more frequently called forth into occupations of
pleasing activity. Numberless occasions open to him of indulging his favorite
taste, by conveying satisfaction to others. Often it is in his power, in one
way or other, to sooth the afflicted heart; to carry some consolation into the
house of woe. In the scenes of ordinary life, in the domestic and social
intercourses of men, the cordiality of his affections cheers and gladdens him.
Every appearance, every description of innocent happiness, is enjoyed by him.
Every native expression of kindness and affection among others, is felt by him,
even though he be not the object of it. Among a circle of friends, enjoying one
another, he is as happy as the happiest. In a word, he lives in a different
sort of world from what the selfish man inhabits. He possesses a new sense that
enables him to behold objects which the selfish cannot see. At the same time,
his enjoyments are not of that kind which remain merely on the surface of the
mind. They penetrate the heart. They enlarge and elevate, they refine and
ennoble it. To all the pleasing emotions of affection, they add the dignified
consciousness of virtue. -- Children of men! men formed by nature to live and
to feel as brethren! how long will ye continue to estrange yourselves from one
another by competitions and jealousies, when in cordial union ye might be so
much more blessed? How long will ye seek your happiness in selfish gratifications
alone, neglecting those purer and better sources of joy, which flow from the
affections and the heart?

BLAIR. SECTION XII. On the true Honor of Man.
THE proper honor of man arises not from some of those splendid actions and
abilities, which excite high admiration. Courage and prowess, military renown,
signal victories and conquests, may render the name of a man famous without
rendering his character truly honorable. To many brave men, to many heroes
renowned in story, we look up with wonder. Their exploits are recorded. Their
praises are sung. They stand as on an eminence above the rest of mankind. Their
eminence, nevertheless, may not be of that sort, before which we bow with
inward esteem and respect. Something more is wanted for that purpose, than the
conquering arm, and the intrepid mind. The laurels of the warrior must at all
times be dyed in blood, and bedewed with the tears of the widow and the orphan.
But if they have been stained by rapine and inhumanity; if sordid avarice has
marked his character; or low and gross sensuality has degraded his life; the
great hero sinks into a little man. What at a distance, or on a superficial
view, we admired, becomes mean, perhaps odious, when we examine it more
closely. It is like the Colossal statue, whose immense size struck the
spectator afar off with astonishment; but when nearly viewed, it appears
disproportioned, unshapely, and rude.

Observations of the same kind may be applied to all the reputation derived
from civil accomplishments; from the refined politics of the statesman; or the
literary efforts of genius and erudition. These bestow, and, within certain
bounds, ought ^o bestow, eminence and distinction on men. They discover talents
which in themselves are shining; and which become highly valuable, when
employed in advancing the good of mankind. Hence, they frequently give rise to
fame. But a distinction is to be made between fame and true honor. The
statesman, the orator, or the poet, may be famous; while yet the man himself is
far from being honored. We envy his abilities. We wish to rival them. But we
would not choose to be classed with him who possessed them. Instances of this
sort are too often found in every record of ancient or modern history.

For all this it follows, that, in order to discern where man's true honor
lies, we must look, not to any adventitious circumstance of fortune; not to any
single sparkling quality but to the whole of what forms a man; what entitles
him, as such, to rank high among that class of beings to which he belongs; in a
word, we must look to the mind and the soul. -- A mind superior to fear, to
selfish interest and corruption; a mind governed by the principles of uniform
rectitude and integrity; the same in prosperity and adversity; which no bribe
can seduce, nor terror overawe; neither by pleasure melted into effeminacy, nor
by distress sunk into dejection: such is the mind which forms the distinction
and eminence of man. -- One, who, in no situation of life, is either ashamed or
afraid of discharging his duty, and acting his proper part with firmness and
constancy; true to the God whom he worships, and true to the faith in which he
professes to believe; full of affection to his brethren of mankind; faithful to
his friends, generous to his enemies, warm with compassion to the unfortunate;
self-denying to little private interests and pleasures, but zealous for public
interest and happiness; magnanimous, without being proud; humble, without being
mean; just, without being harsh; simple in his manners, but manly in his
feelings; on whose word we can entirely rely; whose countenance never deceives
us; whose professions of kindness are the effusions of his heart: one, in fine,
whom, independent of any views of advantage, we would choose for a superior,
could trust in as a friend, and could love as a brother: -- This is the man,
whom in our heart, above all others, we do, we must, honor.

BLAIR. SECTION XIII. The Influence of Devotion on the Happiness of Life.
WHATEVER promotes and strengthens virtue, whatever calms and regulates the
temper, is a source of happiness. Devotion produces those effects in a
remarkable degree. It inspires composure of spirit, mildness and benignity;
weakens the painful, and cherishes the pleasing emotions; and, by these means,
carries on the life of a pious man in a smooth and placid tenor.

Besides exerting this habitual influence on the mind, devotion opens a field
of enjoyments, to which the vicious are entire strangers; enjoyments the more
valuable, as they peculiarly belong to retirement, when the world leaves us;
and to adversity, when it becomes our foe. These are the two seasons, for which
every wise man would most wish to provide some hidden store of comfort. For let
him be placed in the most favorable situation which the human state admits,
the world can neither always amuse him, nor always shield him from distress.
There will be many hours of vacuity, and many of dejection, in his life. If he
be a stranger to God, and to devotion, how dreary will the gloom of solitude
often prove! With what oppressive weight will sickness, disappointment, or old
age, fall upon his spirits! But for those pensive periods, the pious man has a
relief prepared. From the tiresome repetition of the common vanities of life,
or from the painful corrosion of its cares and sorrows, devotion transports him
into a new region; and surrounds him there with such objects, as are the most
fitted to cheer the dejection, to calm the tumults, and to heal the wounds of
his heart. If the world has been empty and delusive, it gladdens him with the
prospect of a higher and better order of things, about to arise. If men have
been ungrateful and base, it displays before him the faithfulness of that
Supreme Being, who, though every other friend fail, will never forsake him. Let
us consult our experience, and we shall find, that the two greatest sources of
inward joy, are, the exercise of love directed toward a deserving object, and
the exercise of hope terminating on some high and assured happiness. Both these
are supplied by devotion; and therefore we have no reason to be surprised, if,
on some occasions, it fills the hearts of good men with a satisfaction not to
be expressed.

The refined pleasures of a pious mind are, in many respects, superior to the
coarse gratifications of sense. They are pleasures which belong to the highest
powers and best affections of the soul; whereas the gratifications of sense
reside in the lowest region of our nature. To the latter the soul stoops below
its native dignity. The former, raise it above itself. The latter, leave always
a comfortless, often a motifying, remembrance behind them. The former, are
reviewed with applause and delight. The pleasures of sense resemble a foaming
torrent, which after a disorderly course, speedily runs out, and leaves an
empty and offensive channel. But the pleasures of devotion resemble the equable
current of a pure river, which enlivens the fields through which it passes, and
diffuses verdure and fertility along its banks. To thee, O Devotion! we owe the
highest improvement of our nature, and much of the enjoyment of our life. Thou
art the support of our virtue, and the rest of our souls, in this turbulent
world. Thou composest the thoughts. Thou calmest the passions. Thou exaltest
the heart. Thy communications, and thine only, are imparted to the low, no less
than to the high; to the poor, as well as to the rich. In thy presence, wordly
distinctions cease; and under thy influence, worldly sorrows are forgotten.
Thou art the balm of the wounded mind. Thy sanctuary is ever open to the
miserable; inaccessible only to the unrighteous and impure Thou beginnest on
earth the temper of heaven. In thee the hosts of angels and blessed spirits
eternally rejoice.

BLAIR. SECTION XIV. The planetary and terrestrial Worlds comparatively
considered.
TO US, who dwell on its surface, the earth is by far the most extensive orb
that our eyes can any where behold: it is also clothed with verdure,
distinguished by trees, and adorned with a variety of beautiful decorations;
whereas, to a spectator placed on one of the planets, it wears a uniform
aspect; looks all luminous; and no larger than a spot. To beings who dwell at
still greater distances, it entirely disappears. That which we call alternately
the morning and the evening star, as in one part of the orbit she rides
foremost in the procession of night, in the other ushers in and anticipates the
dawn, is a planetary world, which, with the four others that so wonderfully
vary their mystic dance, are in themselves dark bodies, and shine only by
reflection; have fields and seas, and skies of their own; are furnished with
all accommodations for animal subsistence, and are supposed to be the abodes of
intellectual life; all which, together with our earthly habitation, are
dependent on that grand dispenser of Divine munificence, the sun; receive their
light from the distribution of his rays, and derive their comfort from his
benign agency.

The sun, which seems to perform its daily stages through the sky, is in this
respect fixed and immovable: it is the great axle of heaven, about which the
globe we inhabit, and other more spacious orbs, wheel their stated courses. The
sun, though seemingly smaller than the dial it illuminates, is abundantly
larger than this whole earth, on which so many lofty mountains rise, and such
vast oceans roll. A line extending from side to side through the center of that
resplendent orb, would measure more than eight hundred thousand miles: a girdle
formed to go round its circumference, would require a length of millions. Were
its solid contents to be estimated, the account would overwhelm our
understanding, and be almost beyond the power of language to express. Are we
startled at these reports of philosophy? Are we ready to cry out in a transport
of surprise, "How mighty is the Being who kindled such a prodigious fire; and
keeps alive, from age to age, such an enormous mass of flame!" let us attend
our philosophic guides, and we shall be brought acquainted with speculations
more enlarged and more inflaming.

This sun with all its attendant planets, is but a very little part of the
grand machine of the universe; every star, though in appearance no bigger than
the diamond that glitters upon a lady's rings, is really a vast globe, like the
sun in size and in ^lory; no less spacious, no less luminous, than the radiant
source of day. So that every star, is not barely a world, but the center of a
magnificent system; has a retinue of worlds, irradiated by its beams, and
revolving round its attractive influence, all which are lost to our sight in
unmeasurable wilds of either. That the stars appear like so many diminutive, and
scarcely distinguishable points, is owing to their immense and inconceivable
distance. Immense and inconceivable indeed it is, since a ball, shot from the
loaded cannon, and flying with unabated rapidity, must travel at this impetuous
rate, almost seven hundred thousand years, before it could reach the nearest of
these twinkling luminaries.

While, beholding this vast expanse, I learn my own extreme meanness, I would
also discover the abject littleness of all terrestrial things. What is the
earth, with all her ostentatious scenes, compared with this astonishing grand
furniture of the skies? What, but a dim speck, hardly perceivable in the map of
the universe? It is observed by a very judicious writer, that if the sun
himself, which enlightens this part of the creation, were extinguished, and all
the host of planetary worlds, which move about him, were annihilated, they
would not be missed by an eye that can take in the whole compass of nature, any
more than a grain of sand upon the seashore. The bulk of which they consist,
and the space which they occupy, are so exceedingly little in comparison of the
whole, that their loss would scarcely leave a blank in the immensity of God's
works. If then, not our globe only, but this whole system, be so very
diminutive, what is a kingdom or a county? What are a few lordships, or the so
much admired patrimonies of those who are styled wealthy? When I measure them
with my own little pittance, they swell into proud and bloated dimensions: but
when I take the universe for my standard, how scanty is their size, how
contemptible their figure! They shrink into pompous nothings.

ADDISON. SECTION XV. On the Power of Custom, and the Uses to which it may be
applied.
THERE is not a common saying, which has a better turn of sense in it, than
what we often hear in the mouths of the vulgar, that 'Custom is a second
nature.' It is indeed able to form the man anew; and give him inclinations and
capacities altogether different from those he was born with. A person who is
addicted to play or gaming, though he took but little delight in it at first,
by degrees contracts so strong an inclination toward it, and gives himself up
so entirely to it, that it seems the only end of his being. The love of a
retired or busy life will grow upon a man insensibly, as he is conversant in
the one or the other, till he is utterly unqualified for relishing that to
which he has been for some time disused. Nay, a man may smoke, or drink, or
take fnuff, till he is unable to pass away his time without it; not to mention
how our delight in any particular study, art, or science, rises and improves,
in proportion to the application which we bestow upon it. Thus, what was at
first an exercise, becomes at length an entertainment. Our employments are
changed into diversions. The mind grows fond of those actions it is accustomed
to; and is drawn with reluctance from those paths in which it has been used to
walk.

If we attentively consider this property of human nature, it may instruct us
in very fine moralities. In the first place, I would have no man discouraged
with that kind of life, or series of action, in which the choice of others, or
his own necessities, may have engaged him. It may perhaps be very disagreeable
to him, at first; but use and application will certainly render it not only
less painful, but pleasing and satisfactory.

In the second place, I would recommend to every one, the admirable precept,
which Pythagoras is said to have given to his disciples, and which that
philosopher must have drawn from the observation I have enlarged upon: "Pitch
upon that course of life which is the most excellent, and custom will render it
the most delightful." Men, whose circumstances will permit them to choose their
own way of life, are inexcusable if they do not pursue that which their
judgment tells them is the most laudable. The voice of reason is more to be
regarded, than the bent of any present inclination; since, by the rule above
mentioned, inclination will at length come over to reason, though we can never
force reason to comply with inclination.

In the third place, this observation may teach the most sensual and
irreligious man, to overlook those hardships and difficulties, which are apt to
discourage him from the prosecution of a virtuous life. "The Gods," said
Hesiod, "have placed labor before virtue; the way to her is at first rough and
difficult, but grows more smooth and easy the farther we advance in it." The
man who proceeds in it with steadiness and resolution, will in a little time,
find that "her ways are ways of pleasantness, and that all her paths are peace."

To enforce this consideration, we may further observe, that the practice of
religion will not only be attended with that pleasure, which naturally
accompanies those actions to which we are habituated, but with those
supernumerary joys of heart, that rise from the consciousness of such a
pleasure; from the satisfaction (...) ^cting up to the dictates of reason; and
from the prospec^ of a happy immortality.

In the fourth place, we may learn from this observation, which we have made on
the mind of man, to take particular care, when we are once settled in a regular
course of life, how we too frequently indulge ourselves in even the most
innocent diversions and entertainments; since the mind may insensibly fall off
from the relish of virtuous actions, and, by degrees, exchange that pleasure
which it takes in the performance of its duty, for delights of a much inferior
and an unprofitable nature.

The last use which I shall make of this remarkable property in human nature,
of being delighted with those actions to which it is accustomed, is, to show
how absolutely necessary it is for us to gain habits of virtue in this life, if
we would enjoy the pleasures of the next. The state of bliss, we call Heaven,
will not be capable of affecting those minds which are not thus qualified for
it: we must, in this world, gain a relish of truth and virtue, if we would be
able to taste that knowledge and perfection, which are to make us happy in the
next. The seeds of those spiritual joys and raptures, which are to rise up and
flourish in the soul to all eternity, must be planted in it during this its
present state of probation. In short, heaven is not to be looked upon only as
the reward, but as the natural effect, of a religious life.

ADDISON. SECTION XVI. The Pleasures resulting from a proper Use of our
Faculties.
HAPPY that man, who, unembarrassed by vulgar cares, master of himself, his
time, and fortune, spends his time in making himself wiser; and his fortune, in
making others (and therefore himself) happier: who, as the will and
understanding are the two ennobling faculties of the soul, thinks himself not
complete, till his understanding is beautified with the valuable furniture of
knowledge, as well as his will enriched with every virtue: who has furnished
himself with all the advantages to relish solitude and enliven conversation;
who when serious, is not sullen; and when cheerful, not indiscreetly gay; whose
ambition is, not to be admired for a false glare of greatness, but to be
beloved for the gentle and sober luster of his wisdom and goodness. The
greatest minister of state has not more business to do, in a public capacity,
than he, and indeed every other man, may find, in the retired and still scenes
of life. Even in his private walks, every thing that is visible convinces him
there is present a Being invisible. Aided by natural philosophy, he reads plain
legible traces of the Divinity in every thing he meets: he sees the Deity in
every tree, as well as Moses did in the burning bush, though not in so glaring
a manner: and when he sees him, he adores him with the tribute of a grateful
heart.

SEED. SECTION XVII. Description of Candor.
TRUE candor is altogether different from that guarded, inoffensive language,
and that studied openness of behavior, which we so frequently meet with among
men of the world. Smiling, very often, is the aspect, and smooth are words, of
those who inwardly are the most ready to think evil of others. That candor
which is a Christian virtue, consists, not in fairness of speech, but in
fairness of heart. It may want the blandishment of external courtesy, but
supplies its place with humane and generous liberality of sentiment. Its
manners are unaffected, and its professions cordial. Exempt, on one hand, from
the dark jealousy of a suspicious mind, it is no less removed, on the other,
from that easy credulity which is imposed on by every specious pretense. It is
perfectly consistent with extensive knowledge of the world, and with due
attention to our own safety. In that various intercourse, which we are obliged
to carry on with persons of every different character, suspicion, to a certain
degree, is a necessary guard. It is only when it exceeds the bounds of prudent
caution, that it degenerates into vice. There is a proper mean between
undistinguishing credulity, and universal jealousy, which a sound understanding
discerns, and which the man of candor studies to preserve.

He makes allowance for the mixture of evil with good, which is to be found in
every human character. He expects none to be faultless: and he is unwilling to
believe that there is any without some commendable quality. In the midst of
many defects, he can discover a virtue. Under the influence of personal
resentment, he can be just to the merit of an enemy. He never lends an open ear
to those defamatory reports and dark suggestions, which, among the tribes of
the censorious, circulate with so much rapidity, and meet with such ready
acceptance. He is not hasty to judge, and he requires full evidence before he
will condemn. As long as an action can be ascribed to different motives, he
holds it as no mark of sagacity to impute it always to the worst. Where there
is just ground for doubt, he keeps his judgment undecided; and, during the
period of suspense, leans to the most charitable construction which an action
can bear. When he must condemn, he condemns with regret; and without those
aggravations which the severity of others adds to the crime. He listens calmly
to the apology of the offender, and readily admits every extenuating
circumstance, which equity can suggest. How much soever he may blame the
principles of any sect or party, he never confounds, under one general censure,
all who belong to that party or sect. He charges them not with such
consequences of their tenets, as they refuse and disavow. From one wrong
opinion, he does not infer the subversion of all sound principles; nor from one
bad action, conclude that all regard to conscience is overthrown. When he
"beholds the mote in his brother's eye," he remembers "the beam in his own." He
commiserates human frailty; and judges of others according to the principles,
by which he would think it reasonable that they should judge of him. In a word,
he views men and actions in the clear sunshine of charity and goodnature; and
not in that dark and sullen shade which jealousy and party-spirit throw over
all characters.

BLAIR. SECTION XVIII. On the Imperfection of that Happiness which rests solely
on worldly Pleasures.
THE vanity of human pleasures is a topic which might be embellished with the
pomp of much description. But I shall studiously avoid exaggeration, and only
point out a threefold vanity in human life, which every impartial observer
cannot but admit; disappointment in pursuit, dissatisfaction in enjoyment,
uncertainty in possession.

First, disappointment in pursuit. When we look around us on the world, we
every where behold a busy multitude, intent on the prosecution of various
designs, which their wants or desires have suggested. We behold them employing
every method which ingenuity can devise; some the patience of industry, some
the boldness of enterprise, others the dexterity of stratagem, in order to
compass their ends. Of this incessant stir and activity, what is the fruit? In
comparison of the crowd who have toiled in vain, how small is the number of the
successful? Or rather where is the man who will declare, that in every point he
has completed his plan, and attained his utmost wish? No extent of human
abilities has been able to discover a path which, in any line of life, leads
unerringly to success. "The race is not always to the swift, nor the battle to
the strong, nor riches to men of understanding." We may form our plans with the
most profound sagacity, and with the most vigilant caution may guard against
dangers on every side. But some unforeseen occurrence comes across, which
baffles our wisdom, and lays our labors in the dust.

Were such disappointments confined to those who aspire at engrossing the
higher departments of life, the misfortune would be less. The humiliation of
the mighty, and the fall of ambition from its towering height, little concern
the bulk of mankind. These are objects on which, as on distant meteors, they
gaze from afar, without drawing personal instruction from events so much above
them. But, alas! when we descend into the regions of private life, we find
disappointment and blasted hope equally prevalent there. Neither the moderation
of our views, nor the justice of our pretens^ons, can ensure success. But "time
and chase happen to all." Against the stream of events, both the worthy and the
undeserving are obliged to struggle; and both are frequently overborn alike by
the current.

Besides disappointment in pursuit, dissatisfaction in enjoyment is a farther
vanity, to which the human state is subject. This is the severest of all
mortifications, after having been successful in the pursuit, to be baffled in
the enjoyment itself. Yet this is found to be an evil still more general than
the former. Some may be so fortunate as to attain what they have pursued; but
none are rendered completely happy by what they have attained. Disappointed
hope is misery; and yet successful hope is only imperfect bliss. Look through
all the ranks of mankind. Examine the condition of those who appear most
prosperous; and you will find that they are never just what they desire to be.
If retired, they languish for action; if busy, they complain of fatigue. If in
middle life, they are impatient for distinction; if in high stations, they sigh
after freedom and ease. Something is still wanting to that plenitude of
satisfaction, which they expected to acquire. Together with every wish that is
gratified, a new demand arises. One void opens in the heart, as another is
filled. On wishes, wishes grow; and to the end, it is rather the expectation of
what they have not, than the enjoyment of what they have, which occupies and
interests the most successful.

This dissatisfaction in the midst of human pleasure, springs partly from the
nature of our enjoyments themselves, and partly from circumstances which
corrupt them. No worldly enjoyments are adequate to the high desires and powers
of an immortal spirit. Fancy paints them at a distance with splendid colors;
but possession unveils the fallacy. The eagerness of passion bestows upon them,
at first a brisk and lively relish. But it is their fate always to pall by
familiarity, and sometimes to pass from satiety into disgust. Happy would the
poor man think himself, if he could enter on all the treasures of the rich; and
happy for a short time he might be: but before he had long contemplated and
admired his state, his possessions would seem to lessen, and his cares would
grow.

Add to the unsatisfying nature of our pleasures, the attending circumstances
which never fail to corrupt them. For, such as they are, they are at no time
possessed unmixed. To human lips it is not given to taste the cup of pure joy.
When external circumstances show fairest to the world, the envied man groans in
private under his own burden. Some vexation disquiets, some passion corrodes
him; some distress, either felt or feared, gnaws, like a worm, the root of his
felicity. When there is nothing from without to disturb the prosperous, a
secret poison operates within. For worldly happiness ever tends to destroy
itself, by corrupting the heart. It fosters the loose and the violent passions.
It engenders noxious habits; and taints the mind with false delicacy, which
makes it feel a thousand unreal evils.

But put the case in the most favorable light. Lay aside from human pleasures
both disappointment in pursuit, and deceitfulness in enjoyment; suppose them to
be fully attainable, and completely satisfactory; still there remains to be
considered the vanity of uncertain possession and short duration. Were there i^
worldly things any fixed point of security which we could gain, the mind would
then have some basis on which to rest. But our condition is such, that every
thing wavers and totters around us. "Boast not thyself of tomorrow; for thou
know not what a day may bring forth." It is much if, during its course, thou
hear not of somewhat to disquiet or alarm thee. For life never proceeds long
in a uniform train. It is continually varied by unexpected events. The seeds of
alteration are every where sown; and the sunshine of prosperity commonly
accelerates their growth. If our enjoyments be numerous, we lie more open on
different sides to be wounded. If we have possessed them long, we have greater
cause to dread an approach^ng change. By slow degrees prosperity rises; but
rapid is the progress of evil. It requires no preparation to bring it forward.
The edifice which it cost much time and labor to erect, one inauspicious
event, one sudden blow, can level with the dust. Even supposing the accidents
of life to leave us untouched, human bliss must still be transitory; for man
changes of himself. No course of enjoyment can delight us long. What amused our
youth, loses its charm in maturer age. As years advance, our powers are
blunted, and our pleasurable feelings decline. The silent lapse of time is ever
carrying somewhat from us, till at length the period comes, when all must be
swept away. The prospect of this termination of our labors and pursuits, is
sufficient to mark our state with vanity. "Our days are a hand-breadth, and our
age is a nothing." Within that little space is all our enterp^ise bounded. We
crowd it with toils and cares, with contention and strife. We project great
designs, entertain high hopes, and then leave our plans unfinished, and sink
into oblivion.

This much let it suffice to have said concerning the vanity of the world. That
too much has not been said, must appear to every one who considers how
generally mankind lean to the opposite side; and how often, by undue attachment
to the present state, they both feed the most sinful passions, and "pierce
themselves through with many sorrows."

BLAIR. SECTION XIX. What are the real and solid enjoyments of Human Life
IT must be admitted, that unmixed and complete happiness is unknown on earth.
No regulation of conduct can altogether prevent passions from disturbing our
peace, and misfortunes from wounding our heart. But after this concession is
made, will it follow, that there is no object on earth which deserves our
pursuit, or that all enjoyment becomes contemptible which is not perfect? Let
us survey our state with an impartial eye, and be just to the various gifts of
Heaven. How vain soever this life, considered in itself, may be, the comforts
and hopes of religion are sufficient to give solidity to the enjoyments of the
righteous. In the exercise of good affections, and the testimony of an
approving conscience; in the sense of peace and reconciliation with God,
through the great Redeemer of mankind; in the firm confidence of being
conducted through all the trials of life, by infinite wisdom and goodness; and
in the joyful prospect of arriving, in the end, at immortal felicity, they
possess a happiness which, descending from a purer and more perfect region than
this world, partakes not of its vanity.

Besides the enjoyments peculiar to religion, there are other pleasures of our
present state, which, though of an inferior order, must not be overlooked in
the estimate of human life. It is necessary to call attention to these, in
order to check that repining and unthankful spirit to which man is always too
prone. Some degree of importance must be allowed to the comforts of health, to
the innocent gratifications of sense, and to the entertainment afforded us by
all the beautiful scenes of nature; some to the pursuits and harmless
amusements of social life; and more to the internal enjoyments of thought and
reflection, and to the pleasures of affectionate intercourse with those whom we
love. These comforts are often held in too low estimation, merely because they
are ordinary and common; although that is the circumstance which ought, in
reason, to enhance their value. They lie open, in some degree, to all; extend
through every rank of life, and fill up agreeably many of those spaces in our
present existence, which are not occupied with higher objects, or with serious
cares.

From this representation it appears that, notwithstanding the vanity of the
world, a considerable degree of comfort is attainable in the present state. Let
the recollection of this serve to reconcile us to our condition, and to repress
the arrogance of complaints and murmurs. -- What art thou, O son of man! who,
having sprung but yesterday out of the dust, dare to lift up thy voice
against thy Maker, and to arraign his providence, because all things are not
ordered according to thy wish? What title have thou to find fault with the
order of the universe, whose lot is so much beyond what thy virtue or mer^t
gave thee ground to claim? Is it nothing to thee to have been introduced into
this magnificent world; to have been admitted as a spectator of the Divine
wisdom and works; and to have had access to all the comforts which nature, with
a bountiful hand, has poured forth around thee? Are all the hours forgotten
which thou have past in ease, in complacency, or joy? Is it a small favor in
thy eyes, that the hand of Divine Mercy has been stretched forth to aid thee,
and, if thou reject not its proffered assistance, is ready to conduct thee into
a happier state of existence? When thou comparest thy condition with thy
desert, blush, and be ashamed of thy complaints. Be silent, be grateful, and
adore. Receive with thankfulness the blessings which are allowed thee. Revere
that government which at present refuses thee more. Rest in this conclusion,
that though there are evils in the world, its Creator is wise and good, and has
been bountiful to thee.

BLAIR. SECTION XX. Scale of Beings.
THOUGH there is a great deal of pleasure in contemplating the material world;
by which I mean, that system of bodies, into which nature has so curiously
wrought the mass of dead matter, with the several relations that those bodies
bear to one another; there is still, methinks, something more wonderful and
surprising, in contemplations on the world of life; by which I understand, all
those animals with which every part of the universe is furnished. The material
world is only the shell of the universe: the world of life are its inhabitants.

If we consider those parts of the material world, which lie the nearest to us,
and are therefore subject to our observations and inquiries, it is amazing to
consider the infinity of animals with which it is stocked. Every part of matter
is peopled; every green leaf swarms with inhabitants. There is scarcely a
single humor in the body of a man, or of any other animal, in which our
glasses do not discover myriads of living creatures. We find, even in the most
solid bodies, as in marble itself, innumerable cells and cavities, which are
crowded with such imperceptible inhabitants, as are too little for the naked
eye to discover. On the other hand, if we look into the more bulky parts of
nature, we see the seas, lakes, and rivers, teeming with numberless kinds of
living creatures. We find every mountain and marsh, wilderness and wood,
plentifully stocked with birds and beasts; and every part of matter affording
proper necessaries and conveniences, for the livelihood of multitudes which
inhabit it.

The author of "the Plurality of Worlds," draws a very good argument from this
consideration, for the peopling of every planet; as indeed it seems very
probable, from the analogy of reason, that if no part of matter, with which we
are acquainted, lies waste and useless, those great bodies, which are at such a
distance from us, are not desert and unpeopled; but rather, that they are
furnished with beings adapted to their respective situations.

Existence is a blessing to those beings only which are endowed with
perception; and is in a manner thrown away upon dead matter, any farther than
as it is subservient to beings which are conscious of their existence.
Accordingly we find, from the bodies which lie under our observation, that
matter is only made as the basis and support of animals; and that there is no
more of the one than what is necessary for the existence of the other.

Infinite Goodness is of so communicative a nature, that it seems to delight in
conferring existence upon every degree of perceptive being. As this is a
speculation, which I have often pursued with great pleasure to myself, I shall
enlarge farther upon it, by considering that part of the scale of beings, which
comes within our knowledge.

There are some living creatures, which are raised but just above dead matter.
To mention only that species of shellfish, which is formed in the fashion of a
cone; that grows to the surface of several rocks; and immediately dies, on
being severed from the place where it grew. There are many other creatures but
one remove from these, which have no other sense than that of feeling and
taste. Others have still an additional one of hearing; others, of smell; and
others, of sight. It is wonderful to observe, by what a gradual progress the
world of life advances, through a prodigious variety of species, before a
creature is formed, that is complete in all its senses: and even among these,
there is such a different degree of perfection, in the sense which one animal
enjoys beyond what appears in another, that though the sense in different
animals is distinguished by the same common denomination, it seems almost of a
different nature. If, after this, we look into the several inward perfections,
of cunning and sagacity, or what we generally call instinct, we find them
rising, after the same manner, imperceptibly one above another; and receiving
additional improvements, according to the species in which they are implanted.
This progress in nature is so very gradual, that the most perfect of an
inferior species, comes very near to the most imperfect of that which is
immediately above it.

The exuberant and overflowing goodness of the Supreme Being, whose mercy
extends to all his works, is plainly seen, as I have before hinted, in his
having made so very little matter, at least what falls within our knowledge,
that does not swarm with life. Nor is his goodness less seen in the diversity,
than in the multitude of living creatures. Had he made but one species of
animals, none of the rest would have enjoyed the happiness of existence: he has
therefore, specified, in his creation, every degree of life, every capacity of
being. The whole chasm of nature, from a plant to a man, is filled up with
diverse kinds of creatures, rising one after another, by such a gentle and easy
ascent, that the little transitions and deviations from one species to another,
are almost insensible. This intermediate space is so well husbanded and
managed, that there is scarcely a degree of perception, which does not appear
in some one part of the world of life. Is the goodness, or the wisdom of the
Divine Being, more manifested in this his proceeding?

There is a consequence, besides those I have already mentioned, which seems
very naturally deducible from the foregoing considerations. If the scale of
being rises by such a regular progress, so high as man, we may, by parity of
reason, suppose, that it still proceeds gradually through those beings which
are of a superior nature to him; since there is infinitely greater space and
room for different degree^ of perfection; between the Supreme Being and man,
than between man and the most despicable insect.

In this great system of being, there is no creature so wonderful in its
nature, and which so much deserves our particular attention, as man; who fills
up the middle space between the animal and the intellectual nature, the visible
and the invisible world; and who is that link in the chain of beings, which
forms the connection between both. So that he who, in one respect, is associated
with angels and archangels, and may look upon a being of infinite perfection
as his father, and the highest order of spirits as his brethren, may, in
another respect, say, to "corruption, thou art my father, and to the worm, thou
art my mother and my sister."

ADDISON. SECTION XXI. Trust in the care of Providence recommended.
MAN, considered in himself, is a very helpless, and a very wretched being. He
is subject every moment to the greatest calamities and misfortunes. He is beset
with dangers on all sides; and may become unhappy by numberless casualties,
which he could not foresee, nor have have prevented had he foreseen them.

It is our comfort, while we are obnoxious to so many accidents, that we are
under the care of ONE who directs contingencies, and has in his hands the
management of every thing that is capable of annoying or offending us; who
knows the assistance we stand in need of, and is always ready to bestow it on
those who ask it of him.

The natural homage, which such a creature bears to so infinitely wise and good
a Being, is a firm reliance on him for the blessings and conveniences of life;
and an habitual trust in him, for deliverance out of all such dangers and
difficulties as may befall us.

The man who always lives in this disposition of mind, has not the same dark
and melancholy views of human nature, as he who considers himself abstractedly
from this relation to the Supreme Being. At the same time that he reflects upon
his own weakness and imperfection, he comforts himself with the contemplation
of those divine attributes, which are employed for his safety, and his welfare.
He finds his want of foresight made up, by the omniscience of him who is his
support. He is not sensible of his own want of strength, when he knows that his
helper is almighty. In short, the person who has a firm trust on the Supreme
Being, is powerful in his power, wise by his wisdom, happy by his happiness. He
reaps the benefit of every divine attribute; and loses his own insufficiency in
the fullness of infinite perfection.

To make our lives more easy to us, we are commanded to put our trust in him,
who is thus able to relieve and succor us; the Divine goodness having made
such a reliance a duty, notwithstanding we should have been miserable, had it
been forbidden us.

Among several motives, which might be made use of to recommend this duty to
us, I shall only take notice of those that follow.

The first and strongest is, that we are promised, He will not fail those who
put their trust in him.

But without considering the supernatural blessing, which accompanies this
duty, we may observe, that it has a natural tendency to its own reward; or, in
other words, that this firm trust and confidence in the great Disposer of all
things, contributes very much to the getting clear of any affliction, or to the
bearing of it manfully. A person who believes he has his succor at hand, and
that he acts in the sight of his friend, often exerts himself beyond his
abilities; and does wonders, that are not to be matched by one who is not
animated with such a confidence of success. Trust in the assistance of an
Almighty Being, naturally produces patience, hope, cheerfulness, and all other
dispositions of mind, which alleviate those calamities that we are not able to
remove.

The practice of this virtue administers great comfort to the mind of man, in
times of poverty and affliction; but most of all, in the hour of death. When
the soul is hovering, in the last moments of its separation: when it is just
entering on another state of existence, to converse with scenes, and objects,
and companions, that are altogether new; what can support her under such
tremblings of thought, such fear, such anxiety, such apprehensions, but the
casting of all her cares upon HIM, who first gave her being; who has conducted
her through one stage of it; and who will be always present, to guide and
comfort her in her progress through eternity?

ADDISON. SECTION XXII. Piety and Gratitude enliven Prosperity.
PIETY, and gratitude to God, contribute, in a high degree, to enliven
prosperity. Gratitude is a pleasing emotion. The sense of being distinguished
by the kindness of another gladdens the heart, warms it with reciprocal
affection, and gives to any possession which is agreeable in itself, a double
relish, from its being the gift of a friend. Favors conferred by men, I
acknowledge, may prove burdensome. For human virtue is never perfect; and
sometimes unreasonable expectations on the one side, sometimes a mortifying
sense of dependence on the other, corrode in secret the pleasure of benefits,
and convert the obligations of friendship into grounds of jealousy. But nothing
of this kind can affect the intercourse of gratitude with Heaven. Its favors
are wholly disinterested; and with a gratitude the most cordial and
unsuspicious, a good man looks up to that Almighty Benefactor, who aims at no
end but the happiness of those whom he blesses, and who desires no return from
them, but a devout and thankful heart. While others can trace their prosperity
to no higher source than a concurrence of worldly causes; and, often, of mean
or trifling incidents, which occasionally favored their designs; with what
superior satisfaction does the servant of God remark the hand of that Gracious
Power which has raised him up; which has happily conducted him through the
various steps of life, and crowned him with the most favorable distinction
beyond his equals?

Let us farther consider, that not only gratitude for the the past, but a
cheering sense of Divine favor at the present, enters into the pious emotion.
They are only the virtuous, who in their prosperous days hear this voice
addressed to them, "Go thy way, eat thy bread with joy, and drink thy wine with
a cheerful heart; for God now accepts thy works." He who is the Author of
their prosperity, gives them a title to enjoy, with complacency, his own gift.
While bad men snatch the pleasures of the world as by stealth, without
countenance from the Great Proprietor of the world* the righteous sit openly
down to the feast of life, under the smile of approving Heaven. No guilty fears
damp their joys. The blessing of God rests upon all that they possess; his
protection surrounds them; and hence, "in the habitations of the righteous, is
found the voice of rejoicing and salvation." A luster unknown to others,
invests, in their sight, the whole face of nature. Their piety reflects a
sunshine from heaven upon the prosperity of the world; unites in one point of
view, the smiling aspect, both of the powers above, and of the objects below.
Not only have they as full a relish as others, of the innocent pleasures of
life, but, moreover, in these they hold communion with their Divine Benefactor.
In all that is good or fair, they trace his hand. From the beauties of nature,
from the improvements of art, from the enjoyments of social life, they raise
their affection to the source of all the happiness which surrounds them; and
thus widen the sphere of their pleasures, by adding intellectual, and
spiritual, to earthly j^ys.

For illustration of what I have said on this head, remark that cheerful
enjoyment of a prosperous state, which King David had when he wrote the
twenty-third psalm; and compare the highest pleasures of the riotous sinner,
with the happy and satisfied spirit which breathes throughout that psalm. -- In
the midst of the splendor of royalty, with what amiable simplicity of
gratitude does he look up to the Lord as "his Shepherd;" happier in ascribing
all his success to Divine favor, than to the policy of his councils, or to the
force of his arms? How many instances of Divine goodness arose before him in
pleasing remembrance, when with such relish he speaks of the "green pastures
and still waters, beside which God had led him; of his cup which he had made to
overflow; and of the table which he had prepared for him in the presence of his
enemies!" With what perfect tranquillity does he look forward to the time of his
passing through "the valley of the shadow of death;" unappalled by that
spectre, whose most distant appearance blasts the prosperity of sinners! He
fears no evil, as long as "the rod and the staff" of his Divine Shepherd are
with him; and, through all the unknown periods of this and of future existence,
commits himself to his guidance with secure and triumphant hope: "Surely
goodness and mercy will follow me all the days of my life; and I shall dwell in
the house of the Lord forever." -- What a purified, sentimental enjoyment of
prosperity is here exhibited! How different from that gross relish of worldly
pleasures, which belongs to those who behold only the terrestrial side of
things; who raise their views to no higher objects than the succession of human
contingences, and the weak efforts of human ability; who have no protector or
patron in the heavens, to enliven their prosperity, or to warm their hearts
with gratitude and trust!

BLAIR. SECTION XXIII. Virtue, when deeply rooted, is not subject to the
Influence of Fortune.
THE city of Sidon having surrendered to Alexander, he ordered Hephestion to
bestow the crown on him whom the Sidonians should think most worthy of that
honor. Hephestion being at that time resident with two young men of
distinction, offered them the kingdom; but they refused, it telling him that it
was contrary to the laws of their country, to admit any one to that honor, who
was not of the royal family. He then, having expressed his admiration of their
disinterested spirit, desired them to name one of the royal race, who might
remember that he received the crown through their hands. Overlooking many, who
would have been ambitious of this high honor, they made choice of Abdolonymus,
whose singular merit had rendered him conspicuous, even in the vale of
obscurity. Though remotely related to the royal family, a series of misfortunes
had reduced him to the necessity of cultivating a garden, for a small stipend,
in the suburbs of the city.

While Abdolonymus was busily employed in weeding his garden, the two friends
of Hephestion, bearing in their hands the ensigns of royalty, approached him,
and saluted him king. They informed him that Alexander had appointed him to
that office; and required him immediately to exchange his rustic garb, and
utensils of husbandry, for the regal robe and scepter. At the same time, they
admonished him, when he should be seated on the throne, and have a nation in
his power, not to forget the humble condition from which he had been raised.

All this, at the first, appeared to Abdolonymus as an illusion of the fancy,
or an insult offered to his poverty. He requested them not to trouble him
farther with their impertinent jests; and to find some other way of amusing
themselves, which might leave him in the peaceable enjoyment of his obscure
habitation. -- At length, however, they convinced him, that they were serious
in their proposal; and prevailed upon him to accept the regal office, and
accompany them to the palace.

No sooner was he in possession of the government, than pride and envy created
him enemies; who whispered their murmers in every place, till at last they
reached the ear of Alexander. He commanded the new-elected prince to be sent
for; and required of him, with what temper of mind he had borne his poverty.
"Would to heaven," replied Abdolonymus, "that I may be able to bear my crown
with equal moderation: for when I possessed little, I wanted nothing: these
hands supplied me with whatever I desired." From this answer, Alexander formed
so high an idea of his wisdom, that he confirmed the choice which had been
made; and annexed a neighboring province to the government of Sidon.

QUINTUS CURTIUS. SECTION XXIV. The Speech of Fabricius, a Roman Ambassador, to
King Pyrrhus, who attempted to bribe him to his Interests, by the offer of a
great Sum of Money.
WITH regard to my poverty, the king has, indeed, been justly informed. My
whole estate consists in a house of but mean appearance, and a little spot of
ground; from which, by my own labor, I draw my support. But if, by any means,
thou have been persuaded to think that this poverty renders me of less
consequence in my own country, or in any degree unhappy, thou art greatly
deceived. I have no reason to complain of fortune; she supplies me with all
that nature requires; and if I am without superfluities, I am also free from
the desire of them. With these, I confess I should be more able to succor the
necessitous, the only advantage for which the wealthy are to be envied; but
small as my possessions are, I can still contribute something to the support of
the state, and the assistance of my friends. With respect to honors, my
country places me, poor as I am, upon a level with the richest; for Rome knows
no qualifications for great employments, but virtue and ability. She appoints
me to officiate in the most august ceremonies of religion; she intrusts me with
the command of her armies; she confides to my care the most important
negociations. My poverty does not lessen the weight and influence of my my
counsels in the senate. The Roman people honor me for that very poverty which
King Pyrrhus considers as a disgrace. They know the many opportunities I have
had to enrich myself, without censure; they are convinced of my disinterested
zeal for their prosperity: and if I have any thing to complain of, in the
return they make me, it is only the excess of their applause. What value, then,
can I put on thy gold and silver? What king can add any thing to my fortune?
Always attentive to discharge the duties incumbent upon me, I have a mind free
from self-reproach; and I have an honest fame.

SECTION XXV. Character of James I, King of England.
No Prince, so little enterprising and so inoffensive, was ever so much exposed
to the opposite extremes of calumny and flattery, of satire and panegyric. And
the factions which began in his time, being still continued, have made his
character be as much disputed to this day, as is commonly that of princes who
are our contemporaries. Many virtues, however, it must be owned, he was
possessed of; but not one of them pure, or free from the contagion of the
neighboring vices. His generosity bordered on profusion, his learning on
pedantry, his pacific disposition on pusillanimity, his wisdom on cunning, his
friendship on light fancy and boyish fondness. While he imagined that he was
only maintaining his own authority, he may perhaps be suspected in some of his
actions, and still more of his pretensions, to have encroached on the liberties
of his people. While he endeavored, by an exact neutrality, to acquire the
good will of all his neighbors, he was able to preserve fully the esteem and
regard of none. His capacity was considerable, but fitter to discourse on
general maxims, than to conduct any intricate business.

His intentions were just, but more adapted to the conduct of private life,
than to the government of kingdoms. Awkward in his person, and ungainly in his
manners, he was ill qualified to command respect: partial and undiscerning in
his affections, he was little fitted to acquire general love. Of a feeble
temper, more than of a frugal judgment; exposed to our ridicule from his
vanity, but exempt from our hatred by his freedom from pride and arrogance.
And, upon the whole, it may be pronounced of his character, that all his
qualities were sullied with weakness, and embellished by humanity. Political
courage he was certainly devoid of; and from thence chiefly is derived the
strong prejudice, which prevails against his personal bravery: an inference,
however, which must be owned, from general experience, to be extremely
fallacious.

HUME. SECTION XXVI. Charles V. Emperor of Germany, resigns his Dominions, and
retires from the World.
THIS great Emperor, in the plenitude of his power, and in possession of all
the honors which can flatter the heart of man, took the extraordinary
resolution, to resign his kingdoms; and to withdraw entirely from any concern
in business or the affairs of this world, in order that he might spend the
remainder of his days in retirement and solitude. Though it requires neither
deep reflection, nor extraordinary discernment, to discover that the state of
royalty is not exempt from cares and disappointments; though most of those who
are exalted to a throne, find solicitude, and satiety, and disgust, to be their
perpetual attendants, in that envied pre-eminence; yet, to descend voluntarily
from the supreme to a subordinate station, and to relinquish the possession of
power in order to attain the enjoyment of happiness, seems to be an effort too
great for the human mind. Several instances, indeed, occur in history, of
monarchs who have quitted a throne, and have ended their days in retirement.
But they were either weak princes, who took this resolution rashly, and
repented of it as soon as it was taken; or unfortunate princes, from whose
hands some strong rival had wrested their scepter, and compelled them to
descend with reluctance into a private station. Dioclesian is, perhaps, the
only prince capable of holding the reins of government, who ever resigned them
from deliberate choice; and who continued, during many years, to enjoy the
tranquillity of retirement, without fetching one penitent sigh, or casting back
one look of desire, toward the power or dignity which he had abandoned.

No wonder, then, that Charles's resignation should fill all Europe with
astonishment; and give rise, both among his contemporaries, and among the
historians of that period, to various conjectures concerning the motives which
determined a prince, whose ruling passion had been uniformly the love of power,
at the age of fifty-six, when objects of ambition operate with full force on
the mind, and are pursued with the greatest ardour, to take a resolution so
singular and unexpected.

The emperor, in pursuance of his determination, having assembled the states of
the Low Countries at Brussels, seated himself, for the last time, in the chair
of state; on one side of which was placed his son, and on the other, his sister
the queen of Hungary, regent of the Netherlands, with a splendid retinue of the
grandees of Spain and the princes of the empire standing behind him. The
president of the council of Flanders, by his command, explained, in a few
words, his intention in calling this extraordinary meeting of the states. He
then read the instrument of resignation, by which Charles surrendered to his
son Philip all his territories, jurisdiction, and authority in the Low
Countries; absolving his subjects there from their oath of allegiance to him,
which he required them to transfer to Philip his lawful heir; and to serve him
with the same loyalty and zeal that they ha^ manifested, during so long a
course of years, in support of his government.

Charles then rose from his seat, and leaning on the shoulder of the Prince of
Orange, because he was unable to stand without support, he addressed himself to
the audience; and, from a paper which he held in his hand, in order to assist
his memory, he recounted, with dignity, but without ostentation, all the great
things which he had undertaken and performed, since the commencement of his
administration. He observed, that from the seventeenth year of his age, he had
dedicated all his thoughts and attention to public objects, reserving no
portion of his time for the indulgence of his ease, and very little for the
enjoyment of private pleasure; that either in a pacific or hostile manner, he
had visited Germany nine times, Spain six times, France four times, Italy seven
times, the Low Countries ten times, England twice, Africa as often, and had
made eleven voyages by sea; that while his health permitted him to discharge
his duty, and the vigor of his constitution was equal in any degree, to the
arduous office of governing such extensive dominions, he had never shunned
labor, nor repined under fatigue; that now, when his health was broken, and
his vigor exhausted by the rage of an incurable distemper, his growing
infirmities admonished him to retire; nor was he so fond of reigning, as to
retain the scepter in an impotent hand, which was no longer able to protect his
subjects, or to render them happy; that instead of a sovereign worn out with
diseases, and scarcely half alive, he gave them one in the prime of life,
accustomed already to govern, and who added to the vigor of youth all the
attention and sagacity of maturer years* that if, during the course of a long
administration, he had committed any material error in government, or if, under
the pressure of so many and great affairs, and amidst the attention which he
had been obliged to give to them, he had either neglected or injured any of his
subjects, he now implored their forgiveness; that, for his part, he should ever
retain a grateful sense of their fidelity and attachment, and would carry the
remembrance of it along with him to the place of his retreat, as his sweetest
consolation, as well as the best reward for all his services; and, in his last
prayers to Almighty God, would pour forth his ardent wishes for their welfare.

Then turning toward Philip, who fell on his knees and kissed his father's
hand, "If," says he, "I had left you, by my death, this rich inheritance, to
which I have made such large additions, some regard would have been justly due
to my memory on that account; but now, when I voluntarily resign to you what I
might have still retained, I may well expect the warmest expressions of thanks
on your part. With these, however, I dispense; and shall consider your concern
for the welfare of your subjects, and your love of them, as the best and most
acceptable testimony of your gratitude to me. It is in your power, by a wise
and virtuous administration, to justify the extraordinary proof which I give
this day of my paternal affection, and to demonstrate that you are worthy of
the confidence which I repose in you. Preserve an inviolable regard for
religion; maintain the Catholic faith in its purity; let the laws of your
country be sacred in your eyes; encroach not on the rights and privileges of
your people; and, if the time shall ever come, when you shall wish to enjoy the
tranquillity of private life, may you have a son endowed with such qualities,
that you can resign your scepter to him, with as much satisfaction as I give up
mine to you."

As soon as Charles had finished this long address to his subjects, and to
their new sovereign, he sunk into the chair, exhausted and ready to faint with
the fatigue of such an extraordinary effort. During his discourse, the whole
audience melted into tears; some from admiration of his magnanimity; others
softened by the expressions of tenderness toward his son, and of love to his
people; and all were affected with the deepest sorrow, at losing a sovereign,
who had distinguished the Netherlands, his native country, with particular
marks of his regard and attachment.

SECTION XXVII. Continuation of the Emperor CHARLES V.
A FEW weeks after the resignation of the Netherlands, Charles, in an assembly
no less splendid, and with a ceremonial equally pompous, resigned to the son
the crowns of Spain, with all the territories depending on them, both in the
old and in the new world. Of all these vast possessions, he reserved nothing
for himself, but an annual pension of an hundred thousand crowns, to defray the
charges of his family, and to afford him a small sum for acts of beneficence
and charity.

Nothing now remained to detain him from that retreat for which he languished.
Every thing having been prepared some time for his voyage, he set out for
Zuitburg in Zealand, where the fleet had orders to rendezvous. ^n his way
thither, he passed through Ghent; and after stopping there a few days, to
indulge that tender and pleasant melancholy, which arises in the mind of every
than in the decline of life, on visiting the place o^ his nativity, and viewing
the scenes and objects fa^iliar to him in ^s early youth, he pursued his
journey, accompanie^ by his son Philip, his daughter the Arch-duchess, his
sisters the Dowager Queens of France and Hungary, Maximilian his son-in-law,
and a numerous retinue of the Flemish nobility. Before he went on board, he
dismissed them, with marks of his attention or regard; and taking leave of
Philip with all the tenderness of a father who embraced his son for the last
time, he set sail under convoy of a large fleet of Spanish, Flemish, and
English ships.

His voyage was prosperous and agreeable; and he arrived at Laredo in Biscay,
on the eleventh day after he left Zealand. As soon as he landed, he fell
prostrate on the ground and considering himself now as dead to the world, he
kissed the earth, and said, "Naked came I out of my mother's womb, and naked I
now return to thee, thou common mother of mankind." From Laredo he proceeded to
Valladolid. There he took a last and tender leave of his two sisters; whom he
would not permit to accompany him to his solitude, though they entreated it
with tears; not only that they might have the consolation of contributing, by
their attendance and care, to mitigate or to sooth his sufferings, but that
they might reap instruction and benefit, by joining with him in those pious
exercises, to which he had consecrated the remainder of his days.

From Valladolid, he continued his journey to Plazencia in Estremadura. He had
passed through that city a great many years before; and having been struck at
that time with the delightful situation of the monastery of St. Justus,
belonging to the order of St. Jerome, not many miles distant from that place,
he had then observed to some of his attendants, that this was a spot to which
Dioclesian might have retired with pleasure. The impression had remained so
strong on his mind, that he pitched upon it as the place of his retreat. It was
seated in a vale of no great extent, watered by a small brook, and surrounded
by rising grounds, covered with lofty trees: from the nature of the soil, as
well as the temperature of the climate, it was esteemed the most healthful and
delicious situation in Spain. Some months before his resignation, he had sent
an architect thither, to add a new apartment to the monastery, for his
accommodation; but he gave strict orders, that the style of the building should
be such as suited his present station, rather than his former dignity. It
consisted only of six rooms, four of them in the form of friars' cells, with
naked walls; the other two, each twenty feet square, were hung with brown cloth
and furnished in the most simple manner. They were all on a level with the
ground; with a door on one side into a garden, of which Charles himself had
given the plan, and had filled it with various plants, which he proposed to
cultivate with his own hands. On the other side, they communicated with the
chapel of the monastery, in which he was to perform his devotions. Into this
humble retreat, hardly sufficient for the comfortable accommodation of a
private gentleman, did Charles enter, with twelve domestics only. He buried
there, in solitude and silence, his grandeur, his ambition, together with all
those vast projects, which, during half a century, had alarmed and agitated
Europe; filling every kingdom in it, by turns, with the terror of his arms, and
the dread of being subjected to his power.

In this retirement Charles formed such a plan of life for himself, as would
have suited the condition of a private person of a moderate fortune. His table
was neat but plain; his domestics few; his intercourse with them familiar; all
the cumbersome and ceremonious forms of attendance on his person were entirely
abolished, as destructive of that social ease and tranquillity, which he
courted, in order to sooth the remainder of his days. As the mildness of the
climate, together with his deliverance from the burdens and cares of
government, procured him, at first, a considerable remission from the acute
pains with which he had been long tormented, he enjoyed, perhaps, more complete
satisfaction in this humble solitude, than all his grandeur had ever yielded
him. The ambitious thoughts and projects, which had so long engrossed and
disquieted him, were quite effaced from his mind. Far from taking any part in
the political transactions of the princes of Europe, he restrained his
curiosity even from any inquiry concerning them; and he seemed to view the busy
scene which he had abandoned, with all the contempt and indifference arising
from his thorough experience of its vanity, as well as from the pleasing
reflection of having disentangled himself from its cares.

DR. ROBERTSON. PART II. PIECES IN POETRY.
CHAPTER I. SELECT SENTENCES AND PARAGRAPHS.
SECTION I. Short and easy sentences.
Education.
IT IS education forms the common mind;
Just as the twig is bent, the tree's inclined.
Candor.
With pleasure let us own our errors past;
And make each day a critic on the last.
Reflection.
A soul without reflection, like a pile
Without inhabitan^, to ruin runs.
NOTE.
In the first chapter, the Compiler has exhibited a considerable variety of
poetical construction, for the young reader's preparatory exercise.




Secret virtue.
The private path, the secret acts of men,
If noble, far the noblest of their lives.
Necessary knowledge easily attained.
Our needful knowledge, like our needful food,
Unhedg'd, lies open in life's common field;
And bids all welcome to the vital feast.
Disappointment.
Disappointment lurks in many a prize,
As bees in flowers; and stings us with success.
Virtuous elevation.
The mind that would be happy, must be great;
Great in its wishes; great in its surveys.
Extended views a narrow mind extend.
Natural and fanciful life.
Who lives to nature, rarely can be poor:
Who lives to fancy, never can be rich.
Charity.
In faith and hope the world will disagree;
But all mankind's concern is charity.
The prize of virtue.
What nothing earthly gives, or can destroy,
The soul's calm sunshine, and the heartfelt joy,
Is virtue's prize.
Sense and modesty connected.
Distrustful sense with modest caution speaks;
It still looks home, and short excursions makes;
But rattling nonsense in full volleys breaks.
Moral discipline salutary.
Heaven gives us friends to bless the present scene,
Resumes them to prepare us for the next.
All evils natural are moral goods;
All discipline, indulgence, on the whole.
Present blessings undervalued.
Like birds, whose beauties languish, half concealed
Till, mounted on the wing, their glossy plumes
Expanded shine with azure, green, and gold,
How blessings brighten as they take their flight!
Hope.
Hope, of all passions most befriends us here*
Passions of prouder name befriend us less.
Joy has her tears, and Transport has her death;
Hope, like a cordial, innocent, though strong,
Man's heart, at once, inspirits and serenes.
Happiness modest and tranquil.
-- Never man was truly blessed,
But it composed, and gave him such a cast
As folly might mistake for want of joy:
A cast unlike the triumph of the proud;
A modest aspect, and a smile at heart.
True greatness.
Who noble ends by noble means obtains,
Or failing, smiles in exile or in chains,
Like good Aurelius let him reign, or bleed
Like Socrates, that man is great indeed.
The tear of sympathy.
No radiant pearl, which crested Fortune wears,
No gem, that twinkling hangs from Beauty's ears,
Nor the bright stars, which Night's blue arch adorn,
Nor rising suns that gild the vernal morn,
Shine with such luster, as the tear that breaks,
For others' woe, down Virtue's manly cheeks.
SECTION II. Verses in which the lines are of different length.
Bliss of celestial origin.
RESTLESS mortals toil for naught;
Bliss in vain from earth is sought;
Bliss, a native of the sky,
Never wanders. Mortals, try;
There you cannot seek in vain;
For to seek her is to gain.
The passions.
The passions are a numerous crowd,
Imperious, positive, and loud,
Curb these licentious sons of strife;
Hence chiefly rise the storms of life;
If they grow mutinous and rave,
They are thy masters, thou their slave.
Trust in Providence recommended.
It Is Providence alone secures,
In every change, both mine and yours.
Safety consists not in escape
From dangers of a frightful shape:
An earthquake may be bid to spare
The man that is strangled by a hair.
Fate steals along with silent tread,
Found oft'nest in what least we dread;
Frowns in the storm with angry brow,
But in the sunshine strikes the blow.
Epitaph.
How loved, how valued once, avails thee not,
To whom related, or by whom begot:
A heap of dust alone remains of thee;
It Is all thou art, and all the proud shall be.
Fame.
All fame is foreign, but of true desert;
Plays round the head, but comes not to the heart.
One self-approving hour whole years outweighs
Of stupid starers, and of loud huzzas;
And more true joy Marcellus exiled feels,
Than Caesar with a senate at his heels.
Virtue the guardian of youth.
Down the smooth stream of life the stripling darts,
Gay as the morn; bright glows the vernal sky,
Hope swells his sails, and passion steers his course.
Safe glides his little bark along the shore,
Where Virtue takes her stand: but if too far
He launches forth beyond Discretion's mark,
Sudden the tempest scowls, the surges roar,
Blot his fair day, and plunge him in the deep.
Sunrise.
But yonder comes the powerful King of Day,
Rejoicing in the east. The lessening cloud,
The kindling azure, and the mountain's brow,
Illum'd with fluid gold, his near approach
Betoken glad. Lo, now, apparent all
Aslant the dew-bright earth, and colored air,
He looks in boundless majesty abroad;
And sheds the shining day, that burnished plays
On rocks, and hills, and towers, and wandering streams,
High gleaming from afar.
Self-government.
May I govern my passions with absolute sway;
And grow wiser and better as life wears away.
Shepherd.
On a mountain, stretched beneath a hoary willow,
Lay a shepherd swain, and viewed the rolling billow.
SECTION III. Verses containing Exclamations, Interrogations, and Parentheses.
Competence.
A COMPETENCE is all we can enjoy:
Oh! be content where Heaven can give no more!
Reflection essential to happiness.
Much joy not only speaks small happiness,
But happiness that shortly must expire.
Can joy, unbottom'd in reflection, stand?
And, in a tempest, can reflection live?
Friendship.
Can gold gain friendship? Impudence o^ hope!
As well mere man an angel might beget.
Love, and love only, is the loan for love.
Lorenzo! pride repress; nor hope to find
A friend, but what has found a friend in thee.
All like the purchase; few the price will pay:
And this make friends such miracles below.
Patience.
Beware of desperate steps. The darkest day
(Live till tomorrow) will have passed away.
Luxury.
-- O Luxury!
Bane of elated life, of affluent states,
What dreary change, what ruin is not thine!
How does thy bowl intoxicate the mind!
To the soft entrance of thy rosy cave,
How do thou lure the fortunate and great!
Dreadful attraction!
Virtuous activity.
Seize, mortals! seize the transient hour;
Improve each moment as it flies:
Life's a short summer -- man a flower;
He dies -- Alas! how soon he dies!
The sources of happiness.
Reason^s whole pleasure, all the joys of sense,
Lie in three words, health, peace, and competence:
But health consists with temperance alone;
And peace, O Virtue! peace is all thy own.
Placid emotion.
Who can forbear to smile with nature? Can
The stormy passions in the bosom roll,
While every gale is peace, and every grove
Is melody?
Solitude By solitude here is meant, a temporary seclusion from the world,
.
O sacred solitude! divine retreat!
Choice of the prudent! envy of the great!
By thy pure stream, or in thy waving shade,
We court fair Wisdom, that celestial maid:
The genuine offspring of her loved embrace,
(Strangers on earth,) are Innocence and Peace.
There, from the ways of men laid safe ashore,
We smile to hear the distant tempest roar;
There, blessed with health, with business unperplex'd,
This life we relish and ensure the next.
Presume not on tomorrow.
In human hearts what bolder thought can rise,
Than man's presumption on tomorrow's dawn?
Where is tomorrow? In another world.
For numbers this is certain; the reverse
Is sure to none.
Dum vivimus vivamus. Whilst we live, let us live.
"Live, while you live," the epicure would say,
"And seize the pleasures of the present day."
"Live, while you live," the sacred preacher cries;
"And give to God each moment as it flies."
Lord! in my views, let both united be;
I live in pleasure, when I live to thee!
DODDRIDGE. SECTION IV. Verses in various forms.
The security of virtue.
Let coward guilt, with pallid fear,
To sheltering caverns fly,
And justly dread the vengeful fate,
That thunders through the sky.
Protected by that h^d, whose law
The threatening storms obey,
^epid virtue smiles secure,
As in the blaze of day.
Resignation.
And O! by Errors force subdued,
Since often my stubborn will
Prepost'rous shuns the latent good,
And grasps the specious ill,
Not to my wish, but to my wan
Do thou thy gifts apply;
Unasked, what good thou know grant;
What ill, though asked, deny.
Compassion.
I have found out a gift for my fair;
I have found where the wood-pigeons breed:
But let me that plunder forbear!
She will say, it is a barbarous deed.
For he never can be true, she averred,
Who can rob a poor bird of its young;
And I loved her the more, when I heard
Such tenderness fall from her tongue.
Epitaph.
Here rests his head upon the lap of earth,
A youth to fortune and to fame unknown;
Fair science frowned not on his humble birth,
And Melancholy marked him for her own.
Large was his bounty, and his soul sincere;
Heaven did a recompense as largely send:
He gave to misery all he had -- a tear;
He gained from Heaven ('it was all he wished) a friend.
No farther seek his merits to disclose,
Or draw his frailties from their dread abode,
(There they alike in trembling hope repose,)
The bosom of his Father and his God.
Joy and sorrow connected.
Still, where rosy Pleasure leads,
See a kindred grief pursue;
Behind the steps that Misery treads,
Approaching comforts view.
The hues of bliss more brightly glow,
Chastis'd by sable tints of woe;
And blendid form, with artful strife,
The strength and harmony of life.
The golden mean.
He that holds fast the golden mean,
And lives contentedly between
The little and the great,
Feels not the wants that pinch the poor,
Nor plagues that haunt the rich man's door,
Imbitt'ring all his state.
The tallest pines feel most the power
Of wintry blast; the loftiest tower
Comes heaviest to the ground.
The bolts that spare the mountain's side,
His cloud-capt eminence divide;
And spread the ruin round.
Moderate views and aims recommended.
With passions unruffled, untainted with pride,
By reason my life let me square:
The wants of my nature are cheaply supplied;
And the rest are but folly and care.
How vainly, through infinite trouble and strife,
The many their labors employ!
Since all that is truly delightful in life,
Is what all, if they please, may enjoy.
Attachment to life.
The tree of deepest root is found
Least willing still to quit the ground:
'Twas therefore said, by ancient sages,
That love of life increased with years,
So much, that in our latter stages,
When pains grow sharp, and sickness rages
The greatest love of life appears.
Virtue's address to Pleasure Sensual pleasure.
.
Vast happiness enjoy thy gay allies!
A youth of follies, an old age of cares;
Young yet enervate, old yet never wise,
Vice wastes their vigor, and their mind impairs.
Vain, idle, delicate, in thoughtless ease,
Reserving woes for age, their prime they spend;
All wretched, hopeless, in the evil days,
With sorrow to the verge of life they tend.
Grieved with the present, of the past ashamed,
They live and are despised; they die, nor more are named.
SECTION V. Verses in which sound corresponds to signification.
Smooth and rough verse.
Soft is the strain when Zephyr gently blows,
And the smooth stream in smoother numbers flows.
But when loud surges lash the sounding shore,
The hoarse rough verse should like the torrent roar.
Slow motion imitated.
When Ajax strives some rock's vast weight to throw,
The line too labors, and the words move slow.
Swift and easy motion.
Not so when swift Camilla scours the plain,
Flies over the unbending corn, and skims along the main.
Falling trees in a wood.
Loud sounds the axe, redoubling strokes on strokes;
On all sides round the forest hurls her oaks
Headlong. Deep echoing groan the thickets brown;
Then rustling, crackling, crashing, thunder down.
Sound of a bow-string.
-- The string let fly
Twang'd short and sharp, like the shrill swallow's cry.
The Pheasant.
See! from the brake the whirring pheasant springs,
And mounts exulting on triumphant wings.
Scylla and Charybdis.
Dire Scylla there a scene of horror forms,
And here Charybdis fills the deep with storms.
When the tide rushes from her rumbling caves,
The rough rock roars; tumultuous boil the waves.
Boisterous and gentle sounds.
Two craggy rocks projecting to the main,
The roaring winds tempestuous rage restrain:
Within, the waves in softer murmurs glide;
And ships secure without their haulsers ride.
Laborious and tempestious motion.
With many a weary step, and many a groan,
Up the high hill he heaves a huge round stone:
The huge round stone resulting, with a bound,
Thunders impetuous down, and smokes along the ground.
Regular and slow movement.
First march the heavy mules securely slow;
Over hills, over d^les, over crags, over rocks they go.
Motion slow and difficult.
A needless Alexandrine ends the song;
That, like a wounded snake, drags its slow length along.
A rock ^orn from the brow of a mountain.
Still gathering force, it smokes, and urged amain,
Whirls leaps, and thunders down, impetuous to the plain.
Extent and violence of the waves.
The waves behind impel the waves before,
Wide-rolling, foaming high, and tumbling to the shore.
Pensive numbers.
In those deep solitudes, and awful cells,
Where heav'nly-pensive Contemplation dwells,
And ever-musing Melancholy reigns.
Battle.
-- Arms on armor clashing brayed
Horrible discord; and the madding wheels
Of brazen fury raged.
Sound imitating reluctance.
For who, to dumb forgetfulness a prey,
This pleasing anxious being ever resigned;
Left the warm precincts of the cheerful day,
Nor cast one longing, lingering look behind?
SECTION VI. Paragraphs of greater length.
Connubial affection.
The love that cheers life's latest stage,
Proof against sickness and old age,
Preserved by virtue from declension,
Becomes not weary of attention:
But lives, when that exterior grace,
Which first inspired the flame, decays.
It Is gentle, delicate, and kind,
To faults compassionate, or blind;
And will with sympathy endure
Those evils it would gladly cure.
But angry, corse, and harsh expression,
Shows love to be a mere profession;
Proves that the heart is none of his,
Or soon expels him if it is.
Swarms of flying insects.
Thick in yon stream of light, a thousand ways,
Upward and downward, thwarting and convol'v'd
The quivering nations sport: till, tempest-wing'd,
Fierce winter sweeps them from the face of day.
Even so, luxurious men, unheeding, pass
An idle summer life, in Fortune's shine,
A season's glitter! Thus they flutter on,
From toy to toy, from vanity to vice;
Till, blown away by Death, Oblivion comes
Behind, and strikes them from the book of life.
Beneficence its own reward.
My fortune (for I Will mention all,
And more than you dare tell) is small;
Yet every friend partakes my store,
And Want goes smiling from my door.
Will forty shillings warm the breast
Of worth or industry distressed?
This sum I cheerfully impart;
It Is fourscore pleasures to my heart:
And you may make, by means like these
Five talents ten, whenever you please.
It Is true, my little purse grows light
But then I sleep so sweet at night!
This grand specific will prevail,
When all the doctor's opiates fail.
Virtue the best treasure.
Virtue, the strength and beauty of the soul,
Is the best gift of heaven: a happiness,
That, even above the smiles and frowns of fate,
Exalts great Nature's favorites: a wealth
That never encumbers; nor to baser hands
Can be transferred. It is the only good
Man justly boasts of, or can call his own.
Riches are often by guilt and baseness earned.
But for one end, one much neglected use,
Are riches worth our care; (for nature's wants
Are few, and without opulence supplied;)
This noble end is to produce the soul;
To show the virtues in their fairest light;
And make humanity the minister
Of bounteous Providence.
Contemplation.
As yet it is midnight deep. The weary clouds,
Slow meeting, mingle into solid gloom.
Now, while the drowsy world lies lost in sleep,
Let me associate with the serious Night,
And contemplation her sedate compeer;
Let me shake off the intrusive cares of day,
And lay the meddling senses all aside.
Where now, ye lying vanities of life!
Y^ ever tempting, ever cheating train!
Where are you now? and what is your amount?
Vexation, disappointment, and re^orse.
Sad, sickening thought! And yet deluded man,
A scene of crude disjointed visions past,
And broken slumbers, rises still resolved,
With new flushed hopes, to run the giddy round.
Pleasures of Piety.
A Deity believed, is joy begun;
A Deity adored, is joy advanced;
A Deity beloved, is joy matur'd.
Each branch of piety delight inspires:
Faith builds a bridge from this world to the next,
Over Death's dark gulf, and all its horror hides;
Praise, the sweet exhaltation of our joy,
That joy exalts, and makes it sweeter still;
Prayer ardent opens heaven, let us down a stream
Of glory, on the consecrated hour
Of man in audience with the Deity.
CHAPTER II. NARRATIVE PIECES.
SECTION I. The Bears and the Bees.
AS two young Bears, in wanton mood,
Forth issuing from a neighboring wood,
Came where the industrious Bees had stored,
In artful cells, their lucious hoard;
O'erjoy'd they seized, with eager haste,
Luxurious on the rich repast.
Alarmed at this, the little crew
About their ears vindictive flew.
The beasts, unable to sustain
The unequal combat, quit the plain;
Half-blind with rage, and mad with pain.
Their native shelter they regain;
There sit, and now, discreeter grown,
Too late their rashness they bemoan;
And this by dear experience gain,
That pleasure's ever bought with pain.
So when the gilded baits of vice
Are placed before our longing eyes,
With greedy haste we snatch our fill,
And swallow down the latent ill;
But when experience opes our eyes,
Away the fancied pleasure flies.
It flies, but oh! too late we find,
It leaves a real sting behind.
MERRICK. SECTION II. The Nightingale and the Glowworm.
A NIGHTINGALE, that all day long
Had cheered the village with his song,
Nor yet at eve his note suspended,
Nor yet when eventide was ended,
Began to feel, as well he might,
The keen demands of appetite;
When, looking eagerly around,
He spied far off, upon the ground,
A something shining in the dark,
And knew the glow-warm by his spark.
So, stooping down from hawthorn top,
He thought to put him in his crop.
The worm, aware of his intent,
Harangu'd him thus, right eloquent --
"Did you admire my lamp," quoth he,
"As much as I your minstrelsy,
"You would abhor to do me wrong,
"As much as I to spoil your song;
"For 'twas the self-same Power Divine
"Taught you to sing, and me to shine;
"That you with music, I with light,
"Might beautify and cheer the night."
The songster heard his short oration,
And, warbling out his approbation,
Released him, as my story tells,
And found a supper some where else.
Hence, jarring sectaries may learn
Their real interest to discern;
That brother should not war with brother,
And worry and devour each other:
But sing and shine by sweet consent,
Till life's poor transient night is spent;
Respecting, in each other's case,
The gifts of nature and of grace.
Those Christians best deserve the name,
Who studiously make peace their aim;
Peace, both the duty and the prize
Of him that creeps, and him that flies.
COWPER. SECTION III. The Trials of Virtue.
PLACED on the verge of youth, my mind
Life's opening scene surveyed:
I viewed its ills of various kind,
Afflicted and afraid.
But chief my fear the dangers moved,
That virtue's path enclose:
My heart the wise pursuit approved;
But O, what toils oppose!
For see, ah see! while yet her ways
With doubtful step I tread,
A hostile world its terrors raise
Its snares delusive spread,
O how shall I, with heart prepared,
Those terrors learn to meet?
How, from the thousand snares to guard
My unexperienced feet!
As thus I mused, oppressive sleep
Soft over my temples drew
Oblivion's veil. -- The watery deep,
An object strange and new.
Before me rose: on the wide shore
Observant as I stood,
The gathering storms around me roar
And heave the boiling flood.
Near and more near the billows rise;
Even now my steps they lave;
And death to my affrighted eyes
Approached in every wave.
What hope, or whither to retreat!
Each nerve at once unstrung;
Chill fear had fettered fast my feet,
And chained my speechless tongue.
I felt my heart within me die;
When sudden to mine ear
A voice, descending from on high,
Reproved my erring fear.
"What though the swelling surge thou see
"Impatient to devour;
"Rest, mortal, rest on God's decree,
"And thankful own his power.
"Know, when he bade the deep appear,
"'Thus far,' the Almighty said,
"'Thus far, nor farther, rage; and here
"'Let thy proud waves be stayed.'"
I heard; and lo! at once controlled,
The waves in wild retreat
Back on themselves reluctant rolled,
And murmuring left my feet.
Deeps to assembling deeps in vain
Once more the signal gave:
The shores the rushing weight sustain,
And check the usurping wave.
Convinced, in nature's volume wise
The imag'd truth I read;
And sudden from my waking eyes
The instructive vision fled.
"Then why thus heavy, O my soul!
"Say why, distrustful still,
"Thy thoughts with vain impatience roll
"Over scenes of future ill?
"Let faith suppress each rising fear,
"Each anxious doubt exclude;
"Thy Maker's will has placed thee here,
"A Maker wise and good!
"He to thy every trial knows
"Its just restraint to give;
"Attentive to behold thy woes,
"And faithful to relieve.
"Then why thus heavy, O my soul!
"Say why distrustful still,
"Thy thoughts with vain impatience roll
"Over scenes of future ill?
"Though griefs unnumber'd throng thee round,
"Still in thy God confide,
"Whose finger marks the seas their bound,
"And curbs the headlong tide."
MERRICK. SECTION IV. The Youth and the Philosopher.
A GRECIAN youth of talents rare,
Whom Plato's philosophic care
Had formed for virtue's nobler view,
By precept and example too,
Would often boast his matchless skill,
To curb the steed, and guide the wheel;
And as he pas^'d the gazing throng,
With graceful ease, and smack'd the thong,
The Idiot wonder they expressed,
Was praise and transport to his breast.
At length, quite vain, he needs would show
His master what his art could do;
And bade his slaves the chariot lead
To Academus' sacred shade.
The trembling grove confessed its fright,
The wood-nymphs started at the sight;
The muses drop the learned lyre,
And to their inmost shades retire.
How'er, the youth, with forward air,
Bows to the sage, and mounts the car,
The lash resounds, the coursers spring,
The chariot marks the rolling ring;
And gathering crowds, with eager eyes,
And shouts, pursue him as he flies.
Triumphant to the goal returned,
With nobler thirst his bosom burned;
And now along the indented plain
The self-same track he marks again,
Pursues with care the nice design,
Nor ever deviates from the line.
Amazement seized the circling crowd;
The youth's with emulation glowed;
Even bearded sages hailed the boy;
And all but Plato gazed with joy.
For he, deep-judging sage, beheld
With pain the triumphs of the field:
And when the charioteer drew nigh,
And, flushed with hope, had caught his eye,
"Alas! unhappy youth," he cried,
"Expect no praise from me," (and sighed).
"With indignation I survey
"Such skill and judgment thrown away.
"The time profusely squandered there,
"On vulgar arts beneath thy care,
"If well employed, at less expense,
"Had taught thee honor, virtue, sense;
"And raised thee from a coachman's fate
"To govern men, and guide the state."
WHITEHEAD. SECTION V. Discourse between ADAM and EVE, retiring to rest.
Now came still Evening on, and Twilight gray
Had in her sober livery all things clad.
Silence accompanied; for beast and bird,
They to their grassy couch, these to their nests
Were slunk; all but the wakeful nightingale.
She all night long her amorous descant sung:
Silence was pleased. Now glowed the firmament
With living sapphires: Hesperus, that led
The starry host, rode brightest, till the Moon,
Rising in clouded majesty, at length
Apparent queen unveiled her peerless light,
And over the dark her silver mantle threw.
When Adam thus to Eve: "Fair consort, the hour
Of night, and all things now retired to rest,
Mind us of like repose; since God has set
Labor and rest, as day and night, to men
Successive; and the timely dew of sleep,
Now falling with soft slumb'rous weight, inclines
Our eyelids. Other creatures all day long
Rove idle unemploy'd, and less need rest:
Man has his daily work of body or mind
Appointed, which declares his dignity,
And the regard of Heaven on all his ways;
While other animals unactive range,
And of their doings God takes no account.
Tomorrow, ere fresh Morning streak the east
With first approach of light, we must be risen,
And at our pleasant labor; to reform
Yon flowery arbors, yonder allies green,
Our wa^ ^noon, with branches overgrown,
That (...) our scant manuring, and require
More hands than ours to lop their wanton growth.
Those blossoms also, and those drooping gums,
That lie bestrown, unsightly and unsmooth,
Ask riddance, if we mean to tread with ease.
Mean while, as Nature wills, night bids us rest."
To whom thus Eve, with perfect beauty adorned:
"My author and disposer, what thou bidst
Unargu'd I obey: so God ordains.
With thee conversing I forget all time;
All seasons and their change, all please alike.
Sweet is the breath of morn, her rising sweet,
With charm of earliest birds; pleasant the sun,
When first on this delightful land he spreads
His orient beams, on herb, tree, fruit, and flower,
Glist'ring with dew; fragrant the fertile earth
After soft showers; and sweet the coming on
Of grateful evening mild; then silent night,
With this her solemn bird, and this fair moon,
And these the gems of heaven, her starry train:
But neither breath of morn, when she ascends
With charm of earliest birds; nor rising sun
On this delightful land; nor herb, fruit, flower,
Glist'ring with dew; nor fragrance after showers;
Nor grateful evening mild; nor silent night
With this her solemn bird; nor walk by moon,
Or glittering starlight, without thee is sweet.
But wherefore all night long shine these? for whom
This glorious sight, when sleep has shut all eyes?"
To whom our general ancestor replied:
"Daughter of God and man, accomplished Eve,
These have their course to finish round the earth,
By morrow evening; and from land to land
In order, though to nations yet unborn,
Minist'ring light prepared* they set and rise;
Lest total darkness should by night regain
Her old possessions, and extinguish life
In nature and all things; which these soft fires
Not only enlighten, but, with kindly heat
Of various influence, foment and warm,
Temper or nourish; or in part shed down
Their stellar virtue on all kinds that grow
On earth, made hereby apter to receive
Perfection from the sun's more potent ray.
These then, though unbeheld in deep of night,
Shine not in vain; nor think, though men were none,
That heaven would want spectators, God want praise:
Millions of spiritual creatures walk the earth
Unseen, both when we wake, and when we sleep.
All these with ceaseless praise his works behold,
Both day and night. How often, from the steep
Of echoing hill or thicket have we heard
Celestial voices to the midnight air,
Sole, or responsive each to others' note,
Singing their great Creator? Often in bands,
While they keep watch, or nightly rounding walk
With heavenly touch of instrumental sounds,
In full harmonic number joined, their songs
Divide the night, and lift our thoughts to heaven."
Thus talking hand in hand alone they passed
On to their blissful bower. --
-- There arrived, both stood,
Both turned; and under open sky adored
The God that made both sky, air, earth, and heaven,
Which they beheld, the moon's resplendent globe,
And starry pole. "Thou also made the night,
Maker omnipotent, and thou the day,
Which we, in our appointed work employed
Have finished, happy in our mutual help
And mutual love, the crown of all our bliss
Ordained by thee; and this delicious place
For us too large, where thy abundance wants
Partakers, and uncropt falls to the ground.
But thou have promised from us two a race,
To fill the earth, who shall with us extol
Thy goodness infinite, both when we wake,
And when we seek, as now, thy gift of sleep."
MILTON. SECTION VI. Religion and Death.
Lo! a form divinely bright
Descends, and bursts upon my sight;
A seraph of illustrious birth;
(Religion was her name on earth;)
Supremely sweet her radiant face,
And blooming with celestial grace!
Three shining cherubs formed her train,
Waved their light wings, and reached the plain;
Faith, with sublime and piercing eye,
And pinions fluttering for the sky;
Here Hope, that smiling angel stands,
And golden anchors grace her hands;
There Charity in robes of white,
Fairest and favorite maid of light!
The seraph spoke -- "'It Is Reason's part
To govern and to guard the heart;
To lull the wayward soul to rest,
When hopes and fears distract the breast.
Reason may calm this doubtful strife,
And steer thy bark through various life:
But when the storms of death are nigh,
And midnight darkness veils the (...),
Shall Reason then direct thy sail,
Disperse the clouds, or sink the ga^e?
Stranger, this skill alone is mine,
Skill that transcends his scanty line."
"Revere thyself -- you are near allied
To angels on thy better side.
How various ever their ranks or kinds,
Angels are but unbodied minds:
When the partition-walls decay,
Men emerge angels from their clay.
Yes, when the frailer body dies,
The soul asserts her kindred skies.
But minds, though sprung from heavenly race,
Must first be tutored for the place:
The joys above are understood,
And relished only by the good.
Who shall assume this guardian care;
Who shall secure their birthright there?
Souls are my charge -- to me it is given
To train them for their native heaven."
"Know then -- who bow the early knee,
And give the willing heart to me;
Who wisely when temptation waits,
Elude her frauds, and spurn her baits;
Who dare to own my injured cause,
Though fools deride my sacred laws;
Or scorn to deviate to the wrong,
Though Persecution lifts her thong;
Though all the sons of hell conspire
To raise the stake and light the fire;
Know, that for such superior souls,
There lies a bliss beyond the poles;
Where spirits shine with purer ray,
And brighten to meridian day;
Where love, where boundless friendship rules;
(No friends that change, no love that cools;)
Where rising floods of knowledge roll,
And pour, and pour upon the soul!"
"But where is the passage to the skies? --
The road through Death's black valley lies.
Nay, do not shudder at my tale;
Though dark the shades, yet safe the vale.
This path the best of men have trod;
And who'd decline the road to God?
Oh! it is a glorious boo^ to die!
This favor cannot be prized too high."
While thus she spoke, my looks expressed
The raptures kindling in my breast;
My soul a fixed attention gave;
When the stern Monarch of the Grave
With haughty strides approached -- amazed
I stood and trembled as I gazed.
The seraph calmed each anxious fear,
And kindly wiped the falling tear;
Then hastened with expanded wing
To meet the pale, terrific king.
But now what milder scenes arise!
The tyrant drops his hostile guise;
He seems a youth divinely fair,
His graceful ringlets wave his hair;
His wings their whit'ning plumes display,
His burnished plumes reflect the day;
Light flows his shining azure vest,
And all the angel stands confessed.
I viewed the change with sweet surprise;
And, Oh! I panted for the skies;
Thanked Heaven, that ever I drew my breath;
And triumphed in the thoughts of Death.
COTTON. CHAPTER III. DIDACTIC PIECES.
SECTION I. The Vanity of Wealth.
NO MORE thus brooding over yon heap,
With Avarice painful vigils keep;
Still unenjoy'd the present store,
Still endless sighs are breathed for more.
O! quit the shadow, catch the prize,
Which not all India's treasure buys!
To purchase heaven has gold the power?
Can gold remove the mortal hour?
In life can love be bought with gold?
Are Friendship's pleasures to be sold?
No -- all that is worth a wish -- a thought,
Fair Virtue gives unbrib'd, unbought.
Cease then on trash thy hopes to bind;
Let nobler views engage thy mind.
DR. JOHNSON^ SECTION II. Nothing formed in Vain.
LET no presuming impious railer tax
Creative wisdom, as if aught was formed
In vain, or not for admirable ends.
Shall little haughty Ignorance pronounce
His works unwise, of which the smallest part
Exceeds the narrow vision of her mind?
As if, upon a full-proportion'd dome,
On swelling columns heaved, the pride of art!
A critic-fly, whose feeble ray scarce spreads
An inch around, with blind presumption bold,
Should dare to tax the structure of the whole.
And lives the man, whose universal eye
Has swept at once the unbounded scheme of things;
Marked their dependence so, and firm accord,
As with unfault'ring accent to conclude,
That this avails naught? Has any seen
The mighty chain of beings, lessening down
From infinite perfection, to the brink
Of dreary nothing, desolate abyss!
From which astonished Thought, recoiling, turns?
Till then alone let zealous praise ascend,
And hymns of holy wonder, to that POWER,
Whose wisdom shines as lovely in our minds,
As on our smiling eyes his servant-sun.
THOMSON. SECTION III. On Pride.
OF all the causes, which conspire to blind
Man's erring judgment, and misguide the mind,
What the weak head with strongest bias rules,
Is Pride, the never-failing vice of fools.
Whatever Nature has in worth denied
She gives in large recruits of needless pride!
For, as in bodies, thus in souls, we find
What wants in blood and spirits, swelled with wind.
Pride, where wit fails, steps into our defense,
And fills up all the mighty void of sense.
If once right Reason drives that cloud away,
Truth breaks upon us with resistless day.
Trust not yourself; but, your defects to know,
Make use of every friend -- and every foe.
A little learning is a dangerous thing;
Drink deep, or taste not the Pierian spring:
There shallow draughts intoxicate the brain;
And drinking largely sobers us again.
Fired at first sight with what the Muse imparts,
In fearless youth we tempt the heights of arts,
While, from the bounded level of our mind,
Short views we take, nor see the lengths behind;
But, more advanced, behold, with strange surprise,
New distant scenes of endless science rise!
So pleased at first the towering Alps we try,
Mount over the vales, and seem to tread the sky;
The eternal snows appear already past,
And the first clouds and mountains seem the last:
But, those attained, we tremble to survey
The growing labors of the lengthened way;
The increasing prospect ti^es our wandering eyes;
Hills peep over hills, and Alps on Alps arise.
POPE. SECTION IV. Cruelty to Brutes censured.
I WOULD not enter on my list of friends,
(Though graced with polished manners and fine sense,
Yet wanting sensibility,) the man
Who needlessly sets foot upon a worm.
An inadvertent step may crush the snail,
That crawls at evening in the public path;
But he that has humanity, forewarned,
Will tread aside, and let the reptile live.
The creeping vermin, loa^hsome to the sight,
And charged perhaps with venom, that intrudes
A visiter unwelcome into scenes
Sacred to neatness and repose, the alcove,
The chamber, or refactory, may die.
A necessary act incurs no blame.
Not so, when held within their proper bounds,
And guiltless of offense, they range the air,
Or take their pastime in the spacious field:
There they are privileged. And he that hunts
Or harms them there, is guilty of a wrong;
Disturbs the economy of Nature's realm,
Who when she formed, designed them an abode.
The sum is this; if man's convenience, health,
Or safety, interfere, his rights and claims
Are paramount, and must extinguish theirs.
Else they are all -- the meanest things that are,
As free to live and to enjoy that life,
As God was free to form them at the first,
Who, in his sovereign wisdom, made them all.
Ye therefore who love mercy, teach your sons
To love it too. The springtime of our years
Is soon dishonored and defiled, in most,
By budding ills, that ask a prudent hand
To check them. But, alas! none sooner shoots,
If unrestrained, into luxuriant growth,
Than cruelty, most devilish of them all.
Mercy to him that shows it, is the rule
And righteous limitation of its act,
By which Heaven moves in pard'ning guilty man:
And he that shows none, being ripe in years,
And conscious of the outrage he commits,
Shall seek it, and not find it in his turn.
COWPER. SECTION V. A Paraphrase on the latter Part of the 6th Chapter of
Matthew.
WHEN my breast labors with oppressive care,
And over my cheek descends the falling tear;
While all my warring passions are at strife,
Oh! let me listen to the words of life!
Raptures deep-felt his doctrine did impart,
And thus he raised from earth the drooping heart.
"Think not, when all your scanty stores afford,
Is spread at once upon the sparing board;
Think not, when worn the homely robe appears,
While on the roof the howling tempest bears;
What farther shall this feeble life sustain,
And what shall clothe these shivering limbs again.
Say, does not life its nourishment exceed?
And the fair body its investing weed?
Behold! and look away your low despair --
See the light tenants of the barren air:
To them, nor stores, nor granaries, belong;
Naught, but the woodland, and the pleasing song;
Yet, your kind heavenly Father bends his eye
On the least wing that flits along the sky.
To him they sing, when spring renews the plain;
To him they cry, in winter's pinching reign;
Nor is their music, nor their plaint in vain:
He hears the gay, and the distressful call;
And with unsparing bounty fills them all."
"Observe the rising lily's snowy grace;
Observe the various vegetable race:
They neither toil, nor spin, but careless grow;
Yet see how warm they blush! how bright they glow!
What regal vestments can with them compare!
What king so shining! or what queen so fair!"
"If ceaseless, thus, the fowls of heaven he feeds;
If over the fields such lucid robes he spreads;
Will he not care for you, ye faithless, say?
Is he unwise? or, are ye less than they?"
THOMSON. SECTION VI. The death of a good Man a strong incentive to Virtue.
THE chamber where the good man meets his fate,
Is priviledg'd beyond the common walk
Of virtuous life, quite in the verge of heaven.
Fly, ye profane! if not, draw near with awe,
Receive the blessing, and adore the chance,
That threw in this Bethesda your disease:
If unrestor'd by this, despair your cure.
For, here, resistless Demonstration dwells;
A death-bed's a detector of the heart.
Here tired Dissimulation drops her mask,
Through life's grimace, that mistress of the scene!
Here real, and apparent, are the same.
You see the man; you see his hold on heaven,
If sound his virtue, as Philander's sound.
Heaven waits not the last moment; owns her friends
On this side death; and points them out to men;
A lecture, silent, but of sovereign power!
To vice, confusion; and to virtue, peace.
Whatever farce the boastful hero plays,
Virtue alone has majesty in death;
And greater still, the more the tyrant frowns.
YOUNG. SECTION VII. Reflections on a Future State, from a Review of Winter.
IT IS done! dread Winter spreads his latest glooms,
And reigns ^remendous over the conquered year.
How dead the vegetable kingdom lies!
How dumb the tuneful! Horror wide extends
His desolate domain. Behold, fond man!
See here thy pictured life: pass some few years,
Thy flow'ring spring, thy summer's ardent strength,
Thy sober autumn fading into age,
And pale concluding winter comes at last,
And shuts the scene. Ah! whither now are fled,
Those dreams of greatness? those unsolid hopes
Of happiness? those longings after fame?
Those restless cares? those busy bustling days?
Those gay-spent, festive nights? those veering thoughts
Lost between good and ill, that shared thy life?
All now are vanished! Virtue sole survives,
Immortal never-failing friend of man,
His guide to happiness on high. And see!
It Is come the glorious morn! the second birth
Of heaven, and earth! awak'ning Nature hears
The new-creating word; and starts to life,
In every heightened form, from pain and death
For ever free. The great eternal scheme,
Involving all, and in a perfect whole
Uniting as the prospect wider spreads,
To Reason's eye refined clears up apace.
Ye vainly wise? Ye blind presumptuous! now,
Confounded in the dust, adore that Power,
And Wisdom often arraigned: see now the cause
Why unassuming Worth in secret lived,
And died neglected: why the good man's share
In life was gall and bitterness of soul:
Why the lone widow and her orphans pined
In starving solitude; while Luxury,
In palaces, lay straining her low thought,
To form unreal wants: why heaven-born Truth,
And Moderation fair, wore the red marks
Of Superstition's scourge: why licensed Pain,
That cruel spoiler, that embosom'd foe,
Embittered all our bliss. Ye good distressed!
Ye noble few! who here unbending stand
Beneath life's pressure, yet bear up a while,
And what your bounded view, which only saw
A little part, deemed evil, is no more:
The storms of wintry time will quickly pass,
And one unbounded spring encircle all.
THOMSON. SECTION VIII. ADAM's Advice to Eve, to avoid Temptation.
"O WOMAN, best are all things as the will
Of God ordained them; his creating hand
Nothing imperfect or deficient left
Of all that be created, much less man,
Or ought that might his happy state secure,
Secure from outward force. Within himself
The danger lies, yet lies within his power:
Against his will he can receive no harm,
But God left free the will; for what obeys
Reason, is free, and Reason he made right;
But bid her well beware, and still erect,
Lest, by some fair appearing good surprised,
She dictate false, and misinform the will
To do what God expressly has forbid.
Not then Mistrust, but tender love, injoins
That I should mind thee often; and mind thou me.
Firm we subsist, yet possible to swerve,
Since Reason not impossibly may meet
Some specious object by the foe suborned,
And fall into deception unaware,
Not keeping strictest watch, as she was warned.
Seek not temptation then, which to avoid
Were better, and most likely if from me
Thou sever not; trial will come unsought.
Would thou approve thy constancy? approve
First thy obedience; the other who can know,
Not seeing thee attempted, who attest?
But if thou think, trial unsought may find
Us both securer than thus warned thou seem,
Go; for thy stay, not free, absents thee more.
Go in thy native innocence; rely
On what thou have of virtue, summon all;
For God toward thee has done his part; do thine."
MILTON. SECTION IX. On Procrastination.
BE wise today; it is madness to defer:
Next day the fatal precedent will plead;
Thus on, till wisdom is pushed out of life.
Procrastination is the thief of time.
Year after year it steals, till all ar^ fled;
And, to the mercies of a moment leaves
The vast concerns of an eternal scene.
Of man's miraculous mistakes, this bears
The palm, "That all men are about to live;"
For ever on the brink of being born.
All pay themselves the compliment to think,
They, one day, shall not drivel; and their pride
On this reversion takes up ready praise;
At least, their own; their future selves applauds;
How excellent that life they never will lead!
Time lodged in their own hands is Folly's vails;
That lodged in Fate's, to Wisdom they consign;
The thing they cannot but purpose, they postpone.
It Is not in Folly, not to scorn a fool;
And scarce in human Wisdom to do more.
All promise is poor dilatory man;
And that through every stage. When young, indeed,
In full content, we sometimes nobly rest,
Unanxious for ourselves; and only wish,
As duteous sons, our fathers were more wise.
At thirty, man suspects himself a fool;
Knows it at forty, and reforms his plan;
At fifty, chides his infamous delay;
Pushes his prudent purpose to resolve;
In all the magnanimity of thought,
Resolves, and re-resolves, then dies the same.
And why? Because he thinks himself immortal.
All men think all men mortal, but themselves;
Themselves, when some alarming shock of fate
Strikes through their wounded hearts the sudden dread:
But their hearts wounded, like the wounded air,
Soon close; where, past the shaft, no trace is found.
As from the wing no scar the sky retains;
The parted wave no furrow from the keel;
So dies in human hearts the thought of death.
Even with the tender tear which Nature sheds
Over those we love, we drop it in their grave.
YOUNG. SECTION X. That Philosophy, which stops at secondary Causes, reproved.
HAPPY the man who sees a God employed
In all the good and ill that checker life!
Resolving all events, with their effects
And manifold results, into the will
And arbitration wise of the Supreme.
Did not his eye rule all things, and intend
The least of our concerns; (since from the least
The greatest often originate;) could chance
Find place in his dominion, or dispose
One lawless particle to thwart his plan;
Then God might be surprised, and unforeseen
Contingence might alarm him, and disturb
The smooth and equal course of his affairs.
This truth, Philosophy, though eagle-eyed
In Nature's tendencies, often overlooks;
And having found his instrument, forgets
Or disregards, or, more presumptuous still,
Denies the power that wields it. God proclaims
His hot displeasure against foolish men
That live an atheist life; involves the heaven
In tempests; quits his grasp upon the winds,
And gives them all their fury; bids a plague
Kindle a fiery boil upon the skin,
And putrify the breath of blooming Health.
He calls for Famine, and the meagre fiend
Blows mildew from between his shrivel'd lips,
And taints the golden ear; he springs his mines,
And desolates a nation at a blast:
Forth steps the spruce philosopher, and tells
Of homogenial and discordant springs
And principles; of causes, how they work
By necessary laws their sure effects,
Of action and re-action. He has found
The source of the disease that Nature feels;
And bids the world take heart and banish fear.
Thou fool! will thy discov'ry of the cause
Suspend the effect or heal it? Has not God
Still wrought by means since first he made the world?
And did he not of old employ his means
To drown it? What is his creation less
Than a capacious reservoir of means,
Formed for his use, and ready at his will?
Go, dress thine eyes with eye salve; ask of him,
Or ask of whomsoever he has taught;
And learn, though late, the genuine cause of all.
COWPER. SECTION XI. Indignant Sentiments on National Prejudices and Hatred;
and on Slavery.
OH for a lodge in some vast wilderness,
Some boundless contiguity of shade,
Where rumor of oppression and deceit,
Of unsuccessful or successful war,
Might never reach me more. My ear is pained,
My soul is sick with every day's report
Of wrong and outrage with which earth is filled.
There is no flesh in man's obdurate heart;
It does not feel for man. The natural bond
Of brotherhood is severed, as the flax
That falls asunder at the touch of fire.
He finds his fellow guilty of a skin
Not colored like his own; and having power
TO enforce the wrong, for such a worthy cause
Dooms and devotes him as his lawful prey.
Lands intersected by a narrow frith
Abhor each other. Mountains interposed,
Make enemies of nations, who had else,
Like kindred drops, been mingled into one.
Thus man devotes his brother, and destroys;
And worse than all, and most to be deplored,
As Human Nature's broadest, foulest blot,
Chains him, and tasks him, and exacts his sweat
With stripes, that Mercy, with a bleeding heart,
Weeps when she sees inflicted on a beast.
Then what is man! And what man seeing this,
And having human feelings, does not blush
And hang his head, to think himself a man?
I would not have a slave to till my ground,
To carry me, to fan me while I sleep,
And tremble when I wake, for all the wealth
That sinews bought and sold have ever earned.
No: dear as freedom is, and in my heart's
Just estimation prized above all price;
I had much rather be myself the slave,
And wear the bonds, than fasten them on him.
We have no slaves at home -- then why abroad?
And they themselves once ferried over the wave
That parts us, are emancipate and loosed.
Slaves cannot breathe in England; if their lungs
Receive our air, that moment they are free;
They touch our country, and their shackles fall.
That Is noble, and bespeaks a nation proud
And jealous of the blessing. Spread it then,
And let it circulate through every vein
Of all your empire. That where Britain's power
Is felt, mankind may feel her mercy too.
COWPER. CHAPTER IV. DESCRIPTIVE PIECES.
SECTION I. The Morning in Summer.
THE meek-ey'd Morn appears, mother of dews,
At first faint gleaming in the dapple east;
Till far over either spreads the wid'ning glow;
And from before the luster of her face
White break the clouds away. With quickened step
Brown Night retires; Young Day pours in apace,
And opens all the lawny prospect wide.
The dripping rock, the mountain's misty top,
Swell on the sight, and brighten with the dawn.
Blue, through the dusk, the smoking currents shine;
And from the bladed field the fearful hare
Limps, awkward: while along the forest-glade
The wild deer trip, and often turning gaze
At early passenger. Music awakes
The native voice of undissembled joy;
And thick around the woodland hymns arise.
Roused by the cock, the soon-clad shepherd leaves
His mossy cottage, where with Peace he dwells;
And from the crowded fold, in order, drives
His flock to taste the verdure of the Morn.
Falsely luxurious, will not man awake;
And, springing from the bed of Sloth, enjoy
The cool, the fragrant, and the silent hour,
To meditation due and sacred song?
For is there aught in sleep can charm the wise?
To l^e in dead oblivion, losing half
The fleeting moments of too short a life;
Total extinction of the enlightened soul!
Or else to feverish vanity alive,
Wildered, and tossing through distempered dreams?
Who would, in such a gloomy state, remain
Longer than Nature craves; when every Muse
And every blooming pleasure waits without,
To bless the wildly devious morning walk?
THOMSON. SECTION II. Rural Sounds, as well as Rural Sights, delightful.
NOR rural sights alone, but rural sounds
Exhilarate the spirit, and restore
The tone of languid Nature. Mighty winds,
That sweep the skirt of some far spreading wood
Of ancient growth, make Music, not unlike
The dash of Ocean on his winding shore,
And lull the spirit while they fill the mind,
Unnumber'd branches waving in the blast,
And all their leaves fast fluttering all at once.
Nor less composure waits upon the roar
Of distant floods; or on the softer voice
Of neighboring fountain; or of ^ills that slip
Through the cleft rock, and, chiming as they fall
Upon loose pebbles, lose themselves at length
In matted grass, that, with a livelier green,
Betrays the secret of their silent course.
Nature inanimate employs sweet sou^,
But animated Nature sweeter (...)
To sooth and satisfy the human ear.
Ten thousand warblers cheer the day, and one
The live-long night. Nor these alone, whose notes
Nice-finger'd Art must emulate in vain,
But cawing rooks, and kites that swim sublime,
In still repeated circles, screaming loud,
The jay, the pie, and even the booding owl
That hails the rising moon, have charms for me.
Sounds inharmonious in themselves, and harsh,
Yet heard in scenes where peace for ever reigns,
And only there, please highly for their sake.
COWPER. SECTION III. The Rose.
THE rose had been washed, just washed in a shower,
Which Mary to Anna conveyed;
The plentiful moisture encumbered the flower,
And weighed down its beautiful head.
The cup was all filled, and the leaves were all wet,
And it seemed to a fanciful view,
To weep for the buds it had left with regret,
On the flourishing bush where it grew.
I hastily seized it, unfit as it was
For a nosegay, so dripping and drowned;
And swinging it rudely, too rudely, alas!
I snapp'd it -- it fell to the ground.
And such, I exclaimed, is the pitiless part,
Some act by the delicate mind,
Regardless of wringing and breaking a heart,
Already to sorrow resigned.
This elegant rose, had I shaken it less,
Might have bloomed with its owner awhile;
And the tear that is wiped with a little address,
May be followed perhaps by a smile.
COWPER. SECTION IV. Care of Birds for their Young.
AS THUS the patient dam assiduous sits,
Not to be tempted from her tender task,
Or by sharp hunger, or by smooth delight,
Though the whole loosened Spring around her blows,
Her sympathizing partner takes his stand
High on the opponent bank, and ceaseless sings
The tedious time away; or else supplies
Her place a moment, while she sudden flits
To pick the scanty meal. The appointed time
With pious toil fulfilled, the callow young,
Warmed and expanded into perfect life,
Their brittle bondage break, and come to light,
A helpless family, demanding food
With constant clamor. O what passions then,
What melting sentiments of kindly care,
On the new parents seize! Away they fly
Affectionate, and undesiring bear
The most delicious morsel to their young;
Which equally distributed, again
The search begins. Even so a gentle pair,
By fortune sunk, but formed of generous mould,
And charmed with cares beyond the vulgar breast
In some lone cot amid the distant woods,
Sustained alone by providential Heaven,
Often, as they weeping eye their infant train,
Check their own appetites, and give them all.
THOMSON. SECTION V. Liberty and Slavery contrasted. Part of a Letter written
from Italy by ADDISON.
How has kind Heaven adorned the happy land,
And scattered blessings with a wasteful hand!
But what avail her unexhausted stores,
Her blooming mountains, and her sunny shores,
With all the gifts that heaven and earth impart,
The smiles of Nature, and the charms of Art,
While proud Oppression in her valleys reigns,
And Tyranny usurps her happy plains?
The poor inhabitant beholds in vain
The redd'ning orange, and the swelling grain;
Joyless he sees the growing oils and wines,
And in the myrtle's fragrant shade repines.
Oh, Liberty, thou power supremely bright,
Profuse of bliss, and pregnant with delight!
Perpetual pleasures in thy presence reign;
And smiling Plenty leads thy wanton train.
Eased of her load, Subjection grows more light;
And Poverty looks cheerful in thy sight*
Thou make the gloomy face of Nature gay;
Giv'st beauty to the sun, and pleasure to the day.
On foreign mountains, may the sun resine
The grapes soft juice, and mellow it to wine;
With citron groves adorn a distant soil,
And the fat olive swell with floods of oil:
We envy not the warmer clime, that lies
In ten degrees of more indulgent skies;
Nor at the coarseness of our heaven repine,
Though over our heads the frozen Pleiads shine.
It Is Liberty that crowns Britania's isle,
And makes her barren rocks, and her bleak mountains smile.
SECTION VI. Charity. A Paraphrase on the 13th Chapter of the First Epistle to
the Corinthians.
DID sweeter sounds adorn my flowing tongue,
Than ever man pronounced or angel sung;
Had I all knowledge, human and divine,
That Thought can reach, or Science can define;
And had I power to give that knowledge birth,
In all the speeches of the babbling earth;
Did Shadrach's zeal my glowing breast inspire,
To weary tortures, and rejoice in fire;
Or had I faith like that which Israel saw,
When Moses gave them miracles, and law:
Yet, gracious Charity, indulgent guest,
Were not thy power exerted in my breast;
Those speeches would send up unheeded prayer;
That scorn of life would be but wild despair;
A cymbal's sound were better than my voice;
My faith were form; my eloquence were noise.
Charity, decent, modest, easy, kind,
Softens the high, and rears the abject mind;
Knows with just reins, and gentle hand, to guide
Betwixt vil^ ^hame, and arbitrary pride.
Not soon provoked, she easily forgives;
And much she suffers, as she much believes.
Soft peace she brings wherever she arrives;
She builds our quiet, as she forms our lives;
Lays the rough paths of peevish nature even;
And opens in each heart a little heaven.
Each other gift, which God on man bestows,
Its proper bounds, and due restriction knows;
To one fixed purpose dedicates its power:
And finishing its act, exists no more.
Thus, in obedience to what heaven decrees,
Knowledge shall fail, and prophecy shall cease;
But lasting Charity's more ample sway,
Nor bound by time, nor subject to decay,
In happy triumph shall for ever live;
And endless good diffuse, and endless praise receive.
As through the artist's intervening glass,
Our eye observes the distant planets pass;
A little we discover; but allow,
That more remains unseen, than Art can show;
So whilst our mind its knowledge would improve,
(Its feeble eye intent on things above,)
High as we may, we lift our reason up,
By Faith directed, and confirmed by Hope;
Yet are we able only to survey
Dawnings of beams, and promises of day;
Heaven's fuller effluence mocks our dazzled sight;
Too great its swiftness, and too strong its light.
But soon the mediate clouds shall be dispelled;
The sun shall soon be face to face beheld,
In all his robes, with all his glory on,
Seated sublime on his meridian throne.
Then constant Faith, and holy Hope shall die,
One lost in certainty, and one in joy:
Whilst thou, more happy power, fair Charity,
Triumphant sister, greatest of the three,
Thy office and thy nature still the same,
Lasting thy lamp, and unconsum'd thy flame,
Shall still survive --
Shall stand before the host of heaven confessed,
For ever blessing, and for ever blessed.
PRIOR. SECTION VII. Picture of a good Man.
SOME angel guide my pencil, while I draw,
What nothing less than angel can exceed,
A man on earth devoted to the skies;
Like ships at sea, while in, above the world.
With aspect mild, and elevated eye,
Behold him seated on a mount serene,
Above the fogs of Sense, and passion's storm:
All the black cares, and tumults, of this life,
Like harmless thunders, breaking at his feet,
Excite his pity, not impair his peace.
Earth's genuine sons, the sceptred, and the slave,
A mingled mob! a wandering herd! he sees,
Bewildered in the vale; in all unlike!
His full reverse in all! What higher praise?
What stronger demonstration of the right?
The present all their care; the future his.
When public welfare calls, or private want,
They give to fame; his bounty he conceals.
Their virtues varnish nature; his exalt.
Mankind's esteem they court; and he his own.
Theirs the wild chase of false felicities;
His, the composed possessions of the true.
Alike throughout is his consistent piece;
All of one color, and an even thread;
While party-colored shreds of happiness,
With hideous gaps between, patch up for them
A madman's robe; each puff of fortune blows
The tatters by, and shows their nakedness.
He sees with other eyes than theirs: Where they
Behold a sun, he spies a Deity;
What makes them only smile, makes him adore.
Where they see mountains, he but atoms sees;
An empire in his balance, weighs a grain.
They things terrestrial worship, as divine;
His hopes immortal blow them by, as dust,
That dims his sight, and shortens his survey,
Which longs, in infinite, to loose all bound.
Titles and honors (if they prove his fate)
He lays aside to find his dignity;
No dignity they find in aught besides.
They triumph in externals, (which conceal
Man's real glory,) proud of an eclipse:
Himself too much he prizes to be proud;
And nothing thinks so great in man, as man.
Too dear he holds his interest, to neglect
Another's welfare, or his right invade;
Their interest, like a lion, lives on prey.
They kindle at the shadow of a wrong;
Wrong he sustains with temper, looks on heaven,
Nor stoops to think his injurer his foe:
Naught, but what wounds his virtue, wounds his peace.
A covered heart their character defends;
A covered heart denies him half his praise.
With nakedness his innocence agrees!
While their broad foliage testifies their fall!
Their no joys end, where his full feast begins:
His joys create, theirs murder, future bliss.
To triumph in existence, his alone;
And his alone triumphantly to think
His true existence is not yet begun.
His glorious course was, yesterday, complete:
Death, then, was welcome; yet life still is sweet.
YOUNG. SECTION VIII. The Pleasures of Retirement.
O KNEW he but his happiness, of men
The happiest he! who, far from public rage,
Deep in the vale, with a choice few retired,
Drinks the pure pleasures of the rural life.
What though the dome be wanting, whose proud gate,
Each morning, vomits out the sneaking crowd
Of flatterers false, and in their turn abused!
Vile intercourse! What though the glittering robe,
Of every hue reflected light can give,
Or floated loose, or stiff with mazy gold,
The pride and gaze of fools, oppress him not?
What though from utmost land and sea purvey'd,
For him each rarer tributary life
Bleeds not, and his insatiate table heaps
With luxury, and death? What though his bowl
Flames not with costly juice; nor sunk in beds
Often of gay Care, he tosses out the night,
Or melts the thoughtless hours in idle state?
What though he knows not those fantastic joys,
That still amuse the wanton, still deceive;
A face of pleasure, but a heart of pain;
Their hollow moments undelighted all?
Sure peace is his; a solid life estranged
To disappointment, and fallacious hope:
Rich in content, in Nature's bounty rich,
In herbs and fruits; whatever greens the Spring,
When heaven descends in showers; or bends the bough
When Summer reddens, and when Autumn beams:
Or in the wintry glebe whatever lies
Concealed and fattens with the richest sap;
These are not wanting; nor the milky drove,
Luxuriant, spread over all the lowing vale;
Nor bleating mountains; nor the chide of streams,
And hum of bees, inviting sleep sincere
Into the guiltless breast, beneath the shade,
Or thrown at large amid the fragrant hay;
Nor aught besides of prospect, grove, or song,
Dim grottoes, gleaming lakes, and fountain clear.
Here too dwells simple Truth; plain Innocence;
Unsullied Beauty; sound unbroken Youth,
Patient of labor, with a little pleased;
Health ever blooming; unambitious Toil;
Calm Contemplation, and poetic Ease.
THOMSON. SECTION IX. The Pleasure and Benefit of an improved and well-directed
Imagination.
OH! blessed of Heaven, who not the languid songs
Of Luxury, the siren! not the bribes
Of sordid Wealth, nor all the gaudy spoils
Of pageant Honor, can seduce to leave
Those ever blooming sweets, which, from the store
Of Nature, fair Imagination culls,
To charm the enlivened soul! What though not all
Of mortal offspring can attain the height
Of envied life: though only few possess
Patrician treasures, or imperial state;
Yet Nature's care, to all her children just,
With richer treasures, and an ampler state,
Endows at large whatever happy man
Will deign to use them. His the city's pomp,
The rural honors his. Whatever adorns
The princely dome, the column and the arch,
The breathing marble and the sculptured gold,
Beyond the proud possessor's narrow claim,
His tuneful breast enjoys. For him, the Spring
Distills her dews, and from the silken gem
Its lucid leaves unfolds: for him, the hand
Of Autumn tinges every fertile branch
With blooming gold, and blushes like the morn.
Each passing hour sheds tribute from her wings;
And still new beauties meet his lonely walk,
And loves unfelt attract him. Not a breeze
Flies over the meadow; not a cloud imbibes
The setting sun's effulgence; not a strain
From all the tenants of the warbling shade
Ascends; but whence his bosom can partake
Fresh pleasure, unreprov'd. Nor thence partakes
Fresh pleasure only; for the attentive Mind,
By this harmonious action on her powers,
Becomes herself harmonious: wont so often
In outward things to meditate the charm
Of sacred order, soon she seeks at home,
To find a kindred order, to exert
Within herself this elegance o^ love,
This fair inspired delight: her tempered powers
Refine at length, and every passion wears
A chaster, milder, more attractive mein.
But if to ampler prospects, if to gaze
On Nature's form, where, negligent of all
These lesser graces, she assumes the port
Of that Eternal Majesty that weighed
The world's foundations, if to these the Mind
Exalts her daring eye; then mightier far
Will be the change, and nobler. Would the forms
Of servile Custom cramp her generous powers?
Would sordid policies, the barbarous growth
Of Ignorance and Rapine* bow her down
To tame pursuits, to indolence and fear;
Lo! she appeals to Nature, to the winds
And rolling waves, the sun's unwearied course,
The elements and seasons* all declare
F^^ what the eternal MAKER has ordained
The powers of man: we feel within ourselves
His energy divine: he tells the heart,
He meant, he made us to behold and love
What he beholds and loves, the general orb
Of life and being; to be great like Him,
Beneficent and active. Thus the men
Whom nature's works instruct, with GOD himself
Hold converse; grow familiar, day by day,
With his conceptions; act upon his plan;
And form to his, the relish of their souls.
AKENSIDE. CHAPTER V. PATHETIC PIECES.
SECTION I. The Hermit.
AT the close of the day, when the hamlet is still,
And mortals the sweets of forgetfulness prove;
When naught but the torrent is heard on the hill,
And naught but the nightingale's song in the grove,
'Twas thus, by the cave of the mountain afar,
While his harp rung symphonious, a Hermit began;
No more with himself or with nature at war,
He thought as a sage, though he felt as a man.
"Ah! why, all abandoned to darkness and woe;
"Why, lone Philomela, that languishing fall?
"For spring shall return, and a lover bestow,
"And sorrow no longer thy bosom enthral.
"But, if pity inspire thee, renew the sad lay,
"Mourn, sweetest complainer, man calls thee to mourn;
"O sooth him, whose pleasures like thine pass away:
"Full quickly they pass -- but they never return.
"Now gliding remote, on the verge of the sky,
"The moon half extinguished her crescent displays:
"But lately I marked, when majestic on high
"She shone, and the planets were lost in her blaze.
"Roll on, thou fair orb, and with gladness pursue
"The path that conducts thee to splendor again:
"But man's faded glory what change shall renew!
"Ah fool! to exult in a glory so vain!
"'It Is night, and the landscape is lovely no more:
"I mourn; but, ye woodlands, I mourn not for you;
"For morn is approaching, your charms to restore,
"Perfumed with fresh fragrance, and glittering with dew.
"Nor yet for the ravage of winter I mourn;
"Kind nature the embryo blossom will save:
"But when shall spring visit the mouldering urn!
"O when shall day dawn on the night of the grave!
''Twas thus, by the glare of false science betrayed,
'That leads, to bewilder; and dazzles, to blind;
'My thoughts wont to roam, from shade onward to shade,
'Destruction before me, and sorrow behind.
"O pity, great father of light, then I cried,
"Thy creature who fain would not wander from thee!
"Lo humbled in dust, I relinquish my pride;
"From doubt and from darkness thou only can free.
'And darkness and doubt are now flying away;
'No longer I roam in conjecture forlorn:
'So breaks on the traveller, faint, and astray,
'The bright and the balmy effulgence of morn.
'See truth, love, and mercy, in triumph descending,
'And nature all glowing in Eden's first bloom!
'On the cold cheek of death smiles and roses are blending,
'And beauty immortal awakes from the tomb.'
BEATTIE. SECTION II. The Beggar's Petition.
PITY the sorrows of a poor old man,
Whose trembling limbs have born him to your door;
Whose days are dwindled to the shortest span;
Oh! give relief, and Heaven will bless your store.
These tattered clothes my poverty bespeak,
These hoary locks proclaim my lengthened years;
And many a furrow in my grief-worn cheek,
Has been the channel to a flood of tears.
Yon house, erected on the rising ground,
With tempting aspect drew me from my road;
For Plenty there a residence has found,
And Grandeur a magnificent abode.
Hard is the fate of the infirm and poor!
Here, as I craved a morsel of their bread,
A pampered menial drove me from the door,
To seek a shelter in a humbler shed.
Oh! take me to your hospitable dome;
Keen blows the wind, and piercing is the cold!
Short is my passage to the friendly tomb;
For I am poor, and miserably old.
Should I reveal the sources of my grief,
If soft humanity ever touched your breast,
Your hands would not withhold the kind relief,
And tears of pity would not be represt.
Heaven sends misfortunes, why should we repine!
It Is Heaven has brought me to the state you see;
And your condition may be soon like mine,
The child of Sorr^w and of Misery.
A little farm was my paternal lot;
Then like the lark I sprightly hailed the morn;
But ah! Oppression forced me from my cot,
My cattle died, and blighted was my corn.
My daughter, once the comfort of my age,
Lured by a villain from her native home,
Is cast abandoned on the world's wide stage,
And doomed in scanty poverty to roam.
My tender wife, sweet soother of my care!
Struck with sad anguish at the stern decree,
Fell, lingering fell, a victim to despair;
And left the world to wretchedness and me.
Pity the sorrows of a poor old man,
Whose trembling limbs have born him to your door;
Whose days are dwindled to the shortest span,
Oh! give relief, and Heaven will bles^ your store.
ANON. SECTION III. Unhappy Close of Life.
How shocking must thy summons be, O Death!
To him that is at ease in his possessions!
Who counting on long years of pleasure here,
Is quite unfurnished for the world to come!
In that dread moment, how the frantic soul
Raves round the walls of her clay tenement:
Runs to each avenue, and shrieks for help*
But shrieks in vain! How wishfully she looks
On all she is leaving, now no longer hers!
A little longer; yet a little longer;
O might she stay to wash away her stains;
And fit her for her passage! mournful sight!
Her very eyes weep blood; and every groan
She heaves is big with horror. But the foe,
Like a staunch murderer, steady to his purpose,
Pursues her close through every lane of life;
Nor misses once the track, but presses on,
Till, forced at last to the tremendous verge,
At once she sinks to everlasting ruin.
BLAIR. SECTION IV. Elegy to Pity.
HAIL, lovely power! whose bosom heaves the sigh,
When Fancy paints the scene of deep distress;
Whose tears spontaneous crystalize the eye,
When rigid Fate denies the power to bless.
Not all the sweets Arabia's gales convey
From flowery meads, can with that sigh compare:
Not dew-drops glittering in the morning ray,
^eem near ^o beauteous as that falling tear.
Devoid of fear, the fawns around thee play;
Emblem of peace, the dove before thee flies;
No blood-stained traces mark thy blameless way*
Beneath thy feet no hapless insect dies,
Come, lovely nymph, and range the mead with me,
To spring the partridge from the guileful foe;
From secret snares the struggling bird to free;
And stop the hand uprais'd to give the blow.
And when the air with heat meridian glows,
And Nature droops beneath the conquering gleam
Let us, slow wandering where the current flows,
Save sinking flies that float along the stream.
Or turn to nobler, greater tasks thy care,
To me thy sympathetic gifts impart;
Teach me in Friendship's griefs to bear a share,
And justly boast the generous feeling heart.
Teach me to sooth the helpless orphan's grief;
With timely aid the widow's woes assuage;
To Mis'ry's moving cries to yield relief;
And be the sure resource of drooping Age.
So when the genial spring of life shall fade,
And sinking Nature own the dread decay,
Some soul congenial then may lend its aid,
And gild the close of Life's eventful day.
SECTION V. Verses, supposed to be written by ALEXANDER SELKIRK, during his
solitary Abode in the Island of Juan Fernandez.
I AM monarch of all I survey,
My right there is none to dispute;
From the center all round to the sea,
I am lord of the fowl and the brute,
Oh Solitude! where are the charms,
That sages have seen in thy face?
Better dwell in the midst of alarms,
Than reign in this horrible place.
I am out of Humanity's reach,
I must finish my journey alone;
Never hear the sweet music of speech;
I start at the sound of my own.
The beasts that roam over the plain,
My form with indifference see;
They are so unacquainted with man,
Their tameness is shocking to me.
Society, friendship, and love,
Divinely bestowed upon man,
Oh had I the wings of a dove,
How soon would I taste you again!
My sorrows I then might assuage
In the ways of Religion and Truth;
Might learn from the wisdom of age,
And be cheered by the sallies of youth.
Religion! what treasure untold
Resides in that heavenly word!
More precious than silver or gold,
Or all that this earth can afford.
But the sound of the church-going bell
These valleys and rocks never heard;
Never sighed at the sound of a knell,
Or smiled when a sabbath appeared.
Ye winds that have made me your sport,
Convey to this desolate shore,
Some cordial endearing report
Of a land I shall visit no more.
My friends, do they now and then send
A wish or a thought after me?
O tell me I yet have a friend,
Though a friend I am never to see.
How fleet is a glance of the Mind!
Compared with the speed of its flight,
The tempest itself lags behind,
And the swift-wing'd arrows of light.
When I think of my own native land,
In a moment I seem to be there;
But, alas! recollection at hand
Soon hurries me back to despair.
But the sea-fowl is gone to her nest,
The beast is laid down in his lair;
Even here is a season of rest,
And I to my cabin repair.
There Is mercy in every place;
And mercy -- encouraging thought!
Gives even Affliction a grace,
And reconciles man to his lot.
COWPER. SECTION VI. Gratitude.
WHEN all thy mercies, O my God!
My rising soul surveys,
Transported with the view, I Am lost
In wonder, love, and praise.
O how shall words, with equal warmth,
The gratitude declare,
That glows within my ravished heart?
But thou can read it there.
Thy Providence my life sustained,
And all my wants redrest,
When in the silent womb I lay,
And hung upon the breast.
To all my weak complaints and cries,
Thy Mercy lent an ear,
Ere yet my feeble thoughts had learnt
To form themselves (...) ^ay'r.
Unnumber'd comforts to my soul
Thy tender care bestowed,
Before my infant heart conceived
From whom those comforts flowed.
When, in the slippery paths of youth,
With heedless steps, I ran,
Thine arm, unseen, conveyed me safe,
And led me up to man.
Through hidden dangers, toils, and deaths,
It gently cleared my way;
And through the pleasing snares of Vice
More to be feared than they.
When worn with sickness, often have thou,
With health, renewed my face,
And, when in sins and sorrow sunk,
Revived my soul with grace.
Thy bounteous hand, with worldly bliss,
Has made my cup run over;
And, in a kind and faithful friend,
Has doubled all my store.
Ten thousand thousand precious gifts
My daily thanks employ;
Nor is the least, a cheerful heart,
That tastes those gifts with joy.
Through every period of my life,
Thy goodness I Will pursue;
And, after death, in distant worlds,
The glorious theme renew.
When Nature fails, and day and night
Divide thy works no more,
My ever-grateful heart, O Lord!
Thy mercy shall adore.
Through all eternity, to thee
A joyful song I Will raise,
For O! eternity's too short
To utter all thy praise.
ADDISON. SECTION VII. A Man perishing in the Snow; from whence Reflections are
raised on the Miseries of Life.
AS THUS the snows arise; and foul, and fierce,
All winter drives along the darkened air;
In his own loose-revolving fields, the swain
Disaster'd stands; sees other hills ascend,
Of unknown joyless brow; and other scenes,
Of horrid prospect, shag the trackless plain:
Nor finds the river, nor the forest, hid
Beneath the formless wild; but wanders on
From hill to dale, still more and more astray;
Impatient flouncing through the drifted heaps,
Stung with the thoughts of home; the thoughts of home
Rush on his nerves, and call their vigor forth
In many a vain attempt. How sinks his soul!
What black despair, what horrors fill his heart!
When, for the dusky spot, which Fancy feigned
His tufted cottage rising through the snow,
He meets the roughness of the middle waste,
Far from the track, and blessed abode of man;
While round him night resistless closes fast,
And every tempest howling over his head,
Renders the savage wilderness more wild.
Then ^hrong the busy shapes into his mind,
Of covered pits, unfa^homably deep,
A dire descent, beyond the power of frost!
Of faithless bogs; of precipices huge,
Smoothed up with snow; and what is land, unknown,
What water, of the still unfrozen spring,
In the loose marsh or solitary lake,
Where the fresh fountain from the bottom boils.
These check his fearful steps; and down he sinks
Beneath the shelter of the shapeless drift,
Thinking over all the bitterness of death,
Mixed with the tender anguish nature s^oots
Through the wrung bosom of the dying man,
His wife, his children, and his friends unseen.
In vain for him the officious wife prepares
The fire fair-blazing, and the vestment warm;
In vain his little children, peeping out
Into the mingled storm, demand their sire,
With tears of artless innocence. Alas!
Nor wife, nor children, more shall he behold;
Nor friends, nor sacred home. On every nerve
The deadly winter seizes; shuts up sense;
And, over his inmost vitals creeping cold,
Lays him along the snows, a stiffen'd corse,
Stretched out and bleaching in the northern blast.
Ah, little think the gay licentious proud,
Whom pleasure, power, and affluence surround;
They who their thoughtless hours in giddy mirth,
And wanton, often cruel riot, waste;
Ah little think they, while they dance along,
How many feel, this very moment, death,
And all the sad variety of pain.
How many sink in the devouring flood,
Or more devouring flame. How many bleed,
By shameful variance betwixt man and man.
How many pine in want, and dungeon glooms,
Shut from the common air, and common use
Of their own limbs. How many drink the cup
Of baleful Grief, or eat the bitter bread
Of Misery. Sore pierced by wintry winds,
How many shrink into the sordid hut
Of cheerless Poverty. How many shake
With all the fiercer tortures of the mind,
Unbounded passion, madness, guilt, remorse.
How many, racked with honest passions, droop
In deep retired distress. How many stand
Around the deathbed of their dearest friends,
And point the parting anguish. Thought fond man
Of these, and all the thousand nameless ills,
That one incessant struggle render life
One scene of toil, of suffering, and of fate,
Vice in his high career would stand appalled,
And heedless rambling Impulse learn to think;
The conscious heart of Charity would warm,
And her wide wish Benevolence dilate;
The social tear would rise, the social sigh
And into clear perfection, gradual bliss,
Refining still, the social Passions work.
THOMSON. SECTION VIII. A Morning Hymn.
THESE are thy glorious works, Parent of good,
Almighty, thine this universal frame,
Thus wondrous fair; thyself how wondrous then!
Unspeakable, who sitt'st above these heavens
To us, invisible, or dimly seen
In these thy lowest works; yet these declare
Thy goodness beyond thought, and power divine.
Speak ye who best can tell, ye sons of light,
Angels; for ye behold him, and with songs
And choral symphonies, day without night,
Circle his throne rejoicing; ye in heaven,
On earth, join all ye creatures to extol
Him first, Him last, Him midst, and without end.
Fairest of stars, last in the train of night,
If better thou belong not to the dawn,
Sure pledge of day, that crown'st the smiling morn
With thy bright circlet, praise him in thy sphere,
While day arises, that sweet hour of prime.
Thou Sun, of this great world, both eye and soul,
Acknowledge him thy greater, sound his praise
In thy eternal course, both when thou climb'st,
And when high noon have gained, and when thou fall'st.
Moon, that now meet'st the orient sun, now fly'st,
With the fixed stars, fixed in their orb that flies;
And ye five other wandering fires that move
In mystic dance, not without song, resound
His praise, who out of darkness called up light.
Air, and ye Elements, the eldest birth
Of Nature's womb, than in quaternion run
Perpetual circle, multiform; and mix
And nourish all things; let your ceaseless change
Vary to our great MAKER still new praise.
Ye Mists and Exhalations that now rise
From hill or steaming lake, dusky or gray,
Till the sun paint your fleecy skirts with gold,
In honor to the worlds great AUTHOR rise!
Whether to deck with clouds the uncolour'd sky,
Or wet the thirsty earth with falling showers,
Rising or falling still advance his praise.
His praise, ye Winds, that from four quarters blow.
Breathe soft or loud; and wave your tops, ye Pines,
With every plant in sign of worship wave.
Fountains, and ye that warble as ye flow
Melodious murmurs, warbling tune his praise.
Join voices, all ye living Souls; ye Birds,
That singing up to heaven's gate ascend,
Bear on your wings and in your notes his praise.
Ye that in waters glide, and ye that walk
The earth, and stately tread, or lowly creep;
Witness if I be silent, morn or even,
To hill or valley, fountain, or fresh shade
Made vocal by my song, and taught his praise.
Hail, UNIVERSAL LORD! be bounteous still
To give us only good; and if the night
Has gathered aught of evil, or concealed,
Disperse it, as now light dispels the dark.
MILTON. CHAPTER VI. PROMISCUOUS AND MIXED PIECES.
SECTION I. Ode to Content.
O THOU, the nymph with placid eye!
O seldom found, yet ever nigh!
Receive my temperate vow:
Not all the storms that shake the pole
Can ever disturb thy halcyon soul,
And smooth unaltered brow.
O come, in simplest vest arrayed,
With all thy sober cheer displayed,
To bless my longing sight;
Thy mien composed, thy even pace,
Thy meek regard, thy matron grace,
And chaste subdued delight.
No more by varying passions beat,
O gently guide my pilgrim feet
To find thy hermit cell;
Where in some pure and equal sky,
Beneath thy soft indulgent eye,
The modest Virtues dwell.
Simplicity in Attic vest,
And Innocence, with candid breast,
And clear undaunted eye;
And Hope, who points to distant years,
Fair opening through this vale of tears
A vista to the sky.
There Health, through whose calm bosom glide
The temperate Joys in even tide,
That rarely ebb or flow;
And Patience there, thy sister meek,
Presents her mild, unvarying cheek,
To meet the offered blow.
Her influence taught the Phrygian sage
A tyrant master's wanton rage,
With settled smiles, to meet:
Inured to toil and bitter bread,
He bowed his meek submitted head,
And kissed thy sainted feet.
But thou, Oh Nymph retired and coy!
In what brown hamlet do thou joy
To tell thy tender tale;
The lowliest children of the ground,
Moss-rose and violet blossom round,
And lilly of the vale.
O say what soft propitious hour
I best may choose to hail thy power,
And court thy gentle sway!
When Autumn, friendly to the Muse,
Shall thy own modest tints diffuse,
And shed thy milder day?
When Eve, her dewy star beneath,
Thy halmy spirit loves to breathe,
And every storm is laid?
If such an hour was ever thy choice,
Often let me hear thy soothing voice,
Low whispering through the shade.
BARBAULD. SECTION II. The Shepherd and the Philosopher.
REMOTE from cities lived a swain,
Unvex'd with all the cares of gain;
His head was silvered over with age,
And long experience made him sage;
In summer's heat and winter's cold,
He fed his flock and penned the fold;
His hours in c^eerful labor flew,
Nor envy no^ ambition knew:
His wisdom and his honest fame
Through all the country raised his name.
A deep philosopher (whose rules
Of moral life were drawn from schools)
The shepherd's homely cottage sought
And thus explored his reach of thought.
"Whence is thy learning? Has thy toil
Over books consumed the midnight oil?
Have thou old Greece and Rome surveyed,
And the vast sense of Plato weighed?
Has Socrates thy soul refined,
And have thou fathomed Tully's mind?
Or, like the wise Ulysses, thrown,
By various fates, on realms unknown,
Have thou through many cities strayed,
Their customs, laws, and manners weighed?"
The shepherd modestly replied,
"I never the paths of learning tried;
Nor have I rom'd in foreign parts,
To read mankind, their laws and arts;
For man is practiced in disguise,
He cheats the most discerning eyes.
Who by that search shall wiser grow?
By that ourselves we never know.
The little knowledge I have gained,
Was all from simple Nature drained;
Hence my life's maxims took their rise,
Hence grew my settled hate to vice.
The daily labors of the be
Awake my soul to industry.
Who can observe the careful ant,
And not provide for future want?
My dog (the trustiest of his kind)
With gratitude inflames my mind;
I mark his true, his faithful way,
And in my service copy Tray.
In constancy and nuptial love,
I learn my duty from the dove.
The hen, who from the chilly air,
With pious wing, protects her care,
And every fowl that flies at large,
Instructs me in a parent's charge."
"From Nature too I take my rule,
To shun contempt and ridicule.
I never, with important air,
In conversation overbear.
Can grave and formal pass for wise,
When men the solemn owl despise?
My tongue within my lips I rein;
For who talks much must talk in vain.
We from the wordy torrent fly:
Who listens to the chat'ring pie?
Nor would I, with felonious flight,
By stealth invade my neighbors right:
Rapacious animals we hate;
Kites, hawks, and wolves, deserve their fate,
Do not we just abhorrence find
Against the toad and serpent kind?
But envy, calumny, and spite,
Bear stronger venom in their bite.
Thus every object of creation
Can furnish hints to contemplation;
And, from the most minute and mean,
A virtuous mind can morals glean."
"Thy fame is just," the sage replies;
"Thy virtue proves thee truly wise.
Pride often guides the author's pen,
Books as affected are as men:
But he who studies nature's laws,
From certain truth his maxims draws;
And those, without our schools, suffice
To make men moral, good, and wise."
GAY. SECTION III. The road to Happiness open to all Men
OH Happiness! our being's end and aim!
Good, Pleasure, Ease, Content! whatever thy name;
That something still which prompts the eternal sigh,
For which we bear to live, or dare to die;
Which still so near us, yet beyond us lies,
O'erlook'd, seen double, by the fool and wise;
Plant of celestial seed, if dropped below,
Say, in what mortal soil thou deign'st to grow?
Fair opening to some court's propitious shine,
Or deep with di'monds in the flaming mine?
Twined with the wreaths Parnassian laurels yield,
Or reaped in iron harvests of the field?
Where grows? where grows it not? if vain our toil,
We ought to blame the culture, not the soil.
Fixed to no spot is happiness sincere,
It Is no where to be found, or every where:
It Is never to be bought, but always free;
And, fled from monarchs, St. John! dwells with thee.
Ask of the learned the way? The learned are blind;
This bids to serve, and that to shun mankind:
Some place the bliss in action, some in ease,
Those call it pleasure, and contentment these:
Some sunk to beasts, find pleasure end in pain;
Some swelled to gods, confess even virtue vain;
Or indolent, to each extreme they fall,
To trust in every thing, or doubt of all.
Who thus define it, say they more or less
Than this, that happiness is happiness?
Take Nature's path, and mad Opinion's leave;
All states can reach it, and all heads conceive;
Obvious her goods, in no extreme they dwell;
There needs but thinking right, and meaning well;
And mourn our various portions as we please,
Equal is Common Sense, and Common Ease.
Remember, man, "the Universal Cause
"Acts not by partial, but by general laws;"
And makes what happiness we justly call
Subsist not in the good of one but all.
POPE. SECTION IV. The Goodness of Providence.
THE Lord my pasture shall prepare,
And feed me with a shepherd's care;
His presence shall my wants supply,
And guard me with a watchful eye;
My noonday walks he shall attend,
And all my midnight hours defend.
When in the sultry glebe I faint,
Or on the thirsty mountains pant;
To fertile vales, and dewy meads,
My weary wandering steps he leads;
Where peaceful rivers, soft and slow,
Amid the verdant landscape flow.
Though in the paths of Death I tread,
With gloomy horrors overspread,
My steadfast heart shall fear no ill,
For thou, O Lord, art with me still;
Thy friendly crook shall give me aid,
And guide me through the dreadful shade.
Though in a bare and rugged way,
Through devious lonely wilds I stray,
Thy bounty shall my pains beguile;
The barren wilderness shall smile,
With sudden greens and herbage crowned,
And streams shall murmur all around.
ADDISON. SECTION V. The CREATOR's Works attest his Greatness.
THE spacious firmament on high,
With all the blue etherial sky,
And spangled heavens, a shining frame,
Their great Original proclaim:
The unwearied sun, from day to day,
Does his Creator's power display,
And publishes to every land,
The work of an Almighty hand.
Soon as the evening shades prevail,
The moon takes up the wondrous tale,
And, nightly, to the listening earth,
Repeats the story of her birth;
Whilst all the stars that round her burn,
And all the planets in their turn,
Confirm the tidings as they roll,
And spread the truth from pole to pole.
What though, in solemn silence, all
Move round the dark terrestrial ball!
What though nor real voice nor sound,
Amid their radient orbs be found!
In Reason's ear they all rejoice,
And utter forth a glorious voice,
For ever singing as they shine,
"The hand that made us is Divine."
ADDISON. SECTION VI. An Address to the DEITY.
O THOU! whose balance does the mountains weigh;
Whose will the wild tumultuous seas obey;
Whose breath can turn those watery worlds to flame,
That flame to tempest, and that tempest tame;
Earth's meanest son, all trembling, prostrate falls,
And on the boundless of thy goodness calls.
O! give the winds all past offense to sweep,
To scatter wide, or bury in the deep.
Thy power, my weakness, may I ever see,
And wholly dedicate my soul to thee.
Reign over my will; my passions ebb and flow
At thy command, nor human motive know!
If anger boil, let anger be my praise,
And sin the graceful indignation raise.
My love be warm to succor the distressed,
And lift the burden from the soul oppressed.
Oh may my understanding ever read
This glorious volume which thy wisdom made!
May sea and land, and earth and heaven be joined,
To bring the eternal Author to my mind!
When oceans roar, or awful thunders roll,
May thoughts of thy dread vengeance shake my soul!
When earth's in bloom, or planets proudly shine,
Adore, my heart, the Majesty divine!
Grant I may ever at the morning ray,
Open with prayer the consecrated day;
Tune thy great praise, and bid my soul arise,
And with the mounting sun ascend the skies;
As that advances, let my zeal improve,
And glow with ardour of consummate love;
Nor cease at eve, but with the setting sun
My endless worship shall be still begun.
And Oh! permit the gloom of solemn night,
To sacred thought may forcibly invite.
When this world's shut, and awful planets rise,
Call on our minds, and raise them to the skies;
Compose our souls with a less dazzling fight,
And show all Nature in a milder light;
How every boisterous thought in calm subsides!
How the smoothed spirit into goodness glides!
O how divine! to tread the milky way,
To the bright palace of the Lord of Day;
His court admire, or his favor sue,
Or leagues of friendship with his saints renew;
Pleased to look down and see the world asleep;
While I long vigils to its Founder keep!
Can thou not shake the center? Oh control,
Subdue by force, the rebel in my soul;
Thou, who can still the raging of the flood,
Restrain the various tumults of my blood;
Teach me, with equal firmness, to sustain
Alluring Pleasure and assaulting Pain.
O may I pant for thee in each desire!
And with strong faith foment the holy fire!
Stretch out my soul in hope, and grasp the prize,
Which in Eternity's deep bosom lies!
At the great day of recompense behold,
Devoid of fear, the fatal book unfold!
Then wasted upward to the blissful seat,
From age to age my grateful song repeat;
My Light, my Life, my God, my Savior see,
And rival angels in the praise of thee!
YOUNG. SECTION VII. The pursuit of Happiness often ill-directed.
THE midnight moon serenely smiles
Over Nature's soft repose:
No lowering cloud obscures the sky,
Nor ruffling tempest blows.
Now every passion sinks to rest,
The throbbing heart lies still;
And varying schemes of life no more
Distract the laboring will.
In silence hushed to Reason's voice,
Attends each mental power:
Come, dear Emilia, and enjoy
Reflection's favorite hour.
Come; while the peaceful scene invites,
Let Us search this ample round,
Where shall the lovely fleeting form
Of Happiness be found?
Does it amidst the frolic mirth
Of gay assemblies dwell;
Or hide beneath the solemn gloom,
That shades the hermit's cell?
How often the laughing brow of Joy
A sickening heart conceals!
And, through the cloisters deep recess,
Invading Sorrow steals.
In vain, through beauty, fortune, wit,
The fugitive we trace;
It dwells not in the faithless smile
That brightens Clodia's face.
Perhaps the joy to these denied,
The heart in friendship finds:
Ah! dear delusion, gay conceit
Of visionary minds!
However our varying notions rove,
Yet all agree in one,
To place its being in some state,
At distance from our own.
O blind to each indulgent aim,
Of power supremely wise,
Who fancy Happiness in aught
The hand of Heaven denies!
Vain is alike the joy we seek,
And vain what we possess,
Unless harmonious Reason tunes
The passions into peace.
To tempered wishes, just desires,
Is Happiness confined;
And, deaf to Folly's call, attends
The music of the mind.
CARTER. SECTION VIII. The Fireside.
DEAR Chloe, while the busy crowd,
The vain, the wealthy, and the proud,
In Folly's maze advance;
Though singularity and pride
Be called our choice, we'll step aside,
Nor join the giddy dance.
From the gay world, we'll often retire
To our own family and fire,
Where love our hours employs;
No noisy neighbor enters here,
No intermeddling stranger near,
To spoil our heartfelt joys.
If solid happiness we prize,
Within our breast this jewel lies;
And they are fools who roam:
The world has nothing to bestow;
From our own selves our joys must flow,
And that dear hut, our home.
Of rest was Noah's dove bereft,
When with impatient wing she left
That safe retreat, the ark;
Giving her vain excursion over,
The disappointed bird once more
Explored the sacred bark.
Though fools spurn Hymen's gentle powers,
We, who improve his golden hours,
By sweet experience know,
That marriage, rightly understood,
Gives to the tender and the good
A paradise below.
Our babes shall richest comforts bring;
If tutored right ^^ey'll prove a spring
Whence pleasures ever rise:
We'll form their minds, with studious care,
To all that is manly, good, and fair,
And train them for the skies.
While they our wisest hours engage,
They Will joy our youth, support our age,
And crown our hoary hairs:
They Will g^ow in virtue every day,
And thus our fondest loves repay,
And recompense our cares.
No borrowed joys! they are all our own,
While to the world we live unknown,
Or by the world forgot;
Monarchs! we envy not your state;
We look with pity on the great,
And bless our humbler lot.
Our portion is not large, indeed;
But then how little do we need!
For nature's calls are few:
In this the art of living lies,
To want no more than may suffice,
And make that little do.
We'll therefore relish, with content,
What'er kind Providence has sent,
Nor aim beyond our power;
For, if our stock be very small,
It Is prudence to enjoy it all,
Nor loose the present hour.
To be resigned, when ills betide,
Patient when favors are denied,
And pleased with favors given:
Dear Chloe, this is wisdom's part;
This is that incense of the heart,
Whose fragrance smells to heaven.
We'll ask no long protracted treat,
Since winter-life is seldom sweet;
But, when our feast is over,
Grateful from table we'll arise,
Nor grudge our sons, with envious eyes,
The relics of our store.
Thus, hand in hand, through life we'll go;
Its checkered paths of joy and woe,
With cautious steps, we'll tread;
Quit its vain scenes without a tear,
Without a trouble or a fear,
And mingle with the dead.
While conscience, like a faithful friend,
Shall through the gloomy vale attend,
And cheer our dying breath;
Shall when all other comforts cease,
Like a kind angel whisper peace,
And smooth the bed of Death.
COTTON. SECTION IX. Providence vindicated in the present State of Man.
HEAVEN from all creatures hides the book of Fate,
All but the page prescribed, their present state;
From brutes what men, from men what spirits know,
Or who could suffer being here below?
The lamb thy riot dooms to bleed today,
Had he thy reason, would he skip and play?
Pleased to the last, he crops the flowery food,
And licks the hand just raised to shed his blood.
Oh blindness to the future! kindly given,
That each may fill the circle marked by Heaven;
Who sees with equal eye, as God of all,
A hero perish, or a sparrow fall;
Atoms or systems into ruin hurled,
And now a bubble burst, and now a world.
Hope humbly then; with trembling pinions soar;
Wait the great teacher Death; and God adore.
What future bliss, he gives not thee to know,
But gives that hope to be thy blessing now.
Hope springs eternal in the human breast;
Man never IS, but always TO BE blessed;
The soul, uneasy and confined from home,
Rests and expatiates in a life to come.
Lo, the poor Indian! whose untutored mind
Sees God in clouds, or hears him in the wind;
His soul proud Science never taught to stray
Far as the Solar Walk or Milky Way;
Yet simple Nature to his hope has given,
Behind the cloud-topt hill, a humbler heaven;
Some safer world in depth of woods embraced,
Some happier island in the watery waste;
Where slaves once more their native land behold,
No fiends torment, no Christians thirst for gold.
To BE, contents his natural desire,
He asks no angel's wing, no seraph's fire:
But thinks, admitted to that equal sky,
His faithful dog shall bear him company.
Go, wiser thou! and in thy scale of sense,
Weigh thy opinion against Providence;
Call imperfection what thou fanciest such,
Say here he gives too little, there too much. --
In pride, in reasoning Pride, our error li^s;
All quit their sphere, and rush into the skies.
Pride still is aiming at the blessed abodes,
Men would be angels, angels would be gods.
Aspiring to be gods, if angels fell,
Aspiring to be angels, men rebel;
And who but wishes to invert the laws
Of ORDER, sins against the ETERNAL CAUSE.
POPE. SECTION X. Selfishness reproved.
HAS God, thou fool! worked solely for thy good,
Thy joy, thy pastime, thy attire, thy food?
Who for thy table feeds the wanton fawn,
For him as kindly spread the flowery lawn.
Is it for thee the lark ascends and sings?
Joy tunes his voice, joy elevates his wings.
Is it for thee the linnet pours his throat?
Loves of his own, and raptures swell the note.
The bounding steed you pompously bestride,
Shares with his lord the pleasure and the pride.
Is thine alone the seed that strews the plain?
The bird's of heaven shall vindicate their grain.
Thine the full harvest of the golden year?
Part pays, and justly the deserving steer.
The hog, that ploughs not, nor obeys thy call,
Lives on the labors of this lord of all.
Know, Natures children all divide her care;
The fur that warms a monarch, warmed a bear.
While man exclaims, "See all things for my use!"
"See man for mine!" replies a pampered goose.
And just as short of reason he must fall,
Who thinks all made for one, not one for all.
Grant that the powerful still the weak control;
Be man the wit and tyrant of the whole
Nature that tyrant checks; he only knows,
And helps another creature's wants and woes.
Say, will the falcon, stooping from above,
Smit with her varying plumage, spare the dove?
Admires the jay, the insect's gilded wings?
Or hears the hawk when Philomela sings?
Man cares for all: to birds he gives his woods,
To beasts his pastures, and to fish his floods;
For some his interest prompts him to provide,
For more his pleasure, yet for more his pride.
All feed on one vain patron, and enjoy
The extensive blessing of his luxury.
That very life his learned hunger craves,
He saves from famine, from the savage saves;
Nay, feasts the animal he dooms his feast;
And, till he ends the being, makes it blessed;
Which sees no more the stroke, nor feels the pain,
Than favored man by touch ethereal slain.
The creature had his feast of life before;
Thou too must perish, when thy feast is over!
POPE. SECTION XI. Human Frailty.
WEAK and irresolute is man;
The purpose of today,
Woven with pains into his plan,
Tomorrow rends away.
The bow well bent, and smart the spring,
Vice seems already slain;
But Passion rudely snaps the string,
And it revives again.
Some foe to his upright intent
Finds out his weaker part,
Virtue engages his assent,
But pleasure wins his heart.
It Is here the folly of the wise,
Through all his art, we view;
And while his tongue the charge denies,
His conscience owns it true.
Bound on a voyage of awful length,
And dangers little known,
A stranger to superior strength,
Man vainly trusts his own.
But oars alone can never prevail
To reach the distant coast;
The breath of heaven must swell the sail,
Or all the toil is lost.
COWPER. SECTION XII. Ode to Peace.
COME, Peace of Mind, delightful guest!
Return, and make thy downy nest
Once more in this sad heart:
Nor riches I, nor power pursue,
Nor hold forbidden joys in view;
We therefore need not part.
Where will thou dwell, if not with me,
From Avarice and Ambition free,
And Pleasure's fatal wiles;
For whom, alas! do thou prepare
The sweets that I was wont to share,
The banquet of thy smiles?
The great, the gay, shall they partake
The heaven that thou alone can make;
And will thou quit the stream,
That murmurs through the dewy mead,
The grove and the sequestered shade,
To be a guest with them?
For thee I panted, thee I prized,
For thee I gladly sacrificed
Whatever I loved before;
And shall I see thee start away,
And helpless, hopeless, hear thee say --
Farewell! we meet no more?
COWPER. SECTION XIII. Ode to Adversity.
DAUGHTER of Heaven, relentless power,
Thou tamer of the human breast,
Whose iron scourge, and torturing hour,
The bad affright, afflict the best!
Bound in thy adamantine chain*
The proud are taught to taste of pain,
And purple tyrants vainly grown
With pangs unfelt before, unpitied and alone.
When first thy Sire to send on earth
Virtue, his darling child, designed,
To thee he gave the heavenly birth,
And bade to form her infant mind.
Stern rugged nurse! thy rigid lore
With patience many a year she bore,
What sorrow was, thou bad'st her know;
And from her own she learned to melt at other's woe.
Scared at thy frown terrific, fly
Self-pleasing Folly's idle brood,
Wild Laughter, Noise, and thoughtless Joy,
And leave us leisure to be good.
Light they disperse; and with them go
The summer-friend, the flattering foe.
By vain Prosperity received,
To her they vow their truth, and are again believed.
Wisdom, in sable garb arrayed,
Immersed in rapturous thought profound,
And Melancholy, silent maid,
With leaden eye, that loves the ground,
Still on thy solemn steps attend;
Warm Charity, the general friend,
With Justice, to herself severe,
And Pity, dropping soft the sadly-pleasing tear.
Oh, gently on thy suppliant's head,
Dread Power, lay thy chast'ning hand!
Not in thy gorgon terrors clad,
Nor circled with the vengeful band,
(As by the impious thou art seen,)
With thundering voice, and threatening mien,
With screaming Horror's funeral cry,
Despair, and fell Disease, and ghastly Poverty.
Thy form benign, propitious, wear,
Thy milder influence impart;
Thy philosophic train be there,
To soften, not to wound my heart.
The generous spark extinct revive;
Teach me to love, and to forgive;
Exact my own defects to scan;
What others are to feel; and know myself a man.
GRAY. SECTION XIV. The Creation required to praise its Author.
BEGIN, my soul, the exalted lay!
Let each enraptured thought obey,
And praise the Almighty's name:
Lo! heaven and earth, and seas and skies,
In one melodious concert rise,
To swell the inspiring theme.
Ye fields of light, celestial plains,
Where gay transporting Beauty reigns,
Ye scenes divinely fair!
Your Maker's wondrous power proclaim,
Tell how he formed your shining frame,
And breathed the fluid air.
Ye angels, catch the thrilling sound!
While all the adoring thrones around
His boundless mercy sing:
Let every listening saint above
Wake all the tuneful soul of Love,
And touch the sweetest string.
Join, ye loud spheres, the vocal choir;
Thou dazzling orb of liquid fire,
The mighty chorus aid:
Soon as gray evening gilds the plain,
Thou, Moon, protract the mel^ing strain,
And praise him in the shade.
Thou heaven of heavens, his vast abode,
Ye clouds, proclaim your forming God,
Who called yon worlds from night:
"Ye shades, dispel!" -- the Eternal said;
At once the involving darkness fled,
And Nature sprung to light.
Whatever a blooming world contains,
That wings the air, that s^ims the plains,
United praise bestow:
Ye dragons, sound his awful name
To heaven aloud; and roar acclaim,
Ye swelling deeps below.
Let every element rejoice;
Ye thunders, burst with awful voice
To HIM who bids you roll:
His praise in softer notes declare,
Each whispering breeze of yielding air,
And breathe it to the soul.
To him, ye graceful cedars, bow;
Ye towering mountains, bending low,
Your great Creator own;
Tell, when affrighted Nature shook,
How Sinai kindled at his look,
And trembled at his frown.
Ye flocks, that haunt the humble vale,
Ye insects flut'ring on the gale,
In mutual concourse rise!
Crop the gay rose's vermeil bloom,
And waft its spoils, a sweet perfume,
In incense to the skies.
Wake all ye mounting tribes, and sing;
Ye plumy warblers of the spring,
Harmonious anthems raise
To HIM who shaped your finer mould,
Who tip'd your glittering wings with gold,
And tuned your voice to praise.
Let man by nobler passions swayed,
The feeling heart, the judging head,
In heavenly praise employ;
Spread his tremendous name around,
Till heaven's broad a^ch rings back the sound,
The general burst of joy.
Ye whom the charms of grandeur please,
Nursed on the downy lap of Ease,
Fall prostrate at his throne:
Ye princes, rulers, all adore;
Praise him, ye kings, who makes your power
An image of his own.
Ye fair, by nature formed to move,
O praise the eternal SOURCE OF LOVE,
With youth's enlivening fire:
Let age take up the tuneful lay,
Sigh his blessed name -- then soar away,
And ask an angel's lyre.
OGILVIE. SECTION XV. The Universal Prayer.
FATHER OF ALL! in every age,
In every clime, adored,
By saint, by savage, and by sage,
Jehovah, Jove, or Lord!
Thou GREAT FIRST CAUSE, least understood,
Who all my sense confined
To know but this, that Thou art good,
And that myself am blind;
Yet gave me, in this dark estate,
To see the good from ill;
And binding Nature fast in Fate,
Left free the human will;
What conscience dictates to be done,
Or warns me not to do,
This teach me more than hell to shun,
That more than heaven pursue.
What blessings thy free bounty gives
Let me not cast away;
For God is paid, when man receives;
TO enjoy is to obey.
Yet not to earth's contracted span
Thy goodness let me bound,
Or think thee Lord alone of man,
When thousand worlds are round.
Let not this weak, unknowing hand
Presume thy bolts to throw;
And deal damnation round the land,
On each I judge thy foe.
If I am right, thy grace impart,
Still in the right to stay;
If I am wrong, Oh teach my heart
To find that better way!
Save me alike from foolish pride,
Or impious discontent,
At aught thy wisdom has denied,
Or aught thy goodness lent.
Teach me to feel another's woe,
To hide the fault I see;
That mercy I to others show,
That mercy show to me.
Mean though I am, not wholly so,
Since quickened by thy breath;
O lead me wheresoe'er I go,
Through this day's life or death!
This day, be bread and peace my lot:
All else beneath the sun
Thou know if best bestowed or not*
And let thy will be done.
To thee, whose temple is all space,
Whose altar, earth, sea, skies!
One chorus let all being raise!
All nature's incense rise.
POPE. SECTION XVI. Conscience.
O treacherous conscience! while she seems to sleep
On rose and myrtle, lulled with siren song;
While she seems, nodding over her change, to drop
On headlong Appetite the slackened rein,
And gives us up to license, unrecall'd,
Unmarked; -- see, from behind her secret stand,
The sly informer minutes every fault,
And her dread diary with horror (...).
Not the gross act alone employs her pen;
She reconnoitres Fancy's airy band,
A watchful foe! the formidable spy,
Listening, o'erhears the whispers of our camp;
Our dawning purposes of heart explores,
And steals our embryos of iniquity.
As all-rapacious usurers conceal
Their doomsday-book from all-consuming heirs;
Thus, with indulgence most severe she treats
Us spendthrifts of inestimable time;
Unnoted, notes each moment misapplied;
In leaves more durable than leaves of brass,
Writes our whole history; which Death shall read
In every pale delinquent's private ear
And judgment publish; publish to more worlds
Than this; and endless age in groans resound.
YOUNG. SECTION XVII. On an Infant.
TO THE dark and silent tomb,
Soon I hasted from the womb:
Scarce the dawn of life began,
Ere I measured out my span.
I no smiling pleasures knew;
I no gay delights could view;
Joyless sojourner was I,
Only born to weep and die. --
Happy infant, early blessed!
Rest, in peaceful ^^umber, rest;
Early resc^'d from the cares,
Which increase with growing years.
No delights are worth thy stay,
Smiling as they seem, and gay;
Short and sickly are they all,
Hardly tasted ere they pall.
All our gaiety is vain,
All our laughter is but pain:
Lasting only, and divine,
Is an innocence like thine.
SECTION XVIII. The Cuckoo.
HAIL, beauteous stranger of the wood,
Attendant on the Spring!
Now heaven repairs thy rural seat,
And woods thy welcome sing.
Soon as the daisy decks the green,
Thy certain voice we hear:
Have thou a star to guide thy path,
Or mark the rolling year?
Delightful visitant! with thee
I hail the time of flowr's,
When heaven is filled with music sweet
Of birds among the bowers.
The schoolboy, wandering in the wood,
To pull the flowers so gay,
Starts, thy curious voice to hear,
And imitates thy lay.
Soon as the pea puts on the bloom,
Thou fly'st thy vocal vale,
An annual guest in other lands,
Another spring to hail.
Sweet bird! thy bower is ever green,
Thy sky is ever clear;
Thou have no sorrow in thy song,
No winter in thy year!
O could I fly, I Would fly with thee;
We'd make, with social wing,
Our annual visit over the globe,
Companions of the spring.
SECTION XIX. Day. A Pastoral in three parts.
MORNING.
In the barn the tenant cock,
Close to Partlet perched on high,
Briskly crows, (the shepherd's cl^^k!)
Jocund that the morning's nigh*
Swiftly, from the mountain's brow,
Shadows, nursed hy Night, retire;
And the peeping sunbeam, now,
Paints with gold the village spire.
Philomel forsakes the thorn,
Plaintive where she pra^es at night;
And the lark, to meet the morn,
Soars beyond the shepherd's sight.
From the low-roof'd cottage ridge,
See the chatt'ring swallow spring;
Darting through the one-arch'd bridge,
Quick she dips her dappled wing.
Now the pine-tree's waving top
Gently greets the morning gale;
Kidlings, now, begin to crop
Daisies, on the dewy dale.
From the balmy sweets, uncloy'd,
(Restless till her task be done,)
Now the busy bee's employed,
Sipping dew before the sun.
Trickling through the crevic'd-rock,
Where the limpid stream di^tils,
Sweet refreshment waits the stock,
When it is sun-drove from the hills.
Colin's for the promised corn
(Ere the harvest hopes are ripe)
Anxious; -- whilst the huntsman's horn,
Boldly sounding, drowns his pipe.
Sweet -- O sweet, the warbling throng,
On the white emblossom'd spray!
Nature's universal song
Echoes to the rising day.
NOON.
FERVID on the glittering flood,
Now the noontide radiance glow^:
Drooping over its infant bud,
Not a dew-drop's left the rose.
By the brook the shepherd dines,
From the fierce meridian heat,
Sheltered by the branching pines,
Pendant over his grassy seat.
Now the flock forsakes the glade,
Where uncheck'd the sunbeams fall,
Sure to find a pleasing shade
By the ivy'd abbey wall.
Echo, in her airy round,
Over the river, rock, and hill,
Cannot catch a single sound,
Save the clack of yonder mill.
Cattle court the zephyrs bland,
When the streamlet wanders cool;
Or with languid silence stand
Midway in the marshy pool.
But from mountain, dell, or stream,
Not a fluttering zephyr springs;
Fearful lest the noontide beam
Scorch its soft, it is silken wings.
Not a leaf has leave to stir,
Nature's lulled -- serene -- and still!
Quiet even the shepherd's our,
Sleeping on the heath-clad hill.
Languid is the landscape round,
Till the fresh descending shower,
Grateful to the thirsty ground,
Raises every fainting flower.
Now the hill -- the hedge -- are green,
Now the warblers' throats in tune;
Blithsome is the verdant scene,
Brightened by the beams of Noon!
EVENING.
OVER the heath the heifer strays
Free -- (the furrowed task is done;)
Now the village windows blane,
Burnished by the setting sun.
Now he sets behind the hill,
Sinking from a golden sky;
Can the pencil's mimic skill
Copy the refulgent dye?
Trudging as the ploughmen go,
(To the smoking hamlet bound,)
Giant like their shadows grow,
Lengthened over the level ground.
Where the rising forest spreads
Shelter for the lordly do^e!
To their high-built airy beds,
See the rooks returning home!
As the lark, with varied tune,
Carols to the evening loud;
Mark the mild resplendent moon,
Breaking through a parted cloud!
Now the hermit howlet peeps
From the barn or twisted brake;
And the blue mist slowly creeps,
Curling on the silver lake.
As the trout in speckled pride,
Playful from it is bosom springs;
To the banks a ruffled tide
Verges in successive rings.
Tripping through the silken grass
Over the path-divided dale,
Mark the rose-complexion'd lass
With her well-pois'd milking pail!
Linnets with unnumber'd notes,
And the cuckoo-bird with two,
Tuning sweet their mellow throats,
Bid the setting sun adieu.
CUNNINGHAN. SECTION XX. The Order of Nature.
SEE, through this air, this ocean, and this earth,
All matter quick, and bursting into birth.
Above, how high progressive life may go!
Around, how wide! how deep extend below!
Vast chain of being! which from God began,
Nature ethereal, human; angel, man;
Beast, bird, fish, insect, what no eye can see,
No glass can reach; from infinite to thee,
From thee to nothing -- On superior powers
Were we to press, inferior might on ours;
Or in the full creation leave a void,
Where, one step broken, the great scale's destroyed:
From Nature's chain whatever link you strike,
Tenth or ten thousandth, breaks the chain alike.
And, if each system in gradation roll,
Alike essential to the amazing whole,
The least confusion but in one not all,
That system only, but the whole must fall.
Let earth, unbalanc'd from her orbit fly,
Planets and suns run lawless through the sky;
Let ruling angels from their spheres be hurled,
Being on being wrecked, and world on world;
Heaven's whole foundations to their center nod,
And Nature trembles to the throne of God.
All this dread ORDER break -- for whom? for thee?
Vile worm! Oh madness! pride! impiety!
What if the foot, ordained the dust to tread,
Or hand, to toil, aspired to be the head?
What if the head, the eye, or ear, repined
To serve mere engines to the ruling mind?
Just as absurd for any part to claim
To be another, in this general frame:
Just as absurd, to mourn the tasks or pains,
The great directing MIND OF ALL ordains.
All are but parts of one stupendous whole,
Whose body Nature is, and God the soul:
That, changed through all, and yet in all the same,
Great in the earth, as in the ethereal frame;
Warms in the sun, refreshes in the breeze,
Glows in the stars, and blossoms in the trees;
Lives through all life, extends through all extent,
Spreads undivided, operates unspent;
Breathes in our soul, informs our mortal part,
As full, as perfect, in a hair as heart;
As full, as perfect, in vile man that mourns,
As the rapt seraph that adores and burns:
To him no high no low, no great no small;
He fills, he bounds, connects, and equals all*
Cease then, nor ORDER imperfection name
Our proper bliss depends on what we blame.
Know thy own point; this kind, this due degree
Of blindness, weakness, Heaven bestows on thee.
Submit. -- In this, or any other sphere,
Secure to be as blessed as thou can bear:
Safe in the hand of one disposing Po^^r,
Or in the natal, or the mortal hour.
All nature is but art, unknown to thee;
All chance, direction, which thou can not see;
All discord, harmony not understood;
All partial evil, universal good:
And, spite of Pride, in erring Reason's spite,
One truth is clear, -- WHATEVER IS, IS RIGHT.
POPE. SECTION XXI. Hymn composed during Sickness.
How are thy servants blessed, O Lord!
How sure is their defense!
Eternal Wisdom is their guide,
Their help Omnipotence.
In foreign realms, and lands remote,
Supported by thy care,
Through burning climes I passed unhurt,
And breathed in tainted air.
Thy mercy sweetened every soil,
Made every region please;
The hoary Alpine hills it warmed,
And smoothed the Tyrrhene seas.
Think, O my soul, devoutly think,
How, with affrighted eyes,
Thou saw the wide-extended deep
In all its horrors rise!
Confusion dwelt in every face,
And fear in every heart,
When waves on waves, and gelphs in gulphs,
O'ercame the pilot's art.
Yet then, from all my griefs, O Lord,
Thy mercy set me free;
While in the confidence of prayer
My soul took hold on thee.
For though in dreadful whirls we hung
High on the broken wave,
I knew thou were not slow to hear,
Nor impotent to save.
The storm was laid, the winds retired,
Obedient to thy will;
The sea, that roared at thy command,
At thy command was still*
In midst of dangers, fears, and deaths,
Thy goodness I Will adore;
And praise thee for thy mercies past
And humbly hope for ^^re.
My life, if thou preserv'st my life,
Thy sacrifice shall be;
And death, if death must be my doom,
Shall join my soul to thee.
ADDISON. SECTION XXII. Hymn, on a Review of the Seasons.
THESE, as they change, Almighty Father, these,
Are but the varied God. The rolling year
Is full of thee. Forth in the pleasing Spring
Thy beauty walks, Thy tenderness and love.
Wid^ slush the fields; the softening air is balm;
Echo the mountains round; the forest smiles*
And every sense, and every heart is joy.
Then comes Thy glory in the Summer-months,
With light and heat refulgent. Then Thy sun
Shoots full perfection through the swelling year*
And often Thy voice in dreadful thunder speaks;
And often at dawn, deep noon, or falling eve,
By brooks and groves, in hollow-whisp'ring gales.
Thy bounty shines in Autumn unconfined,
And spreads a common feast for all that lives.
In Winter awful Thou! with clouds and storms
Around Thee thrown, tempest over tempest rolled,
Majestic darkness! On the whirlwind's wing,
Riding sublime, thou bidst the world adore;
And humblest Nature with Thy northern blast.
Mysterious round! what skill, what force divine,
Deep felt, in these appear! a simple train,
Yet so delightful mixed, with such kind art,
Such beauty and beneficence combined;
Shade, unperceived, so softening into shade,
And all so forming an harmonious whole,
That, as they still succeed, they ravish still.
But wandering often, with brute unconscious gaze,
Man marks not Thee, marks not the mighty hand,
That, ever-busy, wheels the silent spheres;
Works in the secret deep; shoots, steaming, thence
The fair profusion that o'erspreads the Spring;
Flings from the sun direct the flaming day;
Feeds every creature; hurls the tempest forth;
And, as on earth this grateful change revolves,
With transport touches all the springs of life.
Nature, attend! join every living soul,
Beneath the spacious temple of the sky,
In adoration join! and, ardent, raise
One general song! --
Ye, chief, for whom the whole creation smiles,
At once the head, the heart, and tongue of all,
Crown the great hymn!
For me, when I forget the darling theme,
Whether the blossom blows; the summer ray
Russets the plain; inspiring Autumn gleams;
Or Winter rises in the blackening east;
Be my tongue mute, my Fancy paint no more,
And dead to joy, forget my heart to beat!
Should Fate command me to the farthest verge
Of the green earth, to distant barbarous climes,
Rivers unknown to song; where first the sun
Gilds Indian mountains, or his setting beam
Flames on the Atlantic isles; it is naught to me:
Since God is ever present, ever felt,
In the void waste as in the city full;
And where HE vital breathes there must be joy.
When even at last the solemn hour shall come,
And wing my mystic flight to future worlds,
I cheerful will obey; there, with new powers,
Will rising wonders sing: I cannot go
Where UNIVERSAL LOVE not smiles around,
Sustaining all yon orbs, and all their suns;
From seeming evil still educing good,
And better thence again, and better still,
In infinite progression. But I lose
Myself in HIM, in Light ineffable!
Come then, expressive Silence, muse His praise.
THOMSON "The plan of this work is highly comme^ulable, and the execution is
good. We are particularly pleased with the Compiler's having avoided every
sentiment, that might gratify a corrupt mind, or, in the least degree, offend
the eye or ear of innocence."

Gentleman's Magazine, February, 1799. "There is very considerable merit in
this compilation, the contents of which are pretty equally made up of the
agreeable and the useful. After a careful inspection, we feel ourselves bound
in justice to remark; that it comprises much more novelty, than any compilation
of the same size, that ever came into our hands. Three objects are proposed by
Mr. Murray, in giving this volume to the world: first, to improve youth in the
indispensable art of reading; secondly, to meliorate their language and
sentiments; and thirdly, to inculcate some of the most important principles of
piety and virtue. -- The articles selected for the first of these purposes, are
peculiarly calculated for exercising the various pauses, inflections, and
modulations of the voice; they are judiciously diversified and proportioned,
and accurately punctuated -- In pursuance of his second object, Mr. Murray has
made his selections from the most correct and elegant writers; and purity,
propriety, and perspicuity, of course, characterize them. -- In his third
department, we find extracts strongly tending to promote piety and virtue. They
place religion in the most amiable light; and recommend the moral duties^ by
proving the excellence of their nature, and the happy effects which they
produce. In no part of the work do we meet with an expression that might
gratify a corrupt, or vitiate a pure mind; nor a sentiment that can offend the
ear of innocence. The Perusal of the Sacred Scriptures is powerfully
recommended, by the frequent insertion of the most sublime, beautiful, and
interesting passages of these invaluable writings. But though the general cast
of the volume partakes more of the grave than the gay, yet is it not without a
considerable portion of rational amusement: and as it is serious without
enthusiasm or superstition, so is it cheerful without levity -- We do not fear
discrediting our judgment, by recommending to all sects and degrees of people
this portable volume; which though professedly compiled for the instruction of
youth, will not be found unuseful to persons of riper years."

New London Review, July, 1799. "This selection reflects much credit on the
taste of the compiler; and the arrangement of the various pieces is judicious.
The different authors, from whom these extracts are taken, enforce virtue by
the graces of their composition. The preliminary rules for enunciation are
useful, and clearly delivered. We therefore recommend this small volume to
those who wish to attain, without the help of instructors, the important
advantages of thinking and speaking with propriety.

Monthly Review, August, 1799. "We recommend this work as a useful companion to
the young of both Sexes."

Critical Review, July, 1799. The Compiler of this Work observes, that it "aims
at the attainment of three objects: to improve youth in the art of reading; to
meliorate their language and sentiments; and to inculcate some of the most
important principles of piety and virtue:" and we cannot but admit that his
compilation is well calculated to accomplish the end proposed. The selection is
made with judgment; the pieces are such as may be recommended to the perusal of
youth; they are extracted from the works of the most correct and elegant
writers, and are distinguished by their purity, propriety, perspecuity, and in
many instances elegance of diction. With the many performances of the like kind
which have been presented to the public, the present will not suffer in any
respect by a comparison.

European Magazine, October, 1799.
