SERMON, DELIVERED AT THE REQUEST OF THE ELDERS AND OTHER CHURCH MEMBERS OF THE
PRESBYTERIAN SOCIETY IN THE WEST PARISH OF LONDONDERRY, JANUARY 1st, 1800. ON
THE DEATH OF General George Washington.

BY WILLIAM MORISON.

PRINTED AT THE DESIRE OF THE HEARERS.

FROM THE PRESS OF ANGIER MARCH. SOLD AT HIS BOOKSTORE, NORTH SIDE OF
MARKET-SQUARE, NEWBURYPORT.

A SERMON.
2 SAMUEL, 1.27. HOW ARE THE MIGHTY FALLEN, AND THE WEAPONS OF WAR PERISHED!


THE affecting vicissitudes of time are so many, and often so great, that to
calculate their numbers, or estimate their consequences, is beyond the power of
man. Of these, every hour is pregnant, and every moment brings forth, while day
and night spread them from East to West, and the revolving seasons, from pole
to pole. By the ceaseless progress of time, this world is continually passing;
states and kingdoms are dissolved, and the vast arch of all earthly empire
finally falls.

Exposed to such fluctuations as these, how vain for man to trust in man, or to
make flesh his arm! How inconsistent to look for durable enjoyments on the
tossing wave of time! Coincident with these observations, are the mournful
tidings that announce, as with the voice of dreadful thunder, that Washington
is no more; a voice that strikes the Continent into sadness how solemn! into
silence how profound; and clothes millions in mourning. -- -- "'It Is, as the
general pulse
"Of life stood still, and nature made a pause;
"An awful pause! prophetic of her end.
"And let her prophecy be soon fulfilled;
"Fate! drop the curtain; we can lose no more."
YOUNG.

From the heavy news of our Hero's death, nothing can so rationally relieve, as
a dependence on Him who made us; and to break our deep silence, no words can
better aid our tongues, than, How is the mighty fallen, and the weapons of war
perished! The good, the great, the mighty Washington is fallen! Nor did he fall
alone: A political Father in the cabinet; a Hero in the field of battle; the
Deliverer of his country, and a Friend to man, fell and were entombed in
Washington. His name shall be dear to us, and to our children -- it shall not,
it cannot be forgotten in America. Under deep impressions of the debt of
gratitude, we owe the memory of the common Father of our country, we meet
together this day to indulge a reasonable grief, and drop a tear for him who is
now no more. Contemplating the many blessings we enjoy, by the high
instrumentality of his valuable life; and the unequalled qualifications with
which he was endowed for that end, we cannot help joining the Royal Penman of
Israel, in repeating, How are the mighty fallen, and the weapons of war
perished! Did David see a greatness in Saul and Jonathan? A greater than both
is here. -- Did he lament the loss of an Abner, as a General of high qualities,
and a Prince fallen in Israel? We lament the death of a General of far greater
worth. Saul was given to Israel in wrath; but Washington to America in mercy.
Abner was cruel -- and in an unjust cause; but Washington in the cause of
virtue, of reason, and of his country, was merciful. Did David indulge a
reasonable sympathy with the Thousands of Israel for the loss of their Leaders
in arms? -- How are the weapons of war perished! As if he had said; Who shall
give strength to Israel in the day of battle? Who shall wield the weapons of
war with such dexterity as Saul and Jonathan? With what superior propriety may
we use the emphatical exclamations: How is the sword of America fallen! Where
is the man whose presence can enliven and rally her armies of defense like
Washington's? -- Who with equal influence, can collect the forces of our
different states into one? -- Who with equal self-possession, magnanimity, and
perseverance, could lead an undisciplined peasantry, without arms or
ammunition, against veteran troops, in scenes of action, through toils, through
dangers, and through streams of blood; to victory, to triumph, to glory, and to
peace? Who with superior wisdom, could guide the car of state, when riding high
amidst the jarring elements of contending nations, foreign influence, domestic
divisions, and insurrections? -- When Thousands of well-meaning Americans would
have thrown themselves into the bosom of a disorderly, hungry, and insatiable
nation, he wisely and faithfully saved us from that destruction. How, O how is
the mighty fallen! -- Bewail ye soldiers the loss of your General -- Bewail ye
citizens the loss of your political Father. Ye Fathers and Mothers, ye Sons and
Daughters of America, bewail the fall of such an eminent instrument for your
defense.

Sunt lacrymae rerum, et mentem mortalia tangunt. Virg.
What mortal tidings pierce our hearts and ears! --
Tidings, extracting floods of public tears.
But let not the tide of our grief swell to an immoderate degree. Though the
Hero of America is no more, the God that made him lives as the defense of his
people; and gave Washington a good old age, and made him useful to the last day
of his life. -- For my own part, though I bewail the death of Washington, as
the fall of the most honored man on earth; it is a consolation, that he shall
never be exposed to the contempt incident to the frailties of helpless old age.

Waving on examination of the characters to which our text refers, and fully
convinced the words are highly applicable to our deceased General: I shall
consider them as a proper subject, for illustrating, First, The character of a
great man: And, Secondly, That great men must fall in death. After which I will
conclude with some useful reflections. I am,

First, To illustrate the character of a truly great man.

We would observe, that a great man must be a virtuous man. All the greatness
that any of the most enterprising characters ever possessed, without virtue, is
tarnished with vice: And vice has a meanness, below which no man can descend.
The laurels of wicked men, however flourishing in the field of action, mildew
and die, under the blasting influence of vice, whether in public or private
life.

What is the greatness of the Alexanders, the Pompeys, the Caesar's, and other
celebrated warriors of antiquity? What is the greatness of many modern Heroes?
Where is their virtue? By what spirit are they animated? They are mere
Catalines, and conspirators, in comparison to truly great men -- They have
sounding titles of honor -- They are profanely still invincible -- Conquerors
of the world -- Arbiters of peace and war -- Defenders of their country, and
the like -- But in this, their names are transmitted to posterity under the
influence of a false blaze. -- Their true characters are disguised -- Their
secret designs are often base and mean, though covered with all the refinements
of intrigue, of art, and of eloquence. Could we examine their conduct, and the
motives by which such are, and have been inspired, we should find that
unbounded ambition, cruel domination, insolent pride and insatiable avarice
were the incentives of all their enterprises, and the mean and poisonous
springs of all their glory. A glory like this would be infamy to Washington.

A truly great man is inspired with infinitely more noble motives: Motives
flowing from a sense of moral excellence; founded on a firm belief of the
superintending Providence of God, and the reality of religion, as tending to
meliorate the heart, ennoble and dignify human nature; and attended with an
earnest desire to establish peace among mankind, as well as a reigning concern
for the public good. At the call of God and his country, the great man buckles
on his armor, leaves his delightful retirement, and enters the field of battle.
The enemies he opposes are pride, violence, injustice, perfidy and despotic
sway. To these he opposes a humble dependence on Divine Providence, in the
exercise of benevolence, justice and good government for man. With these, in
the use of his weapons of war, he sights against his enemy without revenge,
conquers without haughtiness, rejoices in triumph without insolence, and gives
God the praise. And while his hands are red with the blood of his enemies, his
bowels melt, for the misery of the victims of a just vengeance, and his heart
reverences that God who commands in the day of such a sad necessity.

Numberless examples might be produced, from the experience of past ages, to
show, that virtue is necessary to the constitution of a great General. While
the Roman Commanders, continued uncorrupted by vice, their empire, according to
the significant expression of Daniel's prophecy, remained strong as iron. The
purity of their manners was one great cause of the success of their arms; and
the grandeur of their Commonwealth was the reward of their temperance, wisdom,
and national justice. But how sadly the scene is changed, when the vices and
follies of their conquered nations infected the hearts of their Generals! Their
iron immediately mingled with clay, the foundation of their government was soon
overthrown, their courage degenerated into cowardice, and their once renowned
legions were put to flight by troops of undisciplined barbarians.

No one will deny that firmness and fortitude are necessary for the formation
of a great character. But where shall we find them? The breast of the vicious
is too polluted a residence for such noble virtues. "True fortitude is seen in
great exploits, which justice warrants, and which wisdom guides; all else is
towering frenzy and distraction." A vicious Commander may be lavish of the
lives of others, and foolishly throw away his own; but that can never give him
any just claim to the appellation in our text. The practice of vice destroys
the health of the body, and relaxes the vigor of the mind; fits the man for
mean and mercenary actions, and tends to transform Heroes into effeminate
cowards.

A truly great man subdues his own passions; is adorned with meekness and
generous compassion even to his enemies. Slavery is admitted on all sides to
break the spirits of men, and equally unfits the human mind for the formation
and execution of any great designs. What greater slavery, than to be subject to
the licentious desires of a vicious heart; and to the boisterous commands of
unruly passions? Solomon, that great and wise Prince, observed, "He who is slow
to anger, is better than the mighty; and he that rules his spirit, than he
that takes a City." A polite writer observes; "A coward has fought; and a
coward has conquered; but a coward never forgave." To the same purpose another
observes, to a successful warrior, who had shown uncommon clemency to the
vanquished; "Before, you had conquered all the world; but now you have more
gloriously subdued yourself."

A really great character engages not in war, from hatred and revenge: To push
a conquest to the gratification of such mean and rancorous passions, is foreign
from his mind; and it is a certain indication of the contrary character.
Humanity and benevolence are essential ingredients of his heart: And such a
General knows how to enlarge his glory, by setting bounds to his victories. Nor
is he more ready to encounter a haughty foe in arms, than he is to do him good
when by his valor he has subdued him to his mercy.

A clear head and a penetrating understanding, as well as a firm, virtuous, and
courageous heart, are necessary to the constitution of a great character.
Without these, the most virtuous and firm mind in high offices will be in
danger of many errors. Innumerable are those situations, both in the field and
cabinet, in which there may be neither precept nor example to direct men's
conduct. In such difficulties, if the first men in a nation are destitute of
resources in their own minds, they may become an easy prey, with their country,
to the devouring sword of an enemy, the intrigues of foreign nations, or the
destroying influence of domestic factions, divisions, and "unreasonable
discontent." Men without any singular talents may walk secure, in private life,
and be useful to their fellowcitizens; and should they be even vicious, the
injury may be principally to themselves: But when men without virtue and
firmness, without wisdom and sagacity, are raised to command in the field, or
to important seats in government; while the influence of their vice slides,
with an easy descent, to the moral injury of the community; their errors in
public conduct arising from pride and ambition on the one hand, or from
ignorance and want of judgment on the other, are productive of incalculable
calamities to their country. To this truth many examples in history, both
sacred and profane, attest. And to the confirmation of this truth; what a
striking contrast there is, between our great and beloved Washington, and the
mighty plunderers and tyrants of Europe! If the latter have any safety for
their guilty heads, from the just vengeance of their own injured country, it is
in the arm and power of despotic sway; but the former had a security in the
conscious rectitude of his conduct, and in the heart and affection of his
country, which no length of time, nor change, can consign to oblivion. The
wickedly great, and falsely splendorous tyrants of the earth, have their fears
in life, and the curses of generations to come, in death; but our truly great
Washington had our love in life -- has our grateful remembrance in death; and
generations to come shall rise up, and call him blessed.

To fill up a great character, knowledge of letters, of men and of the world is
necessary. Innumerable are those occurrences in life, especially in eminent
stations, in which ignorance or inexperience of these, betray either
trepidation or rashness of mind, very inconsistent with illustrious characters.
Men invested with high offices resemble a city set on a hill, which cannot be
hid. Their elevated situation casts a light around them, that exhibits equally
to public view, their ignorance and their knowledge; their imperfections and
their worth.

To these I add, that a sense of religion is necessary to the formation of a
truly great man. To honor men, as completely great, who are destitute of this
high qualification, is certainly not judicious. The belief of the existence of
a Deity; our moral obligations to him; the immortality of the soul; the
importance of its salvation by Jesus Christ, are so indispensable to the man we
are describing; that he who fails of this mental trait, fails of a really great
mind, as much as time fails of being equal to eternity. He that conceives
himself, according to our new philosophists, as having done with life, when his
breath is expired, must labor under a meanness of mind, that levels him with
irrational animals, in point of duration. This blackest of French infidelity,
destroys the best motives for action, and must at once unfit the mind for those
noble achievements that the man of real religion is inspired to perform. He
that circumscribes the consequences of his great actions within the narrow
limits of a life that is but a hand breadth, or a span; must fall as far
beneath those who act upon a theater preparing for eternity, as this little
opaque earth is inferior to the expanded light of heaven. -- There is no
comparison. While the former as soon as he is born, is beginning to die (and an
attempt to act as a Hero may effect his death, and eternally bury his triumphs
in nonexistence;) the latter, in dying only begins to live "The life of Gods, O
transport! and of man."
Young. And should his death take place even in the field of battle, it
speedily translates him to join uninterrupted triumphs; "Where momentary ages
are no more!
"Where time, and pain, and chance, and death expire!
"Where Seraphs gather immortality,
"On life's fair tree, fast by the throne of God."
Young.

Of this last class of Heroes, we trust was our beloved Washington: And to
this, his patronising religion, his discountenancing and reproving vice, his
strict regard for the sabbath, his attention to public worship, with his
respect for the ministers of religion, and his own purity of conduct, attest.

That Washington was not of the Heroes who confine their views to the limits of
time only, and that he had a deep sense of the importance of morality and
religion, is very evident from his own language, recorded in his affectionate
farewell address to the people of America; in which he has displayed, in the
most masterly manner, "the dignity of his mind, and the unrivalled benevolence
of his heart." Thus says this great man:

"Of all the dispositions and habits which lead to political prosperity,
religion and morality are indispensable supports. In vain would that man claim
the tribute of patriotism, who should labor to subvert these great pillars of
human happiness, these firmest props of the duties of men and citizens. The
mere politician, equally with the pious man, ought to respect, and cherish
them. A volume could not trace all their connexions with public and private
felicity. Let it be simply asked, where is the security for property, for
reputation, for life, if a sense of religious obligation desert the oaths which
are the instruments of investigation in courts of justice? -- Reason and
experience both forbid us to expect, that national morality can prevail, in
exclusion of religious principles."

We have another testimony of Washington's piety and regard for real religion,
in the concluding passage of his Circular Address, at the time when he resigned
his military command; which we insert in his own words.

"I now make it my earnest prayer that God would have you in his holy
protection; that he would most graciously be pleased, to dispose us all to do
justice, to love mercy, and to demean ourselves with that charity, humility,
and pacific temper of mind, which were the characteristics of the divine Author
of our blessed religion; without a humble imitation of whose example in these
things, we can never hope to be a happy nation."

In fine, were I to give a summary of a real great man, I should say, that he
possesses a virtuous, firm, nobly generous and intrepid heart -- a clear and
penetrating understanding -- extensive knowledge -- consummate wisdom and
enterprise -- unfeigned faithfulness in high offices -- a sincere concern for
the public good -- accompanied with a just sense of religion, and the
superintending Providence of God. -- These are leading features of a great
character. And if a singular dignity of manners and address can add any thing
to the above, they were all found in Washington.

From good authority, Dr. Fullerton, who resided ten years in the vicinity of
Mount Vernon.
I have been informed that in private life the General was regular in his
family, to an exemplary degree. His words were few, his conversation was moral.
-- Hospitable to strangers -- Good to the poor -- Sociable with his friend --
Forgiving, though reserved, to his enemy -- An affectionate husband -- Kind to
all -- flattering to none -- and familiar with few.

In viewing the most illustrious characters of other Heroes whether more
ancient or modern, even their friends must draw a veil of tenderness over some
imperfections in their conduct, while they applaud their virtues; but the
character of our deceased General can bear a full examination, and appears
spotless, as well as splendid, in the sight of his enemies.

The greatness and goodness of his mind evidences the care of a kind Providence
toward America, in furnishing him with such abundant gifts for performing high
services to his country. A just sense of his worth should excite the exercise
of correspondent gratitude to God, who gave Washington to America; while the
same reflection deeply affects our minds, under an impression of our important
loss in his death.

In his death, the mighty is fallen! -- that distinguished character which has
drawn the attention, commanded the respect, and excited the admiration of kings
and conquerors in Europe; and filled the minds of millions in America with joy.
His memory shall remain embalmed to posterity, while the name of virtuous
liberty shall have any friends on earth. How evident in his death, that great
men must die! -- How is the mighty fallen! -- fallen beneath the power of the
king of tyrants -- the conqueror of conquerors* whom neither talents resist --
tears soften -- nor dignity disobeys. What shall we conclude but, at thy
command, O Death! the stars are finally blown out -- and the sun himself may
cease to shine. -- What art thou? How ghastly thy looks! how cruel thy weapons!
how extensive thy dominion! how despotic thy sway! Whence art thou? that with
equal ease, and lordly pride, do throw the prince from his throne, and the
peasant from his humble cottage? Art thou that cruel messenger, by whose
unrelenting power the loving mother and tender babe, the indulgent husband and
beloved wife, are clasped in icy arms, and become the repast of worms and
reptiles in the grave? -- At thy control, the soldier and the citizen lie in
undistinguished ruin; and a mighty Washington mingles kindred dust on a level
with the lowest in the house of silence. Is it at the doleful tolling of thy
bell, O Death, that we hear the sound of thy grating instruments, covering the
rich and the poor, the oppressor and the oppressed deep in the dust, to awake
no more, till the morning of the resurrection? By the ample sweep of thine
enormous scythe, the nations are cut off; and the number of the living is far
inferior to that of the dead.

"How populous! how vital, is the grave!
" This is the desert, this the solitude."
Night Thoughts. To the propriety of these observations, the language of
inspiration, and the experience of all ages fully assent. Long since, the doom
of man was announced by his Maker; "Of dust thou art; and to the dust shall
thou return." Our fathers are not, nor did the prophets live forever -- We are
continually informed that God will bring us to death; to the grave, the house
oppointed for all living -- Man in his best estate is vanity -- His breath
goes forth; to his earth he returns, and that day his thoughts perish, as to
us. All flesh is as grass and the glory of man is as the flower of the field;
the wind passes over it, and it is gone; and the place thereof knows it no
more. Nor need we look for death only in the field of battle, in the billows of
the ocean, nor in cities of pestilence; the air we breathe, the food we eat,
are fraught with death, and have quivers full of the arrows of destruction. To
meet with death, we need not explore the wilds of the forest -- expose
ourselves to the inclemency of stormy elements, nor wait years, and dread it
only in old age; we see it in our common walks; it may follow us to our closet,
it may arrest us on the couch of repose; while it consigns Thousands from the
breast and womb to the congregation of the dead. We are incessantly seeing man
going to his long home, and the mourners going about the streets.

Let us then improve the solemn dispensation that has called us together, as an
incitement to prepare for our own death. Let us number our days so that we may
apply our hearts unto wisdom. The Proprietor of time has now closed another
annual circle of days and months, and brought us to the beginning of that year,
with which he shall shut up the ample round of the present, and which
terminates in the commencement of another Century. Under such important
progressions he has closed the very useful life of our beloved Patriot. As we
have received good by his life, let us now improve by his death. All things
work together for good to them that love God. Let us be habitually and actually
prepared for death. The disappointments incident to us in the present world,
are great and many. The changes that may come upon us in the present year may
be such as our wisdom can neither foresee, nor our power be able to prevent;
though of the last importance to ourselves and country. What may be hid in the
womb of Providence with respect to us as individuals, who can tell? Who can
ascertain his preservation from death for one month, one week, nay, for one
hour? A few minutes may involve the mind of mortal man in a scene more
important to him than Millions of worlds.

Let us then seasonably contemplate the unknown regions of immortality, and
look out for the approach of the king of terrors. Can any of us baffle the
power of death, since Washington is dead? Can honor, can affluence, can love of
friends or of country, can an assemblage of virtues, or usefulness in the
world, can health of body, or strength of mind save us from death, since He is
no more? Can dignity of address, a commanding appearance, added to the most
brilliant achievements and the most splendid triumphs, avert the arrows of that
inevitable Archer, since they have pierced the life of the highest Hero of
America and of the world? Will death respect the most shining dress, the
epaulette, the lace, the sword or superb habitation; since the shroud, the
coffin, and the grave were prepared for Washington? Can our feeble efforts
resist the arrest of death, since that arm which (under God) subdued fleets and
armies, has yielded to its control. Under impressions of that high command, "Be
ye also ready," may we prepare to follow, having our loins girded about, and
our lights burning, and ourselves like unto men that wait for their Lord. Let
us look above, and beyond Washington, to Jesus, the blessed author of our
religion, who has destroyed death. In him, and in him only, we may glory over
this king of terrors, and rise superior to his fears. In Jesus we stand
composed at his approach, and smile at the shaking of his spear. In Christ we
may anticipate an enlightened chamber for death, and victory over the gloom of
the grave. He has stripped death of its terrors. -- He is the resurrection and
the life. -- In him, life and immortality are brought to light by the gospel.

Let us improve this high dispensation, to guard us against every appearance of
moral evil. To this lesson the example of the deceased, as well as the constant
voice of inspiration, directs. Sin is the cause of death -- Sin has entered the
world, and death by sin. While the pride, avarice, and ambition of many great
men in the world, serve as shades to set off the character of our beloved Hero;
that himself should not live, is a striking evidence of the dreadful nature of
sin in its mortal effects and consequences over the best of men -- We shall
never be truly immortal, until we be really sinless. And though such a high
attainment, is not the lot of any, even the best, in the present life; it is
however, our duty to shun sin as dishonorable to our Maker, injurious to
ourselves, and as greatly unfitting for answering the end of our creation in
this life, or enjoying real happiness in that which is to come. It is only
where there is no sin, that there can be no sorrow.

Let us also improve this most humbling Providence, by way of gratitude to God,
that at the most important crisis our country ever saw, we had not only a
Washington alive; but a Washington in the strength of body, and vigor of mind,
added to the degree of experience, which form the aggregate of human life.

And when we contemplate the dangers to which the government of our country,
has been, and is still exposed, from foreign influence, intrigues, and domestic
faction; and at the same time realize our loss in being bereaved of the man
whose voice stilled the tumults of insurrection; let us be thankful to the
supreme Ruler of the Universe, that our counsel in the cabinet and command in
the field, are committed to such able hands as an Adams, and a Hamilton -- and
let me add, to a Gilman, whom with pleasure I mention as a signal favor and
ornament to our State. -- May we never be destitute of such emblems and
successors of Washington to direct the affairs of our state and nation. And may
all ranks of citizens, in the exercise of virtue, piety, and real religion, be
influenced by a spirit of knowledge, firmness, and faithfulness to our
country's good. Then, the happiness of America may rise, spread, and endure,
till the stars shall cease to shine.

FINIS
AN ORATION, DELIVERED AT THE REQUEST OF THE OFFICERS OF THE ASSEMBLED CAVALRY
AND INFANTRY, AND OTHER MILITIA OFFICERS, ON THE 22 d OF FEBRUARY, 1800; IN THE
WEST PARISH OF LONDONDERRY, IN COMMEMORATION OF THE DEATH OF General George
Washington.

BY WILLIAM MORISON.

PRINTED AT THE GENERAL DESIRE OF THE HEARERS.

FROM THE PRESS OF ANGIER MARCH. SOLD AT HIS BOOKSTORE, NORTH SIDE OF
MARKETSQUARE, NEWBURYPORT.

AN ORATION.
MY FELLOWCITIZENS,
WHILE I attempt, with humble diffidence, a discharge of the duty, and
acknowledge with cordial gratitude the honor assigned me on the present
occasion; it affords me high satisfaction, and produces correspondent freedom,
that I arise to address a candid and enlightened audience, whose minds are not
stained with impure adulation, nor that undue devotion paid to departed heroes,
in aeras of ignorance and superstition; nor hardened by that rigid austerity,
and envious ingratitude, that in this informed age, would consign the
characters and actions of great men to oblivion. Encouraged by this happy state
of intellect, in this numerous assembly; I am free to say, your respect for the
memory of GENERAL GEORGE WASHINGTON does you honor; and your attachment to
military order, and the government of your country, gives every good citizen
pleasure.

Agreeably to the Proclamation of the President, we assemble today, to
commemorate our beloved Patriot's birth; to contemplate his illustrious life;
and to condole and lament in his death. What a high assemblage of different
emotions of joy and sorrow, does the remembrance of his character in this view
produce in our minds? An assemblage combining distant years, important events,
and various achievements.

On the 22 d of February, 1732, our Friend, our Father, our Statesman, our Hero
was born -- A day auspicious to the Columbian world! a morning on which a
day star arose in America! -- an era, which neither our children, nor
succeeding generations shall ever forget, till time expires, and days shall be
no more. Then was America honored! Then did Virginia, Westmoreland County, and
Washington parish, become distinguished spots of the earth.

No sooner had WASHINGTON arrived at the age of twenty years, than the happy
influence of his valuable life, bedewed the frontiers of his native state. His
discerning and grateful country clothed him with honorable commissions, and
vested him with plenary powers for a negotiation with her enemies. In
discharging the duties of these youthful honors, he disarmed the savage, and
disposed him for peace.

By his superior penetration and prowess, he distinguished himself a blessing
to his country, triumphing over Indian victory, in saving the remains of
Braddock's defeated army, from the wanton cruelty of a barbarous foe. These
early and successful exertions were ominous of the future toils and dangers he
endured; by which he preserved his country from being a theater of despotic
diversions for European tyrants, to be a garden of liberty for the American
nation.

When the rights of freemen were variously infringed in America; when the
chains of British slavery were cunningly hid in chests of tea; when a Gage, a
Dunmore, with many others, stood ready to rivet the shackles, by which his
country was to be violated; her chaste cries reached his ears; he drew his
sword which never delighted in blood, and determined to save her. Neither
affluence of fortune, nor the prejudices of Britain, high in his favor for past
services, could produce a single hesitation. He risks all, for love of country,
of liberty, and of man. This principle drew him from his beloved and peaceful
retirement. This principle induced him to renounce a life of private ease and
honor; in which he was distinguished as a Father to the fatherless, the
orphan's Shield, the stranger's stay and the widow's Judge; to be more
eminently distinguished in the field of Mars, for his country's general
salvation.

At that distressful period, when every moment seemed pregnant with events more
important than the productions of a century; we see WASHINGTON at the head of
the American arms; elevated in sight of the world, to the performance of
command, perilous as riding the whirlwind, and arduous as directing the storms
of heaven. His name carried order and government among his friends; and set
bounds to the insolence and arms of his enemies. The heights of Boston can
tell; and their warlike entrenchments can witness to his superior Generalship.
The abstinence, the valor, the unwearied fatigues of Long Island, York-Island,
and the Jerseys; when WASHINGTON carried his young and inexperienced country in
his arms, with her countenance heavy, and her heart like to break, are proofs,
that he, only grew brave by distress, and collected strength from
disappointments. Undismayed by the threats of angry elements, in the storms of
winter, and in the highest swellings of the Delaware; unappalled by the
smallness of his numbers, with the increase of every want; and facing a
powerful well equipt and veteran foe; he marshalled his little host; he fired
their souls with love of liberty; and by a single effort of his high genius
crumbled the overgrown pride of his enemies to the dust. By this unexpected and
surprising victory, he revived the desponding spirits of his country and
invigorated her feeble arm for the field.

By his wisdom in war, he often saved the blood of his countrymen; by retreats,
triumphing over victory; converting the advances of his enemies into ambuscades
for their own destruction; and convinced them, their conquests and successes
were temporary and vain.

When we contemplate our American Hero at Brandywine, Germantown, and Monmouth;
how undaunted, traversing clouds of smoke, seas of blood, and tempests of fire!
-- His presence supplying every want -- animating every soul -- bracing every
nerve -- and braving every danger. His voice in the hour of trial, was as sight
to the blind, strength to the weak, courage to the fearful, and comfort to the
dying.

Watched by the eagle eye of WASHINGTON, his enemies fly from City to City for
rest; and from State to State for territory, to no purpose. He soars aloft,
alternately checks and pursues; until the last exertions of his potent foe for
fighting or fleeing, are exhausted. By a noble effort of his great abilities,
and superior talents in command over our auxiliaries from a nation then our
ally; with the army of America, he finally forced his enemies to surrender to
his clemency, as a Commander equally disposed to commiserate the vanquished, as
to subdue those in arms; and to convince the power of Britain of the necessity
of turning her thoughts on peace.

These, my fellowmen, are but an imperfect sample of the heroic luster and
splendid achievements, by which he directed the arms of America; until he
evinced her importance, and weighed her independence before an astonished
world, in the scale of Nations.

When the olive branch succeeded the glitter of arms, and the sound of industry
and agriculture, the thunders of the field of Mars; the Americans beheld
WASHINGTON with delightful admiration, resigning his high command into the
hands of his beloved country, from whom he received it; and amidst the
applauding shouts of thousands, returning to Mount Vernon, with the prayers of
Millions for blessings perpetual to follow him. In the exercise of his high
command, WASHINGTON convinced the wise, that he was more wise; the brave, that
he was the most brave; but in his resignation, the good, that he was the best.
How far inferior are the Heroes of Europe, the convulsed state of her nations
can witness.

But though WASHINGTON had retired to the peaceful shades of private life;
though America is deeply in arrears of gratitude for past services; still she
looks to him, as the man that must secure by his counsel in the cabinet, that
independence which he had gained in the field, by his sword. Possessing every
qualification to finish the Statesman, as well as the General, he is
unanimously chosen President of the Convention, which erected that noble
structure, our federal Constitution. What sagacity in reasoning, penetration in
judgment, and wisdom in conclusion, guided the Convention over which he
presided, in rearing that stupendous fabric, is fully evinced by the happy
effects America enjoys under its roof. To this strong hold (under God) are we
indebted for preservation from the fury of domestic faction; and from the
conquest of terror, and plunder, of foreign nations. It is under the covert of
this all-protecting edifice, that our gaols are not thrown open by the hand of
violence; that our Judges are not torn from the bench of justice; that our
ministers of morality and religion are not dragged from their desks; that
places of public worship are not converted to play houses, nor our precious
sabbaths to a French decade. It is under the banner of this standing testimony
of WASHINGTON'S abilities, with those of his copatriots, that we are safe from
the storms of endless revolutions, conspiracies and intrigues; and that our
wisest statesmen have not felt the dagger of the assassin, on the floor of
Congress. It is rallying round this standard of rational liberty, order and
government, that our citizens are not robbed, our houses not rifled, our fair
not violated, our old men not miserable; nor our tender infants destroyed on
the point of the spear. And give me leave to add, it is under the arch of this
mighty building, that America sits yet in her own house, with her children
around her; and calls them happy. Happy will they still be, if they realize it,
for it is the order of the family.

When the federal Constitution received the sanction of the people, America
looks again to WASHINGTON, as the man, whom she still delights to honor; and as
worthy of her highest confidence in peace, as well as in war. He is unanimously
chosen to hold the chief reins of government. At his country's call, attested
by the joy inspired into all ranks of citizens at his election; he rose from
his seat of ease, on which he had been scarce allowed a moment's rest; and in
the exercise of self-denial for her good, bowed to her request; and with a
diffidence peculiar to a mind equally great in itself, and unsullied by pride
or dissimulation, entered on his high office, with a dignified solemnity
unknown before in America. How well he discharged the duties of this high
honor, the nations of the earth and the grateful heart of every honest American
can witness. -- His whole life seemed to indicate, that a special Providence
had raised him up, and given him a rare assemblage of virtues, and powers of
judgment, to perform a complicated variety of important services; in defending
his country in war; and refining and consolidating her government in peace.
Like a focus of light, in which all rays concentre; he possessed whatever was
noble, virtuous, and good in man. To our American Hero, as to the greatest of
mortals, has been, allotted the highest prize of human glory, in running his
race, without stumble, stain, or defect. The fame of his illustrious deeds has
explored every region of the earth, and crossed every latitude of the ocean. On
WASHINGTON, as on a blazing comet, in the firmament of human stars, the
inhabitants of the different Zones have had their eyes equally set; and whether
friends or enemies to America, have been his equal admirers. His name shall
remain in the archives of the world, till the records of time shall cease; and
the sublime poet, the lively limner, the curious engraver, and every artificer
of monumental remembrance, will be proud to exhibit the most lively stroke of
taste, and the best testimony of invention, to perpetuate the memory of
WASHINGTON.

His sword shall be the delight of the brave, and the wonder of the warrior,
while arms are in use. And while earth is the habitation of man, the traveller
-- Indian -- Foreigner -- or American; as he passes Mount Vernon, will stop;
make a solemn pause! and his commemorating soliloquy shall be, There is the
honored residence of the FATHER of his Country, the DEFENDER of her Rights, and
the BENEFACTOR of man. When the good, the great, the learned, or illiterate,
the soldier or citizen, look at the tomb of WASHINGTON, they will drop the
generous tear on his urn, while the memory of his virtues and valor enlivens
their innate respect for his dust and ashes.

But alas, he is no more! We are bereaved of WASHINGTON forever! For this, our
country utters her groans of grief, and is deeply sorry. For this, the chair of
her state, and the desk of her temple are shrouded in sable -- For this, the
hilt of her sword, and the arm of her citizen, are clothed in crape -- For
this, her drums are muffled, her trumpets are hoarse, and her music mourns. And
for this her national fortitude stands this day in arms reversed, not ashamed
of the tear of heavy woe on her cheek. Let us condole with her. If our hearts
are not adamant; if our eyes are not flint; they will melt, they will weep for
WASHINGTON. To melt is pleasant, to weep is manly; to forget him is ingratitude
of the blackest hue; and to be indifferent under such a high dispensation, is
impious insensibility.

At his birth, the pillars of tyranny trembled; in his life, kings and
conquerors darkened under his superior luster; and at his death, the nations
mourn. If the united abilities that accomplish the General, Patriot, and
Statesman, could have baffled the power of death, WASHINGTON had never died. If
the united prayers of the virtuous in America, from his Excellency ADAMS, to
the lowest citizen, could have availed, WASHINGTON were yet alive. And the most
expressive tokens of respect, from the first characters in the different
quarters of the world, to WASHINGTON, authorize me to say; that if the desires
of the good and the great, in Europe, Asia, and Africa, added to the tears of
the tawny tribes to the western Ocean, could have softened the king of terrors,
our AMERICAN CHIEF were yet spared. But he is gone forever from us -- we shall
hear his voice no more -- To us, in this stupendous dispensation, "The ways of
Heaven are dark and intricate;
"Puzzled in mazes, and perplexed with errors!
"Nor know we where the regular confusion ends." Addison.

"Thy ways are in the sea, and thy paths in the mighty waters, and thy
footsteps are not known." David.




Were an enemy to invade our coasts, wide as the sea, is the breach made in our
army by his death; and to those who realized his worth in the day of danger,
heart-rending indeed is that dispensation by which the Deliverer of our
country, the Founder of our government, and the Bulwark of our nation, is hid
forever from our sight. Had this awful Providence taken place in America, when
his arm was her support in the field of struggle and distress; and when one
stumble in his walk would have made her heart tremble, and her countenance sad;
who can say, that we, with our little ones, might not sit today, under the
darkness of monarchial government, in the sackcloth of slavery. Thank Heaven,
it was otherwise ordered; and while submission to the high decree of his
decease should humble every American in the dust, every heart should mingle
gratitude with mourning, that heaven has spared his illustrious life so long.

Let us not forget the memory of our beloved WASHINGTON; and it will not cease
to do us good. In his life, we have a combination of examples for all classes
of citizens, from the chief seat of government, to the humble peasant. In the
firmness of his integrity, wisdom of his administration, dignity of his
manners, with his unremitted concern for the public good; we have a noble
example for every description of public officers. In the pious goodness of his
heart, illustrated by the justice, temperance, tender benevolence, and
universal correctness and purity of his manners in private life; we have all an
example in WASHINGTON for living; and in his magnanimous, resigned composure in
death, a precious example for dying. The latter fully accords with the former.
General GEORGE WASHINGTON died in the full possession of his reason, without a
groan, though in extreme distress; perfectly resigned to the will of heaven,
and ready to wing his way from this vale of tears, we trust, to the mansions of
bliss, and endless repose. May a deep impression of our common Father's memory,
excite millions of his extensive family to be like him, pious, brave, virtuous,
wise, and good!

END OF THE ORATION.
MEMORANDUM.
THIS great man's ancestors came from Old England, in the year 1657. He is of
the third descent after their migration, the first fruit of a second marriage;
born on the 22d February, 1732, in the parish of Washington, Westmoreland
county, Virginia. His Father's family was numerous. -- His education was
principally managed by a private Tutor, which has been often the case in
families of distinction in Virginia. His Father died when he was but ten years
of age.

In the fifteenth year of his age he had determined to go to sea; and had his
baggage prepared for embarkation; but through the reluctance of his surviving
parent to a seafaring life, he relinquished his determination.

When he was in the twentieth year of his age, he was honored with a Major's
commission. -- In his twenty second year, he was invested with plenary powers
to negociate with the French and Canadians, who were making inroads on the
frontiers of the British Colonies. -- He fulfilled the design of his mission
with singular industry, intelligence, and address. -- It is said his journals
were published to the world and announced, at that early time of his life, the
greatness of mind and correct manner of doing business, which have since
characterized him in the management of more arduous undertakings.

In 1755, he saved the broken remains of Braddock's defeated army, at Fort
Duquesne. -- But innumerable, and too tedious to mention, were the hardships he
endured, and the plans he devised, to defend the frontiers during the war with
France.

Peace being restored to the middle colonies in 1758, and his health having
been greatly injured by the war, he resigned his commission the year following.
--

After his health was gradually restored, he married an amiable widow of merit
and wealth, with whom he has no issue. -- He was often chosen by the suffrages
of his fellow citizens to fill a seat in the General Assembly of Virginia. --
He was Magistrate in his county, and Judge of the Court.

In 1774, he was chosen a Member of the first American Congress -- And the year
following, Commander in Chief of the American Forces. -- With what consummate
abilities he formed a body of peasantry to a regular army, and fit to encounter
the flower of veteran troops, remains unparalleled in the annals of past ages,
and will remain the admiration of the world for ages to come.

At the close of the war, he resigned his command and retired to his seat in
Virginia -- Multitudes thronged his passage, both in city and in country,
hailing him as the preserver of their liberties, the giver of their
independence, and the restorer of peace.

In 1787, He was elected a member of the Federal Convention, and its President,
while framing the federal Constitution, under which we now may so happily live.
-- In 1789, he was unanimously chosen President of the United States of
America, and inducted into office on the 30th of April, in the City of New York
in the gallery of the federal Hall in the view of thousands of spectators. --
The oath was administered by Chancellor Livingston. Several circumstances
concurred to render this ceremony unusually solemn -- The presence of the
Father and Deliverer of his country -- The impression of gratitude for past
services -- The vast concourse of spectators -- The devout and reverential
manner in which he bowed, and in which he received the oath; together with the
consideration of his being chosen to the most dignified office in America, and
perhaps in the world, by the unanimous voice of more than three Millions of
enlightened freemen; all conspired to place this among the most august and
interesting scenes which have ever been exhibited on the theater of time. A
spectator of this scene was so struck with the solemnity of it, as an appeal to
heaven and earth at once, that when the Chancellor pronounced, LONG LIVE GEORGE
WASHINGTON, his sensibility was wound up to such a pitch, that he could only
wave his hat without being able to join one word in the repeated acclamations
that rent the air. -- To this office he was rechosen until he finally declined
a re-election; at which time he formed an address which for wisdom of policy,
justness of thought, perspicuity of style and purity of language, is second to
none, nor equalled by any. This address is recommended to us now as the legacy
of a political father to his family; and we are justly told to read it, and to
read it aloud that all the house may hear. The principal part of the preceding
Memorandum is extracted from Dr. Morse's Geography, and is here inserted for
the use of those who may have few means or opportunities of information on this
most interesting subject.


We add; his care for his country's good is very evident in his last public act
of condescension in accepting the appointment of Lieut. General of the American
army; which office he has resigned with his life; which we are informed took
place as follows. On Friday, the day before he died, he spent some time in
marking a gravel walk which he had in contemplation, on the banks of the
Potowmac. -- There came a fall of snow which did not deter him from his
pursuit. -- He continued till his neck and hair were quite covered with snow.
He spent the evening with Mrs. Washington, reading the newspapers; -- went to
bed as usual about nine of the clock -- waked in the night very unwell. -- In
the morning finding himself still so -- sent for Dr. Craik of Alexandria. Soon
after his arrival, two consulting Physicians were sent for, but all to no
purpose. -- His disorder would not yield to medicine; and by twelve of the
clock at night on Saturday, the 14th of December, 1799 -- expired without a
groan -- in the 68th year of his age. He said a few minutes before his death,
"Bury me decently, and not till two days after my decease." -- To Dr. Craik he
said: "I die a very hard death, but I am not afraid to die." -- Before he
breathed his last, he laid himself on his back, placed his hands before him,
and closed his own mouth and eyes.

These extracts are from a letter sent from a Gentleman of respectability in
Philadelphia, dated January 20th, who had recently returned, from Mount Vernon;
after the General's death.

FINIS.

