STRICTURES ON THE MODERN SYSTEM OF FEMALE EDUCATION.

VOL. I.

Domestic Happiness, thou only bliss
Of Paradise that has survived the Fall!
Thou art not known where PLEASURE is adored,
That reeling Goddess with the zoneless waist.
Forsaking thee, what shipwreck have we made
Of honor, dignity, and fair renown!
COWPER. STRICTURES ON THE MODERN SYSTEM OF FEMALE EDUCATION. WITH A VIEW OF
THE PRINCIPLES AND CONDUCT PREVALENT AMONG WOMEN OF RANK AND FORTUNE.

BY HANNAH MORE.

May you so raise your character that you may help to make the next age a
better thing, and leave posterity in your debt, for the advantage it shall
receive by your example. LORD HALIFAX. IN TWO VOLUMES. VOL. I.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED BY BUDD AND BARTRAM, FOR THOMAS DOBSON, AT THE STONE
HOUSE, NO. 41, SOUTH SECOND STREET. 1800.

CONTENTS OF THE FIRST VOLUME.
INTRODUCTION. ix. CHAP. I. Address to women of rank and fortune, on the
effects of their influence on society. -- Suggestions for the exertion of it in
various instances. 17 CHAP. II. On the education of women. -- The prevailing
system tends to establish the errors which it ought to correct. -- Dangers
arising from an excessive cultivation of the arts. 59 CHAP. III. External
improvement. -- Children's Balls. -- French Governesses. 77 CHAP. IV.
Comparison of the mode of female education in the last age with the present. 88
CHAP. V. On the religious employment of time. -- On the manner in which
holidays are passed. -- Selfishness and inconsideration considered. -- Dangers
arising from the world. 98 CHAP. VI. Filial obedience not the character of the
age. -- A comparison with the preceding age in this respect. -- Those who
cultivate the mind advised to study the nature of the soil*. -- Unpromising
children often make strong characters. -- Teachers too apt to devote their
pains almost exclusively to children of parts. 115 CHAP. VII. On female study,
and initiation into knowledge. -- Error of cultivating the imagination to the
neglect of the judgment. -- Books of reasoning recommended. 131 CHAP. VIII. On
the religious and moral use of history and geography. 146 CHAP. IX. On the use
of definitions, and the moral benefits of accuracy in language. 162 CHAP. X. On
religion. -- The necessity and duty of early instruction shown by analogy with
human learning. 170 CHAP XI. On the manner of instructing young persons in
religion. -- General remarks on the genius of Christianity. 185 CHAP. XII.
Hints suggested for furnishing young persons with a scheme of prayer. 205
INTRODUCTION.
IT is a singular injustice which is often exercised toward women, first to
give them a very defective Education, and then to expect from them the most
undeviating purity of conduct; -- to train them in such a manner as shall lay
them open to the most dangerous faults, and then to censure them for not
proving faultless. Is it not unreasonable and unjust, to express disappointment
if our daughters should, in their subsequent lives, turn out precisely that
very kind of character for which it would be evident to an unprejudiced
by-stander that the whole scope and tenor of their instruction had been
systematically preparing them?

Some reflections on the present erroneous system are here with great deference
submitted to public consideration. The Author is apprehensive that she shall be
accused of betraying the interests of her sex by laying open their defects: but
surely, an earnest wish to turn their attention to objects calculated to
promote their true dignity, is not the office of an enemy. So to expose the
weakness of the land as to suggest the necessity of internal improvement, and
to point out the means of effectual defense, is not treachery, but patriotism.

Again, it may be objected to this little work, that many errors are here
ascribed to women which by no means belong to them exclusively, and that it
seems to confine to the sex those faults which are common to the species: but
this is in some measure unavoidable. In speaking on the qualities of one sex,
the moralist is somewhat in the situation of the Geographer, who is treating on
the nature of one country: -- the air, soil, and produce of the land which he
is describing, cannot fail in many essential points to resemble those of other
countries under the same parallel; yet it is his business to descant on the one
without adverting to the other: and though in drawing his map he may happen to
introduce some of the neighboring coast, yet his principal attention must be
confined to that country which he proposes to describe, without taking into
account the resembling circumstances of the adjacent shores.

It may be also objected that the opinion here suggested on the state of
manners among the higher classes of our country-women, may seem to controvert
the just encomiums of modern travelers, who generally concur in ascribing a
decided superiority to the ladies of this country over those of every other.
But such is the state of foreign manners, that the comparative praise is almost
an injury to English women. To be flattered for excelling those whose standard
of excellence is very low, is but a degrading kind of commendation; for the
value of all praise derived from superiority depends on the worth of the
competitor. The character of British ladies, with all the unparalleled
advantages they possess, must never be determined by a comparison with the
women of other nations, but by what they themselves might be if all their
talents and unrivalled opportunities were turned to the best account.

Again, it may be said, that the Author is less disposed to expatiate on
excellence than error: but the office of the historian of human manners is
delineation rather than panegyric. Were the end in view eulogium and not
improvement, eulogium would have been far more gratifying, nor would just
objects for praise have been difficult to find. Even in her own limited sphere
of observation, the Author is acquainted with much excellence in the class of
which she treats; -- with women who, possessing learning which would be thought
extensive in the other sex, set an example of deep humility to their own; --
women who, distinguished for wit and genius, are eminent for domestic
qualities; -- who, excelling in the fine arts, have carefully enriched their
understandings; -- who, enjoying great affluence, devote it to the glory of
God; -- who, possessing elevated rank, think their noblest style and title is
that of a Christian. --

That there is also much worth which is little known, she is persuaded; for it
is the modest nature of goodness to exert itself quietly, while a few
characters of the opposite cast seem, by the rumor of their exploits, to fill
the world; and by their noise to multiply their numbers. It often happens that
a very small party of people, by occupying the foreground, so seize the public
attention, and monopolize the public talk, that they appear to be the great
body: and a few active spirits, provided their activity take the wrong turn and
support the wrong cause, seem to fill the scene; and a few disturbers of order,
who have the talent of thus exciting a false idea of their multitudes by their
mischiefs, actually gain strength and swell their numbers by this fallacious
arithmetic.

But the present work is no more intended for a panegyric on those purer
characters who seek not human praise because they act from a higher motive,
than for a satire on the avowedly licentious, who, urged by the impulse of the
moment or led away by the love of fashion, dislike not censure, so it may serve
to rescue them from neglect or oblivion.

There are, however, multitudes of the young and the well-disposed, who have as
yet taken no decided part, who are just launching on the ocean of life, just
about to lose their own right convictions, and to counteract their better
propensities, unreluctantly yielding themselves to be carried down the tide of
popular practices, sanguine and confident of safety. -- To these the Author
would gently hint, that, when once embarked, it will be no longer easy to say
to their passions, or even to their principles, "Thus far shall ye go, and no
further."

Should any reader revolt at what is conceived (...) be unwarranted strictness
in this little book, let it not be thrown by in disgust before the following
short consideration be weighed. -- If in this Christian country we are actually
beginning to regard the solemn office of Baptism as merely furnishing an
article to the parish register; -- if we are learning from our indefatigable
Teachers, to consider this Christian rite as a legal ceremony retained for the
sole purpose of recording the age of our children; -- then, indeed, the
prevailing System of Education and Manners on which these volumes presume to
animadvert, may be adopted with propriety and persisted in with safety, without
entailing on our children or on ourselves the peril of broken promises or the
guilt of violated vows. -- But, if the obligation which Christian Baptism
imposes be really binding; -- if the ordinance have, indeed, a meaning beyond a
mere secular transaction, beyond a record of names and dates; -- if it be an
institution by which the child is solemnly devoted to God as his Father, to
Jesus Christ as his Savior, and to the Holy Spirit as his Sanctifier; if there
be no definite period assigned when the obligation of fulfilling the duties it
enjoins shall be superseded; -- if, having once dedicated our offspring to
their Creator, we no longer dare to mock Him by bringing them up in ignorance
of His Will and neglect of His Laws; -- if, after having enlisted them under
the banners of Christ, to fight manfully against the three great enemies of
mankind, we are no longer at liberty to let them lay down their arms; much less
to lead them to act as if in alliance instead of hostility with these enemies;
-- if after having promised that they shall renounce the vanities of the world,
we are not allowed to invalidate the engagement; -- if after such a covenant we
should tremble to make these renounced vanities the supreme object of our own
pursuit or of their instruction; -- if all this be really so, then the
Strictures on Modern Education, and on the Habits of polished Life, will not be
found so repugnant to truth, and reason, and common sense, as may on a first
view be supposed.

But if on heartily summing up the evidence, the design and scope of the Author
be fairly judged, not by the customs or opinions of the worldly, (for every
English subject has a right to object to a suspected or prejudiced jury,) but
by an appeal to that divine law which is the only infallible rule of judgment;
if on such an appeal her views and principles shall be found censurable for
their rigor, absurd in their requisitions, or preposterous in their
restrictions, she will have no right to complain of such a verdict, because she
will then stand condemned by that court to whose decision she implicitly
submits.

Let it not be suspected that the Author arrogantly conceives herself to be
exempt from that natural corruption of the heart which it is one chief object
of this slight work to exhibit; that she superciliously erects herself into the
impeccable censor of her sex and of the world; as if from the critic's chair
she were coldly pointing out the faults and errors of another order of beings,
in whose welfare she had not that lively interest which can only flow from the
tender and intimate participation of fellow-feeling.

With a deep self-abasement arising from a strong conviction of being indeed a
partaker in the same corrupt nature; together with a full persuasion of the
many and great defects of these Volumes, and a sincere consciousness of her
inability to do justice to a subject which, however, a sense of duty impelled
her to undertake, she commits herself to the candor of that Public which has
so frequently, in her instance, accepted a right intention as a substitute for
a powerful performance.

BATH, March 14, 1799.
STRICTURES ON THE MODERN SYSTEM OF FEMALE EDUCATION.
CHAP. I.
Address to women of rank and fortune, on the effects of their influence on
society. -- Suggestions for the exertion of it in various instances.

AMONG the talents for the application of which women of the higher class will
be peculiarly accountable, there is one, the importance of which they can
scarcely rate too highly. This talent is influence. We read of the greatest
orator of antiquity, that the wisest plans which it had cost him years to
frame, a woman could overturn in a single day; and when one considers the
variety of mischiefs which an ill-directed influence has been known to produce,
one is led to reflect with the most sanguine hope on the beneficial effects to
be expected from the same powerful force when exerted in its true direction.

The general state of civilized society depends, more than those are aware, who
are not accustomed to scrutinize into the springs of human action, on the
prevailing sentiments and habits of women, and on the nature and degree of the
estimation in which they are held. Even those who admit the power of female
elegance on the manners of men, do not always attend to the influence of female
principles on their character. In the former case, indeed, women are apt to be
sufficiently conscious of their power, and not backward in turning it to
account. But there are nobler objects to be effected by the exertion of their
powers, and unfortunately, ladies, who are often unreasonably confident where
they ought to be diffident, are sometimes capriciously diffident just when they
ought to feel where their true importance lies; and, feeling, to exert it. To
use their boasted power over mankind to no higher purpose than the
gratification of vanity or the indulgence of pleasure, is the degrading triumph
of those fair victims to luxury, caprice, and despotism, whom the laws and the
religion of the voluptuous prophet of Arabia exclude from light, and liberty,
and knowledge; and it is humbling to reflect, that in those countries in which
fondness for the mere persons of women is carried to the highest excess, they
are slaves; and that their moral and intellectual degradation increases in
direct proportion to the adoration which is paid to mere external charms.

But I turn to the bright reverse of this mortifying scene; to a country where
our sex enjoys the blessings of liberal instruction, of reasonable laws, of a
pure religion, and all the endearing pleasures of an equal, social, virtuous,
and delightful intercourse: I turn with an earnest hope, that women, thus
richly endowed with the bounties of Providence, will not content themselves
with polishing, when they are able to reform; with entertaining, when they may
awaken; and with captivating for a day, when they may bring into action powers
of which the effects may be commensurate with eternity.

In this moment of alarm and peril, I would call on them with a "warning
voice," which would stir up every latent principle in their minds, and kindle
every slumbering energy in their hearts; I would call on them to come forward,
and contribute their full and fair proportion toward the saving of their
country. But I would call on them to come forward, without departing from the
refinement of their character, without derogating from the dignity of their
rank, without blemishing the delicacy of their sex: I would call them to the
best and most appropriate exertion of their power, to raise the depressed tone
of public morals, and to awaken the drowsy spirit of religious principle. They
know too well how arbitrarily they give the law to manners, and with how
despotic a sway they fix the standard of fashion. But this is not enough; this
is a low mark, a prize not worthy of their high and holy calling. For, on the
use which women of the superior class may be disposed to make of that power
delegated to them by the courtesy of custom, by the honest gallantry of the
heart, by the imperious control of virtuous affections, by the habits of
civilized states, by the usages of polished society; on the use, I say, which
they shall hereafter make of this influence, will depend, in no low degree, the
well-being of those states, and the virtue and happiness, nay perhaps the very
existence of that society.

At this period, when our country can only hope to stand by opposing a bold and
noble unanimity to the most tremendous confederacies against religion, and
order, and governments, which the world ever saw; what an accession would it
bring to the public strength, could we prevail on beauty, and rank, and
talents, and virtue, confederating their several powers, to come forward with a
patriotism at once firm and feminine for the general good! I am not founding an
alarm to female warriors, nor exciting female politicians: I hardly know which
of the two is the most disgusting and unnatural character. Propriety is to a
woman what the great Roman critic says action is to an orator; it is the first,
the second, the third requisite. A woman may be knowing, active, witty, and
amusing; but without propriety she cannot be amiable. Propriety is the center
in which all the lines of duty and of agreeableness meet. It is to character
what proportion is to figure, and grace to attitude. It does not depend on any
one perfection; but it is the result of general excellence. It shows itself by
a regular, orderly, undeviating course; and never starts from its sober orbit
into any splendid eccentricities; for it would be ashamed of such praise as it
might extort by any aberrations from its proper path. It renounces all
commendation but what is characteristic; and I would make it the criterion of
true taste, right principle, and genuine feeling, in a woman, whether she would
be less touched with all the flattery of romantic and exaggerated panegyric
than with that beautiful picture of correct and elegant propriety, which Milton
draws of our first mother, when he delineates Those thousand decencies which
daily flow
From all her words and actions.


Even the influence of religion is to be exercised with discretion. A female
Polemic wanders almost as far from the limits prescribed to her sex, as a
female Machiavel or warlike Thalestris. Fierceness has made almost as few
converts as the sword, and both are peculiarly ungraceful in a female. Even
religious violence has human tempers of its own to indulge, and is gratifying
itself when it would be thought to be serving God. Let not the bigot place her
natural passions to the account of Christianity, or imagine she is pious when
she is only passionate. Let her bear in mind that a Christian doctrine is
always to be defended with a Christian spirit, and not make herself amends by
the stoutness of her orthodoxy for the badness of her temper. Many because they
defend a doctrine with pertinacity, seem to fancy that they thereby acquire a
kind of right to withhold the obedience which should be necessarily involved in
the principle.

But the character of a consistent Christian is as carefully to be maintained,
as that of a fiery disputant is to be avoided; and she who is afraid to avow
her principles, or ashamed to defend them, has little claim to that honorable
title. A profligate, who laughs at the most sacred institutions, and keeps out
of the way of every thing which comes under the appearance of formal
instruction, may be disconcerted by the modest, but spirited rebuke of a
delicate woman, whose life adorns the doctrines which her conversation defends:
but she who administers reproof with ill-breeding, defeats the effect of her
remedy. On the other hand, there is a dishonest way of laboring to conciliate
the favor of a whole company, though of characters and principles
irreconcilably opposite. The words may be so guarded as not to shock the
believer, while the eye and voice may be so accommodated, as not to discourage
the infidel. She who, with a half earnestness, trims between the truth and the
fashion; who, while she thinks it creditable to defend the cause of religion,
yet does it in a faint tone, a studied ambiguity of phrase, and a certain
expression in her countenance, which proves that she is not displeased with
what she affects to censure, or that she is afraid to lose her reputation for
wit, in proportion as she advances her credit for piety, injures the cause more
than he who attacked it; for she proves, either that she does not believe what
she professes, or that she does not reverence what fear compels her to believe.
But this is not all: she is called on not barely to repress impiety, but to
excite, to encourage, and to cherish every tendency to serious religion.

Some of the occasions of contributing to the general good which are daily
presenting themselves to ladies, are almost too minute to be pointed out. Yet
of the good which right-minded women, anxiously watching these minute
occasions, and adroitly seizing them, might accomplish, we may form some idea
by the ill-effects which we actually see produced, through the mere levity,
carelessness, and inattention (to say no worse) of some of those ladies, who
are looked up to as standards in the fashionable world.

I am persuaded, if many a one, who is now disseminating unintended mischief,
under the dangerous notion that there is no harm in any thing short of positive
vice, and under the false colors of that indolent humility, "What good can I
do?" could be brought to see in its collected force the annual aggregate of the
random evil she is daily doing, by constantly throwing a little casual weight
into the wrong scale, by mere inconsiderate and unguarded chat, she would start
from her self-complacent dream. If she could conceive how much she may be
diminishing the good impressions of young men; and if she could imagine how
little amiable levity or irreligion makes her appear in the eyes of those who
are older and abler, (however loose their own principles may be,) she would
correct herself in the first instance, from pure good nature; and in the
second, from worldly prudence and mere self-love. But on how much higher
principles would she restrain herself, if she habitually took into account the
important doctrine of consequences; and if she reflected that the lesser but
more habitual corruptions make up by their number, what they may seem to come
short of by their weight: then perhaps she would find that, among the higher
class of women, inconsideration is adding more to the daily quantity of evil
than almost all other causes put together.

There is an instrument of inconceivable force, when it is employed against the
interests of Christianity. It is not reasoning, for that may be answered; it is
not learning, for luckily the infidel is not seldom ignorant; it is not
invective, for we leave so course an engine to the hands of the vulgar; it is
not evidence, for happily we have that on our side. It is RIDICULE, the most
deadly weapon in the whole arsenal of impiety, and which becomes an almost
unerring shaft when directed by a fair and fashionable hand. No maxim has been
more readily adopted, or is more intrinsically false, than that which the
fascinating eloquence of a noble skeptic of the last age contrived to render so
popular, that "ridicule is the test of truth." It is no test of truth itself;
but of their firmness who assert the cause of truth, it is indeed a severe
test. This light, keen, missile weapon, the irresolute, unconfirmed Christian
will find it harder to withstand, than the whole heavy artillery of infidelity
united.

A young man of the better sort, having just entered upon the world, with a
certain share of good dispositions and right feelings, not ignorant of the
evidences, nor destitute of the principles of Christianity; without parting
with his respect for religion, he sets out with the too natural wish of making
himself a reputation, and of standing well with the fashionable part of the
female world. He preserves for a time a horror of vice, which makes it not
difficult for him to resist the grosser corruptions of society; he can as yet
repel profaneness; nay, he can withstand the banter of a club. He has sense
enough to see through the miserable fallacies of the new philosophy, and spirit
enough to expose its malignity. So far he does well, and you are ready to
congratulate him on his security. You are mistaken: the principles of the
ardent, and hitherto promising adventurer are shaken, just in that very society
where, while he was looking for pleasure, he doubted not of safety. In the
company of certain women of good fashion and no ill fame, he makes shipwreck of
his religion. He sees them treat with levity or derision subjects which he has
been used to hear named with respect. He could confute an argument, he could
unravel a sophistry; but he cannot stand a laugh. A sneer, not at the truth of
religion, for that perhaps is by none of the party disbelieved, but at its
gravity, its unseasonableness, its dullness, puts all his resolution to flight.
He feels his mistake, and struggles to recover his credit; in order to which,
he adopts the gay affectation of trying to seem worse than he really is, he
goes on to say things which he does not believe, and to deny things which he
does believe, and all to efface the first impression, and to recover a
reputation which he has committed to their hands on whose report he knows he
shall stand or fall, in those circles in which he is ambitious to shine.

That cold compound of irony, irreligion, selfishness, and sneer, which make up
what the French (from whom we borrow the thing as well as the word) so well
express by the term persiflage, has of late years made an incredible progress
in blasting the opening buds of piety in young persons of fashion. A cold
pleasantry, a temporary cant word, the jargon of the day (for the "great
vulgar" have their jargon) blights the first promise of seriousness. The ladies
of ton have certain watch-words, which may be detected as indications of this
spirit. The clergy are spoken of under the contemptuous appellation of The
Parsons. Some ludicrous association is infallibly combined with every idea of
religion. If a warm-hearted youth has ventured to name with enthusiasm some
eminently pious character, his glowing ardour is extinguished with a laugh; and
a drawling declaration that the person in question is really a mighty harmless
good creature, is uttered in a tone which leads the youth secretly to vow, that
whatever else he may be, he will never be a good harmless creature.

Nor is ridicule more dangerous to true piety than to true taste. An age which
values itself on parody, burlesque, irony, and caricature, produces little that
is sublime, either in genius or in virtue; but they amuse, and we live in an
age which must be amused, though genius, feeling, truth, and principle, be the
sacrifice. Nothing chills the ardours of devotion like a frigid sarcasm; and,
in the season of youth, the mind should be kept particularly clear of all light
associations. This is of so much importance, that I have known persons who,
having been early accustomed to certain ludicrous combinations, were never able
to get their minds cleansed from the impurities contracted by this habitual
levity, even after a thorough reformation in their hearts and lives had taken
place: their principles became reformed, but their imaginations were indelibly
soiled. They could desist from sins which the strictness of Christianity would
not allow them to commit, but they could not dismiss from their minds images,
which her purity forbade them to entertain.

There was a time when a variety of epithets were thought necessary to express
various kinds of excellence, and when the different qualities of the mind were
distinguished by appropriate and discriminating terms; when the words
venerable, learned, sagacious, profound, acute, pious, ingenious, elegant,
agreeable, wise, or witty, were used as specific marks of distinct characters.
But the legislators of fashion have of late years thought proper to comprise
all merit in one established epithet, and it must be confessed to be a very
desirable one as far as it goes. This epithet is exclusively and
indiscriminately applied wherever commendation is intended. The word pleasant
now serves to combine and express all moral and intellectual excellence. Every
individual, from the gravest professors of the gravest profession, down to the
trifler who is of no profession at all, must earn the epithet of pleasant, or
must be contented to be nothing; and must be consigned over to ridicule, under
the vulgar and inexpressive cant word of a bore. This is the mortifying
designation of many a respectable man, who, though of much worth and much
ability, cannot perhaps clearly make out his letters patent to the title of
pleasant. For, according to this modern classification, there is no
intermediate state, but all are comprised within the ample bounds of one or
other of these two terms.

We ought to be more on our guard against this spirit of ridicule, because,
whatever may be the character of the present day, its faults do not spring from
the redundancies of great qualities, or the overflowings of extravagant
virtues. It is well if more correct views of life, a more regular
administration of laws, and a more settled state of society, have helped to
restrain the excesses of the heroic ages, when love and war were considered as
the great and sole business of human life. Yet, if that period was marked by a
romantic extravagance, and the present by an indolent selfishness, our
superiority is not so triumphantly decisive, as, in the vanity of our hearts,
we may be ready to imagine.

I do not wish to bring back the frantic reign of chivalry, nor to reinstate
women in that fantastic empire in which they then sat enthroned in the hearts,
or rather in the imaginations of men. Common sense is an excellent material of
universal application, which the sagacity of latter ages has seized upon, and
rationally applied to the business of common life. But let us not forget, in
the insolence of acknowledged superiority, that it was religion and chastity,
operating on the romantic spirit of those times, which established the despotic
sway of woman; and though she now no longer looks down on her adoring votaries,
from the pedestal to which an absurd idolatry had lifted her, yet let her
remember that it is the same religion and chastity which once raised her to
such an elevation, that must still furnish the noblest energies of her
character.

While we lawfully ridicule the absurdities which we have abandoned, let us not
plume ourselves on that spirit of novelty which glories in the opposite
extreme. If the manners of the period in question were affected, and if the
gallantry was unnatural, yet the tone of virtue was high; and let us remember
that constancy, purity, and honor, are not ridiculous in themselves, though
they may unluckily be associated with qualities which are so: and women of
delicacy would do well to reflect, when descanting on those exploded manners,
how far it be decorous to deride with too broad a laugh, attachments which
could subsist on remote gratifications; or grossly to ridicule the taste which
led the admirer to sacrifice pleasure to respect, and inclination to honor; to
sneer at that purity which made self-denial a proof of affection, and to call
in question the sound understanding of him who preferred the fame of his
mistress to his own indulgence.

One cannot but be struck with the wonderful contrast exhibited to our view,
when we contemplate the manners of the two periods in question. In the former,
all the flower of Europe smit with a delirious gallantry; all that was young
and noble, and brave and great, with a fanatic frenzy and preposterous contempt
of danger, traversed seas, and scaled mountains, and compassed a large portion
of the globe, at the expense of ease, and fortune, and life, for the
unprofitable project of rescuing, by force of arms, from the hands of infidels,
the sepulcher of that Savior, whom, in the other period, their posterity would
think it the height of fanaticism so much as to name in good company: whose
altars they desert, whose temples they neglect; and though in more than one
country at least they still call themselves by his name, yet too many, it is to
be feared, contemn his precepts, still more are ashamed of his doctrines, and
not a few reject his sacrifice. Too many consider Christianity rather as a
political than a religious distinction; too many claim the appellation of
Christians, in mere opposition to that Democracy with which they conceive
infidelity to be associated, rather than from an abhorrence of impiety for its
own sake; and dread irreligion as the badge of a reprobated party, more than on
account of that moral corruption which is its inseparable concomitant.

But in an age when inversion is the order of the day, the modern idea of
improvement does not consist in altering, but extirpating. We do not reform,
but subvert. We do not correct old systems, but demolish them; fancying that
when every thing shall be new it will be perfect. Not to have been wrong, but
to have been at all, is the crime. Excellence is no longer considered as an
experimental thing which is to grow gradually out of observation and practice,
and to be improved by the accumulating additions brought by the wisdom of
successive ages. Our wisdom is not slowly perfected by age and gradual growth,
but a goddess which starts at once, full grown, mature, armed cap-a-pee, from
the heads of our modern thunderers. Or rather, if I may change the allusion, a
perfect system is now expected inevitably to spring at once, like the fabled
bird of Arabia, from the ashes of its parent; and, like that, can receive its
birth no other way but by the destruction of its predecessor.

Instead of clearing away what is redundant, pruning what is cumbersome,
supplying what is defective, and amending what is wrong, we adopt the
indefinite rage for radical reform of Jack, who in altering Lord Peter's
Swift's "Tale of a Tub."
coat, showed his zeal by crying out, Tear away, brother Martin, for the love
of heaven; never mind, so you do but tear away.

This tearing system has unquestionably rent away some valuable parts of that
strong, rich, native stuff, which formed the ancient texture of British
manners. That we have gained much I am persuaded; that we have lost nothing I
dare not therefore affirm. But though it fairly exhibits a mark of our improved
judgment to ridicule the fantastic notions of love and honor in the heroic
ages; let us not rejoice that that spirit of generosity in sentiment, and of
ardour in piety, the exuberancies of which were then so inconvenient, are now
sunk as unreasonably low. That revolution of manners which the unparalleled wit
and genius of Don Quixote so happily effected, by abolishing extravagancies the
most absurd and pernicious, was so far imperfect, that some virtues which he
never meant to expose, fell into disrepute with the absurdities which he did:
and it is become the turn of the present taste to attach in no small degree
that which is ridiculous to that which is serious and heroic. Some modern works
of wit have assisted in bringing piety and some of the noblest virtues into
contempt, by studiously associating them with oddity, childish simplicity, and
ignorance of the world: and unnecessary pains have been taken to extinguish
that zeal and ardour, which, however liable to excess and error, are yet the
spring of whatever is great and excellent in the human character. The novel of
Cervantes is incomparable; the Tartuffe of Moliere is unequalled; but true
generosity and true religion will never lose any thing of their intrinsic
value, because knight-errantry and hypocrisy are legitimate objects for satire.

But to return from this too long digression, to the subject of female
influence. Those who have not watched the united operation of vanity and
feeling on a youthful mind, will not conceive how much less formidable the
ridicule of all his own sex will be to a very young man, than that of those
women to whom he has been taught to look up as the arbitresses of elegance.
Such an one, I doubt not, might be able to work himself up, by the force of
genuine christian principle, to such a pitch of true heroism, as to refuse a
challenge, (and it requires more real courage to refuse a challenge than to
accept one,) who would yet be in danger of relapsing into the dreadful
pusillanimity of the world, when he is told that no woman of fashion will
hereafter look on him but with contempt. While we have cleared away the rubbish
of the Gothic ages, it were to be wished we had not retained the most criminal
of all their institutions. Why chivalry should indicate a madman, while its
leading object, the single combat, should designate a gentleman, has not yet
been explained. Nay the original motive is lost, while the sinful practice is
continued; for the fighter of the duel no longer pretends to be a glorious
redresser of the wrongs of strangers; no longer considers himself as piously
appealing to heaven for the justice of his cause; but from the slavish fear of
unmerited reproach, often selfishly hazards the happiness of his nearest
connections, and always comes forth in direct defiance of an acknowledged
command of the Almighty. Perhaps there are few occasions in which female
influence might be exerted to a higher purpose than in this, in which laws and
conscience have hitherto effected so little. But while the duellist (who
perhaps becomes a duellist only because he was first a seducer) is welcomed
with smiles; the more hardy youth, who, because he fears not man but God,
declines a challenge; who is resolved to brave disgrace rather than commit sin,
would be treated with cool contempt by those very persons to whose esteem he
might reasonably look, as one of the rewards of his true and substantial
fortitude.

How then is it to be reconciled with the decisions of principle, that delicate
women should receive with complacency the successful libertine, who has been
detected by the wretched father or the injured husband in a criminal commerce,
the discovery of which has too justly banished the unhappy partner of his crime
from virtuous society? Nay, if he happen to be very handsome, or very brave, or
very fashionable, is there not sometimes a kind of dishonorable competition
for his favor? But, whether his popularity be derived from birth, or parts, or
person, or (what is often a substitute for all) from his having made his way
into good company, women of distinction sully the sanctity of virtue by the too
visible pleasure they sometimes express at the attentions of such a popular
libertine, whose voluble small-talk they admire, and whose sprightly nothings
they quote, and whom perhaps their very favor tends to prevent from becoming a
better character, because he finds himself more acceptable as he is.

May I be allowed to introduce a new part of my subject, by remarking that it
is a matter of inconceivable importance, though not perhaps sufficiently
considered, when any popular work, not on a religious topic, but on any common
subject, such as politics, history, or science, has happened to be written by
an author of sound Christian principles? It may not have been necessary, nor
prudently practicable, to have a single page in the whole work professedly
religious: but still, when the living principle informs the mind of the writer,
it is almost impossible but that something of its spirit will diffuse itself
even into subjects with which it should seem but remotely connected. It is at
least a comfort to the reader, to feel that honest confidence which results
from knowing that he has put himself into safe hands; that he has committed
himself to an author, whose known principles are a pledge that his reader need
not be driven to watch himself at every step with anxious circumspection; that
he need not be looking on the right hand and on the left, as if he knew there
were pitfalls under the flowers which are delighting him. And it is no small
point gained, that on subjects in which you do not look to improve your
religion, it is at least secured from deterioration. If the Athenian laws were
so delicate that they disgraced any one who showed an inquiring traveller the
wrong road, what disgrace, among Christians, should attach to that author, who,
when a youth is inquiring the road to history or philosophy, directs him to
blasphemy and unbelief.

In animadverting farther on the reigning evils which the times more
particularly demand that women of rank and influence should repress,
Christianity calls upon them to bear their decided testimony against every
thing which is notoriously contributing to the public corruption. It calls upon
them to banish from their dressing rooms, (and oh, that their influence could
banish from the libraries of their sons and husbands!) that sober and
unsuspected mass of mischief, which, by assuming the plausible names of
Science, of Philosophy, of Arts, of Belles Lettres, is gradually administering
death to the principles of those who would be on their guard, had the poison
been labelled with its own pernicious title. Avowed attacks upon revelation are
more easily resisted, because the malignity is advertised. But who suspects the
destruction which lurks under the harmless or instructive names of General
History, Natural History, Travels, Voyages, Lives, Encyclopedias, Criticism,
and Romance? Who will deny that many of these works contain much admirable
matter; brilliant passages, important facts, just descriptions, faithful
pictures of nature, and valuable illustrations of science? But while "the dead
fly lies at the bottom," the whole will exhale a corrupt and pestilential
stench.

Novels, which chiefly used to be dangerous in one respect, are now become
mischievous in a thousand. They are continually shifting their ground, and
enlarging their sphere, and are daily becoming vehicles of wider mischief.
Sometimes they concentrate their force, and are at once employed to diffuse
destructive politics, deplorable profligacy, and impudent infidelity. Rousseau
was the first popular dispenser of this complicated drug, in which the
deleterious infusion was strong, and the effect proportionably fatal. For he
does not attempt to seduce the affections but through the medium of the
principles. He does not paint an innocent woman, ruined, repenting, and
restored; but with a far more mischievous refinement, he annihilates the value
of chastity, and with pernicious subtlety attempts to make his heroine appear
almost more amiable without it. He exhibits a virtuous woman, the victim not of
temptation but of reason, not of vice but of sentiment, not of passion but of
conviction; and strikes at the very root of honor by elevating a crime into a
principle. With a metaphysical sophistry the most plausible, he debauches the
heart of woman, by cherishing her vanity in the erection of a system of male
virtues, to which, with a lofty dereliction of those that are her more peculiar
and characteristic praise, he tempts her to aspire; powerfully insinuating,
that to this splendid system chastity does not necessarily belong: thus
corrupting the judgment and bewildering the understanding, as the most
effectual way to inflame the imagination and deprave the heart.

The rare mischief of this author consists in his power of seducing by
falsehood those who love ruth, but whose minds are still wavering, and whose
principles are not yet formed. He allures the warmhearted to embrace vice, not
because they prefer vice, but because he gives to vice so natural an air of
virtue: and ardent and enthusiastic youth, too confidently trusting in their
integrity and in their teacher, will be undone, while they fancy they are
indulging in the noblest feelings of their nature. Many authors will more
infallibly complete the ruin of the loose and ill-disposed, but perhaps (if I
may change the figure) there never was a net of such exquisite art and
inextricable workmanship, spread to entangle innocence and ensnare
inexperience, as the writings of Rousseau: and, unhappily, the victim does not
even struggle in the toils, because part of the delusion consists in imagining
that he is set at liberty.

Some of our recent popular publications have adopted and enlarged all the
mischiefs of this school, and the principal evil arising from them is, that the
virtues they exhibit are almost more dangerous than the vices. The chief
materials out of which these delusive systems are framed, are characters who
practice superfluous acts of generosity, while they are trampling on obvious
and commanded duties; who combine inflated sentiments of honor with actions
the most flagitious; a high tone of self-confidence, with a perpetual neglect
of self-denial: pathetic apostrophes to the passions, but no attempt to resist
them. They teach, that chastity is only individual attachment; that no duty
exists which is not prompted by feeling; that impulse is the main spring of
virtuous actions, while laws and religion are only unjust restraints; the
former imposed by arbitrary men, the latter by the absurd prejudices of
timorous and unenlightened conscience. Alas! they do not know that the best
creature of impulse that ever lived is but a wayward, unfixed, unprincipled
being! that the best natural man requires a curb; and needs that balance to the
affections which Christianity alone can furnish, and without which benevolent
propensities are no security to virtue. And perhaps it is not too much to say,
in spite of the monopoly of benevolence to which the new philosophy lays claim,
that the human duties of the second table have never once been well performed
by any of the rejectors of that previous portion of the Decalogue which enjoins
duty to God. -- In some of the most splendid of these characters compassion is
erected into the throne of justice, and justice is degraded into the rank of
plebeian virtues. Creditors are defrauded, while the money due to them is
lavished in dazzling acts of charity to some object that affects the senses;
which fits of charity are made the sponge of every sin, and the substitute of
every virtue: the whole indirectly tending to intimate how very benevolent
people are who are not Christians. From many of these compositions, indeed,
Christianity is systematically, and always virtually excluded; for the law, and
the prophets, and the gospel can make no part of a scheme in which this world
is looked upon as all in all; in which want and misery are considered as evils
arising solely from human governments, and not from the dispensations of God;
in which poverty is represented as merely a political evil, and the restraints
which tend to keep the poor honest, as the most flagrant injustice. The gospel
can make no part of a system in which the chimerical project of consummate
earthly happiness (founded on the pretense of loving the poor better than God
loves them) would defeat the divine plan, which meant this world a scene of
discipline, not of remuneration. The gospel can have nothing to do with a
system in which sin is reduced to a little human imperfection, and Old Bailey
crimes are softened down into a few engaging weaknesses; and in which the
turpitude of all the vices a man himself commits, is done away by his candor
in tolerating all the vices committed by others.

But the part of the system the most fatal to that class whom I am addressing
is, that even in those works which do not go all the length of treating
marriage as an unjust infringement on liberty, and a tyrannical deduction from
general happiness; yet it commonly happens that the hero or heroine, who has
practically violated the letter of the seventh commandment, and continues to
live in the allowed violation of its spirit, is painted as so amiable and so
benevolent, so tender or so brave; and the temptation is represented as so
irresistible, (for all these philosophers are fatalists,) the predominant and
cherished sin is so filtered and purged of its pollutions, and is so sheltered
and surrounded, and relieved with shining qualities, that the innocent and
impressible young reader is brought to lose all horror of the awful crime in
question, in the complacency she feels for the engaging virtues of the criminal.

But there is another object to which I would direct the exertion of that power
of female influence of which I am speaking. Those ladies who take the lead in
society are loudly called upon to act as the guardians of the public taste as
well as of the public virtue. They are called upon therefore, to oppose with
the whole weight of their influence, the irruption of those swarms of
publications now daily issuing from the banks of the Danube, which, like their
ravaging predecessors of the darker ages, though with far other arms, are
overrunning civilized society. Those readers, whose purer taste has been formed
on the correct models of the old classic school, see with indignation and
astonishment the Huns and Vandals once more overpowering the Greeks and Romans.
They behold our minds, with a retrograde but rapid motion, hurried back to the
reign of "chaos and old night," by terrific and unprincipled compositions,
which unite the taste of the Goths with the morals of Bagshot The newspapers
announce that Schiller's Tragedy of the Robbers, which inflamed the young
nobility of Germany to inlist themselves into a band of highwaymen to rob in
the forests of Bohemia, is now acting in England by persons of quality!
, Gorgons, and Hydras, and Chimeras dire!
and by wild and misshapen superstitions, in which, with that consistency
which forms so striking a feature of the new philosophy, those who deny the
immortality of the soul are most eager to introduce the machinery of ghosts.

The writings of the French infidels were some years ago circulated in England
with uncommon industry and with some effect: (...) the plain sense and good
principles of the far greater part of our countrymen resisted the attack, and
rose superior to the trial. Of the doctrines and principles here alluded to,
the dreadful consequences, not only in the unhappy country where they
originated and were almost universally adopted, but in every part of Europe
where they have been received, have been such as to serve as a beacon to
surrounding nations, if any warning can preserve them from destruction. In this
country the subject is now so well understood, that every thing that issues
from the French press is received with jealousy; and a work, on the first
appearance of its exhibiting the doctrines of Voltaire and his associates, is
rejected with indignation.

But let us not on account of this victory repose in confident security. The
modern apostles of infidelity and immorality, little less indefatigable in
dispersing their pernicious doctrines than the first apostles were in
propagating gospel truths, have indeed changed their weapons, but they have by
no means desisted from the attack. To destroy the principles of Christianity in
this island, appears at the present moment to be their grand aim. Deprived of
the assistance of the French press, they are now attempting to attain their
object under the close and more artificial veil of German literature. Conscious
that religion and morals will stand or fall together, their attacks are
sometimes levelled against the one and sometimes against the other. With strong
occasional professions of general attachment to both of these, they endeavor
to interest the feelings of the reader, sometimes in favor of some one
particular vice, at other times on the subject of some one objection to
revealed religion. Poetry as well as prose, romance as well as history,
writings on philosophical as well as on political subjects, have thus been
employed to instill the principles of Illuminatism, while incredible pains have
been taken to obtain able translations of every book which was supposed likely
to be of use in corrupting the heart or misleading the understanding. In many
of these translations, certain stronger passages, which, though well received
in Germany, would have excited disgust in England, are wholly omitted, in order
that the mind may be more certainly, though more slowly, prepared for the full
effect of the same poison to be administered in a stronger degree at another
period.

Let not those to whom these pages are addressed deceive themselves, by
supposing this to be a fable; and let them inquire most seriously whether I
speak truth, in asserting that the attacks of infidelity in Great Britain are
at this moment principally directed against the female breast. Conscious of the
influence of women in civil society, conscious of the effect which female
infidelity produced in France, they attribute the ill success of their attempts
in this country, to their having been hitherto chiefly addressed to the male
sex. They are now sedulously laboring to destroy the religious principles of
women, and in too many instances have fatally succeeded. For this purpose not
only novels and romances have been made the vehicles of vice and infidelity,
but the same allurement has been held out to the women of our country, which
was employed by the first philosophist to the first sinner-Knowledge. Listen to
the precepts of the new German enlighteners, and you need no longer remain in
that situation in which Providence has placed you! Follow their examples, and
you shall be permitted to indulge in all those gratifications which custom, not
religion, has tolerated in the male sex!

Let us jealously watch every deepening shade in the change of manners; let us
mark every step, however inconsiderable, whose tendency is downwards.
Corruption is neither stationary nor retrograde; and to have departed from
modesty, is already to have made a progress. It is not only awfully true, that
since the new principles have been afloat, women have been too eagerly
inquisitive after these monstrous compositions; but it is true also that, with
a new and offensive renunciation of their native delicacy, many women of
character make little hesitation in avowing their familiarity with works
abounding with principles, sentiments, and descriptions, "which should not be
so much as named among them." By allowing their minds to come in contact with
such contagious matter, they are irrecoverably tainting them; and by
acknowledging that they are actually conversant with such corruptions, (with
whatever reprobation of the author they may qualify their perusal of the book,)
they are exciting in others a most mischievous curiosity for the same
unhallowed gratification. Thus they are daily diminishing in the young and the
timid those wholesome scruples, by which, when a tender conscience ceases to be
entrenched, all the subsequent stages of ruin are gradually facilitated.

We have hitherto spoken only of the German writings; but because there are
multitudes who seldom read, equal pains have been taken to promote the same
object through the medium of the stage; and this weapon is, of all others, that
against which it is, at the present moment, the most important to warn the more
inconsiderate of my countrywomen.

As a specimen of the German drama, it may not be unseasonable to offer a few
remarks on the admired play of the Stranger. In this piece the character of an
adultress, which, in all periods of the world, ancient as well as modern, in
all countries, heathen as well as christian, has hitherto been held in
detestation, and has never been introduced but to be reprobated, is for the
first time presented to our view in the most pleasing and fascinating colors.
The heroine is a woman who forsook a husband the most affectionate and the most
amiable, and lived for some time in the most criminal commerce with her
seducer. Repenting at length of her crime, she buries herself in retirement.
The talents of the poet during the whole piece are exerted in attempting to
render this woman the object not only of the compassion and forgiveness, but of
the esteem and affection, of the audience. The injured husband, convinced of
his wife's repentance, forms a resolution, which every man of true feeling and
christian piety will probably approve. He forgives her offense, and promises
her through life his advice, protection, and fortune, together with every thing
which can alleviate the misery of her situation, but refuses to replace her in
the situation of his wife. But this is not sufficient for the German author.
His efforts are employed, and it is to be feared but too successfully, in
making the audience consider the husband as an unrelenting savage, while they
are led by the art of the poet anxiously to wish to see an adultress restored
to that rank of women who have not violated the most solemn covenant that can
be made with man, nor disobeyed one of the most positive laws which has been
enjoined by God.

About the same time that this first attempt at representing an adultress in an
exemplary light was made by a German dramatist, which forms an era in manners;
a direct vindication of adultery was for the first time attempted by a woman, a
professed admirer and imitator of the German suicide Werter. The female Werter,
as she is styled by her biographer, asserts, in a work entitled "The Wrongs of
Women," that adultery is justifiable, and that the restrictions placed on it by
the laws of England constitute one of the Wrongs of Women.

And this leads me to dwell a little longer on this most destructive class in
the whole wide range of modern corruptors, who effect the most desperate work
of the passions, without so much as pretending to urge their violence in
extenuation of the guilt of indulging them. They solicit this very indulgence
with a sort of cold-blooded speculation, and invite the reader to the most
unbounded gratifications, with all the saturnine coolness of a geometrical
calculation. Theirs is an iniquity rather of phlegm than of spirit: and in the
pestilent atmosphere they raise about them, as in the infernal climate
described by Milton, The parching air When the north wind blows it devoureth
the mountains, and burns the wilderness, and consumes the grass as fire.
Eccles. xl. 20.

Burns frore, and frost performs the effect of fire.


This cool, calculating, intellectual wickedness eats out the very heart and
core of virtue, and like a deadly mildew blights and shrivels the blooming
promise of the human spring. Its benumbing touch communicates a torpid
sluggishness, which paralyzes the soul. It descants on depravity, and details
its grossest acts as frigidly as if its object were to allay the tumult of the
passions, while it is letting them loose on mankind, by "plucking off the
muzzle" of present restraint and future accountableness. The system is a dire
infusion compounded of bold impiety, brutish sensuality, and exquisite folly,
which creeping fatally about the heart checks the moral circulation, and
totally stops the pulse of goodness by the extinction of the vital principle.
Thus not only choking the stream of actual virtue, but drying up the very
fountain of future remorse and remote repentance.

The ravages which some of the old offenders against purity made in the
youthful heart, by the exercise of a fervid but licentious imagination on the
passions, was like the mischief effected by floods, cataracts, and volcanos.
The desolation indeed was terrible, and the ruin was tremendous: yet it was a
ruin which did not infallibly preclude the possibility of recovery. The
country, though deluged and devastated, was not utterly put beyond the power of
restoration. The harvests indeed were destroyed, and all was wide sterility.
But, though the crops were lost, the seeds of vegetation were not absolutely
eradicated; so that, after a long and barren blank, fertility might finally
return.

But the heart once infected with this newly medicated venom, subtle though
sluggish in its operation, resembles what travelers relate of that blasted
spot the dead-sea, where those devoted cities once stood which for their
pollutions were burnt with fire from heaven. It continues a stagnant lake of
putrefying waters. No wholesome blade ever more shoots up; the air is so
tainted that no living thing subsists within its influence. Near the
sulphurous pool the very principle of life is annihilated. All is death,
Death, unrepealable, eternal death!


But let us take comfort. These projects are not yet generally realised. These
atrocious principles are not yet adopted into common practice. Though
corruptions seem with a confluent tide to be pouring in upon us from every
quarter, yet there is still left among us a discriminating judgment. Clear and
strongly marked distinctions between right and wrong still subsist. While we
continue to cherish this sanity of mind, the case is not desperate. Though that
crime, the growth of which always exhibits the most irrefragable proof of the
dissoluteness of public manners; though that crime, which cuts up order and
virtue by the roots, and violates the sanctity of vows, is awfully increasing,
Till senates seem,
For purposes of empire less convened
Than to release the adult'ress from her bonds;
yet, thanks to the surviving efficacy of a holy religion, to the operation of
virtuous laws, and to the energy and unshaken integrity with which these laws
are now administered; and most of all perhaps to a standard of morals which
continues in force, when the principles which sanctioned it are no more; this
crime, in the female sex at least, is still held in just abhorrence; if it be
practiced, it is not honorable; if it be committed, it is not justified; we do
not yet affect to palliate its turpitude; as yet it hides its abhorred head in
lurking privacy; and reprobation hitherto follows its publicity.

But on YOUR exerting your influence, with just application and increasing
energy, may in no small degree depend whether this corruption shall still
continue to be resisted. For, from admiring to adopting, the step is short, and
the progress rapid; and it is in the moral as in the natural world; the motion,
in the case of minds as well as of bodies, is accelerated as they approach the
center to which they are tending.

O ye to whom this address is particularly directed! an awful charge is, in
this instance, committed to your hands; as you discharge it or shrink from it,
you promote or injure the honor of your daughters and the happiness of your
sons, of both which you are the depositaries. And, while you resolutely
persevere in making a stand against the encroachments of this crime, suffer not
your firmness to be shaken by that affectation of charity, which is growing
into a general substitute for principle. Abuse not so noble a quality as
Christian candor, by misemploying it in instances to which it does not apply.
Pity the wretched woman you dare not countenance; and bless HIM who has "made
you to differ." If unhappily she be your relation or friend, anxiously watch
for the period when she shall be deserted by her betrayer; and see if, by your
Christian offices, she can be snatched from a perpetuity of vice. But if,
through the Divine blessing on your patient endeavors, she should ever be
awakened to remorse, be not anxious to restore the forlorn penitent to that
society against whose laws she has so grievously offended; and remember, that
her soliciting such a restoration, furnishes but too plain a proof that she is
not the penitent your partiality would believe; since penitence is more anxious
to make its peace with Heaven than with the world. Joyfully would a truly
contrite spirit commute an earthly for an everlasting reprobation! To restore a
criminal to public society, is perhaps to tempt her to repeat her crime, or to
deaden her repentance for having committed it, as well as to injure that
society; while to restore a strayed soul to God will add luster to your
Christian character, and brighten your eternal crown.

In the mean time, there are other evils, ultimately perhaps tending to this,
into which we are falling, through that sort of fashionable candor which, as
was hinted above, is among the mischievous characteristics of the present day;
of which period perhaps it is not the smallest evil, that vices are made to
look so like virtues, and are so assimilated to them, that it requires
watchfulness and judgment sufficiently to analyze and discriminate. There are
certain women of good fashion who practice irregularities not consistent with
the strictness of virtue; while their good sense and knowledge of the world
make them at the same time keenly alive to the value of reputation. They want
to retain their indulgences, without quite forfeiting their credit; but finding
their fame fast declining, they artfully cling, by flattery and marked
attentions, to a few persons of more than ordinary character; and thus, till
they are driven to let go their hold, continue to prop a falling fame.

On the other hand, there are not wanting women of distinction, of very correct
general conduct, and of no ordinary sense and virtue, who, confiding with a
high mind on what they too confidently call the integrity of their own hearts;
anxious to deserve a good fame on the one hand, by a life free from reproach,
yet secretly too desirous on the other of securing a worldly and fashionable
reputation; while their general associates are persons of honor, and their
general resort places of safety; yet allow themselves to be occasionally
present at the midnight orgies of revelry and gaming, in houses of no
honorable estimation; and thus help to keep up characters, which, without
their sustaining hand, would sink to their just level of contempt and
reprobation. While they are holding out this plank to a drowning reputation,
rather, it is to be feared, showing their own strength than assisting another's
weakness, they value themselves, perhaps, on not partaking of the worst parts
of the amusements which may be carrying on; but they sanction them by their
presence; they lend their countenance to corruptions they should abhor, and
their example to the young and inexperienced, who are looking about for some
such sanction to justify them in that which they were before inclined to, but
were too timid to have ventured upon without the protection of such unsullied
names. Thus these respectable characters, without looking to the general
consequences of their indiscretion, are thoughtlessly employed in breaking
down, as it were, the broad fence which should ever separate two very different
sorts of society, and are becoming a kind of unnatural link between vice and
virtue.

There is a gross deception which even persons of reputation practice on
themselves. They loudly condemn vice and irregularity as an abstract principle;
nay, they stigmatize them in persons of an opposite party, or in those from
whom they themselves have no prospect of personal advantage or amusement, and
in whom therefore they have no particular interest to tolerate evil. But the
same disorders are viewed without abhorrence when practiced by those who in any
way minister to their pleasures. Refined entertainments, luxurious decorations,
select music, whatever furnishes any delight rare and exquisite to the senses,
these soften the severity of criticism; these palliate sins, varnish over the
flaws of a broken character, and extort not pardon merely, but justification,
countenance, intimacy! The more respectable will not, perhaps, go all the
length of vindicating the disreputable vice, but they affect to disbelieve its
existence in the individual instance; or, failing in this, they will bury its
acknowledged turpitude in the seducing qualities of the agreeable delinquent.
Talents of every kind are considered as a commutation for a few vices, and such
are made a passport to introduce into honorable society characters whom their
profligacy ought to exclude from it.

But the great object to which YOU who are, or may be mothers, are more
especially called, is the education of your children. If we are responsible for
the use of influence in the case of those over whom we have no immediate
control, in the case of our children we are responsible for the exercise of
acknowledged power: a power wide in its extent, indefinite in its effects, and
inestimable in its importance. On YOU, depend in no small degree the principles
of the whole rising generation. To your direction the daughters are almost
exclusively committed; and until a certain age, to you also is consigned the
mighty privilege of forming the hearts and minds of your infant sons. By the
blessing of God on the principles you shall, as far as it depends on you,
infuse into both sons and daughters, they will hereafter "arise and call you
blessed." And in the great day of general account, may every Christian mother
be enabled through divine grace to say, with humble confidence, to her Maker
and Redeemer, Behold the children whom thou have given me!

Christianity, driven out from the rest of the world, has still, blessed be
God! a "strong hold" in this country. And though it be the special duty of the
appointed watchman, now that he sees the sword come upon the land, to blow the
trumpet and warn the people, which if he neglect to do, their blood shall be
required of the watchman's hand: Ezekiel, xxxiii. 6.
yet, in this sacred garrison, impregnable but by neglect, YOU too have an
awful post, that of arming the minds of the rising generation with the shield
of faith, whereby they shall be able to quench the fiery darts of the wicked;
that of girding them with that sword of the spirit which is the word of God. If
you neglect this your bounden duty, you will have effectually contributed to
expel Christianity from her last citadel. And, remember, that the dignity of
the work to which you are called, is no less than that of preserving the ark of
the Lord.

CHAP. II.
On the education of women. -- The prevailing system tends to establish the
errors which it ought to correct. -- Dangers arising from an excessive
cultivation of the arts.

IT is far from being the object of this slight work to offer a regular plan of
female education, a task which has been often more properly assumed by far
abler writers; but it is intended rather to suggest a few remarks on the
reigning mode, which, though it has had many panegyrists, appears to be
defective, not only in a few particulars, but as a general system. There are
indeed numberless honorable exceptions to an observation which will be thought
severe; yet the author questions if it be not the natural and direct tendency
of the prevailing and popular system, to excite and promote those very defects,
which it ought to be the main end and object of Christian education to remove;
whether, instead of directing this important engine to attack and destroy
vanity, selfishness, and inconsideration, that triple alliance in league
against female virtue; the combined powers of instruction are not sedulously
confederated in confirming their strength and establishing their empire?

If indeed the material substance, if the body and limbs, with the organs and
senses, be really the more valuable objects of attention, then there is little
room for animadversion and improvement. But if the immaterial and immortal
mind; if the heart, "out of which are the issues of life," be the main concern;
if the great business of education be to implant ideas, to communicate
knowledge, to form a correct taste and a sound judgment, to resist evil
propensities, and, above all, to seize the favorable season for infusing
principles and confirming habits; if education be a school to fit us for life,
and life be a school to fit us for eternity; if such, I repeat it, be the chief
work and grand ends of education, it may then be worth inquiring how far these
ends are likely to be effected by the prevailing system.

Is it not a fundamental error to consider children as innocent beings, whose
little weaknesses may perhaps want some correction, rather than as beings who
bring into the world a corrupt nature and evil dispositions, which it should be
the great end of education to rectify? This appears to be such a
foundation-truth, that if I were asked what quality is most important in an
instructor of youth, I should not hesitate to reply, such a strong impression
of the corruption of our nature, as should insure a disposition to counteract
it: together with such a deep view and thorough knowledge of the human heart,
as should be necessary for developing and controuling its most secret and
complicated workings. And let us remember that to know the world, as it is
called, that is, to know its local manners, temporary usages, and evanescent
fashions, is not to know human nature: and where this prime knowledge is
wanting, those natural evils which ought to be counteracted will be fostered.

Vanity, for instance, is reckoned among the light and venial errors of youth;
nay, so far from being treated as a dangerous enemy, it is often called in as
an auxiliary. At worst, it is considered as a harmless weakness, which
subtracts little from the value of a character; as a natural effervescence,
which will subside of itself, when the first ferment of the youthful passions
shall have done working. But those know little of the conformation of the
human, and especially of the female heart, who fancy that vanity is ever
exhausted, by the mere operation of time and events. Let those who maintain
this opinion look into our places of public resort, and there behold if the
ghost of departed beauty is not to its last flitting fond of haunting the
scenes of its past pleasures; the soul, unwilling (if I may borrow an allusion
from the Platonic mythology) to quit the spot in which the body enjoyed its
former delights, still continues to hover about the same place, though the same
pleasures are no longer to be found there. Disappointments indeed may divert
vanity into a new direction; prudence may prevent it from breaking out into
excesses, and age may prove that it is "vexation of spirit;" but neither
disappointment, prudence, nor age can cure it; for they do not correct the
principle. Nay, the very disappointment itself serves as a painful evidence of
its protracted existence.

Since then there is a season when the youthful must cease to be young, and the
beautiful to excite admiration; to grow old gracefully is perhaps one of the
rarest and most valuable arts which can be taught to woman. It is for this
sober season of life that education should lay up its rich resources. However
disregarded they may hitherto have been, they will be wanted now. When admirers
fall away, and flatterers become mute, the mind will be driven to retire into
itself, and if it find no entertainment at home, it will be driven back again
upon the world with increased force. Yet forgetting this, do we not seem to
educate our daughters, exclusively, for the transient period of youth, when it
is to maturer life we ought to advert? Do we not educate them for a crowd,
forgetting that they are to live at home? for the world, and not for
themselves? for show, and not for use? for time, and not for eternity?

Vanity (and the same may be said of selfishness) is not to be resisted like
any other vice, which is sometimes busy and sometimes quiet; it is not to be
attacked as a single fault, which is indulged in opposition to a single virtue;
but it is uniformly to be controlled, as an active, a restless, a growing
principle, at constant war with all the Christian graces; which not only mixes
itself with all our faults, but insinuates itself into all our virtues too; and
will, if not checked effectually, rob our best actions of their reward. Vanity,
if I may use the analogy, is, with respect to the other vices, what feeling is
in regard to the other senses; it is not confined in its operation to the eye,
or the ear, or any single organ, but diffused through the whole being, alive in
every part, awakened and communicated by the slightest touch.

Not a few of the evils of the present day arise from a new and perverted
application of terms; among these, perhaps, there is not one more abused,
misunderstood, or misapplied, than the term accomplishments. This word in its
original meaning, signifies completeness, perfection. But I may safely appeal
to the observation of mankind, whether they do not meet with swarms of youthful
females, issuing from our boarding schools, as well as emerging from the more
private scenes of domestic education, who are introduced into the world, under
the broad and universal title of accomplished young ladies, of all of whom it
cannot very truly and correctly be pronounced, that they illustrate the
definition by a completeness which leaves nothing to be added, and a perfection
which leaves nothing to be desired.

This phrenzy of accomplishments, unhappily, is no longer restricted within the
usual limits of rank and fortune; the middle orders have caught the contagion,
and it rages downward with increasing violence, from the elegantly dressed but
slenderly portioned curate's daughter, to the equally fashionable daughter of
the little tradesman, and of the more opulent but not more judicious farmer.
And is it not obvious, that as far as this epidemical mania has spread, this
very valuable part of society is declining in usefulness, as it rises in its
unlucky pretensions to elegance? And this revolution of the manners of the
middle class has so far altered the character of the age, as to be in danger of
rendering obsolete the heretofore common saying, that most worth and virtue are
to be found in the middle station. For I do not scruple to assert, that in
general, as as far as my little observation has extended, this class of
females, in what relates both to religious knowledge and to practical industry,
falls short both of the very high and the very low. Their new course of
education, and the habits of life and elegance of dress connected with it,
peculiarly unfits them for the active duties of their own very important
condition; while, with frivolous eagerness and secondhand opportunities, they
run to snatch a few of those showy acquirements which decorate the great. This
is done apparently with one or other of these views; either to make their
fortune by marriage, or if that fail, to qualify them to become teachers of
others: hence the abundant multiplication of superficial wives, and of
incompetent and illiterate governesses. The use of the pencil, the performance
of exquisite but unnecessary works, the study of foreign languages and of
music, require (with some exceptions which should always be made in favor of
great natural genius) a degree of leisure which belongs exclusively to
affluence. Those among the class in question, whose own good sense leads them
to avoid these mistaken pursuits, cannot be offended at a reproof which does
not belong to them.
One use of learning languages is, not that we may know what the terms which
express the articles of our dress and our table are called in French or
Italian; not that we may think over a few ordinary phrases in English, and then
translate them, without one foreign idiom; for he who cannot think in a
language cannot be said to understand it: but the great use of acquiring any
foreign language is, either that it enables us occasionally to converse with
foreigners unacquainted with any other, or that it is a key to the literature
of the country to which it belongs; and those humbler females, the chief part
of whose time is required for domestic offices, are little likely to fall in
the way of foreigners; and so far from enjoying opportunities for the
acquisition of foreign literature, they have seldom time to possess themselves
of all that valuable knowledge which the books of their own country so
abundantly furnish; and the acquisition of which would be so much more useful
and honorable than the paltry accessions they make, by hammering out the
meaning of a few passages in a tongue they but imperfectly understand, and of
which they are likely to make no use.

It would be well if the reflection how eagerly this redundancy of
accomplishments is seized on by their inferiors, were to operate as in the case
of other absurd fashions, which the great can seldom be brought to renounce
from any other consideration than that they are adopted by the vulgar.

But, to return to that more elevated, and, on account of their more extended
influence only, that more important class of females, to whose use this little
work is more immediately dedicated. Some popular authors, on the subject of
female instruction, had for a time established a fantastic code of artificial
manners. They had refined elegance into insipidity, frittered down delicacy
into frivolousness, and reduced manner into minauderie. But to lisp, and to
amble, and to nickname God's creatures, has nothing to do with true gentleness
of mind; and to be silly makes no necessary part of softness. Another class of
cotemporary authors turned all the force of their talents to excite emotions,
to inspire sentiment, and to reduce all mental and moral excellence into
sympathy and feeling. These softer qualities were elevated at the expense of
principle; and young women were incessantly hearing unqualified sensibility
extolled as the perfection of their nature; till those who really possessed
this amiable quality, instead of directing, and chastising, and restraining it,
were in danger of fostering it to their hurt, and began to consider themselves
as deriving their excellence from its excess; while those less interesting
damsels, who happened not to find any of this amiable sensibility in their
hearts, but thought it creditable to have it somewhere, fancied its seat was in
the nerves; and here indeed it was easily found or feigned; till a false and
excessive display of feeling became so predominant, as to bring in question the
actual existence of that true tenderness, without which, though a woman may be
worthy, she can never be amiable.

Fashion then, by one of her sudden and rapid turns, instantaneously struck out
real sensibility and the affectation of it from the standing list of female
perfections; and, by a quick touch of her magic wand, shifted the scene, and at
once produced the bold and independent beauty, the intrepid female, the hoyden,
the huntress, and the archer; the swinging arms, the confident address, the
regimental, and the four-in-hand. These self-complacent heroines made us ready
to regret their softer predecessors, who had aimed only at pleasing the other
sex, while these aspiring fair ones struggled for the bolder renown of
rivalling them; the project failed; for, whereas the former had sued for
admiration, the latter challenged, seized, compelled it; but the men, as was
natural, continued to prefer the more modest claimant to the sturdy competitor.

It were well if we, who have the advantage of contemplating the errors of the
two extremes, were to look for truth where she is commonly to be found, in the
plain and obvious middle path, equally remote from each excess; and, while we
bear in mind that helplessness is not delicacy, let us also remember that
masculine manners do not necessarily include strength of character nor vigor
of intellect. Should we not reflect also, that we are neither to train up
Amazons nor Circamans, but to form Christians? that we have to educate not only
rational but accountable beings? and, remembering this, should we not be
solicitous to let our daughters learn of the well-taught, and associate with
the well-bred? In training them, should we not carefully cultivate intellect,
implant religion, and cherish modesty? then, whatever is delicate in manners,
would be the natural result of whatever is just in sentiment, and correct in
principle: then, the decorums, the proprieties, the elegancies, and even the
graces, as far as they are simple, pure, and honest, would follow as an almost
inevitable consequence; for to follow in the train of the Christian virtues,
and not to take the lead of them, is the proper place which religion assigns to
the graces.

Whether we have made the best use of the errors of our predecessors, and of
our own numberless advantages, and whether the prevailing system be really
consistent with sound policy or with Christian principle, it may be worth our
while to inquire.

Would not a stranger be led to imagine by a view of the reigning mode of
female education, that human life consisted of one universal holiday, and that
the grand contest between the several competitors was, who should be most
eminently qualified to excel, and carry off the prize, in the various shows and
games which were intended to be exhibited in it? And to the exhibitors
themselves, would be not be ready to apply Sir Francis Bacon's observation on
the Olympian victors, that they were so excellent in these unnecessary things,
that their perfection must needs have been acquired by the neglect of whatever
was necessary?

What would the polished Addison, who thought that one great end of a lady's
learning to dance was, that she might know how to sit still gracefully; what
would even the Pagan historian Sallust.
of the great Roman conspirator, who could commemorate it among the defects of
his hero's accomplished mistress, that she was too good a singer and dancer for
a virtuous woman; what would these refined critics have said, had they lived as
we have done, to see the art of dancing lifted into such importance, that it
cannot with any degree of safety be confided to one instructor, but a whole
train of successive masters are considered as absolutely essential to its
perfection? What would these accurate judges of female manners have said, to
see a modest young lady first delivered into the hands of a military sergeant
to instruct her in the feminine art of marching? and when this delicate
acquisition is attained, to see her transferred to a professor, who is to teach
her the Scotch steps; which professor, having communicated his indispensable
portion of this indispensable art, makes way for the professor of French
dances; and all perhaps, in their turn, either yield to or have the honor to
cooperate with a finishing master; each probably receiving a stipend which
would make the pious curate or the learned chaplain rich and happy?

The science of music, which used to be communicated in so competent a degree
to a young lady by one able instructor, is now distributed among a whole band.
She now requires, not a master, but an orchestra. And my country readers would
accuse me of exaggeration were I to hazard enumerating the variety of musical
teachers who attend in the same family; the daughters of which are summoned, by
at least as many instruments as the subjects of Nebuchadnezzar, to worship the
idol which fashion has set up. They would be incredulous were I to produce real
instances, in which the delighted mother has been heard to declare, that the
visits of masters of every art, and the different masters for various
gradations of the same art, followed each other in such close and rapid
succession during the whole London residence, that her girls had not a moment's
interval to look into a book; nor could she contrive any method to introduce
one, till she happily devised the scheme of reading to them herself for half an
hour while they were drawing, by which means no time was lost. Since the first
edition of this Work appeared, the author has received from a person of great
eminence the following statement, ascertaining the time employed in the
acquisition of music in one instance. As a general calculation it will perhaps
be found to be far from exaggerated. The statement concludes with remarking,
that the individual who is the subject of it is now married to a man who
dislikes music!

Suppose your pupil to begin at six years of age and to continue at the average
of four hours a day only, Sunday excepted, and thirteen days allowed for
traveling annually, till she is eighteen, the state stands thus; 300 days
multiplied by four, the number of hours amount to 1200; that number multiplied
by twelve, which is the number of years, amounts to 14,400 hours!




Before the evil is past redress, it will be prudent to reflect that in all
polished countries an entire devotedness to the fine arts has been one grand
source of the corruption of the women; and so justly were these pernicious
consequences appreciated by the Greeks, among whom these arts were carried to
the highest possible perfection, that they seldom allowed them to be cultivated
to a very exquisite degree by women of great purity of character. And if the
ambition of an elegant British lady should be fired by the idea that the
accomplished females of those polished states were the admired companions of
the philosophers, the poets, the wits, and the artists of Athens; and their
beauty or talents the favorite subjects of the muse, the lyre, the pencil, and
the chissel; so that their pictures and statues furnished the most consummate
models of Grecian art: if, I say, the accomplished females of our days are
panting for similar renown, let their modesty chastise their ambition, by
recollecting that these celebrated women are not to be found among the chaste
wives and the virtuous daughters of the Aristides's, the Agis's, and the
Phocions; but that they are to be looked for among the Phrynes, the Lais's, the
Aspasias, and the Glyceras. I am persuaded the Christian female, whatever be
her talents, will renounce the desire of any celebrity when attached to
impurity of character, with the same noble indignation with which the virtuous
biographer of the abovenamed heroes renounced all dishonest fame, by
exclaiming, I had rather it should be said there never was a Plutarch, than
that they should say Plutarch was malignant, unjust, or envious. No censure is
levelled at the exertions of real genius, which is as valuable as it is rare;
but at the absurdity of that system which is erecting the whole sex into
artists.


And while this corruption, brought on by an excessive cultivation of the arts,
has contributed its full share to the decline of states, it has always
furnished an infallible symptom of their impending fall. The satires of the
most penetrating and judicious of the Roman poets corroborating the testimonies
of the most accurate of their historians, abound with invectives against the
depravity of manners introduced by the corrupt habits of female education. The
bitterness and gross indelicacy of some of these satirists (too gross to be
either quoted or referred to) make little against their authority in these
points; for how shocking must those corruptions have been, and how obviously
offensive their causes, which could have appeared so highly disgusting to minds
not likely to be scandalized by slight deviations from decency! The famous ode
of Horace, attributing the vices and disasters of his country to the same
cause, might, were it quite free from the above objections, be produced, I will
not presume to say as an exact picture of the existing manners of this country;
but may I not venture to say, as a prophecy, the fulfillment of which cannot be
very remote? It may however be observed, that the modesty of the Roman matron,
and the chaste demeanor of her virgin daughters, which amidst the stern virtues
of the state were as immaculate and pure as the honor of the Roman citizen,
fell a sacrifice to the luxurious dissipation brought in by their Asiatic
conquests; after which the females were soon taught a complete change of
character. They were instructed to accommodate their talents of pleasing to the
more vitiated tastes of the other sex; and began to study every grace and every
art which might captivate the exhausted hearts, and excite the wearied and
capricious inclinations of the men: till by a rapid and at length complete
enervation, the Roman character lost its signature, and through a quick
succession of slavery, effeminacy, and vice, sunk into that degeneracy of which
some of the modern Italian states serve to furnish a too just specimen.

It is of the essence of human things that the same objects which are highly
useful in their season, measure, and degree, become mischievous in their
excess, at other periods, and under other circumstances. In a state of
barbarism, the arts are among the best reformers; and they go on to be improved
themselves, and improving those who cultivate them, till having reached a
certain point, those very arts which were the instruments of civilization and
refinement, become instruments of corruption and decay; enervating and
depraving in the second instance as certainly as they refined in the first.
They become agents of voluptuousness. They excite the imagination; and the
imagination thus excited, and no longer under the government of strict
principle, becomes the most dangerous stimulant of the passions; promotes a too
keen relish for pleasure, teaching how to multiply its sources, and inventing
new and pernicious modes of artificial gratification.

May we not rank among their present corrupt consequences, the unchaste
costume, the impure style of dress, and that indelicate statue-like exhibition
of the female figure, which by its artfully-disposed folds, its wet and
adhesive drapery, so defines the form as to prevent covering itself from
becoming a veil? This licentious mode, as the acute Montesquieu observed on the
dances of the Spartan virgins, has taught us "to strip chastity itself of
modesty."

May the author be allowed to address to our own country and our own
circumstances to both of which they seem peculiarly applicable, the spirit of
that beautiful apostrophe of the most polished poet of antiquity to the most
victorious nation? Let us leave to the inhabitants of conquered countries the
praise of carrying to the very highest degree of perfection, sculpture and the
sister arts; but let this country direct her own exertions to the art of
governing mankind in equity and peace, of showing mercy to the submissive, and
of abasing the proud among surrounding nations. Let me not be suspected of
bringing into any sort of comparison the gentleness of British government with
the rapacity of Roman conquests, or the principles of Roman dominion. To spoil,
to butcher, and to commit every kind of violence, they call, says one of the
ablest of their historians, by the lying name of government, and when they have
spread a general desolation they call it peace Tacitus' Life of Agricola,
speech of Galgacus to his Soldiers.


With such dictatorial, or, as we might now read directorial inquisitors, we
can have no point of contact; and if I have applied the servile flattery of a
delightful poet to the purpose of English happiness, it was only to show
wherein true national grandeur consists, and that every country pays too dear a
price for those arts and embellishments of society which endanger the loss of
its morals and manners.




CHAP. III.
External improvement. -- Children's Balls. -- French Governesses.

Let me not however be misunderstood. The customs which fashion has
established, when not in direct opposition to what is right, should
unquestionably be pursued in the education of ladies. Piety maintains no
natural war with elegance, and Christianity would be no gainer by making her
disciples unamiable. Religion does not forbid that the exterior be made to a
certain degree the object of attention. But the admiration bestowed, the sums
expended, and the time lavished on arts which add little to the intrinsic value
of life, should have limitations. While these arts should be admired, let them
not be admired above their just value: while they are practiced, let it not be
to the exclusion of higher employments: while they are cultivated, let it be to
amuse leisure, but not to engross life.

But it happens unfortunately, that to ordinary observers, the girl who is
really receiving the worst education often makes the best figure. The outward
accomplishments have the dangerous advantage of addressing themselves more
immediately to the senses, and of course meet every where with those who can in
some measure appreciate as well as admire them; for all can see and hear, but
all cannot scrutinize and discriminate. External acquirements, too recommend
themselves the more because they are more rapidly as well as more visibly
progressive. While the mind is led on to improvement by slow motions and
imperceptible degrees; while the heart must now be admonished by reproof, and
now allured by kindness; its liveliest advances being suddenly impeded by
obstinacy, and its brightest prospects often obscured by passion; it is slow in
its acquisitions of virtue, and reluctant in its approaches to piety. The
unruly and turbulent propensities of the mind are not so obedient to the
forming hand as defects of manner or awkwardness of gait. Often when we fancy
that a troublesome passion is completely crushed, we have the mortification to
find that we have "scotch'd" the snake, not killed it." One evil temper starts
up before another is conquered. The subduing hand cannot cut off the
ever-sprouting heads so fast as the prolific Hydra can re-produce them, nor
fell the stubborn Antaeus so often as he can recruit his strength, and rise in
vigorous and repeated opposition.

Hired teachers are also under a disadvantage resembling tenants at rack-rent;
it is their interest to bring in an immediate revenue of praise and profit, and
for the sake of a present rich crop, those who are not strictly conscientious,
do not care how much the ground is impoverished for future produce. But
parents, who are the lords of the soil, must look to permanent value, and to
continued fruitfulness. The best effects of a careful education are often very
remote; they are to be discovered in future scenes, and exhibited in as yet
untried connections. Every event of life will be putting the heart into fresh
situations, and making new demands on its prudence, its firmness, its
integrity, or its forbearance. Those whose business it is to form and model it,
cannot foresee those contingent situations specifically and distinctly; yet, as
far as human wisdom will allow, they must enable it to prepare for them all by
general principles, correct habits, and an unremitted sense of dependence on
the Great Disposer of events. The young Christian militant must learn and
practice all his evolutions; though he does not know on what service his leader
may command him, by what particular foe he shall be most assailed, nor what
mode of attack the enemy may employ.

But the contrary of all this is the case with external acquisitions. The
master, it is his interest, will industriously instruct his young pupil to set
all her improvements in the most immediate and conspicuous point of view. To
attract admiration is the great principle sedulously inculcated into her young
heart; and is considered as the fundamental maxim; and, perhaps, if we were
required to condense the reigning system of the brilliant education of a lady
into an aphorism, it might be comprised in this short sentence, To allure and
to shine. This system however is the fruitful germ, from which a thousand yet
unborn vanities, with all their multiplied ramifications will spring. A tender
mother cannot but feel an honest triumph in completing those talents in her
daughter which will necessarily excite admiration; but she will also shudder at
the vanity that admiration may excite, and at the new ideas it will awaken;
and, startling as it may sound, the labors of a wise mother anxious for her
daughter's best interests, will seem to be at variance with those of all her
teachers. She will indeed rejoice at her progress, but she will rejoice with
trembling; for she is fully aware that if all possible accomplishments could be
bought at the price of a single virtue, of a single principle, the purchase
would be infinitely dear, and she would reject the dazzling but destructive
acquisition. She knows that the superstructure of the accomplishments can be
alone safely erected on the broad and solid basis of Christian humility: nay
more, that as the materials of which that superstructure is to be composed, are
in themselves of so unstable and tottering a nature, the foundation must be
deepened and enlarged with more abundant care, otherwise the fabric will be
overloaded with its own ornaments, and what was intended only to embellish the
building, will prove the occasion of its fall.

To every thing there is a season, and a time for every purpose under heaven,
said the wise man; but he said it before the invention of baby-balls. This
modern device is a sort of triple conspiracy against the innocence, the health,
and the happiness of children; thus, by factitious amusements, to rob them of a
relish for the simple joys, the unbought delights, which naturally belong to
their blooming season, is like blotting out spring from the year. To sacrifice
the true and proper enjoyments of sprightly and happy children, is to make them
pay a dear and disproportionate price for their artificial pleasures. They step
at once from the nursery to the ball-room; and, by a preposterous change of
habits, are thinking of dressing themselves, at an age when they used to be
dressing their dolls. Instead of bounding with the unrestrained freedom of
little wood nymphs, over hill and dale, their cheeks flushed with health, and
their hearts overflowing with happiness, these gay little creatures are shut up
all the morning, demurely practicing the pas grave, and transacting the serious
business of acquiring a new step for the evening, with more cost of time and
pains than it would have taken them to acquire twenty new ideas.

Thus they lose the amusements which naturally belong to their smiling period,
and unnaturally anticipate those pleasures (such as they are) which would come
in, too much of course, on their introduction into fashionable life. The true
pleasures of childhood are cheap and natural; for every object teems with
delight to eyes and hearts new to the enjoyment of life; nay, the hearts of
healthy children abound with a general disposition to mirth and joyfulness,
even without a specific object to excite it; like our first parent, in the
world's first spring, when all was new, and fresh, and gay about him, they live
and move,
And feel that they are happier than they know.
Only furnish them with a few simple and harmless materials, and a little, but
not too much, leisure, and they will manufacture their own pleasures with more
skill, and success, and satisfaction, than they will receive from all that your
money can purchase. Their bodily recreations should be such as will promote
their health, quicken their activity, enliven their spirits, what their
ingenuity, and qualify them for their mental work. But if you begin thus early
to create wants, to invent gratifications, to multiply desires, to waken
dormant sensibilities, to (...) up hidden fires, you are studiously laying up
for your children a store of premature caprice, and irritability, and
discontent.

While childhood preserves its native simplicity, every little change is
interesting, every gratification is a luxury; a ride or a walk will be a
delightful amusement to a child in her natural state; but it will be dull and
tasteless to a sophisticated little creature, nursed in these forced, and
costly, and vapid pleasures. Alas! that we should throw away this first grand
opportunity of working into a practical habit the moral of this important
truth, that the chief source of human discontent is to be looked for, not in
our real but in our factitious wants; not in the demands of nature, but in the
artificial cravings of desire!

When one sees the growing zeal to crowd the midnight ball with these pretty
fairies, one would be almost tempted to fancy it was a kind of pious emulation
among the mothers to cure their infants of a fondness for vain and foolish
pleasures, by tiring them out by this premature familiarity with them; and that
they were actuated by something of the same principle which led the Spartans to
introduce their sons to scenes of riot, that they might conceive an early
disgust at vice! or possibly, that they imitated those Scythian mothers who
used to plunge their newborn infants into the flood, thinking none to be worth
saving who could not stand this early struggle for their lives: the greater
part indeed, as it might have been expected, perished; but the parents took
comfort, that if many were lost, the few who escaped would be the stronger for
having been thus exposed.

To behold lilliputian coquettes, projecting dresses, studying colors,
assorting ribbands and feathers, their little hearts beating with hopes about
partners and fears about rivals; and to see their fresh cheeks pale after the
midnight supper, their aching heads and unbraced nerves, disqualifying the
little languid beings for the next day's task; and to hear the grave apology,
that it is owing to the wine, the crowd, the heated room of the last night's
ball; all this, I say, would really be as ludicrous, if the mischief of the
thing did not take off from the merriment of it, as any of the ridiculous and
preposterous disproportions in the diverting travels of Captain Lemuel Gulliver.

Under a just impression of the evils which we are sustaining from the
principles and the practices of modern France, we are apt to lose sight of
those deep and lasting mischiefs which so long, so regularly, and so
systematically, we have been importing from the same country, though in another
form and under another government. In one respect, indeed, the first were the
more formidable, because we embraced the ruin without suspecting it; while we
defeat the malignity of the latter, by detecting the turpitude and defending
ourselves against it. This is not the place to descant on that levity of
manners, that contempt of the Sabbath, that fatal familiarity with loose
principles, and those relaxed notions of conjugal fidelity, which have often
been transplanted into this country by women of fashion, as a too common effect
of a long residence in that: but it is peculiarly suitable to my subject to
advert to another domestic mischief derived from the same foreign extraction: I
mean, the risks that have been run, and the sacrifices which have been made, in
order to furnish our young ladies with the means of acquiring the French
language in the greatest possible purity. Perfection in this accomplishment has
been so long established as the supreme object; so long considered as the
predominant excellence to which all other excellencies must bow down, that it
would be hopeless to attack a law which fashion has immutably decreed, and
which has received the stamp of long prescription. We must therefore be
contented with expressing a wish, that this indispensable perfection could have
been attained at the expense of sacrifices less important. It is with the
greater regret I animadvert on this and some other prevailing practices, as
they are errors into which the wise and respectable have, through want of
consideration, or rather through want of firmness to resist the tyranny of
fashion, sometimes fallen. It has not been unusual when mothers of rank and
reputation have been asked how they ventured to entrust their daughters to
foreigners, of whose principles they knew nothing, except that they were Roman
Catholics, to answer, That they had taken care to be secure on that subject;
for that it had been stipulated that the question of religion should never be
agitated between the teacher and the pupil. This, it must be confessed, is a
most desperate remedy; it is like starving to death, to avoid being poisoned.
And one cannot help trembling for the event of that education, from which
religion, as far as the governess is concerned, is thus formally and
systematically excluded. Surely it would not be exacting too much to suggest at
least that an attention no less scrupulous should be exerted to insure the
character of our children's instructor, for piety and knowledge, than is
thought necessary to ascertain that she has nothing patois in her dialect.

I would rate a correct pronunciation and an elegant phraseology at their just
price, and I would not rate them low; but I would not offer up principle as a
victim to sounds and accents. And the matter is now made more easy; for
whatever disgrace it might once have brought on an English lady to have had it
suspected from her accent that she had the misfortune not to be born in a
neighboring country; some recent events may serve to reconcile her to the
suspicion of having been bred in her own: a country, to which (with all its
sins, which are many!) the whole world is looking up with envy and admiration,
as the seat of true glory and of comparative happiness; a country, in which the
exile, driven out by the crimes of his own, finds a home! a country, to obtain
the protection of which it was claim enough to be unfortunate; and no
impediment to have been the subject of her direst foe! a country, which in this
respect, humbly imitating the Father of compassion, when it offered mercy to a
suppliant enemy, never conditioned for merit, nor insisted on the virtues of
the miserable as a preliminary to its own bounty!

CHAP. IV.
Comparison of the mode of female education in the last age with the present.

To return, however, to the subject of general education. A young lady may
excel in speaking French and Italian, may repeat a few passages from a volume
of extracts; play like a professor, and sing like a siren; have her dressing
room decorated with her own drawings, tables, stands, screens, and cabinets;
nay, she may dance like Sempronia* herself, and yet may have been very badly
educated. I am far from meaning to set no value whatever on any or all of these
qualifications; they are all of them elegant, and many of them properly tend to
the perfecting of a polite education. These things in their measure and degree,
may be done, but there are others which should not be left undone. Many things
are becoming, but "one thing is needful." Besides, as the world seems to be
fully apprized of the value of whatever tends to embellish life, there is less
occasion here to insist on its importance.

But, though a well-bred young lady may lawfully learn most of the fashionable
arts, yet it does not seem to be the true end of education to make women of
fashion dancers, singers, players, painters, actresses, sculptors, gilders,
varnishers, engravers, and embroiderers. Most men are commonly destined to some
profession, and their minds are consequently turned each to its respective
object. Would it not be strange if they were called out to exercise their
profession, or to set up their trade, with only a little general knowledge of
the trades of all other men, and without any previous definite application to
their own peculiar calling? The profession of ladies, to which the bent of
their instruction should be turned, is that of daughters, wives, mothers, and
mistresses of families. They should be therefore trained with a view to these
several conditions, and be furnished with a stock of ideas, and principles, and
qualifications, and habits, ready to be applied and appropriated, as occasion
may demand, to each of these respective situations: for though the arts which
merely embellish life must claim admiration; yet when a man of sense comes to
marry, it is a companion whom he wants, and not an artist. It is not merely a
creature who can paint, and play, and dress, and dance; it is a being who can
comfort and counsel him; one who can reason, and reflect, and feel, and judge,
and act, and discourse, and discriminate; one who can assist him in his
affairs, lighten his cares, soothed his sorrows, purify his joys, strengthen
his principles, and educate his children.

Almost any ornamental talent is a good thing, when it is not the best thing a
woman has; and talents are admirable when not made to stand proxy for virtues.
The writer of these pages is intimately acquainted with several ladies who,
excelling most of their sex in the art of music, but excelling them also in
prudence and piety, find little leisure or temptation, amidst the delights and
duties of a large and lovely family, for the exercise of this talent, and
regret that so much of their own youth was wasted in acquiring an art which can
be turned to so little account in married life; and are now conscientiously
restricting their daughters in the portion of time allotted to its acquisition.

Far be it from me to discourage the cultivation of any existing talent; but
may it not be suggested to the fond believing mother, that talents, like the
spirit of Owen Glendower, though conjured by parental partiality with ever so
loud a voice, Yet will not come when you do call for them?


That injudicious practice, therefore, cannot be too much discouraged, of
endeavoring to create talents which do not exist in nature. That their
daughters shall learn every thing, is so general a maternal maxim, that even
unborn daughters, of whose expected abilities and conjectured faculties, it is
presumed, no very accurate judgment can previously be formed, are yet
predestined to this universality of accomplishments. This comprehensive maxim*
(...) almost universally brought into practice, at once weakens the general
powers of the mind, by drawing off its strength into too great a variety of
directions; and cuts up time into too many portions, by splitting it into such
an endless multiplicity of employments. I know that I am treading on tender
ground; but I cannot help thinking that the restless pains we take to cram up
every little vacuity of life, by crowding one new thing upon another, rather
creates a thirst for novelty than knowledge; and is but a well-disguised
contrivance to keep us in afterlife more effectually from conversing with
ourselves. The care taken to prevent ennui (...) but a creditable plan for
promoting self-ignorance. We run from one occupation to another (I speak of
those arts to which little intellect is applied) with a view to lighten the
pressure of time; above all, we fly to them to save us from our own thoughts;
whereas were we thrown a little more on our own hands, we might at last be
driven, by way of something to do, to try to get acquainted with our own
hearts; and though our being less absorbed by this busy trifling, which
dignifies its inanity with the imposing name of occupation, might render us
somewhat more sensible of the tedium of life; might not this very sensation
tend to quicken our pursuit of a better? For an awful thought here suggests
itself. If life be so long that we are driven to set at work every engine to
pass away the tediousness of time; how shall we do to get rid of the
tediousness of eternity? an eternity in which not one of the acquisitions which
life has been exhausted in acquiring, will be of the least use? Let not then
the soul be starved by feeding it on these empty husks, for it can be no more
nourished by them than the body can be fed with ideas and principles.

Among the boasted improvements of the present age, none affords more frequent
matter of peculiar exultation, than the manifest superiority in the employments
of the young ladies of our time over those of the good housewives of the last
century. They glory that they are at present employed in learning the polite
arts, or in acquiring liberal accomplishments; while the others wore out their
joyless days in adorning the mansion house with hangings of hideous tapestry
and disfiguring tent-stitch. Most cheerfully do I allow to the reigning modes
their boasted superiority; for certainly there is (...) piety in bad taste.
Still, granting all the deformity of the exploded ornaments, one advantage
attended them: the walls and floors were not vain of their decorations; and it
is to be feared, that the little person sometimes is. The flattery bestowed on
the obsolete employments, for probably even they had their flatterers,
furnished less aliment and less gratification to vanity, and was less likely to
impair the delicacy of modesty, than the exquisite cultivation of personal
accomplishments or personal decorations; and every mode which keeps down vanity
and keeps back self, has at least a moral use. And while one admires the
elegant fingers of a young lady, busied in working or painting her ball dress,
one cannot help suspecting that her alacrity may be a little stimulated by the
animating idea how very well she shall look in it. Nor was the industrious
matron of Ithaca more soothed at her solitary loom with the sweet reflection
that by her labor she was gratifying her filial and conjugal feelings This web
a robe for poor Ulysses' fire,
, than the pleasure-loving damsel, by the anticipated admiration which her
ingenuity is procuring for her beauty.

Might not this propensity be a little checked, and an interesting feeling
combined with her industry, were the fair artist habituated to exercise her
skill in adorning some one else rather than herself? For it will add no
lightness to the lightest head, nor vanity to the vainest heart, to take
pleasure in reflecting how exceedingly the gown she is working will become her
mother. This suggestion, trifling as it may seem, of habituating young ladies
to exercise their taste and devote their leisure, not to the decoration of
their own persons, but to the service of those to whom they are bound by every
tender tie, would not only help to repress vanity, but by thus associating the
idea of industry with that of filial affection, would promote, while it
gratified, some of the best affections of the heart. The Romans (and it is
mortifying on the subject of Christian education to be driven so often to refer
to the superiority of Pagans) were so well aware of the importance of keeping
up a sense of family fondness and attachment by the very same means which
promoted simple and domestic employment, that no citizen of note ever appeared
in public in any garb but what was spun by his wife and daughter; and this
virtuous fashion was not confined to the days of republican severity, but even
in all the pomp and luxury of imperial power, Augustus preserved in his own
family this simplicity of manners.

Let me be allowed to repeat, that I mean not with preposterous praise to
descant on the ignorance or the prejudices of past times, nor absurdly to
regret that vulgar system of education which rounded the little circle of
female acquirements within the limits of the sampler and the receipt book. Yet
if a preference almost exclusive was then given to what was merely useful, a
preference almost exclusive also is now assigned to what is merely ornamental.
And it must be owned, that if the life of a young lady, formerly, too much
resembled the life of a confectioner, it now too much resembles that of an
actress; the morning is all rehearsal, and the evening is all performance: and
those who are trained in this regular routine, who are instructed in order to
be exhibited, soon learn to feel (...) of impatience in those societies in
which their kind of talents are not likely to be brought into play: the task of
an auditor becomes dull to her who has been used to be a performer. Esteem and
kindness become but cold substitutes to her who has been fed with plaudits and
acclamations. And the excessive commendation which the visitor is expected to
pay for his entertainment not only keeps alive the flame of vanity in the
artist by constant fuel, but is not seldom exacted at a price which a veracity
at all strict would grudge; but when a whole circle are obliged to be
competitors who shall flatter most, it is not easy to be at once very sincere
and very civil. And unluckily, while the age is become so knowing and so
fastidious, that if a young lady does not play like a public performer, no one
thinks her worth attending to; yet if she does so excel, some of the soberest
of the admiring circle feel a strong alloy to their pleasure, on reflecting at
what a vast expense of time this perfection must probably have been acquired
That accurate judge of the human heart, Madam de Maintenon, was so well aware
of the danger resulting from some kinds of excellence, that after the young
ladies of the Court of Louis Quatorze had distinguished themselves by the
performance of some dramatic pieces of Racine, when her friends told her how
admirably they had played their parts; "Yes," answered this wise woman, "so
admirably that they shall never play again."
.

May I venture, without being accused of pedantry, to conclude this chapter
with another reference to Pagan examples? The Hebrews, Egyptians, and Greeks,
believed that they could more effectually teach their youth maxims of virtue,
by calling in the aid of music and poetry; these maxims, therefore, they put
into verses, and these again were set to the most popular and simple tunes,
which the children sang; thus was their love of goodness excited by the very
instruments of their pleasure; and (...) senses, the taste, and the
imagination, as it were, pressed into the service of religion and morals. Dare
I appeal to Christian parents, if these arts are commonly used by them, as
subsidiary to religion and to a system of morals much more worthy of every
ingenious aid and association, which might tend to recommend them to the
youthful mind? Dare I appeal to Christian parents, whether music, which fills
up no trifling portion of their daughters' time, does not fill it without any
moral end, or even specific object? Nay, whether some of the favorite songs of
polished societies are not amatory, are not Anacreontic, more than quite become
the modest lips of innocent youth and delicate beauty?

CHAP. V.
On the religious employment of time. -- On the manner in which holidays are
passed. -- Selfishness and inconsideration considered. -- Dangers arising from
the world.

THERE are many well-disposed parents who, while they attend to these
fashionable acquirements, do not neglect to infuse religious knowledge into the
minds of their daughters; and having done this are but too apt to conclude that
they have fully acquitted themselves of the important duties of education. For
having, as they think, sufficiently grounded them in religion they do not
scruple to allow their daughters to spend almost the whole of their time
exactly like the daughters of worldly people. Now, though it be one great point
gained, to have imbued their young minds with the best knowledge, the work is
not therefore accomplished. "What do ye more than others?" is a question which,
in a more extended sense, religious parents must be prepared to answer.

Such parents should go on to teach children the religious use of time, the
duty of consecrating to God every talent, every faculty, every possession, and
of devoting their whole lives to his glory.

They should be more peculiarly on their guard against a spirit of idleness,
and a slovenly habitual wasting of time, because this practice, by not assuming
a palpable shape of guilt, carries little alarm to the conscience. Even
religious characters are in danger on this side; for not allowing themselves to
follow the world in its excesses and diversions, they have consequently more
time upon their hands; and instead of dedicating the time so rescued to its
true purposes, they sometimes make as it were compensation to themselves for
their abstinence from dangerous places of public resort, by an habitual
frivolousness at home; by a superabundance of unprofitable small-talk, idle
reading, and a quiet and dull frittering away of time. Their day perhaps has
been more free from actual evil; but it will often be found to have been as
unproductive as that of more worldly characters; and they will be found to have
traded to as little purpose with their master's talents. But a Christian must
take care to keep his conscience peculiarly alive to the unapparent, though
formidable, perils of unprofitableness.

To these, and to all, the author would earnestly recommend to accustom their
children to pass at once from serious business to active and animated
recreation; they should carefully preserve them from those long and torpid
intervals between both, that languid indolence and spiritless trifling, which
wears out such large portions of life in both young and old. It has indeed
passed into an aphorism, that activity is necessary to virtue, even among those
who are not apprized that it is also indispensable to happiness. So far are
many parents from being sensible of this truth, that vacations from school are
not merely allowed, but appointed to pass away in wearisome sauntering and
indeterminate idleness; and this by way of converting the holidays into
pleasure! Nay, the idleness is specifically made over to the child's mind, as
the strongest expression of the fondness of the parent! A dislike to learning
is thus systematically excited by preposterously erecting indolence into a
reward for application! And the promise of doing nothing is held out as the
best recompense for having done well!

These and such like errors of conduct arise from the latent but very operative
principle of selfishness. This principle is obviously promoted by many habits
and practices seemingly of little importance; and indeed selfishness is so
commonly interwoven with vanity and inconsideration, that I have not always
thought it necessary to mark the distinction. They are alternately cause and
effect; and are produced and re-produced by reciprocal operation. They are a
confederacy who are mutually promoting each other's strength and interest.
Ill-judging tenderness is in fact only a concealed self-love, which cannot bear
to be witness to the uneasiness which a present disappointment, or difficulty,
or vexation, would cause to a darling child, yet does not scruple by improper
gratification to store up for it future miseries, which the child will
infallibly suffer, though it may be at a distant period which the mother will
be saved the pain of beholding.

Another principle something different from this, though it may properly fall
under the head of selfishness, seems to actuate some parents in their conduct
toward their children: I mean, a certain slothfulness of mind, a love of ease,
which imposes a voluntary blindness, and makes them not choose to see what will
give them trouble to combat. From such persons we frequently hear such
expressions as these: "Children will be children:" -- "My children I suppose
are much like those of other people," etc. Thus we may observe this dangerous
and delusive principle frequently turning off with a smile from the first
indications of those tempers, which from their fatal tendency ought to be very
seriously taken up. I would be understood now as speaking to conscientious
parents, who consider it as a duty to correct the faults of their children, but
who, from this indolence of mind, are extremely backward in discovering such
faults, and not very well pleased when they are pointed out by others. Such
parents will do well to take notice that whatever they consider it as a duty to
correct, must be equally a duty to endeavor to find out. And this love of ease
is the more to be guarded against, as it not only leads parents into erroneous
conduct toward their children, but is peculiarly dangerous to themselves. It
is a fault frequently cherished from ignorance of its real character; for, not
bearing on it the strong features of deformity which mark many other vices, but
on the contrary bearing some resemblance to virtue, it is frequently mistaken
for the Christian graces of patience, meekness, and forbearance, than which
nothing can be more opposite; these proceeding from the Christian principle of
self-denial, the other from self-indulgence.

In this connection may I be permitted to remark on the practice at the tables
of many families, when the children are at home for the holidays; every
delicacy is forced upon them, with the tempting remark, "that they cannot have
this or that dainty at school;" and they are indulged in irregular hours for
the same motive, "because they cannot have that indulgence at school." Thus the
natural seeds of idleness, sensuality, and sloth, are at once cherished, by
converting the periodical visit at home into a season of intemperance, late
hours, and exemption from study; so that children are habituated, at an age
when lasting associations are formed in the mind, to connect the idea of study
with that of hardship, of happiness with gluttony, and of pleasure with
loitering, feasting, or sleeping. Would it not be better to make them combine
the delightful idea of home, with the gratification of the social affections,
the fondness of maternal love, the kindness and warmth and confidence of the
sweet domestic attachments, -- And all the charities
Of father, son, and brother?


I will venture to say, that those listless and vacant days, when the thoughts
have no precise object; when the imagination has nothing to shape; when
industry has no definite pursuit; when the mind and the body have no exercise,
and the ingenuity no acquisition either to anticipate or to enjoy, are the
longest, the dullest, and the least happy, which children of spirit and genius
ever pass. Yes! it is a few short but keen and lively intervals of animated
pleasure, snatched from between the successive labors and duties of a busy
day, looked forward to with hope, enjoyed with taste, and recollected without
remorse, which, both to men and to children, yield the truest portions of
enjoyment. O snatch your offspring from adding to the number of those objects
of supreme commiseration, who seek their happiness in doing nothing! Life is
but a short day; but it is a working day. Activity may lead to evil; but
inactivity cannot be led to good.

Young ladies should also be accustomed to set apart a fixed portion of their
time, as sacred to the poor, It would be a noble employment and well becoming
the tenderness of their sex, if ladies were to consider the superintendance of
the poor as their immediate office. They are peculiarly fitted for it; for from
their own habits of life they are more intimately acquainted with domestic
wants than the other sex; and in certain instances of sickness and suffering
peculiar to themselves, they should be expected to have more sympathy; and they
have obviously more leisure. There is a certain religious society,
distinguished by the simplicity of their dress, manners, and language, whose
poor are perhaps better taken care of than any other; and one reason may be,
that they are immediately under the inspection of the women.
whether in relieving, instructing, or working for them; and the performance of
this duty must not be left to the event of contingent circumstances, or the
operation of accidental impressions; but it must be established into a
principle, and wrought into a habit. A specific portion of time must be
allotted to it, on which no common engagement must be allowed to entrench. This
will help to furnish a powerful remedy for that selfishness whose strong holds,
the truth cannot be too often repeated, it is the grand business of Christian
education perpetually to attack. If we were but aware how much better it makes
ourselves to wish to see others better, and to assist in making them so, we
should find that the good done would be of as much importance by the habit it
would induce in our own minds, as by its beneficial effects on others. In
addition to the instruction of the individual poor, and the superintendance of
charity schools, ladies might be highly useful in assisting the parochial
clergy in the adoption of that excellent plan for the instruction of the
ignorant suggested by the Bishop of Durham in his last admirable charge to his
clergy. It is with pleasure the author is enabled to add that the scheme has
actually been adopted with good effect in that extensive diocese.


In what relates to pecuniary bounty, it will be requiring of children a very
small sacrifice, if you teach them merely to give that money to the poor which
properly belongs to the parent; this sort of charity commonly subtracts little
from their own pleasures, especially when what they have bestowed is
immediately made up to them, as a reward for their little fit of generosity.
They will, on this plan, soon learn to give, not only for praise but for
profit. The sacrifice of an orange to a little girl, or a feather to a great
one, given at the expense of their own gratification, would be a better lesson
of charity on its right ground, than a considerable sum of money to be
presently replaced by the parent. And it would be habituating them early to
combine two ideas which ought never to be separated, charity and self-denial.

As an antidote to selfishness, as well as pride and indolence, they should
also very early be taught to perform all the little offices in their power for
themselves; not to be insolently calling for servants where there is no real
occasion; above all, they should be accustomed to consider the domestics' hours
of meals and rest as almost sacred, and the golden rule should be practically
and uniformly enforced, even on so trifling an occasion as ringing a bell
through mere wantonness, or self-love, or pride.

To check the growth of inconsiderateness, young ladies should early be taught
to discharge their little debts with punctuality. They should be made sensible
of the cruelty of obliging trades-people to call often for the money due to
them; and of hindering and detaining those whose time is the source of their
subsistence, under pretense of some frivolous engagement, which ought to be
made to bend to the comfort and advantage of others. They should
conscientiously allow sufficient time for the execution of their orders; and
with a Christian circumspection, be careful not to drive work-people, by
needless hurry, into losing their rest, or breaking the Sabbath. I have known a
lady give her gown to a mantua-maker on the Saturday night, to whom she would
not for the world say in so many words, "You must work through the whole of
Sunday," while she was virtually compelling her to do so, by an injunction to
bring the gown home finished on the Monday morning, on pain of her displeasure.
To these hardships numbers are continually driven by good-natured but
inconsiderate employers. As these petty exactions of inconsideration furnish
also a constant aliment to selfishness, let not a desire to counteract them be
considered as leading to too minute details; nothing is too frivolous for
animadversion, which tends to fix a bad habit in the superior, or to would the
feelings of the dependant.

Would it not be turning those political doctrines, which are now so warmly
agitating, to a truly moral account, and give the best practical answer to the
popular declamations on the inequality of human conditions, were the rich
carefully to instruct their children to soften that inevitable inequality by
the mildness and tenderness of their behavior to their inferiors? This
dispensation of God, which excites so many murmurs, would, were it thus
practically improved, tend to establish the glory of that Being who is now so
often reviled for his injustice; for God himself is covertly attacked in many
of the invectives against laws and governments, and the disproportion of ranks.

This dispensation, thus properly improved, would at once call into exercise
the generosity, kindness, and forbearance of the superior; and the patience,
resignation, and gratitude of the inferior: and thus, while we were vindicating
the ways of Providence, we should be accomplishing his plan, by bringing into
action those virtues of both classes which would have had little exercise had
there been no inequality in fortune. Those who are so zealously contending for
the privileges of rank and power, should never lose sight of the religious
duties and considerate virtues which the possession of these imposes on
themselves; duties and virtues which should ever be inseparable from those
privileges. As the inferior classes have little real right to complain of laws,
in this respect let the great be watchful to give them as little cause to
complain of manners; by carefully training up their children to supply by
individual kindness those cases of hardship which laws cannot reach: by such
means every lesson of politics may be converted into a lesson of piety; and a
spirit of condescending love might win over some, whom a spirit of invective
will only inflame.

It can never be too often repeated, that one of the great objects of education
is the forming of habits. Among the instances of negligence into which even
religiously disposed parents and teachers are apt to fall, one is, that they
are not sufficiently attentive in finding interesting employment for the
Sunday. They do not make a scruple of sometimes allowing their children to fill
up the intervals of public worship with their ordinary employments and common
school exercises. They are not aware that they are thus training their
offspring to an early and a systematic profanation of the Sabbath by this
habit; for to children, their tasks are their business; to them a French or
Latin exercise is as serious an occupation as the exercise of a trade or
profession is to a man; and if they are allowed to think the one right now,
they will not be brought hereafter to think that the other is wrong; for the
opinions and practices fixed at this early season are not easily altered. By
this oversight even the friends of religion may be contributing eventually to
that abolition of the Sabbath, so devoutedly wished by its enemies, as the
desired preliminary to the destruction of whatever is most dear to Christians.
What obstruction would it offer to the general progress of youth, if all their
Sunday exercises (which, with reading, composing, transcribing, and getting by
heart, might be extended to an entertaining variety) were adapted to the
peculiar nature of the day? It is not meant to impose on them such rigorous
study as shall convert the day they should be taught to love into a day of
burdens and hardships, or to abridge their innocent enjoyments; but it is
intended merely to suggest that there should be a marked distinction in the
nature of their employments and studies; for on the observance or neglect of
this, as was before observed, their future notions and principles will in a
good degree be formed. The gospel, in rescuing the Lord's day from the rigorous
bondage of the Jewish Sabbath, never lessened the obligation to keep it holy,
nor meant to sanction any secular occupation.

Though the author, chiefly writing with a view to domestic instruction, has
purposely avoided entering on the disputed question, whether a school or home
education be best; a question which perhaps must generally be decided by the
state of the individual home, and the state of the individual school; yet she
begs leave to suggest one remark, which peculiarly belongs to a school
education; namely, the general habit of converting the Sunday into a visiting
day by way of gaining time; as if the appropriate instructions of the Sunday
were the cheapest sacrifice which could be made to pleasure. Even in those
schools, in which religion is considered as an indispensable part of
instruction, this kind of instruction is almost exclusively limited to Sundays:
how then are girls ever to make any progress in this most important article, if
they are habituated to lose the religious advantages of the school, for the
sake of having more dainties for dinner abroad? This remark cannot be supposed
to apply to the visits which children make to religious parents, and indeed it
only applies to those cases where the school is a conscientious school, and the
visit a trifling visit.

Among other subjects which engross a good share of worldly conversation, one
of the most attracting is beauty. Many ladies have often a random way of
talking rapturously on the general importance of beauty, who are yet prudent
enough to be very unwilling to let their own daughters find out they are
handsome. Perhaps the contrary course might be safer. If the little listener
were not constantly hearing that beauty is the best gift, she would not be so
vain from fancying herself to be the best gifted. Be less solicitous,
therefore, to conceal from her a secret which with all your watchfulness she
will be sure to find out, without your telling; but rather seek to lower the
general value of beauty in her estimation. Use your daughter in all things to a
different standard from that of the world. It is not by vulgar people and
servants only that she will be told of her being pretty. She will be hearing it
not only from gay ladies, but from grave men; she will be hearing it from the
whole world around her. The antidote to the present danger is not now to be
searched for; it must be already operating; it must have been provided for in
the foundation laid in the general principle she had been imbibing, before this
particular temptation of beauty came in question. And this general principle is
an habitual indifference to flattery. She must have learnt not to be
intoxicated by the praise of the world. She must have learnt to estimate things
by their intrinsic worth, rather than by the world's estimation. Speak to her
with particular kindness and commendation of plain but amiable girls; mention
with compassion such as are handsome but ill-educated; speak casually of some
who were once thought pretty, but have ceased to be good; make use of the
shortness and uncertainty of beauty, as strong additional reasons for making
that which is little valuable in itself, still less valuable. As it is a new
idea which is always dangerous, you may thus break the force of this danger by
allowing her an early introduction to this inevitable knowledge, which would
become more interesting, and of course more perilous by every additional year:
and if you can guard against that fatal error of letting her see that she is
more loved on account of her beauty, her familiarity with the idea may be less
than its novelty afterward would prove.

But the great and constant danger to which young persons in the higher walks
of life are exposed, is the prevailing turn and spirit of general conversation.
Even the children of better families, who are well instructed when at their
studies, are yet at other times continually beholding the WORLD set up in the
highest and most advantageous point of view. Seeing the world! knowing the
world! standing well with the world! making a figure in the world! is spoken of
as including the whole sum and substance of human advantages. They hear their
education almost exclusively alluded to with reference to the figure it will
enable them to make in the world. In almost all companies, they hear all that
the world admires spoken of with admiration; rank flattered, fame coveted,
power sought, beauty idolized, money considered as the one thing needful, and
as the atoning substitute for the want of all other things; profit held up as
the reward of virtue, and worldly estimation as the just and highest prize of
lawful ambition; and after the very spirit of the world has been thus
habitually infused into them all the week, one cannot expect much effect from
their being coldly told now and then on Sundays, that they must not "love the
world, nor the things of the world." To tell them once in seven days that it is
a sin to gratify an appetite which you have been whetting and stimulating the
preceding six, is to require from them a power of self-control, which our
knowledge of the impetuosity of the passions, especially in early age, should
have taught us is impossible.

This is not the place to animadvert on the usual misapplication of the phrase,
"knowing the world;" which term is commonly applied, in the way of panegyric,
to keen, designing, selfish, ambitious men, who study mankind in order to turn
it to their own account. But in the true sense of the expression, the sense
which Christian parents would wish to impress on their children, to know the
world, is to know its emptiness, its vanity, its futility, and its wickedness.
To know it, is to despise it; and in this view, an obscure Christian in a
village may be said to know it better than a hoary courtier or wily politician;
for how can they be said to know it, who go on to love it, to value it, to be
led captive by its allurements, to give their soul in exchange for its lying
promises?

But while so false an estimate is often made in fashionable society of the
real value of things; that is, while Christianity does not furnish the
standard, and human opinion does; while the multiplying our desires is
considered as a symptom of elegance, though to subdue them is made the grand
criterion of religion; while moderation is beheld as indicating a poorness of
spirit, though to that very poverty of spirit the highest promise of the Gospel
is assigned; while worldly wisdom is enjoined by worldly friends, in
contradiction to that assertion, "that the wisdom of the world is foolishness
with God;" while the praise of man is to be sought in opposition to that
assurance, that "the fear of man works a snare:" while these things are so,
and that they are so in a good degree who will deny? may we not venture to
affirm that a Christian education, though not an impossible, is yet a very
difficult work?

CHAP. VI.
Filial obedience not the character of the age. -- A comparison with the
preceding age in this respect. -- Those who cultivate the mind advised to study
the nature of the soil. -- Unpromising children often make strong characters.
-- Teachers too apt to devote their pains almost exclusively to children of
parts.

AMONG the real improvements of modern times, and they are not a few, it is to
be feared that the growth of filial obedience cannot be included. Who can
forbear observing and regretting in a variety of instances, that not only sons
but daughters have adopted something of that spirit of independence, and
disdain of control, which characterise the times? And is it not obvious that
domestic manners are not slightly tinctured with the hue of public principles?
The rights of man have been discussed, till we are somewhat wearied with the
discussion. To these have been opposed, with more presumption than prudence,
the rights of woman. It follows, according to the natural progression of human
things, that the next stage of that irradiation which our enlighteners are
pouring in upon us will produce grave descants on the rights of children.

This revolutionary spirit in families suggests the remark, that among the
faults with which it has been too much the fashion of recent times to load the
memory of the incomparable Milton, one of the charges brought against his
private character (for with his political character we have here nothing to do)
has been, that he was so severe a father as to have compelled his daughters,
after he was blind, to read aloud to him, for his sole pleasure, Greek and
Latin authors of which they did not understand a word. But this is in fact
nothing more than an instance of the strict domestic regulations of the age in
which Milton lived; and should not be brought forward as a proof of the
severity of his individual temper. Nor indeed in any case should it ever be
considered as an hardship for an affectionate child to amuse an afflicted
parent, though it should be attended with a heavier sacrifice of her own
pleasure than in the present instance In spite of this too prevailing spirit,
numberless instances might be adduced of filial affection truly honorable to
the present period. And the author records with pleasure, that she has seen
amiable young ladies of high rank conducting the steps of a blind but
illustrious parent with true filial fondness; and has often contemplated, in
another family, the interesting attentions of daughters who were both hands and
eyes to an infirm and nearly blind father. It is but justice to add, that these
examples are not taken from that middle rank of life which Milton filled, but
from the daughters of the highest officers in the state.
.

Is the author then inculcating the harsh doctrine of parental austerity? By no
means. It drives the gentle spirit to artifice, and the rugged to despair. It
generates deceit and cunning, the most hopeless and hateful in the whole
catalogue of female failings. Ungoverned anger in the teacher, and inability to
discriminate between venial errors and premeditated offense, though they may
lead a timid creature to hide wrong tempers, to conceal bad actions, will not
help her to subdue the one or correct the other. Severity will drive terrified
children to seek, not for reformation, but for impunity. A readiness to forgive
them promotes frankness. And we should, above all things, encourage them to be
frank, in order to come at their faults. They have not more faults for being
open, they only discover more.

Discipline, however, is not cruelty, and restraint is not severity. We must
strengthen the feeble, while we repel the bold. The cultivator of the human
mind must, like the gardener, study diversities of soil. The skilful labourer
knows that even where the surface is not particularly promising, there is often
a rough strong ground which will amply repay the trouble of breaking it up; yet
we are often most taken with the soft surface, though it conceal a shallow
depth, because it promises present reward and little trouble. But strong and
pertinacious tempers, of which perhaps obstinacy is the leading vice, under
skillful management often turn out steady and sterling characters; while from
softer clay a firm and vigorous virtue is but seldom produced.

But these revolutions in character cannot be effected by mere education.
Plutarch has observed that the medical science would never be brought to
perfection till poisons should be converted into physic. What our late
improvers in natural science have done in the medical world, by converting the
most deadly ingredients into instruments of life and health, Christianity with
a sort of divine Alchymy has effected in the moral world, by that transmutation
which makes those passions which have been working for sin become active in the
cause of religion. The violent temper of Saul of Tarsus which was "exceedingly
mad" against the saints of God, did God see fit to convert into that burning
zeal which enabled Paul the Apostle to labor so unremittingly for the
conversion of the Gentile world. Christianity indeed does not so much give us
new affections or faculties, as give a new direction to those we already have.
She changes that sorrow of the world which works death, into "godly sorrow
which works repentance." She changes our anger against the persons we
dislike, into hatred of their sins. "The fear of man which works a snare,"
she transmutes into "that fear of God which works salvation." That religion
does not extinguish the passions, but alters their object, the animated
expressions of the fervid Apostle confirm -- Yea, what fearfulness; yea, what
clearing of yourselves; yea, what indignation; yea, what fear; yea, what
vehement desire; yea, what zeal; yea, what revenge! 2 Corinthians, vii. 11.


Thus, by some of the most troublesome passions of our nature being converted
by the blessing of God on a religious education to the side of virtue, a double
purpose is effected. Because, if I may be allowed to change the metaphor, it is
the character of the passions never to observe a neutrality. If they are no
longer rebels, they become auxiliaries; and a foe subdued is an ally obtained.
And it is the effect of religion on the passions, that when she seizes the
enemy's garrison, she does not destroy the works, she does not burn the arsenal
and spike the cannon; but the artillery she seizes, she turns to her own use,
and plants its whole force against the enemy from whom she has taken it.

But while I would deprecate harshness, I would enforce discipline; and that
not merely on the ground of religion, but of happiness also. One reason not
seldom brought forward by tender but mistaken mothers as an apology for their
unbounded indulgence, especially to weakly children, is, that they probably
will not live to enjoy the world when grown up, and that therefore they will
not abridge the little pleasure they may enjoy at present. But a slight degree
of observation would prove that this is an error in judgment as well as in
principle. For, omitting any considerations respecting their future welfare,
and entering only into their immediate interests; it is an indisputable fact
that children who know no control, whose faults encounter no contradiction, and
whose humors experience constant indulgence, grow more irritable and
capricious, invent wants, create desires, lose all relish for the pleasures
which they know they may reckon upon; and become perhaps more miserable than
even those children who labor under the more obvious and more commiserated
misfortune of suffering under the tyranny of unkind parents.

An early habitual restraint is peculiarly important to the future character
and happiness of women. They should when very young be inured to contradiction.
Instead of hearing their bon-mots treasured up and repeated to the guests till
they begin to think it dull, when they themselves are not the little heroine of
the theme, they should be accustomed to receive but little praise for their
vivacity or their wit, though they should receive just commendation for their
patience, their industry, their humility, and other qualities which have more
worth than splendor. They should be led to distrust their own judgment; they
should learn not to murmur at expostulation; but should be accustomed to expect
and to endure opposition. It is a lesson with which the world will not fail to
furnish them; and they will not practice it the worse for having learnt it the
sooner. It is of the last importance to their happiness in life that they
should early acquire a submissive temper and a forbearing spirit. They must
even endure to be thought wrong sometimes, when they cannot but feel they are
right. And while they should be anxiously aspiring to do well, they must not
expect always to obtain the praise of having done so. But while a gentle
demeanor is inculcated, let them not be instructed to practice gentleness
merely on the low ground of its being decorous, and feminine, and pleasing, and
calculated to attract human favor: but let them be carefully taught to
cultivate it on the high principle of obedience to Christ; on the practical
ground of laboring after conformity to HIM, who, when he proposed himself as a
perfect pattern of imitation, did not say, Learn of me, for I am great, or
wise, or mighty, but "Learn of me, for I am meek and lowly:" and graciously
promised that the reward should accompany the practice, by encouragingly
adding, "and ye shall find rest to your souls." Do not teach them humility on
the ordinary ground that vanity is unamiable, and that no one will love them if
they are proud; for that will only go to correct the exterior, and make them
soft and smiling hypocrites. But inform them, that "God resists the proud,"
while them that are meek he shall guide in judgment, and such as are gentle,
them shall he teach his way. In these, as in all other cases, an habitual
attention to the motives should be carefully substituted in their young hearts,
in the place of too much anxiety about the event of actions, and too much
solicitude for that human praise which attaches to appearances as much as to
realities, to success more than to desert.

Let me repeat, that it will be of vast importance not to let slip the earliest
occasions of working gentle manners into an habit on their only true
foundation, Christian meekness. For this purpose I would again urge your
calling in the example of our Redeemer in aid of his precepts. Endeavor to
make your pupil feel that all the wonders exhibited in his life do not so
overwhelm the awakened heart with rapture, love, and astonishment, as the
perpetual instances of his humility and meekness. Stupendous miracles,
exercises of infinite power prompted by infinite mercy, are actions which we
should naturally enough conceive as growing out of the divine perfections: but
silence under cruel mockings, patience under reproach, gentleness of demeanor
under unparalleled injuries; these are perfections of which unassisted nature
not only has no conception in a Divine Being, but at which it would revolt, had
not the reality been exemplified by our perfect pattern. Healing the sick,
feeding the multitude, restoring the blind, raising the dead, are deeds of
which we could form some adequate idea, as necessarily flowing from Almighty
goodness: but to wash his disciples' feet, -- to preach the gospel to the poor,
-- to renounce not only ease, for that heroes have done on human motives, --
but to renounce praise, to forgive his persecutors, to love his enemies, to
pray for his murderers with his last breath; -- these are things which, while
they compel us to cry out with the Centurion, "Truly this was the Son of God,"
should remind us also, that they are not only adorable but imitable parts of
his character. These are perfections which we are not barely to contemplate
with holy awe and distant admiration, as if they were restricted to the divine
nature of our Redeemer; but we must consider them as suited to the human nature
also, which he condescended to participate; in contemplating, we must imitate;
and in our measure and degree go and do likewise. Elevate your thoughts for one
moment to this standard, and then go, if you can, and teach your children to be
mild, and soft, and gentle on worldly grounds, on human motives, and as an
external attraction.

There is a custom among teachers, which is not the more right for being
common; they are apt to bestow an undue proportion of pains on children of the
best capacity, as if only geniuses were worthy of attention. They should
reflect that in moderate talents, carefully cultivated, we are perhaps to look
for the chief happiness and virtue of society. If superlative genius had been
generally necessary, its existence would not have been so rare; for Omnipotence
could have made those talents common which we now consider as extraordinary.
Besides, while we are conscientiously instructing children of moderate
capacity, it is a comfort to reflect, that if no labor will raise them to a
high degree in the scale of intellectual excellence, yet they may be led on to
perfection in that road in which "a wayfaring man, though simple, shall not
err." And when a mother feels disposed to repine that her family is not likely
to exhibit a groupe of future wits and growing beauties, let her console
herself by looking abroad into the world, where she will quickly perceive that
the monopoly of happiness is not engrossed by beauty, nor that of virtue by
genius.

Perhaps mediocrity of parts was decreed to be the ordinary lot, by way of
furnishing a stimulus to industry, and strengthening the motives to virtuous
application. For is it not obvious that moderate abilities, carefully carried
to that measure of perfection of which they are capable, often enable their
possessors to outstrip, in the race of knowledge and of usefulness, their more
brilliant but less persevering competitors? It is with mental endowments, as
with other rich gifts of Providence: the inhabitant of the luxuriant southern
clime, where Nature has done every thing in the way of vegetation, indolently
lays hold on this very fertility as a plea for doing nothing himself; so that
the soil which teems with such encouraging abundance leaves the possessor idle:
while the native of the less genial region supplying by his labors the
deficiencies of his lot, overtakes his more favored competitor; by
substituting industry for opulence, he improves the riches of his native land
beyond that which is blessed with warmer suns, and thus vindicates Providence
from the charge of partial distribution.

A girl who has docility will seldom be found to want understanding sufficient
for all the purposes of a useful, a happy, and a pious life. And it is as wrong
for parents to set out with too sanguine a dependence on the figure their
children are to make in life, as it is unreasonable to be discouraged at every
disappointment. Want of success is so far from furnishing a motive for relaxing
their energy, that it is a reason for redoubling it. Let them suspect their own
plans, and reform them; let them distrust their own principles, and correct
them. The generality of parents do too little; some do much, and miss their
reward, because they look not to any strength beyond their own* after much is
done, much will remain undone; for the entire regulation of the heart and
affections is not the work of education alone, but the operation of divine
grace. Will it be accounted enthusiasm to suggest that the fervent effectual
prayer of a righteous parent avails much? and perhaps the reason why so many
anxious mothers fail of success is, because they repose with confidence in
their own skill and labor, without looking to HIM without whose blessing they
do but labor in vain.

On the other hand, is it not to be feared that some pious parents have fallen
into an error of an opposite kind? From a full conviction that human endeavors
are vain, and that it is God alone who can change the heart, they are earnest
in their prayers, but not so earnest in their endeavors. Such parents should
be reminded, that if they do not add their exertions to their prayers, their
children are not likely to be more benefited than the children of those who do
not add their prayers to their exertions. What God has joined, let not man
presume to separate. It is the work of God, we readily acknowledge, to implant
religion in the heart, and to maintain it there as a ruling principle of
conduct. And is it not the same God which causes the corn to grow? Are not our
natural lives constantly preserved by his power? Who will deny that in him we
live, and move, and have our being? But how are these works of God carried on?
By means which he has appointed. By the labor of the husbandman the corn is
made to grow. By food the body is sustained: and by religious instruction God
is pleased to work upon the human heart. As far as we see of the ways of God,
all his works are carried on by means. It becomes therefore our duty to use the
means and trust in God; to remember that God will not work without the means;
and that the means can effect nothing without his blessing. Paul may plant and
Apollos water, but it is God must give the increase. But to what does he give
the increase? To the exertions of Paul and Apollos. It is never said, because
God only can give the increase, that Paul and Apollos may spare their labor.

It is one grand object to give the young probationer just and sober views of
the world on which she is about to enter. Instead of making her bosom bound at
the near prospect of emancipation from her instructors; instead of teaching her
young heart to dance with premature flutterings as the critical winter draws
near in which she is to come out; instead of raising a tumult in her busy
imagination at the approach of her first grown up ball; endeavor to convince
her, that the world will not turn out to be that scene of unvarying and
never-ending delights which she has perhaps been led to expect, not only from
the sanguine temper and warm spirits natural to youth, but from the value she
has seen put on those showy accomplishments which have too probably been
fitting her for her exhibition in life. Teach her that this world is not a
stage for the display of superficial talents, but for the strict and sober
exercise of fortitude, temperance, meekness, faith, diligence, and self-denial;
of her due performance of which Christian graces, Angels will be spectators,
and God the judge. Teach her that human life is not a splendid romance,
spangled over with brilliant adventures, and enriched with extraordinary
occurrences, and diversified with wonderful incidents; lead her not to expect
that it will abound with scenes which will call shining qualities and great
powers into perpetual action; and for which if she acquit herself well she will
be rewarded wish proportionate fame and certain commendation. But apprize her
that human life is a true history, many passages of which will be dull,
obscure, and uninteresting; some perhaps tragical; but that whatever gay
incidents and pleasing scenes may be interspersed in the progress of the piece,
yet finally "one event happens to all;" to all there is one awful and
infallible catastrophe. Apprize her that the estimation which mankind forms of
merit is not always just, nor its praise exactly proportioned to desert; that
the world weighs actions in far different scales from "the balance of the
sanctuary," and estimates worth by a far different standard from that of the
gospel: apprize her that while her best intentions may be sometimes
calumniated, and her best actions misrepresented, she will be liable to receive
commendation on occasions wherein her conscience will tell her she has not
deserved it.

Do not however give her a gloomy and discouraging picture of the world, but
rather seek to give her a just and sober view of the part she will have to act
in it. And humble the impetuosity of hope, and cool the ardour of expectation,
by explaining to her, that this part, even in her best estate, will probably
consist in a succession of petty trials, and a round of quiet duties which,
however well performed, though they will make little or no figure in the book
of Fame, will prove of vast importance to her in that day when another book is
opened, and the judgment is set, and every one will be judged according to the
deeds done in the body, whether they be good or bad.

Say not that these just and sober views will cruelly wither her young hopes,
and deaden the innocent satisfactions of life. It is not true. There is,
happily, an active spring in the mind of youth which bounds with fresh vigor
and uninjured elasticity from any such temporary depression. It is not meant
that you should darken her prospect, so much as that you should enlighten her
understanding to contemplate it. And though her feelings, tastes, and passions,
will all be against you, if you set before her a faithful delineation of life,
yet it will be something to get her judgment on your side. It is no unkind
office to assist the short view of youth with the aids of long-sighted
experience, to enable them to discover spots in the brightness of that life
which dazzles them in prospect, though it is probable they will after all
choose to believe their own eyes rather than the offered glass.

CHAP. VII.
On female study, and initiation into knowledge. -- Error of cultivating the
imagination to the neglect of the judgment. -- Books of reasoning recommended.

As this little work by no means assumes the character of a general scheme of
education, the author has purposely avoided expatiating largely on any kind of
instruction; but so far as it is connected, either immediately or remotely,
with objects of a moral or religious nature. Of course she has been so far from
thinking it necessary to enter into the enumeration of those books which are
useful in general instruction, that she has forborne to mention any. With such
books the rising generation is far more copiously and ably furnished than any
preceding period has been; and out of an excellent variety the judicious
instructor can hardly fail to make such a selection as shall be beneficial to
the pupil.

But while due praise ought not to be withheld from the improved methods of
communicating the elements of general knowledge; yet is there not some danger
that our very advantages may lead us into error, by causing us to repose so
confidently on the multiplied helps which facilitate the entrance into
learning, as to render our pupils superficial through the very facility of
acquirement? Where so much is done for them, may they not be led to do too
little for themselves? May there not be a moral disadvantage in possessing them
with the notion that learning may be acquired without diligence and labor?
Sound education never can be made a "primrose path of dalliance." Do what we
will, we cannot cheat children into learning, or play them into knowledge,
according to the smoothness of the modern creed. There is no idle way to any
acquisitions which really deserve the name. And as Euclid, in order to repress
the impetuous vanity of greatness, told his Sovereign that there was no royal
way to geometry, so the fond mother may be assured that there is no short cut
to any other kind of learning. The tree of knowledge, as a punishment, perhaps,
for its having been at first unfairly tasted, cannot now be climbed without
difficulty; and this very circumstance serves afterward to furnish not only
literary pleasures, but moral advantages: for the knowledge which is acquired
by unwearied assiduity is lasting in the possession, and sweet to the
possessor; both perhaps in proportion to the cost and labor of the
acquisition. And though an able teacher ought to endeavor, by improving the
communicating faculty in himself, (for many know what they cannot teach,) to
soften every difficulty; yet in spite of the kindness and ability with which he
will smooth every obstruction, it is probably, among the wise institutions of
Providence, that great difficulties should still remain. For education is but
an initiation into that life of trial to which we are introduced on our
entrance into this world. It is the first breaking-in to that state of toil and
labor to which we are born, and to which sin has made us liable; and in this
view of the subject the acquisition of learning may be converted to higher uses
than such as are purely literary.

Will it not be ascribed to a captious singularity if I venture to remark that
real knowledge and real piety, though they may have gained in many instances,
have suffered in others from that profusion of little, amusing, sentimental
books with which the youthful library overflows? Abundance has its dangers as
well as scarcity. In the first place may not the multiplicity of these alluring
little works increase the natural reluctance to those more dry and
uninteresting studies, of which, after all, the rudiments of every part of
learning must consist? And, secondly, is there not some danger (though there
are many honorable exceptions) that some of those engaging narratives may
serve to infuse into the youthful heart a sort of spurious goodness, a
confidence of virtue, a parade of Charity? And that the benevolent actions with
the recital of which they abound, when they are not made to flow from any
source but feeling, may tend to inspire a self-complacency a self-gratulation,
a "stand by, for I am holier than thou?" May they not help to infuse a love of
popularity and an anxiety for praise, in the place of that simple and
unostentatious rule of doing whatever good we do, because it is the will of
God? The universal substitution of this principle would tend to purify the
worldly morality of many a popular little story. And there are few dangers
which good parents will more carefully guard against than that of giving their
children a mere political piety; that sort of religion which just goes to make
people more respectable, and to stand well with the world; a religion which is
to save appearances without inculcating realities. An ingenious (and in many
respects useful) French Treatise on Education, has too much encouraged this
political piety; by considering religion as a thing of human convention, rather
than of divine institution; as a thing creditable, rather than commanded; by
erecting the doctrine of expediency in the place of Christian simplicity; and
wearing away the spirit of truth, by the substitution of occasional deceit,
equivocation, subterfuge, and mental reservation.


There is a certain precocity of mind which is much helped on by these
superficial modes of instruction; for frivolous reading will produce its
correspondent effect, in much less time than books of solid instruction; the
imagination being liable to be worked upon, and the feelings to be set a-going,
much faster than the understanding can be opened and the judgment enlightened.
A talent for conversation should be the result of education, not its precursor;
it is a golden fruit when suffered to ripen gradually on the tree of knowledge;
but if forced in the hotbed of a circulating library, it will turn out
worthless and vapid in proportion as it was artificial and premature. Girls who
have been accustomed to devour frivolous books, will converse and write with a
far greater appearance of skill as to style and sentiment at twelve or fourteen
years old, than those of a more advanced age who are under the discipline of
feverer studies; but the former having early attained to that low standard
which had been held out to them, became stationary; while the latter, quietly
progressive, are passing through just gradations to a higher strain of mind;
and those who early begin with talking and writing like women, commonly end
with thinking and acting like children.

The swarms of Abridgments, Beauties, and Compendiums, which form too
considerable a part of a young lady's library, may be considered in many
instances as an infallible receipt for making a superficial mind. The names of
the renowned characters in history thus become familiar in the mouths of those
who can neither attach to the ideas of the person, the series of his actions
nor the peculiarities of his character. A few fine passages from the poets
(passages perhaps which derived their chief beauty from their position and
connection) are huddled together by some extract-maker, whose brief and
disconnected patches of broken and discordant materials, while they inflame
young readers with the vanity of reciting, neither fill the mind nor form the
taste: and it is not difficult to trace back to their shallow sources the
hackney'd quotations of certain accomplished young ladies, who will be
frequently found not to have come legitimately by any thing they know: I mean,
not to have drawn it from its true spring, the original works of the author
from which some beauty-monger has severed it. Human inconsistency in this, as
in other cases, wants to combine two irreconcilable things; it strives to
unite the reputation of knowledge with the pleasures of idleness, forgetting
that nothing that is valuable can be obtained without sacrifices, and that if
we would purchase knowledge we must pay for it the fair and lawful price of
time and industry. For this extract-reading, while it accommodates itself to
the convenience, illustrates the character of the age in which we live. The
appetite for pleasure, and that love of ease and indolence which is generated
by it, leave little time or taste for sound improvement; while the vanity,
which is equally a characteristic of the existing period, puts in its claim
also for indulgence, and contrives to figure away by these little snatches of
reading, caught in the short intervals of successive amusements.

Besides, the taste, thus pampered with delicious morsels, is early vitiated.
The young reader of these clustered beauties conceives a disrelish for every
thing which is plain, and is impatient if obliged to get through those equally
necessary though less showy parts of a work, in which perhaps the author gives
the best proof of his judgment by keeping under that occasional brilliancy of
which these superficial students are in constant pursuit. In all well-written
books, there is much that is good which is not dazzling; and these shallow
critics should be taught, that it is for the more tame and uninteresting parts
of his work, that the judicious poet commonly reserves those flowers, whose
beauty is defaced when they are plucked from the garland into which he had so
skilfully woven them.

The remark, however, is by no means of general application; there are many
valuable works which from their bulk would be almost inaccessible to a great
number of readers, and a considerable part of which may not be generally
useful. Even in the best written books there is often superfluous matter;
authors are apt to get enamoured of their subject, and to dwell too long on it:
every person cannot find time to read a longer work on any subject, and yet it
may be well for them to know something on almost every subject; those,
therefore, who abridge voluminous works judiciously, render service to the
community. But there seems, if I may venture the remark, to be a mistake in the
use of abridgments. They are put systematically into the hands of youth, who
have, or ought to have, leisure for the works at large; while abridgments seem
more immediately calculated for persons in more advanced life, who wish to
recall something they had forgotten; who want to restore old ideas rather than
acquire new ones; or they are useful for persons immersed in the business of
the world, who have little leisure for voluminous reading. They are excellent
to refresh the mind, but not competent to form it.

Perhaps there is some analogy between the mental and bodily conformation of
women. The instructor therefore should imitate the physician. If the latter
prescribe bracing medicines for a body of which delicacy is the disease, the
former would do well to prohibit relaxing reading for a mind which is already
of too soft a texture, and should strengthen its feeble tone by invigorating
reading.

By softness, I cannot be supposed to mean imbecility of understanding, but
natural softness of heart, together with that indolence of spirit which is
fostered by indulging in seducing books, and in the general habits of
fashionable life.

I mean not here to recommend books which are immediately religious, but such
as exercise the reasoning faculties, teach the mind to get acquainted with its
own nature, and to stir up its own powers. Let not a timid young lady start if
I should venture to recommend to her, after a proper course of preparation, to
swallow and digest such strong meat as Watt's or Duncan's little book of Logic,
some parts of Mr. Locke's Essay on the Human Understanding, and Bishop Butler's
Analogy. Where there is leisure, and capacity, and an able friend to comment
and to counsel, works of this nature might be profitably substituted in the
place of so much English Sentiment, French Philosophy, Italian Love Songs, and
fantastic German imagery and magic wonders. While such enervating or absurd
books sadly disqualify the reader for solid pursuit or vigorous thinking, the
studies here recommended would act upon the constitution of the mind as a kind
of alterative, and, if I may be allowed the expression, would help to brace the
intellectual stamina.

This is however by no means intended to exclude works of taste and
imagination, which must always make the ornamental part, and of course a very
considerable part, of female studies. It is only suggested, that they should
not form them entirely and exclusively. For what is called dry tough reading,
independent of the knowledge it conveys, is useful as an habit, and wholesome
as an exercise. Serious study serves to harden the mind for more trying
conflicts; it lifts the reader from sensation to intellect; it abstracts her
from the world and its vanities; it fixes a wandering spirit, and fortifies a
weak one; it divorces her from matter; it corrects that spirit of trifling
which she naturally contracts from the frivolous turn of female conversation,
and the petty nature of female employments; it concentrates her attention,
assists her in a habit of excluding trivial thoughts, and thus even helps to
qualify her for religious pursuits. Yes, I repeat it, there is to woman a
Christian use to be made of sober studies; while books of an opposite cast,
however unexceptionable they may be sometimes found in point of expression,
however free from evil in its more gross and palpable shapes, yet by their very
nature and constitution they excite a spirit of relaxation, by exhibiting
scenes and ideas which soften the mind and set the fancy at work; they impair
its general powers of resistance, and at best feed habits of improper
indulgence, and nourish a vain and visionary indolence, which lays the mind
open to error and the heart to seduction.

Women are little accustomed to close reasoning on any subject; still less do
they inure their minds to consider particular parts of a subject; they are not
habituated to turn a truth round, and view it in all its varied aspects and
positions; and this perhaps is one cause (as will be observed in another
Chapter on Conversation.
place) of the too great confidence they are disposed to place in their own
opinions. Though their imagination is already too lively, and their judgment
naturally incorrect; in educating them we go on to stimulate the imagination,
while we neglect the regulation of the judgment. They already want ballast, and
we make their education consist in continually crowding more sail than they can
carry. Their intellectual powers being so little strengthened by exercise,
makes every little business appear a hardship to them: whereas serious study
would be useful, were it only that it leads the mind to the habit of conquering
difficulties. But it is peculiarly hard to turn at once from the indolent
repose of light reading, from the concerns of mere animal life, the objects of
sense, or the frivolousness of chit chat; it is peculiarly hard, I say, to a
mind so softened, to rescue itself from the dominion of self-indulgence, to
resume its powers, to call home its scattered strength, to shut out every
foreign intrusion, to force back a spring so unnaturally bent, and to devote
itself to religious reading, to active business, to reflection, or
self-examination, whereas to an intellect accustomed to think at all, the
difficulty of thinking seriously is obviously lessened.

Far be it from me to desire to make scholastic ladies or female dialecticians;
but there is little fear that the kind of books here recommended, if thoroughly
studied, and not superficially skimmed, will make them pedants or induce
conceit; for by showing them the possible powers of the human mind, you will
bring them to see the littleness of their own; and to get acquainted with the
mind, and to regulate and inform it, does not seem the way to puff it up. But
let her who is disposed to be elated with her literary acquisitions, check her
vanity by calling to mind the just remark or Swift, that after all her boasted
acquirements, a woman will, generally speaking, be found to possess less of
what is called learning than a common school boy.

Neither is there any fear that this sort of reading will convert ladies into
authors. The direct contrary effect will be likely to be produced by the
perusal of writers who throw the generality of readers at such an
unapproachable distance as to check presumption, instead of exciting it. Who
are those ever multiplying authors, that with unparalleled fecundity are
overstocking the world with their quick-succeeding progeny? They are novel
writers; the easiness of whose productions is at once the cause of their own
fruitfulness, and of the almost infinite numerous race of imitators to whom
they give birth* such is the frightful facility of this species of composition,
that every raw girl, while she reads, is tempted to fancy that she can also
write. And as Alexander, on perusing the Iliad, found by congenial sympathy the
image of Achilles in his own ardent soul, and felt himself the hero he was
studying; and as Corregio, on first beholding a picture which exhibited the
perfection of the Graphic art, prophetically felt all his own future greatness,
and cried out in rapture, "And I too am a painter!" so a thorough paced
novel-reading Miss, at the close of every tissue of hackney'd adventures, feels
within herself the stirring impulse of corresponding genius, and triumphantly
exclaims, "And I too am an author!" The glutted imagination soon overflows with
the redundance of cheap sentiment and plentiful incident, and by a sort of
arithmetical proportion, is enabled by the perusal of any three novels, to
produce a fourth; till every fresh production, like the progeny of Banquo, is
followed by Another, and another, and another It is surely not necessary to
state, that no disrespect can be here intended to those females of real genius
and correct character, some of whose justly admired writings in this kind are
accurate histories of life and manners, and striking delineations of character.
It is not (...) fault if their works have been attended with the consequences
(...) usually attend good originals, that of giving birth to a multitude of
miserable imitations.
!
Is a lady, however destitute of talents, education, or knowledge of the world,
whose studies have been completed by a circulating library, in any distress of
mind? the writing a novel suggests itself as the best soother of her sorrows!
Does she labor under any depression of circumstances? writing a novel occurs
as the readiest receipt for mending them! And she solaces herself with the
conviction that the subscription which has been given to her importunity or her
necessities, has been offered as an homage to her genius. And this confidence
instantly levies a fresh contribution for a succeeding work. Capacity and
cultivation are so little taken into the account, that writing a book seems to
be now considered as the only sure resource which the idle and the illiterate
have always in their power.

May the Author be indulged in a short digression while she remarks, though
rather out of its place, that the corruption occasioned by these books has
spread so wide, and descended so low, that not only among milleners,
mantua-makers, and other trades where numbers work together, the labor of one
girl is frequently sacrificed that she may be spared to read those mischievous
books to the others; but she has been assured by clergymen, who have witnessed
the fact, that they are procured and greedily read in the wards of our
Hospitals! an awful hint, that those who teach the poor to read, should not
only take care to furnish them with principles which will lead them to abhor
corrupt books, but should also furnish them with such books as shall strengthen
and confirm their principles The above facts furnish no argument on the side of
those who would keep the poor (...). Those who cannot read can hear, and are
likely to (...) worse purpose than those who have been better taught. And that
ignorance furnishes no security for integrity either in morals or politics, the
late revolts in more than one country, remarkable for the ignorance of the
poor, fully illustrate. It is earnestly hoped that the above facts may tend to
impress ladies with the importance of superintending the instruction of the
poor, and of making it an indispensable part of their charity to give them
moral and religious books.
. And let every Christian remember, that there is no other way of entering
truly into the spirit of that divine prayer, which petitions that the name of
God may be "hallowed," that "his kingdom (of grace) may come," and that "his
will may be done on earth as it is in heaven," than by each individual
contributing according to his measure to accomplish the work for which he
prays; for to pray that these great objects may be promoted, without
contributing to their promotion by our exertions, our money, and our influence,
is a palpable inconsistency.

CHAP. VIII.
On the religious and moral use of history and geography.

BUT while every sort of useful knowledge should be carefully imparted to young
persons, it should be imparted not merely for its own sake, but also for the
sake of its subserviency to higher things. All human learning should be taught,
not as an end, but a means; and in this view even a lesson of history or
geography may be converted into a lesson of religion. In the study of history,
the instructor will accustom the pupil not merely to store her memory with
facts and anecdotes, and to ascertain dates and epochas; but she will accustom
her also to trace effects to their causes, to examine the secret springs of
action, and accurately to observe the operation of the passions. It is only
meant to notice here some few of the moral benefits which may be derived from a
judicious perusal of history; and from among other points of instruction, I
select the following:

The study of history may serve to give a clearer insight into the corruption
of human nature:

It may show the plan of Providence in the direction of events, and in the use
of unworthy instruments:

It may assist in the vindication of Providence, in the common failure of
virtue and the success of vice:

It may lead to a distrust of our own judgment:

It may contribute to our improvement in self-knowledge.

But to prove to the pupil the important doctrine of human corruption from the
study of history, will require a truly Christian commentator; for, from the low
standard of right established by the generality of historians, who erect so
many persons into good characters who fall short of the true idea of Christian
virtue, the unassisted reader will be liable to form very imperfect views of
what is real goodness; and will conclude, as his author sometimes does, that
the true idea of human nature is to be taken from the medium between his best
and his worst characters; without acquiring a just notion of that prevalence of
evil, which in spite of those few brighter luminaries that here and there just
serve to gild the gloom of history, tends abundantly to establish the doctrine.
It will indeed be continually establishing itself by those who, in perusing the
history of mankind, carefully mark the progress of sin, from the first timid
irruption of an evil thought, to the fearless accomplishment of the abhorred
crime in which that thought has ended: from the indignant question, Is thy
servant a dog that he should do this great thing? 2 Kings, viii. 13.
to the perpetration of that very enormity of which he could not endure the
slightest suggestion.

In this connection may it not be observed, that young persons should be put on
their guard against a too implicit belief in the flattering accounts which some
voyage-writers are fond of exhibiting of the virtue, amiableness, and benignity
of some of the countries newly discovered by our circumnavigators, the superior
goodness ascribed to the Hindoos, and particularly the account of the
inhabitants of the Pellew Islands? These last indeed have been almost
represented as having escaped the universal taint of our common nature, and
would seem by their purity to have sprung from another ancestor than Adam.

One cannot forbear suspecting that these pleasing but somewhat overcharged
portraits of man, in his natural state, are drawn with the invidious design, by
counteracting the doctrine of human corruption, to degrade the value and even
destroy the necessity of the Christian religion. That in countries professing
Christianity, very many are not Christians will be too readily granted. Yet, to
say nothing of the vast superiority of goodness in the lives of those who are
really governed by Christianity, is there not something even in her reflex
light which guides to greater purity many of those who do not profess to walk
by it? I doubt much, if numbers of the unbelievers of a Christian country, from
the sounder views and better habits derived incidentally and collaterally, as
it were, from the influence of a Gospel, the truth of which however they do not
acknowledge, would not start at many of the actions which these heathen
perfectionists daily commit without hesitation.

The religious reader of general history will observe the controlling hand of
Providence in the direction of events, and in turning the most unworthy actions
and instruments to the accomplishment of his own purposes. She will mark
infinite Wisdom directing what appears to be casual occurrences, to the
completion of his own plan. She will point out how causes seemingly the most
unconnected, events seemingly the most unpromising, circumstances seemingly the
most incongruous, are all working together for some final good. She will mark
how national as well as individual crimes are often overruled to some hidden
purpose far different from the intention of the actors: how Omnipotence can and
often does, bring about the best purposes by the worst instruments: how the
bloody and unjust conqueror is but "the rod of His wrath," to punish or to
purify his offending children: how "the fury of the oppressor," and the
sufferings of the oppressed, will one day vindicate His righteous dealings. She
will unfold to the less enlightened reader how infinite Wisdom often mocks the
insignificance of human greatness, and the shallowness of human ability, by
setting aside instruments the most powerful, while He works by agents
comparatively contemptible. But she will carefully guard this doctrine of
Divine Providence, thus working out his own purposes through the sins of his
creatures, and by the instrumentality of the wicked, by calling to mind, that
while the offender is but a tool in the hands of the great artificer, yet woe
be to him by whom the offense comes! She will explain how all the mutations
and revolutions in states which appear to us so unaccountable, and how those
operations of Providence which seem to us so entangled and complicated, all
move harmoniously and in perfect order: that there is not an event but has its
commission; not a misfortune which breaks its allotted rank; not a trial which
moves out of its appointed track. While calamities and crimes seem to fly in
casual confusion, all is commanded or permitted; all is under the control of a
wisdom which cannot err, of a goodness which cannot do wrong.

To explain my meaning by a few instances. When the spirit of the youthful
reader rises in honest indignation at that hypocritical piety which divorced an
unoffending Queen to make way for the lawful crime of our eighth Henry's
marriage with Ann Boleyn; and when that indignation is increased by the more
open profligacy which brought about the execution of the latter; the instructor
will not lose so fair an occasion for unfolding how in the councils of the Most
High the crimes of the king were overruled to the happiness of the country; and
how, to this inauspicious marriage, from which the heroic Elizabeth sprung, the
Protestant religion owed its firm stability.

She will explain to her, how even the conquests of ambition, after having
deluged a land with blood, and involved the perpetrator in guilt, and the
innocent victim in ruin, may yet be made the instruments of opening to future
generations the way to commerce, to civilization, to Christianity. She may
remind her, as they are following Caesar in his invasion of Britain, that
whereas the conqueror fancied he was only gratifying his own inordinate
ambition, extending the flight of the Roman Eagle, immortalizing his own name,
and proving that "this world was made for Caesar;" he was in reality becoming
the effectual though unconscious instrument of leading a land of barbarians to
civilization and to science: and was in fact preparing an island of Pagans to
embrace the religion of Christ. She will inform her, that when the abovenamed
victorious nation had made Judea a Roman province, and the Jews had become
their tributaries, the Romans did not know, nor did the indignant Jews suspect,
that this circumstance was confirming an event the most important the world
ever saw.

For when Augustus sent forth a decree that all the world should be taxed; he
thought he was only enlarging his own imperial power, whereas he was acting in
unconscious subservience to the decree of a higher Sovereign, and was helping
to ascertain by a public act the exact period of Christ's birth, and furnishing
a record of his extraction from that family from which it was predicted by a
long line of Prophets that he should spring. Herod's atrocious murder of the
innocents has added an additional circumstance for the confirmation of our
faith; nay, the treachery of Judas, and the injustice of Pilate, were the human
instruments employed for the salvation of the world.

The youth that is not armed with Christian principles, will be tempted to
mutiny not only against the justice, but the very existence of a superintending
Providence, in contemplating those frequent instances which occur in history of
the ill success of the more virtuous cause, and the prosperity of the wicked.
He will see with astonishment that it is Rome which triumphs, while Carthage,
which had clearly the better cause, falls. Now and then indeed a Cicero
prevails, and a Cataline is subdued: but often, it is Caesar successful against
the somewhat juster pretensions of Pompey, and against the still clearer cause
of Cato. It is Octavius who triumphs, and it is over Brutus that he triumphs!
It is Tiberius that is enthroned, while Germanicus falls!

Thus his faith in a righteous Providence at first view is staggered, and he is
ready to say, Surely it is not God that governs the earth! But on a fuller
consideration, (and here the suggestions of a Christian instructor are
peculiarly wanted), there will appear great wisdom in this very confusion of
vice and virtue; for it is calculated to send one's thoughts forward to a world
of retribution, the principle of retribution being so imperfectly established
in this. It is indeed so far common for virtue to have the advantage here, in
point of happiness at least, though not of glory, that the course of Providence
is still calculated to prove that God is on the side of virtue; but still,
virtue is so often unsuccessful, that clearly the God of virtue, in order that
his work may be perfect, must have in reserve a world of retribution. This
confused state of things therefore is just that state which is most of all
calculated to confirm the deeply considerate mind in the belief of a future
state: for if all were even here, or very nearly so, should we not say Justice
is already satisfied, and there needs no other world? On the other hand, if
vice always triumphed, should we not then be ready to argue in favor of vice
rather than virtue, and to wish for no other world?

It seems so very important to ground young persons in the belief that they
will not inevitably meet in this world with reward and success according to
their merit, but to habituate them to expect even the most virtuous attempts to
be often, though not always disappointed, that I am in danger of tautology on
this point. This fact is precisely what history teaches. The truth should be
plainly told to the young reader; and the antidote to that evil, which mistaken
and worldly people would expect to arise from divulging this discouraging
doctrine, is faith. The importance of faith therefore, and the necessity of it
to real, unbending, and persevering virtue, is surely made plain by profane
history itself. For the same thing which happens to states and kings, happens
to private life and to individuals.

Distrust and diffidence in our own judgment seems to be also an important
instruction to be learnt from history. How contrary to all expectation do the
events therein recorded commonly turn out? and yet we proceed to foretell this
and that event from the appearances of things under our own observation, with
the same arrogant certainty as if we had never been warned by the monitory
annals of mankind.

There is scarcely one great event in history which does not, in the issue,
produce effects upon which human foresight could never have calculated. The
success of Augustus against his country produced peace in many distant
provinces, who thus ceased to be harassed and tormented by this oppressive
republic. Could this effect have been foreseen, it might have sobered the
despair of Cato, and checked the vehemence of Brutus. In politics, in short in
every thing except in morals and religion, all is, to a considerable degree,
uncertain. This reasoning is not meant to show that Cato ought not to have
fought, but that he ought not to have desponded even after the last battle; and
certainly, even upon his own principles, ought not to have killed himself. It
would be departing too much from my object to apply this argument against those
who were driven to unreasonable distrust and despair by the late successes of a
neighboring nation.

But all knowledge will be comparatively of little value, if we neglect
self-knowledge; and of self-knowledge history and biography may be made
successful vehicles. It will be to little purpose that our pupils become
accurate critics on the characters of others, while they remain ignorant of
themselves; for while to those who exercise a habit of self-application a book
of profane history may be made an instrument of improvement in this difficult
science; so without this habit the Bible itself may, in this view, be read with
little profit.

It will be to no purpose that the reader weeps over the fortitude of the
Christian hero, or the constancy of the martyr, if she do not bear in mind that
she herself is called to endure her own common trials with something of the
same temper: if she do not bear in mind that, to control irregular humors, and
to submit to the daily vexations of life, will require, though in a lower
degree, the exertion of the same principle, and supplication for the aid of the
same spirit which sustained the Christian hero in the trying conflicts of life,
or the martyr in his agony at the stake.

May I be permitted to suggest a few instances, by way of specimen, how both
sacred and common history may tend to promote self-knowledge? And let me again
remind the warm admirer of suffering piety under extraordinary trials, that if
she now fail in the petty occasions to which she is actually called out, she
would not be likely to have stood in those more trying occasions which excite
her admiration.

While she is applauding the self-denying saint who renounced his ease, or
chose to embrace death, rather than violate his duty, let her ask herself if
she has never refused to submit to the paltry inconvenience of giving up her
company, or even altering her dinner-hour on a Sunday, by which trifling
sacrifice her family might have been enabled to attend the public worship in
the afternoon.

While she reads with horror that Belshazzar was rioting with his thousand
nobles at the very moment when the Persian army was bursting through the brazen
gates of Babylon; is she very sure that she herself, in an almost equally
imminent moment of public danger, has not been nightly indulging in every
species of dissipation?

When she is deploring the inconsistency of the human heart, while she
contrasts Mark Anthony's bravery and contempt of ease at one period, with his
licentious indulgences at another; or while she laments over the intrepid soul
of Caesar, whom she had been following in his painful marches, or admiring in
his contempt of death, dissolved in dissolute pleasures with the ensnaring
Queen of Egypt; let her examine whether she herself has never, though in a much
lower degree, evinced something of the same inconsistency? whether she who
lives perhaps an orderly, sober, and reasonable life during her summer
residence in the country, does not plunge with little scruple in the winter
into all the most extravagant pleasures of the capital? whether she never
carries about with her an accommodating kind of religion, which can be made to
bend to places and seasons, to climates and customs; which takes its tincture
from the fashion without, and not its habits from the principle within?

While she is admiring the generosity of Alexander in giving away kingdoms and
provinces, let her, in order to ascertain whether she could imitate this
magnanimity, take heed if she herself is daily seizing all the little occasions
of doing good, which every day presents to the affluent? Her call is not to
sacrifice a province; but does she sacrifice an opera ticket? She who is not
doing all the good she can under her present circumstances, would not do all
she foresees she should, in imaginary ones, were her power enlarged to the
extent of her wishes.

While she is inveighing with patriotic indignation, that in a neighboring
metropolis thirty theaters were open every night in time of war and public
calamity, is she very clear, that in a metropolis which contains only three,
she was not almost constantly at one of them in time of war and public calamity
also? For though in a national view it may make a wide difference whether there
be in the capital three theaters or thirty, yet, as the same person can only go
to one of them at once, it makes but little difference as to the quantum of
dissipation in the individual. She who rejoices at successful virtue in a
history, or at the prosperity of a person whose interests do not interfere with
her own, may exercise her self-knowledge, by examining whether she rejoices
equally at the happiness of every one about her; and let her remember she does
not rejoice at it in the true sense, if she does not labor to promote it. She
who glows with rapture at a virtuous character in history, should ask her own
heart, whether she is equally ready to do justice to the fine qualities of her
acquaintance, though she may not particularly love them; and whether she takes
unfeigned pleasure in the superior talents, virtues, fame, and fortune of those
whom she professes to love, though she is eclipsed by them?

In like manner, in the study of geography and natural history, the attention
should be habitually turned to the goodness of Providence, who commonly adapts
the various productions of climates to the peculiar wants of the respective
inhabitants. To illustrate my meaning by one or two instances out of a
thousand. The reader may be led to admire the considerate goodness of
Providence in having caused the spiry fir, whose slender foliage does not
obstruct the beams of the sun, to grow in the dreary regions of the North,
whose shivering inhabitants could spare none of its scanty rays; while in the
torrid zone, the palm tree, the plantane, and the banana, spread their umbrella
leaves to break the almost intolerable fervors of a vertical sun. How the
camel, who is the sole carrier of all the merchandise of Turkey, Persia, Egypt,
Arabia, and Barbary, who is obliged to transport his incredible burdens
through countries in which pasture is so rare, can subsist twenty-four hours
without food, and can travel, loaded, many days without water, through dry and
dusty deserts, which supply none; and all this, not from the habit but from the
conformation of the animal: for Naturalists make this conformity of powers to
climates a rule of judgment in ascertaining the native countries of animals,
and always determine it to be that to which their powers and properties are
most appropriate.

Thus the writers of natural history are perhaps unintentionally magnifying the
operations of Providence, when they insist that animals do not modify and give
way to the influence of other climates; but here they too commonly stop; and
here the pious instructor will come in, in aid of their deficiency; for
Philosophers too seldom trace up causes, and wonders, and blessings to their
Author. And it is peculiarly to be regretted that such a writer as Buffon, who,
though not famous for his accuracy, possessed such diversified powers of
description that he had the talent of making the driest subjects interesting;
together with such a liveliness of delineation, that his characters of animals
are drawn with a spirit and variety rather to be looked for in an historian of
men than of beasts: it is to be regretted that this writer is absolutely
inadmissible into the library of a young lady, both on account of his immodesty
and his impiety; and if, in wishing to exclude him, it may be thought wrong to
have given him so much commendation, it is only meant to show that the author
is not led to reprobate his principles from insensibility to his talents
Goldsmith's History of animated Nature has many references to a Divine Author.
It is to be wished that some judicious person would publish a new edition of
this work, purified from the indelicate and offensive parts.
.

CHAP. IX.
On the use of definitions, and the moral benefits of accuracy in language.

PERSONS having been accustomed from their cradles to learn words before they
knew the ideas for which they stand, usually continue to do so all their lives,
never taking the pains to settle in their minds the determined ideas which
belong to them. This want of a precise signification in their words, when they
come to reason, especially in moral matters, is the cause of very obscure and
uncertain notions. They use these undetermined words confidently, without much
troubling their heads about a certain fixed meaning, whereby, besides the ease
of it, they obtain this advantage, that as in such discourse they are seldom in
the right, so they are as seldom to be convinced that they are in the wrong, it
being just the same to go about to draw those persons out of their mistakes,
who have no settled notions, as to dispossess a vagrant of his habitation who
has no settled abode. -- The chief end of language being to be understood,
words serve not for that end when they do not excite in the hearer the same
idea which they stand for in the mind of the speaker. Lock.


I have chosen to shelter myself under the broad sanction of the great Author
here quoted, with a view to apply this rule in philology to a moral purpose;
for it applies to the veracity of conversation as much as to its correctness;
and as strongly recommends unequivocal and simple truth, as accurate and just
expression. Scarcely any one perhaps has an adequate conception how much clear
and correct expressions favor the elucidation of truth; and the side of truth
is obviously the side of morals; it is in fact one and the same cause; and it
is of course the same cause with that of true religion also.

It is therefore no worthless part of education to study the precise meaning of
words, and the appropriate signification of language. To this end I know no
better method than to accustom young persons very early to define common words
and things; for, as definition seems to lie at the root of correctness, to be
accustomed to define English words in English, would improve the understanding
more than barely to know what those words are called in French or Italian. Or
rather, one use of learning other languages is, because definition is often
involved in etymology; that is, since many English words take their derivation
from foreign languages, they cannot be so accurately understood without some
knowledge of those languages: but precision of any kind too seldom finds its
way into the education of women.

It is perhaps going out of my province to observe, that it might be well if
young men also, before they entered on the world, were to be furnished with
correct definitions of certain words, the use of which is become rather
ambiguous. For instance; they should be provided with a good definition of the
word honor in the fashionable sense, showing what vices it includes, and what
virtues it does not include: the term good company, which even the courtly
Petronius of our days has defined as sometimes including not a few immoral and
disreputable characters: religion, which in the various senses assigned it by
the world, sometimes means superstition, sometimes fanaticism, and sometimes a
mere disposition to attend on any kind of form of worship: the word goodness,
which is made to mean every thing that is not notoriously bad; and sometimes
even that too, if what is notoriously bad be accompanied by good humor,
pleasing manners, and a little almsgiving. By these means they would go forth
armed against many of the false opinions which through the abuse or ambiguous
meaning of words pass so current in the world.

But to return to the youthful part of that sex which is the more immediate
object of this little work. With correct definition they should also be taught
to study the shades of words, and this not merely with a view to accuracy of
expression, but to moral truth.

It may be thought ridiculous to assert, that morals have any connection with
the purity of language, or that the precision of truth may be violated through
defect of critical exactness in the three degrees of comparison: yet how
frequently do we hear from the dealers in superlatives, of "most admirable,"
superexcellent, and "quite perfect" people, who, to plain persons, not bred in
the school of exaggeration, would appear mere common characters, not rising
above the level of mediocrity! By this negligence in the just application of
words, we shall be as much misled by these trope and figure ladies, when they
degrade as when they panegyrize; for to a plain and sober judgment, a tradesman
may not be "the most good-for-nothing fellow that ever existed," merely because
it was impossible for him to execute in an hour an order which required a week;
a lady may not be "the most hideous fright the world ever saw," though the make
of her gown may have been obsolete for a month; nor may one's young friend's
father be "a monster of cruelty," though he may be a quiet gentleman who does
not choose to live at watering-places, places, but likes to have his daughter
stay at home with him in the country.

But of all the parts of speech the interjection is the most abundantly in use
with the hyperbolical fair ones. Would it could be added that these emphatical
expletives (if I may make use of a contradictory term) were not sometimes
tinctured with profaneness! Though I am persuaded that idle habit is more at
the bottom of this deep offense than intended impiety, yet there is scarcely
any error of youthful talk which wants severer castigation. And an habit
exclamation should be rejected by polished people as vulgar, even if it were
not abhorred as profane.

The habit of exaggerating trifles, together with the grand female failing of
mutual flattery, and elaborate general profession of fondness and attachment,
is inconceivably cherished by the voluminous private correspondences in which
some girls are indulged. A facility of style, and an easy turn of expression,
are dearly purchased by the sacrifice of that truth, sobriety, and correctness
of language, and that ingenuous simplicity of character and manners so lovely
in female youth.

But antecedent to this epistolary period of life, they should have been
accustomed to the most scrupulous exactness in whatever they relate. They
should maintain the most critical accuracy in facts, in dates, in numbering, in
describing, in short, in whatever pertains, either directly or indirectly,
closely or remotely, to the great fundamental principle, Truth.

The conversation of young females is also in danger of being overloaded with
epithets. As in the warm season of youth hardly any thing is seen in the true
point of vision, so hardly any thing is named in naked simplicity; and the very
sensibility of the feelings is partly a cause of the extravagance of the
expression. But here, as in other points, the sacred writers, particularly of
the New Testament, present us with the purest models; and its natural and
unlaboured style of expression is perhaps not the meanest evidence of the truth
of the gospel. There is throughout the whole narratives, no overcharged
character, no elaborate description, nothing studiously emphatical, as if truth
of itself were weak, and wanted to be helped out. There is little panegyric,
and less invective; none but on great, and awful, and justifiable occasions.
The authors record their own faults with the same honesty as if they were the
faults of other men, and the faults of other men with as little amplification
as if they were their own. There is perhaps no book in which adjectives are so
sparingly used. A modest statement of the fact, with no coloring and little
comment, is the example held out to us for correcting the exuberances of
passion and of language, by that divine volume which furnishes us with the
still more important rule of faith and standard of practice. Nor is the truth
lowered by any feebleness; for with all this plainness there is so much force
that a few simple touches and artless strokes of Scripture characters convey a
stronger outline of the person delineated, than is sometimes given by the most
elaborate portrait of more artificial historians.

If it be objected to this remark, that many parts of the sacred writings
abound in a lofty, figurative, and even hyperbolical style; this objection
applies chiefly to the writings of the Old Testament, and to the prophetical
and poetical parts of that. But this metaphorical and florid style is distinct
from the inaccurate and overstrained expression we have been censuring; for
that only is inaccuracy which leads to a false and inadequate conception in the
reader or hearer. The lofty style of the Eastern, and of other heroic poetry
does not so mislead, for the metaphor is understood to be a metaphor, and the
imagery is understood to be ornamental. The style of the Scriptures of the Old
Testament is not, it is true, plain in opposition to figurative, nor simple in
opposition to florid; but it is plain and simple in the best sense; it raises
no false idea; it gives an exact impression of the thing it means to convey;
and its very tropes and figures, though bold, are never unnatural or affected.
Even when it exaggerates, it does not misrepresent; if it be hyperbolical, it
is so either in compliance with the genius of Oriental language, or in
compliance with contemporary customs, or because the subject is one which will
be most forcibly impressed by a bold figure. The loftiness of the expression
deducts nothing from the truth of the circumstance, and the imagery animates
the reader without misleading him.

CHAP. X.
On religion. -- The necessity and duty of early instruction shown by analogy
with human learning.

IT has been the fashion of our late innovators in philosophy, who have written
some of the most brilliant and popular treatises on education, to decry the
practice of early instilling religious knowledge into the minds of children: it
has been alleged that it is of the utmost importance to the cause of truth,
that the mind of man should be kept free from prepossessions; and in
particular, that every one should be left to form such judgment on religious
subjects as may seem best to his own reason in maturer years.

This sentiment has received some countenance from those who have wished, on
the fairest principle, to encourage free inquiry in religion; but it has been
pushed to the blameable excess here censured, chiefly by the new philosophers;
who, while they profess only an ingenuous zeal for truth, are in fact slily
endeavoring to destroy Christianity itself, by discountenancing, under the
plausible pretense of free inquiry, all attention whatever to the religious
education of our youth.

It is undoubtedly our duty, while we are instilling principles into the tender
mind, to take peculiar care that those principles be sound and just; that the
religion we teach be the religion of the Bible, and not the inventions of human
error or superstition: that the principles we infuse into others, be such as we
ourselves have well scrutinized, and not the result of our credulity or
bigotry; nor the mere hereditary, unexamined prejudices of our own undiscerning
childhood. It may also be granted, that it is the duty of every parent to
inform the youth, that when his faculties shall have so unfolded themselves as
to enable him to examine for himself those principles which the parent is now
instilling, it will be his duty so to examine them.

But after making these concessions, I would most seriously insist that there
are certain leading and fundamental truths; that there are certain sentiments
on the side of Christianity, as well as of virtue and benevolence, in favor of
which every child ought to be prepossessed; and may it not be also added, that
to expect to keep the mind void of all prepossession, even upon any subject,
appears to be altogether a vain and impracticable attempt? an attempt which
argues much ignorance of human nature.

Let it be observed here that we are not combating the infidel; that we are not
producing evidences and arguments in favor of Christianity, or trying to win
over the assent of the reader to that which he disputes; but that we are taking
it for granted, not only that Christianity is true, but that we are addressing
those who believe it to be true. Assuming, therefore, that there are religious
principles which are true, and which ought to be communicated in the most
effectual manner, the next question which arises seems to be, at what age and
in what manner these ought to be inculcated? That it ought to be at an early
period we have both the example and the command of Christ; for he himself
attended his parents in their annual public devotions at Jerusalem during his
own infancy; and afterward in his public ministration encouragingly said,
"Suffer little children to come unto me."

But here conceding for the sake of argument what yet cannot be conceded, that
some good reasons may be brought in favor of delay; allowing that such
impressions as are communicated early may not be very deep; allowing them even
to become totally effaced by the subsequent corruptions of the heart and of the
world; still I would illustrate the importance of early infusing religious
knowledge, by an allusion drawn from the power of early habit in human
learning. Put the case, for instance, of a person who was betimes initiated in
the rudiments of classical studies. Suppose him after quitting school to have
fallen, either by a course of idleness or of vulgar pursuits, into a total
neglect of study. Should this person at any future period happen to be called
to some profession, which would oblige him, as we say, to rub up his Greek and
Latin; his memory still retaining the unobliterated though faint traces of his
early pursuits, he will be able to recover his neglected learning with less
difficulty than he could now begin to learn; for he is not again obliged to set
out with studying the simple elements; they come back on being pursued; they
are found on being searched for; the decayed images assume shape, and strength,
and color; he has in his mind first principles to which to recur; the rules of
grammar which he has allowed himself to violate, he has not however forgotten;
he will recall neglected ideas, he will resume slighted habits far more easily
than he could now begin to acquire new ones. I appeal to Clergymen who are
called to attend the dying beds of such as have been bred in gross and stupid
ignorance of religion, for the justness of this comparison. Do they not find
that these unhappy people have no ideas in common with them? that they possess
no intelligible medium by which to make themselves understood? that the persons
to whom they are addressing themselves have no first principles to which they
can be referred? that they are ignorant not only of the science, but the
language of Christianity?

But at worst, whatever be the event to the child, though in general we are
encouraged, from the tenor of Scripture and the course of experience, to hope
that that event would be favorable, is it nothing for the parent to have
acquitted himself of his prime duty? And will not the parent who so acquits
himself, with better reason and more lively hope, supplicate the Father of
mercies for the reclaiming of a prodigal, who has wandered out of that right
path in which he had set him forward, than for the conversion of a neglected
creature, to whose feet the Gospel had never been offered as a light? And how
different will be the dying reflections even of that parent whose
earnest-endeavours have been unhappily defeated by the subsequent and voluntary
perversion of his child, from his who will reasonably aggravate his pangs by
transferring the sins of his neglected child to the number of his own
transgressions.

And to such well-intentioned but ill-judging parents as really wish their
children to be hereafter pious, but erroneously withhold instruction till the
more advanced period prescribed by the great master of splendid paradoxes
Rousseau.
shall arrive; who can assure them that while they are withholding the good
seed, the great and ever vigilant enemy, who assiduously seizes hold on every
opportunity which we neglect, may not be stocking the fallow ground with tares?
Nay, who in this fluctuating scene of things can be assured, even if this were
not certainly to be the case, that to them the promised period ever shall
arrive at all? Who shall ascertain to them that their now neglected child shall
certainly live to receive the delayed instruction? Who can assure them that
they themselves will live to communicate it?

It is almost needless to observe that parents who are indifferent about
religion, much more those who treat it with scorn, are not likely to be anxious
on this subject; it is therefore the attention of religious parents which is
here chiefly called upon; and the more so, as there seems, on this point, an
unaccountable negligence in many of these, whether it arise from indolence,
false principles, or whatever other motive.

But independent of knowledge, it is something, nay, let philosophers say what
they will, it is much, to give youth prepossessions in favor of religion, to
secure their prejudices on its side before you turn them adrift into the world;
a world in which, before they can be completely armed with arguments and
reasons, they will be assailed by numbers whose prepossessions and prejudices,
far more than their arguments and reasons, attach them to the other side.

Why should not the Christian youth furnish himself in a good cause with the
same natural armor which the enemies of religion wear in a bad one? It is
certain that to set out with sentiments in favor of the religion of our
country is no more an error or a weakness, than to grow up with a fondness for
our country itself. Nay, if the love of our country be judged a fair principle,
surely a Christian, who is "a citizen of no mean city," may lawfully have his
attachments too. If patriotism be an honest prejudice, Christianity is not a
servile one. Nay, let us teach the youth to hug his prejudices rather than to
acquire that versatile and accommodating citizenship of the world, by which he
may be an Infidel in Paris, a Papist at Rome, and a Mussulman at Cairo.

Let me not be supposed so to elevate politics, or so to depress religion, as
to make any comparison of the value of the one with the other, when I observe,
that between the true British patriot and the true Christian, there will be
this common resemblance: the more deeply each of them inquires, the more will
he be confirmed in his respective attachment, the one to his country, the other
to his religion. I speak with reverence of the immeasurable distance; but the
more the one presses on the firm arch of our constitution, and the other on
that of Christianity, the stronger he will find them both. Each challenges
scrutiny; each has nothing to dread but from shallow politicians, and shallow
philosophers; in each intimate knowledge justifies prepossession; in each
investigation confirms attachment.

If we divide the human being into three component parts, the bodily, the
intellectual, and the spiritual, is it not reasonable that a portion of care
and attention be assigned to each in some degree adequate to its importance?
Should I venture to say a due portion, a portion adapted to the real
comparative value of each, would not that condemn in one word the whole system
of modern education? Yet the rational and intellectual part being avowedly more
valuable than the bodily, while the spiritual and immortal part exceeds even
the intellectual still more than that surpasses what is corporeal; is it then
acting according to the common rules of proportion; is it acting on the
principles of distributive justice; is it acting with that good sense and right
judgment with which the ordinary business of this world is usually transacted,
to give the larger proportion of time and care to that which is worth the
least? Is it fair that what relates to the body and the organs of the body, I
mean those accomplishments which address themselves to the eye and the ear,
should occupy almost the whole thoughts; that the intellectual part should be
robbed of its due proportion, and that the spiritual part should have almost no
proportion at all? Is not this preparing your children for an awful
disappointment in the tremendous day when they shall be stripped of that body,
of those senses and organs, which have been made almost the sole objects of
their attention, and shall feel themselves left in possession of nothing but
that spiritual part which in education was scarcely taken into the account of
their existence?

Surely it should be thought a reasonable compromise (and I am in fact
undervaluing the object for the importance of which I plead) to suggest, that
at least two-thirds of that time which is now usurped by externals, should be
restored to the rightful owners, the understanding and the heart; and that the
acquisition of religious knowledge in early youth, should at least be no less
an object of sedulous attention than the cultivation of human learning or of
outward embellishments. It is also reasonable to suggest, that we should in
Christianity, as in arts, sciences, or languages, begin with the beginning, set
out with the simple elements and thus "go on unto perfection."

Why in teaching to draw do you begin with straight lines and curves, till by
gentle steps the knowledge of outline and proportion be attained, and your
picture be completed; never losing sight, however, of the elementary lines and
curves? why in music do you set out with the simple notes, and pursue the
acquisition through all its progress, still in every stage recurring to the
notes? why in the science of numbers do you invent the simplest methods of
conveying just ideas of computation, still referring to the tables which
involve the fundamental rules? why in the science of quantity do men introduce
the pupil at first to the plainest diagrams, and clear up one difficulty before
they allow another to appear? why in teaching languages to the youth do you
sedulously infuse into his mind the rudiments of syntax? why in parsing is he
led to refer every word to its part of speech, to resolve every sentence into
its elements, to reduce every term to its original, and from the first case of
nouns, and the first tense of verbs, to explain their formations, changes, and
dependencies, till the principles of language become so grounded, that, by
continually recurring to the rules, the speaking and writing correctly are
fixed into a habit? why all this, but because you uniformly wish him to be
grounded in each of his acquirements? why, but because you are persuaded that a
slight, and slovenly, and superficial, and irregular way of instruction will
never train him to excellence in any thing?

Do young persons then become musicians, and painters, and linguists, and
mathematicians, by early study and regular labor; and shall they become
Christians by accident? or rather, is not this acting on that very principle of
Dogberry, at which you probably have often laughed? Is it not supposing that
religion, like "reading and writing, comes by Nature?" Shall all those
accomplishments "which perish in the using" be so assiduously, so
systematically taught? Shall all these habits be so carefully formed, so
persisted in, as to be interwoven with our very make, so as to become as it
were a part of ourselves, and shall that knowledge which is to make us "wise
unto salvation" be picked up at random, cursorily, or perhaps not picked up at
all? Shall that difficult divine science which requires "line upon line, and
precept upon precept," here a little and there a little; which parents, even
under a darker dispensation, were required to teach their children diligently,
and to talk of it when they sat down in their house, and when they walked by
the way, and when they lay down, and when they rose up; shall this knowledge be
by Christian parents deferred, or taught slightly; or be superseded by things
of little comparative worth?

Shall the lively period of youth, the soft and impressible season when lasting
habits are formed, when the seal cuts deep into the yielding wax, and the
impression is more likely to be clear and strong; shall this warm and
favorable season be suffered to slide by, without being turned to the great
purpose for which not only youth, but life, and breath, and being were
bestowed? Shall not that "faith without which it is impossible to please God;"
shall not that "holiness without which no man can see the Lord;" shall not that
knowledge which is the foundation of faith and practice; shall not that charity
without which all knowledge is sounding brass and a tinkling cymbal, be
impressed, be inculcated, be enforced, as early, as constantly, as
fundamentally, with the same earnest pushing on to continual progress, with the
same constant reference to first principles, as are used in the case of those
arts which merely adorn human life? Shall we not seize the happy period when
the memory is strong, the mind and all its powers vigorous and active, the
imagination busy and all alive, the heart flexible, the temper ductile, the
conscience tender, curiosity awake, fear powerful, hope eager, love ardent; for
inculcating that knowledge, and impressing those principles which are to form
the character, and fix the destination for eternity?

Or, if I may be allowed to address another and a still more dilatory class,
who are for procrastinating all concern about religion till we are driven to it
by actual distress, like the sailor who said, "he thought it was always time
enough to begin to pray when the storm began." Of these I would ask, shall we,
with an unaccountable deliberation, defer our anxiety about religion till the
man and woman are become so immersed in the cares of life, or so entangled in
its pleasures, that they will have little heart or spirit to embrace a new
principle? a principle whose precise object it will be to condemn that very
life into which they have already embarked; nay to condemn almost all that they
have been doing and thinking ever since they began to act or think? Shall we, I
say, begin now? or shall we suffer those instructions, to receive which
requires all the concentrated powers of a strong and healthy mind, to be put
off till the day of excruciating pain, till the period of debility and
stupefaction? Shall we wait for that season, as if it were the most favorable
for religious acquisitions, when the senses shall have been palled by excessive
gratification, when the eye shall be tired with seeing, and the ear with
hearing? Shall we, when the whole man is breaking up by disease or decay,
expect that the dim apprehension will discern a new science, or the obtuse
feelings delight themselves with a new pleasure? a pleasure too, not only
incompatible with many of the hitherto indulged pleasures, but one which
carries with it a strong intimation that those pleasures terminate in the death
of the soul.

But, not to lose sight of the important analogy on which we have already dwelt
so much; how preposterous would it seem to you to hear any one propose to an
illiterate dying man, to set about learning even the plainest and easiest
rudiments of any new art; to study the musical notes; to conjugate an auxiliary
verb; to learn, not the first problem in Euclid, but even the numeration table;
and yet you do not think it absurd to postpone religious instruction, on
principles which, if admitted at all, must terminate either in ignorance, or in
your proposing too late to a dying man to begin to learn the totally unknown
scheme of Christianity. You do not think it impossible that he should be
brought to listen to the voice of this charmer, when he can no longer listen to
"the voice of singing men and singing women." You do not think it unreasonable
that immortal beings should delay to devote their days to Heaven, till they
have "no pleasure in them" themselves. You will not bring them to offer up the
first fruits of their lips, and hearts, and lives, to their Maker, because you
persuade yourselves that he who has called himself a "jealous God," may however
be contented hereafter with the wretched sacrifice of decayed appetites, and
the worthless leavings of almost extinguished affections.

For one cannot believe that there is scarcely any one, except he be a decided
infidel, who does not consider religion as at least a good reversionary thing;
as an object which ought always to occupy a little remote corner of his map of
life; the study of which, though it is always to be postponed, is however not
to be finally rejected; which, though it cannot conveniently come into his
present scheme of life, it is intended somehow or other to take up before
death. This awful deception arises, partly from the bulk which the objects of
time and sense acquire in our eyes by their nearness; while the invisible
realities of eternity are but faintly discerned by a feeble faith, through a
dim and distant medium; and partly from a totally false idea of the nature of
Christianity, from a fatal fancy that we can repent at any future period, and
that as amendment will always be in our own power, it will be time enough to
think of reforming our life, when we should only think of closing it.

But depend upon it, that a heart long hardened, I do not mean by gross vices
merely, but by a fondness for the world, by an habitual and excessive
indulgence in the pleasures of sense, is by no means in a favorable state to
admit the light of divine truth, or to receive the impressions of divine grace.
God indeed sometimes shows us by an act of his sovereignty, that this wonderful
change, the conversion of a sinner's heart, may be produced without the
intervention of human means, to show that the work is HIS. But as this is not
way in which the Almighty usually deals with his creatures, it would be nearly
as preposterous for men to act on this presumption, as it would be to take no
means for the preservation of our lives, because Jesus Christ raised Lazarus
from the dead.

CHAP. XI.
On the manner of instructing young persons in Religion. -- General remarks on
the genius of Christianity.

I WOULD now with great deference address those respectable characters who are
really concerned about the best interests of their children; those to whom
Christianity is indeed an important consideration, but whose habits of life
have hindered them from giving it its due degree in the scale of education.

Begin then with considering that religion is a part, and the most prominent
part, in your system of instruction. Do not communicate its principles in a
random desultory way; nor scantily stint this business to only such scraps and
remnants of time as may be casually picked up from the gleanings of other
acquirements. Will you bring to God for a sacrifice that which costs you
nothing? Let the best part of the day, which with most people is the earliest
part, be steadily and invariably dedicated to this work by your children,
before they are tired with their other studies, while the intellect is clear,
the spirits light, and the attention unfatigued.

Confine not your instructions to mere verbal rituals and dry systems; but
instruct them in a way which shall interest their feelings; by lively images,
and by a warm practical application of what they read to their own hearts and
circumstances. There seems to be no good reason that while every other thing is
to be made amusing, religion alone must be dry and uninviting. Do not fancy
that a thing is good merely because it is dull. Why should not the most
entertaining powers of the mind be supremely consecrated to that subject which
is most worthy of their full exercise? The misfortune is, that religious
learning is too often rather considered as an act of the memory than of the
heart and feelings; and that children are turned over to the dry work of
getting by rote as a task that which they should get from example and animated
conversation. Teach them rather, as their Blessed Savior taught, by
interesting parables, which while they corrected the heart, left some exercise
for the ingenuity in their solution, and for the feelings in their application.
Teach, as HE taught, by seizing on surrounding objects, passing events, local
circumstances, peculiar characters, apt allusions, just analogy, appropriate
illustration. Call in all creation, animate and inanimate, to your (...), and
accustom your young audience to Find tongues in trees, books in the running
brooks,
(...) in stones, and good in every thing.
Do, according to your measure of ability, what the Holy Spirit which indicted
the Scriptures has done, always take the sensibility of the learner into your
account of the faculties which are to be worked upon. "For the doctrines of the
Bible," as the profound and enlightened Bacon observes, are not proposed to us
in a naked logical form, but arrayed in the most beautiful and striking colors
which creation affords. By those illustrations used by Him "who knew what was
in man," and therefore best knew how to address him, it was, that the
unlettered audiences of Christ and his Apostles were enabled both to comprehend
and to relish doctrines, which would not readily have made their way to their
understandings, had they not first touched their hearts; and which would have
found access to neither the one nor the other, had they been delivered in dry,
scholastic disquisitions. Now those audiences not being learned, may be
supposed to have been nearly in the state of children, as to their receptive
faculties, and to have required nearly the same sort of instruction; that is,
they were more capable of being affected with what was simple, and touching,
and lively, than what was elaborate, abstruse, and unaffecting. Heaven and
earth were made to furnish their contributions, when man was to be taught that
science which was to make him wise unto salvation. If that be the purest
eloquence which most persuades, then no eloquence is so powerful as that of
Scripture: and an intelligent Christian teacher will be admonished by the mode
of Scripture itself, how to communicate its truths with (...); while he is
musing, the fire (...) (...) fire which will preserve him from an (...) and
freezing mode of instruction. He will moreover, like his great Master, always
carefully keep up a quick sense of the personal interest the pupil has in every
religious instruction which is impressed upon him. He will teach as Paul
prayed, with the spirit, and with the understanding also; and in imitating this
great model he will necessarily avoid the opposite faults of two different
sorts of instructors; for while some of our divines of the higher class have
been too apt to preach as if mankind had only intellect, and the lower and more
popular sort as if they had only passions, do you borrow what is good from
both, and address your pupils as beings compounded of both understanding and
affections. The zeal and diligence with which the Bishop of London's weekly
lectures have been attended by persons of all ranks and descriptions, but more
especially by that class to whom this little work is addressed, is a very
promising circumstance for the age. And while one considers with pleasure the
advantages peculiarly to be derived by the young from so interesting and
animated an exposition of the Gospel, one is further led to rejoice at the
countenance given by such high authority to the revival of that excellent, but
too much neglected, practice of lectures.


Fancy not that the Bible is too difficult and intricate to be presented in its
own naked form, and that it puzzles and bewilders the youthful understanding.
In all needful and indispensable points of knowledge the darkness of Scripture,
as a great Christian philosopher Mr. Boil.
has observed, is but a partial darkness, like that of Egypt, which benighted
only the enemies of God, while it left his children in clear day. And if it be
really the appropriate character of Scripture, as it tells us itself that it
is, to enlighten the eyes of the blind, and "to make wise the simple," then it
is as well calculated for the youthful and uninformed as for any other class;
and as it was never expected that the greater part of Christians should be
learned, so is learning, though of inestimable value in a teacher of theology,
no essential qualification for a common Christian; for which reason Scripture
truths are expressed with that clear and simple evidence adapted to the kind of
assent which they require. He who could bring an unprejudiced heart and an
unperverted will would bring to the Scriptures the best qualification for
understanding and receiving them. And though they contain things which the
pupil cannot comprehend, (as what ancient poet, historian, or orator does not,)
the teacher may address to him the words which Christ addressed to Peter, What
I do, thou know not now, but thou shall know hereafter.

Young people who have been taught religion in a dry and superficial way, who
have had all its drudgeries and none of its pleasures, will probably have
acquired so little relish for it, as to consider the continued prosecution of
their religious studies as a badge of their tutelage, as a mark that they are
still under subjection; and will look forward with impatience to the hour of
their emancipation from the lectures on Christianity. They will long for the
period when its lessons shall cease to be delivered; will conclude that, having
once attained such an age, and arrived at the required proficiency, the object
will be accomplished and the labor at an end. But let not your children "so
learn Christ." Apprize them that no specific day will ever arrive on which they
shall say, I have attained; but inform them, that every acquisition must be
followed up; knowledge must be increased; prejudices subdued; good habits
rooted; evil ones eradicated; dispositions strengthened; principles confirmed;
till, going on from strength to strength, they come to the measure of the
stature of the fullness of Christ.

But though serious instruction will not only be uninteresting but irksome if
conveyed to youth in a mere didactic way, yet if their affections are suitably
engaged, their hearts, so far from necessarily revolting, as some insist they
will, often receive the most solemn truths with alacrity. It is the manner
which revolts them, and not the thing.

As it is notorious that men of wit and imagination have been the most
formidable enemies to Christianity; while men, in whom those talents have been
consecrated to God, have been some of her most useful champions, take
particular care to press that ardent and ever-active power, the imagination,
into the service of religion; this bright and busy faculty will be leading its
possessor into perpetual peril, and is an enemy of peculiar potency till it
come to be employed in the cause of God. It is a lion, which though worldly
prudence indeed may chain so as to prevent outward mischief, yet the malignity
remains within; but when sanctified by Christianity, the imagination is a lion
tamed; you have all the benefit of its strength and its activity, divested of
its mischief. God never bestowed that noble but restless faculty, without
intending it to be an instrument of his own glory; though it has been too often
set up in rebellion against him; because, in its youthful stirrings, while all
alive to evil, it has not been seized upon to fight for its rightful Sovereign,
but was early enlisted with little opposition under the banners of the world,
the flesh, and the devil. Religion is the only subject in which, under the
guidance of an holy and sober-minded prudence, this discursive faculty can
safely stretch its powers and expand its energies. But let it be remembered,
that it must be a sound and genuine Christianity which can alone so chastise
and regulate the imagination, as to restrain it from those errors and excesses
into which a false, a mistaken, an irregular religion, has too often plunged
its injudicious and ill-instructed professor. To secure the imagination
therefore on the safe side, and, if I may change the metaphor, to put it under
the direction of its true pilot in the stormy voyage of life, is like engaging
those potent elements, the wind and tide, in your favor.

In your communications with young people, take care to convince them that as
religion is not a business to be laid aside with the lesson, so neither is it a
single branch of duty; some detached thing, which like an art or a language is
to be practiced separately, and to have its distinct periods and (...) of
operation. But let them understand, that common acts, by the spirit in which
they are to be performed, are to be made acts of religion: that Christianity
may be considered as having something of that influence over the conduct which
external grace has over the manners; for as it is not the performance of some
particular act which denominates any one to be graceful, grace being a spirit
diffused through the whole system which animates every sentiment, and informs
every action; as she who has true personal grace has it uniformly, and is not
sometimes awkward and sometimes elegant; does not sometimes lay it down and
sometimes take it up; so religion is not an occasional act, but an indwelling
principle, an in wrought habit, a pervading and informing spirit, from which
indeed every act derives all its life, and energy, and beauty.

Give them clear views of the broad discrimination between practical religion
and worldly morality. Show them that no good qualities are genuine but such as
flow from the religion of Christ. Let them learn that the virtues which the
better sort of people, who yet are destitute of true Christianity, inculcate
and practice, resemble those virtues which have the love of God for their
motive, just as counterfeit coin resembles sterling gold; they may have, it is
true, certain points of resemblance with the others; they may be bright and
shining; they have perhaps the image and the superscription, but they ever want
the true distinguishing properties; they want sterling value, purity, and
weight. They may indeed pass current in the traffic of this world, but when
brought to the touchstone, they will be found full of alloy; when weighed in
the balance of the sanctuary, "they will be found wanting;" they will not stand
that final trial which is to separate the precious from the vile; they will not
abide the day of his coming who is like a refiner's fire.

One error into which even some good people are apt to fall, is that of
endeavoring to deceive young minds by temporising expedients. In order to
allure them to become religious, they exhibit false, or faint, or inadequate
views of Christianity; and while they represent it as it really is, as a life
of superior happiness and advantage, they conceal its difficulties, and like
the Jesuitical Chinese missionaries, extenuate, or sink, or deny, such parts of
it as are least alluring to human pride. But besides that, the project fails
with them as it did with the Jesuits; all fraud is bad; and a (...) fraud is a
contradiction in terms which ought to be buried in the rubbish of papal
desolation.

Instead of representing to the young Christian that it may be possible by a
prudent ingenuity at once to pursue, with equal ardour and success, worldly
fame and eternal glory, would it not be more honest to tell him fairly and
unambiguously that there are two distinct roads between which there is a broad
boundary line? that there are two irreconcilable interests; that he must
forsake the one if he would cleave to the other? that there are two sorts of
characters at eternal variance? that nothing short of absolute decision can
make a confirmed Christian? Point out the different sort of promises annexed to
these different sorts of characters. Confess in the language of Christ how the
man of the world often obtains (and it is the natural course of human things)
the recompense he sedulously seeks. Verily I say unto you they have their
reward. Explain the beatitudes on the other hand, and unfold what kind of
specific reward is there individually promised to its concomitant virtue. Show
your pupil that to that poverty of spirit to which the kingdom of heaven is
promised, it would be inconsistent to expect that the recompense of human
commendation should be also attached; that to that "purity of heart" to which
the beatific vision is annexed, it would be unreasonable to suppose you can
unite the praise of licentious wits, or the admiration of a catch club. These
will be bestowed on their appropriate and corresponding merits. Do not enlist
them under false colors. Different sorts of rewards are attached to different
sorts of services; and while you truly assert that religions ways are ways of
pleasantness, and all her paths are peace, take care that you do not lead them
to depend too exclusively on worldly happiness and earthly peace, for these
make no part of the covenant; they may be superadded, but they were never
stipulated in the contract.

But if, in order to attract the young to a religious course, you
disingenuously conceal its difficulties, while you are enlarging upon its
pleasures, you will tempt them to distrust the truth of Scripture itself. For
what will they think, not only of a few detached texts, but of the general cast
and color of the Gospel when contrasted with your representation of it? What
notion will they conceive of the strait gate and "narrow way?" of the
amputation of a "right hand?" of the excision of a "right eye?" of the other
strong metaphors by which the Christian warfare is shadowed out? of crucifying
the flesh? of "mortifying the old man?" of dying unto sin? of "overcoming the
world?" Do you not think their meek and compassionate Savior who died for your
children loved them as well as you love them? And if this were his language,
ought it not to be yours? It is the language of true love; of that love with
which a merciful God loved the world, when he spared not his own Son. Do not
then try to conceal from them, that the life of a Christian is necessarily
opposite to the life of the world; and do not seek, by a vain attempt at
accommodation, to reconcile that difference which Christ himself has pronounced
to be irreconcilable.

May it not be partly owing to the want of a due introduction to the knowledge
of the real nature and spirit of religion, that so many young Christians, who
set out in a fair and flourishing way, decline and wither when they come to
perceive the requisitions of experimental Christianity? requisitions which they
had not suspected of making any part of the plan.

People are no more to be cheated into religion than into learning. The same
spirit which influences your oath in a court of justice should influence your
discourse in that court of equity -- your family. Your children should be told
the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth. It is unnecessary to
add, that it must be done gradually and discreetly. We know whose example we
have for postponing that which the mind is not yet prepared to receive: I have
many things yet to say to you, but ye cannot bear them now. Accustom them to
reason by analogy. Explain to them that great worldly seize are never
made without great sacrifices; that the merchant cannot become rich without
industry; the statesman eminent without labor; the scholar learned without
study; the hero renowned without danger: would it not then, on human
principles, be unreasonable to think that the Christian alone should obtain a
triumph without a warfare? the highest prize with the lowest exertions? an
eternal crown without a present cross? and that heaven is the only reward which
the idle may reckon upon? No: though salvation "be the gift of God," yet it
must be "worked out." Convince your young friends, however, that in this case
the difficulty bears no proportion to the prize; though in one respect the
point of resemblance fails, and that most advantageously for the Christian; for
while, even by the most probable means, which are the union of talents with
diligence, no human prosperity can be insured to the worldly candidate; while
the most successful adventurer may fail by the fault of another; while the best
concerted project of the statesman may be crushed; the bravest hero lose the
battle; the brightest genius fail of getting bread; and while, moreover, the
pleasure arising from success in these may be no sooner tasted than it is
poisoned by a more prosperous rival; the persevering Christian is safe and
certain of attaining his object; no misfortunes can defeat his hope; no
competition can endanger his success; for though another gain, he will not
lose. Nay, the success of another, so far from diminishing his gain, is an
addition to it; the more he diffuses, the richer he grows; and that mortal hour
which cuts off for ever the hopes of worldly men, crowns and consummates his.

Beware at the same time of setting up any act of self-denial or mortification
as the procuring cause of salvation. This would be a presumptuous project to
purchase that eternal life which is declared to be the "free gift of God." This
would be to send your children, not to the Gospel to learn their Christianity,
but to the Monks and Ascetics of the middle ages; it would be sending them to
Peter the Hermit, and the holy fathers of the Desert, and not to Peter the
Apostle and his Divine Master. Mortification is not the price; it is nothing
more than the discipline of a soul of which sin is the disease, the diet
prescribed by the great physician. Without this guard the young devout
Christian would be led to fancy that abstinence, pilgrimage, and penance might
be adopted as the cheap substitute for the subdued desire, the conquered
temptation, and the obedient will; and would be almost in as much danger, on
the one hand, of self-righteousness arising from austerities and mortification,
as she would be, on the other, from self-gratification in the indulgences of
the world. And while you carefully impress on her the necessity of living a
life of strict obedience if she would please God, do not neglect to remind her
also that a complete renunciation of her own performances as a ground of merit,
purchasing the favor of God by their own intrinsic worth, is included in that
obedience.

It is of the last importance, in stamping on young minds a true impression of
the genius of Christianity, to possess them with a conviction that it is the
purity of the motive which not only gives worth and beauty, but which, in a
Christian sense, gives life and soul to the best action: nay, that while a
right intention will be acknowledged and accepted at the final judgment, even
without the act, the act itself will be disowned which wanted the basis of a
pure design. Thou did well that it was in thy heart to build me a temple,
said the Almighty to that Monarch whom yet he permitted not to build it. How
many splendid actions will be rejected in the great day of retribution, to
which statues and monuments have been raised on earth, while their almost
deified authors shall be as much confounded at their own unexpected
reprobation, as at the acceptance of those "whose life the world counted
madness." "Depart from me, I never knew you," is not the malediction denounced
on the skeptic or the scoffer, but on the unfruitful worker of "miracles," on
the unsanctified utterer of "prophecies;" for even acts of piety wanting the
purifying principle, however they may dazzle men, offend God. Cain sacrificed,
Balaam prophesied, Rousseau wrote the most sublime panegyric on the Son of
Mary, VOLTAIRE BUILT A CHURCH! nay, so superior was his affectation of
sanctity, that he ostentatiously declared, that while others were raising
churches to Saints, there was one man at least who would erect his church to
God: that God whose altars he was overthrowing, whose name he was vilifying,
whose gosdel he was exterminating, and the very name of whose Son he had
solemnly pledged himself to blot from the face of the earth!

Though it be impossible here to enumerate all those Christian virtues which
should be impressed in the progress of a Christian education, yet in this
connection I cannot forbear mentioning one which more immediately grows out of
the subject; and to remark that the principle which should be the invariable
concomitant of all instruction, and especially of religious instruction, is
humility. As this temper is inculcated in every page of the Gospel; as it is
deducible from every precept and every action of Christ; that is a sufficient
intimation that it should be made to grow out of every study, that it should be
grafted on every acquisition. It is the turning point, the leading principle
indicative of the very genius of Christianity. This chastising quality should
therefore be constantly made in education to operate as the only counteraction
of that knowledge which puffs up. Youth should be taught that as humility is
the discriminating characteristic of our religion, therefore a proud Christian,
a haughty disciple of a crucified Master, furnishes perhaps a stronger
opposition in terms than the whole compass of language can exhibit. They should
be taught that humility being the appropriate grace of Christianity, is what
makes Christian and Pagan virtues essentially different. The virtues of the
Romans, for instance, were obviously founded in pride; as a proof of this, they
had not even a word in their copious language to express humility, but what was
used in a bad sense, and conveyed the idea of meanness or vileness.
Christianity so stands on its own single ground, is so far from assimilating
itself to the spirit of other religions, that, unlike the Roman Emperor, who
though he would not become a Christian, yet ordered that the image of Christ
should be set up in the Pantheon with those of the heathen gods, and be
worshipped in common with them; Christianity not only rejects all such
partnerships with other religions, but it pulls down their images, defaces
their temples, tramples on their honors, founds its own existence on the ruins
of spurious religions and spurious virtues, and will be every thing when it is
admitted to be any thing.

Will it be going too much out of the way to observe, that Christian Britain
retaliates upon Pagan Rome? For if the former used humility in a bad sense, has
not the latter learnt to use pride in a good one? May we, without impertinence,
venture to remark, that, in the deliberations of as honorable and upright
political assemblies as ever adorned, or, under Providence, upheld a country;
in orations which leave us nothing to envy in Attic or Roman eloquence in their
best days; it were to be wished that we did not borrow from Rome an epithet
which suited the genius of her religion, as much as it militates against that
of ours? The panegyrist of the battle of Marathon, of Plataea, or of Zama,
might with propriety speak of a "proud day," or a proud event, or a "proud
success." But surely the Christian encomiasts of the battle of the Nile may,
from their abundance, select an epithet better appropriated to such a victory
-- a victory which, by preserving Europe, has perhaps preserved that religion
which sets its foot on the very neck of pride, and in which the conqueror
himself, even in the first ardors of triumph, forgot not to ascribe the victory
to ALMIGHTY GOD. Let us leave to the enemy both the term and the thing;
arrogant words being the only weapons in which we must ever vail to their
decided superiority.

Above all things then you should beware that your pupils do not take up with a
vague, general, and undefined religion; but look to it that their Christianity
be really the religion of Christ. Instead of slurring over the doctrines of the
Cross, as disreputable appendages to our religion, which are to be got over as
well as we can, but which are never to be dwelt upon, take care to make these
your fundamental articles. Do not explain away these doctrines, and by some
elegant periphrasis hint at a Savior, instead of making him the foundation
stone of your system. Do not convey primary, and plain, and awful, and
indispensable truths elliptically, I mean as something that is to be understood
without being expressed; nor study fashionable circumlocutions to avoid names
and things on which our salvation hangs, in order to prevent your discourse
from being offensive. Persons who are thus instructed in religion with more
good breeding than seriousness and simplicity, imbibe a distaste for plain
scriptural language; and the Scriptures themselves are so little in use with a
certain fashionable class of readers, that when the doctrines and language of
the Bible occasionally occur in other authors, they present a sort of novelty
and peculiarity which offend; and such readers as disuse the Bible are apt to
call that precise and puritanical which is in fact sound and scriptural. Nay,
it has several times happened to the author to hear persons of sense and
learning ridicule insulated sentiments and expressions that have fallen in
their way, which they would have treated with decent respect had they known
them to be, as they really were, texts of Scripture. This observation is
hazarded with a view to enforce the importance of early communicating religious
knowledge, and of infusing an early taste for Scripture phraseology.

The persons in question are apt to acquire a kind of Pagan Christianity, which
just enables them to hear with complacency of the "Deity," of a first cause,
and of "conscience." Nay, some may even go so far as to talk of the Founder of
our religion, of the "Author of Christianity," in general terms, as they would
talk of the prophet of Arabia, or the lawgiver of China, of Athens, or of the
Jews. But their refined ears revolt not a little at the unadorned name of
Christ; and even the naked and unqualified term of our Savior, or Redeemer,
carries with it a queerish, inelegant, not to say a suspicious sound. They will
express a serious disapprobation of what is wrong under the moral term of vice,
or the forensic term of crime; but they are apt to think that the Scripture
term of sin has something fanatical in it: and, while they discover a great
respect for morality, they do not much relish holiness, which is indeed the
specific morality of a Christian. They will speak readily of a man's reforming,
or leaving off a vicious habit, or growing more correct in some individual
practice; but the expression of a total change of heart, they would stigmatize
as the very shibboleth of a sect, though it is the language of a Liturgy they
affect to admire, and of a Gospel which they profess to receive.

CHAP. XII.
Hints suggested for furnishing young persons with a scheme of prayer.

THOSE who are aware of the inestimable value of prayer themselves, will
naturally be anxious not only that this duty should be earnestly inculcated on
their children, but that they should be taught it in the best manner; and such
parents need little persuasion or counsel on the subject. Yet children of
decent and orderly (I will not say of strictly religious) families are often so
superficially instructed in this important business, that it is not unusual,
when they are asked what prayers they use, to answer, the Lord's Prayer and the
Creed. And even some who are better taught, are not always made to understand
with sufficient clearness the specific distinction between the two; that the
one is the confession of their faith, and the other the model for their
supplications. By this confused and indistinct beginning, they set out with a
perplexity in their ideas, which is not always completely disentangled in more
advanced life.

An intelligent mother will seize the first occasion which the child's opening
understanding shall allow, for making a little course of lectures on the Lord's
Prayer, taking every division or short sentence separately; for each furnishes
valuable materials for a distinct lecture. The child should be led gradually
through every part of this divine composition; she should be taught to break it
into all the regular divisions, into which indeed it so naturally resolves
itself. She should be made to comprehend one by one each of its short but
weighty sentences; to amplify and spread them out for the purpose of better
understanding them, not in their most extensive and critical, but in their most
simple and obvious meaning. For in those condensed and substantial expressions,
every word is an ingot, and will bear beating out; so that the teacher's
difficulty will not so much be what she shall say as what she shall suppress;
so abundant is the expository matter which this succinct pattern suggests.

When the child has a pretty good conception of the meaning of each division,
she should then be made to observe the connection, relation, and dependence of
the several parts of this prayer one upon another; for there is great method
and connection in it. We pray that the kingdom of God may come, as the best
means to "hallow his name;" and that by us, the obedient subjects of this
kingdom, "his will may be done." A judicious interpreter will observe how
logically and consequently one clause grows out of another, though she will use
neither the word logical nor consequence: for all explanations should be made
in the most plain and familiar terms, it being words, and not things, which
commonly perplex children, if, as it sometimes happens, the teacher, though not
wanting sense, want perspicuity and simplicity.

The young person, from being made a complete mistress of this short
composition, (which as it is to be her guide and model through life, too much
pains cannot be bestowed on it,) will have a clearer conception, not only of
its individual contents, but of prayer in general, than many ever attain,
though their memory has been perhaps loaded with long and unexplained forms,
which they have been accustomed to swallow in the lump without scrutiny. Prayer
should not be so swallowed. It is a regular prescription, which should stand
analysis and examination: it is not a charm, the successful operation of which
depends on your blindly taking it, without knowing what is in it, and in which
the good you receive is promoted by your ignorance of its contents.

I would have it understood that by these little comments, I do not mean that
the child should be put to learn dry, and to her, unintelligible, expositions;
and here I must remark in general, that the teacher is sometimes apt to relieve
herself at the child's expense, by loading the memory of a little creature on
occasions in which far other faculties should be put in exercise. The child
herself should be made to furnish a good part of the commentary by her answers;
in which answers she will be much assisted by the judgment the teacher uses in
her manner of questioning. And the youthful understanding, when its powers are
properly set at work, will soon strengthen by exercise so as to furnish
reasonable if not very correct answers.

Written forms of prayer are not only useful and proper, but indispensably
necessary. But I will hazard the remark, that if children are thrown
exclusively on the best forms, if they are made to commit them to memory like a
copy of verses, and to repeat them in a dry, customary way, they will produce
little effect on their minds. They will not understand what they repeat, if we
do not early open to them the important scheme of prayer. Without such an
elementary introduction to this duty, they will afterward be either ignorant
or enthusiasts, or both. We should give them knowledge before we can expect
them to make much progress in piety, and as a due preparative to it: Christian
instruction in this resembling the sun, who, in the course of his
communications, gives light before he gives heat. And to excite a spirit of
devotion without infusing that knowledge out of which it is to grow, is
practically reviving the popish maxim, that Ignorance is the mother of
Devotion, and virtually adopting the popish rule, of praying in an unknown
tongue.

Children, let me again observe, will not attend to their prayers if they do
not understand them; and they will not understand them, if they are not taught
to analyze, to dissect them, to know their component parts, and to methodise
them.

It is not enough to teach them to consider prayer under the general idea that
it is an application to God for what they want, and an acknowledgment for what
they have. This, though true in the gross, is not sufficiently precise and
correct. They should learn to define and to arrange all the different parts of
prayer. And as a preparative to prayer itself, they should be impressed with as
clear an idea as the nature of the subject admits, of HIM with whom they have
to do. His omnipresence is perhaps, of all his attributes, that of which we may
make the first practical use. Every head of prayer is founded on some great
scriptural truths, which truths the little analysis here suggested will
materially assist to fix in their minds.

On the knowledge that "God is," that he is an infinitely holy Being, and that
he is the rewarder of all them that diligently seek him, will be grounded the
first part of prayer, which is adoration. The creature devoting itself to the
Creator, or self-dedication, next presents itself. And if they are first taught
that important truth, that as needy creatures they want help, which may be done
by some easy analogy, they will easily be led to understand how naturally
petition forms a most considerable branch of prayer: and divine grace being
among the things for which they are to petition, this naturally suggests to the
mind the doctrine of the influences of the spirit. And when to this is added
the conviction, which will be readily worked into an ingenuous mind, that as
offending creatures they want pardon, the necessity of confession will easily
be made intelligible to them. But they should be brought to understand that it
must not be such a general and vague confession as awakens no sense of personal
humiliation, as excites no recollection of their own more peculiar and
individual faults. But it must be a confession founded on self-knowledge, which
is itself to arise out of the practice of self-examination: for want of this
sort of discriminating habit, a well-meaning but ill-instructed girl may catch
herself confessing the sins of some other person, and omitting those which are
more especially her own. On the gladness of heart natural to youth, it will be
less difficult to impress the delightful duty of thanksgiving, which forms so
considerable a branch of prayer. In this they should be habituated to
recapitulate not only their general, but to enumerate their peculiar, daily,
and incidental mercies, in the same specific manner as they should have been
taught to detail their wants in the petitionary, and their faults in the
confessional part. The same warmth of feeling which will more readily dispose
them to express their gratitude to God in thanksgiving, will also lead them
more gladly to express their love to their parents and friends, by adopting
another indispensable, and to an affectionate heart, pleasing part of prayer,
which is intercession.

When they have been made, by a plain and perspicuous mode of instruction,
fully to understand the different nature of all these; and when they clearly
comprehend that adoration, self-dedication, confession, petition, thanksgiving,
and intercession, are distinct heads, which must not be involved in each other,
you may exemplify the rules by pointing out to them these successive branches
in any well written form. And they will easily discern, that ascription of
glory to that God to whom we owe so much, and on whom we so entirely depend, is
the conclusion into which a Christian's prayer will naturally resolve itself.
It is hardly needful to remind the teacher that our truly Scriptural Liturgy
invariably furnishes the example of presenting every request in the name of the
great Mediator. In the Liturgy too they will meet with the best
exemplifications of prayers, exhibiting separate specimens of each of the
distinct heads we have been suggesting.

But in order that the minds of young persons may, without labor or
difficulty, be gradually brought into such a state of preparation as to be
benefited by such a little course of lectures as we have recommended; they
should, from the time when they were first able to read, have been employing
themselves at their leisure hours, in laying in a store of provision for their
present demands. And here the memory may be employed to good purpose; for being
the first faculty which is ripened, and which is indeed perfected when the
others are only beginning to unfold themselves, this is an intimation of
Providence that it should be the first seized on for the best uses. It should
therefore be devoted to lay in a stock of the more easy and devotional parts of
Scripture. The Psalms alone are an inexhaustible storehouse of rich materials.
This will be so far from spoiling the cheerfulness, or impeding the pleasures
of childhood, that the author knows a little girl who, before she was seven
years old, had learnt the whole Psalter through a second time; and that without
any diminution of uncommon gaiety of spirits, or any interference with the
elegant acquirements suited to her station.
Children whose minds have been early well furnished from these, will be
competent at nine or ten years old to produce from them, and to select with no
contemptible judgment suitable examples of all the parts of prayer; and will be
able to extract and appropriate texts under each respective head, so as to
exhibit, without help, complete specimens of every part of prayer. By confining
them entirely to the sense, and nearly to the words of Scripture, they will be
preserved from enthusiasm, from irregularity, and conceit. By being obliged
continually to apply for themselves, they will get a habit in all their
difficulties, of searching the Scriptures, which may be useful to them on
future and more trying occasions. But I would confine them to the Bible; for
were they allowed with equal freedom to ransack other books with a view to get
helps to embellish their little compositions, or rather compilations, they
might be tempted to pass off for their own what they pick up from other, which
might tend at once to make them both vain and deceitful. This is a temptation
to which they are too much laid open when they get commended for any pilfered
passage with which they decorate their little themes and letters. But in the
present instance there is no danger of any similar deception, for there is such
a sacred signature stamped on every Scripture phrase, that the owner's name can
never be defaced or torn off from the goods, either by fraud or violence.

It would be well, if in those Psalms which children were first directed to get
by heart, an eye were had to this their future application; and that they were
employed, but without any intimation of your subsequent design, in learning
such as may be best turned to this account. In the 139th the first great truth
to be imprinted on the young heart, as was before observed, is unfolded with
such a mixture of majestic grandeur, and such an interesting variety of
intimated and local circumstances, as is likely to seize on the quick and
lively feelings of youth. The awful idea that that Being whom she is taught to
reverence, is not only in general acquainted with all her ways, but that he is
about her path, and about her bed, bestows such a sense of real and present
existence on him of whom she is apt to conceive as having his distant
habitation only in Heaven, as will help her to realize the sense of his actual
presence.

The 103d Psalm will open to the mind rich and abundant sources of expression
for gratitude and thanksgiving, and it includes spiritual as well as temporal
favors. It illustrates the mercies of God by familiar and domestic images, of
such peculiar tenderness and endearment, as are calculated to strike upon every
chord of filial fondness in the heart of an affectionate child. The 51st
supplies an infinite variety of matter in whatever relates to confession of
sin, or to supplication for the aids of the Spirit. The 23d abounds with
captivating expressions of the protecting goodness of their heavenly Father,
conveyed by pastoral imagery of uncommon sweetness: in short the greater part
of these beautiful compositions overflow with materials for every head of
prayer.

The child who, while she was engaged in learning these Scriptures, was not
aware that there was any specific object to be answered by it, will afterward
feel an unexpected pleasure arising from the application of her petty labors,
when she is called to draw out from her little treasury of knowledge the stores
she has been collecting; and will be pleased to find that without any fresh
application to study, for she is now obliged to exercise a higher faculty than
memory, she has lying ready in her mind the materials with which she is now
called upon to work. Her judgment must be set about selecting one or two, or
more texts which shall contain the substance of every specific head of prayer
before noticed; and it will be a farther exercise to her understanding to
concatenate the detached parts into one regular whole, occasionally varying the
arrangement as she likes; that is, changing the order, sometimes beginning with
invocation, sometimes with confession; sometimes dwelling longer on one part,
sometimes on another. As the hardships of a religious Sunday are often so
pathetically pleaded, as making one of the heavy burdens of religion; and as
the friends of religion are so often called upon to mitigate its rigours, might
not such an exercise as has been here suggested help to vary its occupations?

The habits of the pupil being thus early formed, her memory, attention, and
intellect being bent in a right direction, and the exercise invariably
maintained, may one not reasonably hope that her affections also, through
divine grace, may become interested in the work, till she will be enabled to
pray with the spirit and with the understanding also? She will now be qualified
to use a well-composed form with seriousness and advantage; for she will now
use it not mechanically, but rationally. That which before appeared to her a
mere mass of good words, will now appear a significant composition, exhibiting
variety, and order, and beauty; and she will have the farther advantage of
being enabled by her improved judgment to distinguish and select for her own
purpose such as are more judicious and more scriptural.

END OF THE FIRST VOLUME.
STRICTURES ON THE MODERN SYSTEM OF FEMALE EDUCATION. WITH A VIEW OF THE
PRINCIPLES AND CONDUCT PREVALENT AMONG WOMEN OF RANK AND FORTUNE.

By HANNAH MORE.

May you so raise your character that you may help to make the next age a
better thing, and leave posterity in your debt, for the advantage it shall
receive by your example. LORD HALIFAX. IN TWO VOLUMES. VOL. II.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED BY BUDD AND BARTRAM, FOR THOMAS DOBSON, AT THE STONE
HOUSE, NO. 41, SOUTH SECOND STREET. 1800.

The Hope and Expectation of the Time
Should not so lavish of their presence be,
Nor so enfeoff'd to Popularity,
That being nightly swallowed by Men's eyes,
They Are surfeited with honey, and begin
To loathe the taste of sweetness.
SHAKESPEARE. CONTENTS OF THE SECOND VOLUME.
CHAP. XIII. THE practical use of female knowledge, with a sketch of the female
character, and a comparative view of the sexes. 5 CHAP. XIV. CONVERSATION. --
Hints suggested on the subject. -- On the tempers and dispositions to be
introduced in it. -- Errors to be avoided. -- Vanity under various shapes the
cause of those errors. 34 CHAP. XV. On the danger of an ill-directed
sensibility. 71 CHAP. XVI. On dissipation, and the modern habits of fashionable
life. 98 CHAP. XVII. On public amusements. 130 CHAP. XVIII. A worldly spirit
incompatible with the spirit of Christianity. 149 CHAP. XIX. On the leading
doctrines of Christianity. -- The corruption of human nature. -- The doctrine
of redemption. -- The necessity of a change of heart, and of the divine
influences to produce that change. -- With a sketch of the Christian character.
175 CHAP. XX. On the duty and efficacy of prayer. 209
A VIEW OF THE PRINCIPLES AND CONDUCT PREVALENT AMONG WOMEN OF RANK AND FORTUNE.
CHAP. XIII.
The practical uses of female knowledge. -- Sketch of the female character. --
A comparative view of both sexes.

THE chief end to be proposed in cultivating the understandings of women, is to
qualify them for the practical purposes of life. Their knowledge is not often
like the learning of men, to be reproduced in some literary composition, nor
ever in any learned profession; but it is to come out in conduct. A lady
studies, not that she may qualify herself to become ^^^orator or a pleader; not
that she may learn to debate, but to act. She is to read the best books, not so
much to enable her to talk of them, as to bring the improvement which they
furnish, to the rectification of her principles, and the formation of her
habits. The great uses of study are to enable her to regulate her own mind, and
to be useful to others.

To woman therefore, whatever be her rank, I would recommend a predominance of
those more sober studies, which, not having display for their object, may make
her wise without vanity, happy without witnesses, and content without
panegyrists; the exercise of which will not bring celebrity, but improve
usefulness. She should pursue every kind of study which will teach her to
elicit truth; which will lead her to be intent upon realities; will give
precision to her ideas; will make an exact mind; every study which, instead of
stimulating her sensibility, will chastise it; which will give her definite
notions; will bring the imagination under dominion; will lead her to think, to
compare, to combine, to methodise; which will confer such a power of
discrimination that her judgment shall learn to reject what is dazzling if it
be not solid; and to prefer, not what is striking, or bright, or new, but what
is just. That kind of knowledge which is rather fitted for home consumption
than foreign exportation, is peculiarly adapted to women.

It is because the superficial nature of their education furnishes them with a
false and low standard of intellectual excellence, that women have sometimes
become ridiculous by the unfounded pretensions of literary vanity: for it is
not the really learned but the smatterers, who have generally brought their sex
into discredit, by an absurd affectation, which has set them on despising the
duties of ordinary life. There have not indeed been wanting (but the character
is not now common) precieuses ridicules, who, assuming a superiority to the
sober cares which ought to occupy their sex, have claimed a lofty and
supercilious exemption from the dull and plodding drudgeries Of this dim speck
called earth!
who have affected to establish an unnatural separation between talents and
usefulness, instead of bearing in mind that talents are the great appointed
instruments of usefulness; who have acted as if knowledge were to confer on
woman a kind of fantastic sovereignty, which should exonerate her from female
duties; whereas it is only meant the more eminently to qualify her for the
performance of them. For a woman of real sense will never forget, that while
the greater part of her proper duties are such as the most moderately gifted
may fulfill with credit, (since Providence never makes that to be very
difficult, which is generally necessary), yet the most highly endowed are
equally bound to fulfill them; and the humblest of these offices, performed on
Christian principles, are wholesome for the minds even of the most enlightened,
and tend to the casting down of those high imaginations which women of genius
are too much tempted to indulge.

For instance; ladies whose natural vanity has been aggravated by a false
education, may look down on economy as a vulgar attainment, unworthy of the
attention of an highly cultivated intellect; but this is the false estimate of
a shallow mind. Economy, such as a woman of fortune is called on to practice,
is not merely the petty detail of small daily expenses, the shabby curtailments
and stinted parsimony of a little mind operating on little concerns; but it is
the exercise of a sound judgment exerted in the comprehensive outline of order,
of arrangement, of distribution; of regulations by which alone well governed
societies, great and small, subsist. She who has the best regulated mind will,
other things being equal, have the best regulated family. As in the
superintendence of the universe, wisdom is seen in its effects; and as in the
visible works of Providence that which goes on with such beautiful regularity
is the result not of chance but of design; so that management which seems the
most easy is commonly the consequence of the best concerted plan. A sound
economy is a sound understanding brought into action: it is calculation
realized; it is the doctrine of proportion reduced to practice; it is
foreseeing consequences and guarding against them; it is expecting
contingencies and being prepared for them. The difference is, that to a narrow
minded vulgar oeconomist the details are continually present; she is
overwhelmed by their weight, and is perpetually bespeaking your pity for her
labors and your praise for her exertions; she is afraid you will not see how
much she is harrassed. Little events, and trivial operations, engross her whole
soul; while a woman of sense, having provided for their probable recurrence,
guards against the inconveniences, without being disconcerted by the casual
obstructions which they offer to her general scheme.

Superior talents however are not so common, as, by their frequency, to offer
much disturbance to the general course of human affairs; and many a lady, who
tacitly accuses herself of neglecting her ordinary duties because she is a
genius, will perhaps be found often to accuse herself as unjustly as good St.
Jerome, when he laments that he was beaten by the Angel for being too
Ciceronian in his style See Dr. Owen.
.

The truth is, women who are so puffed up with the conceit of talents as to
neglect the plain duties of life, will not frequently be found to be women of
the best abilities. And here may the author be allowed the gratification of
observing, that those women of real genius and extensive knowledge, whose
friendship have conferred honor and happiness on her own life, have been in
general eminent for economy, and the practice of domestic virtues; and greatly
superior to the poor affectation of despising the duties and the knowledge of
common life.

A romantic girl with a pretension to sentiment, which her still more ignorant
friends mistake for genius, (for in the empire of the blind the one-eyed are
kings) and possessing something of a natural ear, has perhaps in her childhood
exhausted all the images of grief and love, and fancy, picked up in her
desultory poetical reading, in an elegy on a sick linnet or a dead lap-dog; she
begins thence-forward to be considered as a prodigy in her little circle;
surrounded with flatterers, she has no opportunity of getting to know that her
same is derived not from her powers, but her position; and that when an
impartial critic shall have made all the necessary deductions, such as -- that
she is a neighbor, that she is a relation, that she is a female, that she is
young, that she has had no advantages, that she is pretty perhaps -- when her
verses come to be stripped of all their extraneous appendages, and the fair
author is driven off her 'vantage-ground of partiality, sex, and favor, she
will commonly sink to the level of ordinary capacities; while those quieter
women, who have meekly sat down in the humble shades of prose and prudence, by
a patient perseverance in rational studies, rise afterward much higher in the
scale of intellect, and acquire a stock of sound knowledge for far better
purposes than mere display. And, though it may seem a contradiction, yet it
will generally be found true, that girls who take to scribbling are the least
studious. They early acquire a false confidence in their own unassisted powers;
it becomes more gratifying to their natural vanity to be always pouring out
their minds on paper, than to be drawing into them fresh ideas from richer
sources. The original stock, small perhaps at first, is soon spent; and the
subsequent efforts grow more and more faint, if the mind which is continually
exhausting itself, be not also continually replenished; till the latter
compositions become little more than reproductions of the same images, a little
varied and modified perhaps, and not a little diluted and enfeebled.

These self-taught, and self-dependent scribblers pant for the unmerited praise
of fancy and of genius, while they disdain the commendation of judgment,
knowledge, and perseverance which would be within their reach. To extort
admiration they are accustomed to boast of an impossible rapidity in composing;
and while they insinuate how little time their performances cost them, they
intend you should infer how perfect they might have made them had they
condescended to the drudgery of application. They take superfluous pains to
convince you that there was neither learning nor labor employed in the work
for which they solicit your praise: the judicious eye too soon perceives it!
though it does not perceive that native strength and mother-wit, which in works
of real genius make some amends for the negligence, which yet they do not
justify. But instead of extolling these effusions for their facility, it would
be kind in friends rather to blame them for their crudeness: and when the young
pretenders are eager to prove in how short a time such a poem has been struck
off, it would be well to regret that they had not either taken a longer time,
or forborne from writing at all; as in the former case the work would have been
less defective, and in the latter the writer would have discovered more
humility and self-distrust.

A general capacity for knowledge, and the cultivation of the understanding at
large, will always put a woman into the best state for directing her pursuits
into those particular channels which her destination in life may afterward
require. But she should be carefully instructed that her talents are only means
to a still higher attainment, and that she is not to rest in them as an end;
that merely to exercise them as instruments for the acquisition of fame and the
promoting of pleasure, is subversive of her delicacy as a woman, and contrary
to the spirit of a christian.

Study, therefore, is to be considered as the means of strengthening the mind,
and of fitting it for higher duties, just as exercise is to be considered as an
instrument for strengthening the body for the same end. And the valetudinarian
who is religiously punctual in the observance of his daily rides to promote his
health, and rests in that as an end, without so much as intending to make his
improved health an instrument of increased usefulness, acts on the same low and
selfish principle with her who reads merely for pleasure and for fame, without
any design of devoting the more enlarged and invigorated mind to the glory of
the Giver.

But there is one human consideration which would perhaps more effectually tend
to damp in an aspiring woman the ardours of literary vanity (I speak not of
real genius) than any which she will derive from motives of humility, or
propriety, or religion; which is, that in the judgment passed on her
performances, she will have to encounter the mortifying circumstance of having
her sex always taken into account, and her highest exertions will probably be
received with the qualified approbation, that it is really extraordinary for a
woman. Men of learning, who are naturally inclined to estimate works in
proportion as they appear to be the result of art, study, and institution, are
apt to consider even the happier performances of the other sex as the
spontaneous productions of a fruitful but shallow soil; and to give them the
same sort of praise which we bestow on certain sallads, which often draw from
us a sort of wondering commendation; not indeed as being worth much in
themselves, but because by the lightness of the earth, and a happy knack of the
gardener, these indifferent cresses spring up in a night, and therefore one is
ready to wonder they are no worse.

As to men of sense, however, they need be the less inimical to the improvement
of the other sex, as they themselves will be sure to be gainers by it; the
enlargement of the female understanding being the most likely means to put an
end to those petty cavils and contentions for equality which female smatterers
so anxiously maintain. I say smatterers, for between the first class of both
sexes the question is much more rarely and always more temperately agitated.
Cooperation and not competition is indeed the clear principle we wish to see
reciprocally adopted by those higher minds in each sex which really approximate
the nearest to each other. The more a woman's understanding is improved, the
more obviously she will discern that there can be no happiness in any society
where there is a perpetual struggle for power; and the more her judgment is
rectified, the more accurate views will she take of the station she herself was
born to fill, and the more readily will she accommodate herself to it; while
the most vulgar and ill-informed women are ever most inclined to be tyrants,
and those always struggle most vehemently for power, who would not fail to make
the worst use of it when attained. Thus the weakest reasoners are always the
most positive in debate; and the cause is obvious, for they are unavoidably
driven to maintain their pretensions by violence who want arguments and reasons
to prove that they are in the right.

There is this singular difference between a woman vain of her wit, and a woman
vain of her beauty; that the beauty, while she is anxiously alive to her own
fame, is often indifferent enough about the beauty of other women; and provided
she herself is sure of your admiration, she does not insist on your thinking
that there is another handsome woman in the world: while she who is vain of her
genius, more liberal at least in her vanity, is jealous for the honor of her
whole sex, and contends for the equality of their pretensions, in which she
feels that her own are involved. The beauty vindicates her own rights, the wit,
the rights of women; the beauty fights for herself, the wit for a party; and
while the more selfish though moderate beauty would but be Queen for life,
the public spirited wit struggles to abrogate the Salique law of intellect,
and to enthrone a whole sex of Queens.


At the revival of letters in the sixteenth and the following century, the
controversy about this equality was agitated with more warmth than wisdom; and
the process was instituted and carried on, on the part of the female
complainant, with that sort of acrimony which always raises a suspicion of the
justice of any cause. The novelty of that knowledge which was then bursting out
from the dawn of a long dark night, kindled all the ardours of the female mind,
and the ladies fought zealously for a portion of that renown which the
reputation of learning was beginning to bestow. Besides their own pens, they
had for their advocates all those needy authors who had any thing to hope from
their power, their riches, or their influence; and so giddy did some of these
literary ladies become by the adulation of their numerous panegyrists, that
through these repeated draughts of inebriating praise, they grew to despise the
equality for which they had before contended, as a state below their merit and
unworthy of their acceptance. They now scorned to litigate for what they
already thought they so obviously possessed, and nothing short of the palm of
superiority was at length considered as adequate to their growing claims. When
court-ladies and princesses were the candidates, they could not long want
champions to support their cause; by these champions female authorities were
produced as if paramount to facts; quotations from these female authors were
considered as proofs, and their point blank assertions stood for solid and
irrefragable arguments. In those parasites who offered this homage to female
genius, the homage was therefore the effect neither of truth, nor of justice,
nor of conviction. It arose rather out of gratitude, or it was a reciprocation
of flattery; it was sometimes vanity, it was often distress, which prompted the
adulation; it was the want of a patroness; it was the want of a dinner. When a
lady, and especially as it then often happened, when one who was noble or
royal, sat with gratifying docility at the foot of a professor's chair; when
she admired the philosopher, or took upon her to protect the theologian, whom
his rivals among his own sex were tearing to pieces, what could the grateful
professor or delighted theologian do less in return than make the apotheosis of
her who had had the penetration to discern his merit and the spirit to reward
it? Thus in fact it was not so much her vanity as his own that he was often
flattering, though she was the dupe of her more deep and designing panegyrist.

But it is a little unlucky for the perpetuity of that fame which the encomiast
had made over to his patroness, in the never-dying records of his verses and
orations, that in the revolution of a century or two the very names of the
flattered are now almost as little known as the works of the flatterers. Their
memorial is perished with them: See Brantome, Pere le Moine, Mons. Thomas, etc.
an instructive lesson, that whoever bestows, or assumes a reputation
disproportioned to the merit of the claimant, will find it as little durable as
solid. For this literary warfare which engaged such troops of the second-hand
authors of the age in question in such continual skirmishes, and not a few
pitched battles, which provoked so much rancour, so many volumes, and so little
wit; so much vanity and so much flattery, produced no useful or lasting effect.
Those who promised themselves that their names would outlive "one half of round
eternity," did not reach the end of the century in which the boast was made;
and those who offered the incense, and those who greedily snuffed up its fumes,
are buried in the same blank oblivion!

But when the temple of Janus seemed to have been closed, or when at worst the
peace was only occasionally broken by a slight and random shot from the hand of
some single straggler; it appears that though open rebellion had ceased, yet
the female claim had not been renounced; it had only (if we may change the
metaphor) lain in abeyance. The contest has recently been revived with added
fury, and with multiplied exactions; for whereas the ancient demand was merely
a kind of imaginary prerogative, a speculative importance, a mere titular
right, a shadowy claim to a few unreal acres of Parnassian territory; the
revived contention has taken a more serious turn, and brings forward political
as well as intellectual pretensions: and among the innovations of this
innovating period, the imposing term of rights has been produced to sanctify
the claim of our female pretenders, with a view not only to rekindle in the
minds of women a presumptuous vanity dishonorable to their sex, but produced
with a view to excite in their hearts an impious discontent with the post which
God has assigned them in this world.

But they little understand the true interests of woman who would lift her from
the important duties of her allotted station, to fill with fantastic dignity a
loftier but less appropriate niche. Nor do they understand her true happiness,
who seek to annihilate distinctions from which she derives advantages, and to
attempt innovations which would depreciate her real value. Each sex has its
proper excellencies, which would be lost were they melted down into the common
character by the fusion of the new philosophy. Why should we do away
distinctions which increase the mutual benefits and enhance the satisfactions
of life? Whence, but by carefully preserving the original marks of difference
stamped by the hand of the Creator, would be derived the superior advantage of
mixed society? Have men no need to have their rough angles filed off, and their
harshnesses and asperities smoothed and polished by assimilating with beings of
more softness and refinement? Are the ideas of women naturally so very
judicious, are their principles so invincibly firm, are their views so
perfectly correct, are their judgments so completely exact, that there is
occasion for no additional weight, no superadded strength, no increased
clearness, none of that enlargement of mind, none of that additional
invigoration which may be derived from the aids of the stronger sex? What
identity could advantageously supersede an enlivening opposition and an
interesting variety of character? Is it not then more wise as well as more
honorable to move contentedly in the plain path which Providence has obviously
marked out to the sex, and in which custom has for the most part rationally
confirmed them, than to stray awkwardly, unbecomingly, and unsuccessfully, in a
forbidden road? Is it not desirable to be the lawful possessors of a lesser
domestic territory, rather than the turbulent usurpers of a wider foreign
empire? to be good originals, rather than bad imitators? to be the best thing
of one's own kind, rather than an inferior thing even if it were of an higher
kind? to be excellent women rather than indifferent men?

Is the author then undervaluing her own sex? -- No. It is her zeal for their
true interests which leads her to oppose their imaginary rights. It is her
regard for their happiness which makes her endeavor to cure them of a feverish
thirst for fame. A little Christian humility and sober-mindedness are worth all
the wild metaphysical discussion, which has unsettled the peace of vain women,
and forfeited the respect of reasonable men. And the most elaborate definition
of ideal rights, and the most hardy measures for attaining them, are of less
value in the eyes of a truly amiable woman, than that meek and quiet spirit,
which is in the sight of God of great price.

Natural propensities best mark the designations of Providence as to their
application. The fin was not more clearly bestowed on the fish that he should
swim, nor the wing given to the bird that he should fly, than superior strength
of body and a firmer texture of mind was given to man, that he might preside in
the deep and daring scenes of action and of council; in government, in arms, in
science, in commerce, and in those professions which demand a higher reach, and
a wider range of powers. The true value of woman is not diminished by the
imputation of inferiority in these respects; she has other requisites better
adadted to answer the ends and purposes of her being, by HIM who does all
things well; who suits the agent to the action; who accommodates the instrument
to the work.

Let her not then view with pining envy the keen satyrist, hunting vice through
all the doublings and windings of the heart; the sagacious politician, leading
senates, and directing the fate of empires; the acute lawyer, detecting the
obliquities of fraud; and the skilful dramatist, exposing the pretensions of
folly: but let her ambition be consoled by reflecting, that those who thus
excel, to all that Nature bestows and books can teach, must add besides that
consummate knowledge of the world to which a delicate woman has no fair
avenues, and which even if she could attain she would never be supposed to have
come honestly by.

In almost all that comes under the description of polite letters, in all that
captivates by imagery or warms by just and affecting sentiment, women are
excellent. They possess in a high degree that delicacy and quickness of
perception and that nice discernment between the beautiful and defective, which
comes under the denomination of taste. Both in composition and action they
excel in details; but they do not so much generalize their ideas as men, nor do
their minds seize a great subject with so large a grasp. They are acute
observers, and accurate judges of life and manners, as far as their own sphere
of observation extends; but they describe a smaller circle. A woman sees the
world, as it were, from a little elevation in her own garden, whence she makes
an exact survey of home scenes, but takes not in that wider range of distant
prospects, which he who stands on a loftier eminence commands. Women have a
certain tact which often enables them to feel what is just more instantaneously
than they can define it. They have an intuitive penetration into character,
bestowed on them by Providence, like the sensitive and tender organs of some
timid animals, as a kind of natural guard to warn of the approach of danger
beings who are often called to act defensively.

In summing up the evidence, if I may so speak, of the different powers of the
sexes, one may venture, perhaps, to assert, that women have equal parts, but
are inferior in wholeness of mind, in the integral understanding: that though a
superior woman may possess single faculties in equal perfection, yet there is
commonly a juster proportion in the mind of a superior man; that if women have
in an equal degree the faculty of fancy which creates images, and the faculty
of memory which collects and stores ideas, they seem not to possess in equal
measure the faculty of comparing, combining, analyzing, and separating these
ideas; that deep and patient thinking which goes to the bottom of a subject;
nor that power of arrangement which knows how to link a thousand connected
ideas in one dependent train, without losing sight of the original idea out of
which the rest grow, and on which they all hang. The female too, wanting
steadiness in her intellectual pursuits, is perpetually turned aside by her
characteristic tastes and feelings. Woman in the career of genius, is the
Atalanta, who will risk losing the race by running out of her road to pick up
the golden apple; while her male competitor, without, perhaps, possessing
greater natural strength or swiftness, will more certainly attain his object,
by direct pursuit, by being less exposed to the seductions of extraneous
beauty, and will win the race, not by excelling in speed, but by despising the
bait. What indisposes even reasonable women to concede in these points is, that
the weakest man instantly lays hold on the concession; and, on the mere ground
of sex, plumes himself on his own individual superiority; inferring, that the
silliest man is superior to the first-rate woman.
.

Here it may be justly enough retorted, that, as it is allowed the education of
women is so defective, the alleged inferiority of their minds may be accounted
for on that ground more justly than by ascribing it to their natural make. And,
indeed there is so much truth in the remark, that till women shall be more
reasonably educated, and till the native growth of their minds shall cease to
be stinted and cramped, we have no juster ground for pronouncing that their
understanding has already reached its highest attainable point, than the
Chinese would have for affirming that their women have attained to the greatest
possible perfection in walking, while the first care is, during their infancy,
to cripple their feet. At least, till the female sex are more carefully
instructed, this question will always remain as undecided as to the degree of
difference between the masculine and feminine understanding, as the question
between the understandings of blacks and whites; for until Africans and
Europeans are put more nearly on a par in the cultivation of their minds, the
shades of distinction, if any there be, between their native powers can never
be fairly ascertained.

And when we see (and who will deny that we see it frequently?) so many women
nobly rising from under all the pressure of a disadvantageous education and a
defective system of society, and exhibiting the most unambiguous marks of a
vigorous understanding, a correct judgment, and a sterling piety, it reminds
one of those shining lights which have now and then burst out through all the
"darkness visible" of the Romish church, have disencumbered themselves from the
gloom of ignorance and shaken off the fetters of prejudice, and risen superior
to all the errors of a corrupt theology.

But whatever characteristical distinctions may exist; whatever inferiority may
be attached to woman from the slighter frame of her body, or the more
circumscribed powers of her mind, from a less systematic education, and from
the subordinate station she is called to fill in life; there is one great and
leading circumstance which raises her importance, and even establishes her
equality. Christianity has exalted women to true and undisputed dignity; in
Christ Jesus, as there is neither "rich nor poor," bond nor free, so there is
neither "male nor female." In the view of that immortality, which is brought to
light by the gospel, she has no superior. Women (to borrow the idea of an
excellent prelate) make up one half of the human race; equally with men
redeemed by the blood of Christ. In this their true dignity consists; here
their best pretensions rest, here their highest claims are allowed.

All disputes then for pre-eminence between the sexes have only for their
object the poor precedence for a few short years, the attention of which would
be better devoted to the duties of life and the interest of eternity.

And as the final hope of the female sex is equal, so are their present means,
perhaps, more favorable, and their opportunities, often, less obstructed than
those of the other sex. In their Christian course women have every superior
advantage, whether we consider the natural make of their minds, their leisure
for acquisition in youth, or their subsequently less exposed mode of life.
Their hearts are naturally soft and flexible, open to impressions of love and
gratitude; their feelings tender and lively: all these are favorable to the
cultivation of a devotional spirit. Yet while we remind them of these benefits,
they will do well to be on their guard lest this very softness and ductility
lay them more open to the seductions of temptation and error.

They have in the native constitution of their minds, as well as from the
relative situations they are called to fill, a certain sense of attachment and
dependence, which is peculiarly favorable to religion. They feel, perhaps,
more intimately the want of a strength which is not their own. Christianity
brings that superinduced strength; it comes in aid of their conscious weakness,
and offers the only true counterpoise to it. Woman, be thou healed of thine
infirmity, is still the heart cheering language of a gracious Savior.

Women also bring to the study of Christianity fewer of those prejudices which
persons of the other sex too often early contract. Men, from their classical
education, acquire a strong partiality for the manners of Pagan antiquity, and
the documents of Pagan philosophy: this, together with the impure taint caught
from the loose descriptions of their poets, and the licentious language even of
their historians, (in whom we reasonably look for more gravity,) often weakens
the good impressions of young men, and at least confuses their ideas of piety,
by mixing them with so much heterogeneous matter. Their very spirits are embued
all the week with the impure follies of a depraved mythology; and it is well if
even on Sundays they get to hear of the "true God, and Jesus Christ whom he has
sent." While women, though struggling with the same natural corruptions, have
commonly less knowledge to unknow, and fewer schemes to unlearn; they have not
to shake off the pride of system, and to disencumber their minds from the
shackles of favorite theories: they do not bring from the porch or the academy
any oppositions of science to obstruct their reception of those pure doctrines
taught on the Mount: doctrines which ought to find a readier entrance into
minds uninfected with the pride of the school of Zeno, or the libertinism of
that of Epicurus.

And as women are naturally more affectionate than fastidious; they are likely
both to read and to hear with a less critical spirit than men: they will not be
on the watch to detect errors, so much as to gather improvement; they have
seldom that hardness which is acquired by dealing deeply in books of
controversy, but are more inclined to works which quicken the devotional
feelings, than to such as awaken a spirit of doubt and skepticism. They are
less disposed to consider the compositions they peruse, as materials on which
to ground objections and answers, than as helps to faith and rules of life.
With these advantages, however, they should also bear in mind that their
impressions being often less abiding, and their reason less open to conviction,
by means of the strong evidences which exist in favor of the truth of
Christianity, they ought therefore, to give the more earnest heed to the things
which they have heard, lest at any time they should let them slip. Women are
also from their domestic habits, in possession of more leisure and tranquillity
for religious pursuits, as well as secured from those difficulties and
temptations to which men are exposed in the tumult of a bustling world. Their
lives are more uniform, less agitated by the passions, the businesses, the
contentions, the shock of opinions and of interests which convulse the world.

If we have denied them the talents which might lead them to excel as lawyers,
they are preserved from the peril of having their principles warped by that too
indiscriminate defense of right and wrong, to which the professors of the law
are exposed. If we should question their title to eminence as mathematicians,
they are happily exempt from the danger to which men devoted to that science
are said to be liable; namely, that of looking for demonstration on subjects,
which, by their very nature, are incapable of affording it. If they are less
conversant in the powers of nature, the structure of the human frame, and the
knowledge of the heavenly bodies, than philosophers, physicians, and
astronomers; they are, however, delivered from the error into which many of
each of these have sometimes fallen, I mean from the fatal habit of resting in
second causes, instead of referring all to the first; instead of making the
heavens declare the glory of God, and proclaim his handy work; instead of
concluding, when they observe, how fearfully and wonderfully we are made,
mavelous are thy works, O Lord, and that my soul knows right well.

And let the weaker sex take comfort, that in their very exemption from
privileges, which they are sometimes disposed to envy, consists their security
and their happiness. If they enjoy not the distinctions of public life and high
offices, do they not escape the responsibility attached to them, and the
mortification of being dismissed from them? If they have no voice in
deliberative assemblies, do they not avoid the load of duty connected with such
privileges? Preposterous pains have been taken to excite in women an uneasy
jealousy, that their talents are neither rewarded with public honors nor
emoluments in life; nor with inscriptions, statues, and mausoleums after death.
It has been absurdly represented to them as a hardship, that while they are
expected to perform duties, they must yet be contented to relinquish honors,
and must unjustly be compelled to renounce fame while they must sedulously
labor to deserve it.

But for Christian women to act on the low views suggested to them by their
ill-judging panegyrists; and to look up with a giddy head and a throbbing heart
to honors and remunerations, so little suited to the wants and capacities of
an immortal spirit, would be no less ridiculous than if Christian heroes should
look back with envy on the pagan rewards of ovations, oak garlands, parsley
crowns, and laurel wreaths. The Christian hope more than reconciles Christian
women to these petty privations, by substituting a nobler prize for their
ambition, the prize of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus; by
substituting, for that popular and fluctuating voice, which may cry "Hosanna"
and "crucify" in a breath, that "favor of God which is eternal life."

If women should lament the disadvantages attached to their sex, that their
character is of so delicate a texture as to be sullied by the slightest breath
of calumny, and that the stain is indelible; yet are they not led by that very
circumstance more instinctively to shrink from all those irregularities to
which the loss of character is so much expected to be attached; and to shun
with keener circumspection the most distant approach toward the confines of
danger? Let them not lament it as a hardship, but account it to be a privilege,
that the delicacy of their sex impels them more scrupulously to avoid the very
appearance of evil, and that the consciousness of their danger serves to secure
their purity, by placing them at a greater distance from the evil itself.

Though it be one main object of this little work, rather to lower than to
raise any desire of celebrity in the female heart; yet I would awaken it to a
just sensibility to honest fame: I would call on women to reflect that our
religion has not only made them heirs to a blessed immortality hereafter, but
has greatly raised them in the scale of being here, by lifting them to an
importance in society unknown to the most polished ages of antiquity. The
religion of Christ has even bestowed a degree of renown on the sex beyond what
any other religion ever did. Perhaps there are hardly so many virtuous women
(for I reject the long catalogue whom their vices have transferred from
oblivion to infamy) named in all the pages of Greek or Roman History, as are
handed down to eternal fame, in a few of those short chapters with which the
great Apostle to the Gentiles has concluded his epistles to his converts. Of
"devout and honorable women," the sacred scriptures record "not a few." Some
of the most affecting scenes, the most interesting transactions, and the most
touching conversations which are recorded of the Savior of the world, passed
with women. They are the first remarked as having ministered to him of their
substance. Theirs was the praise of not abandoning their despised Redeemer when
he was led to execution, and under all the hopeless circumstances of his
ignominious death; they appear to have been the last attending at his tomb, and
the first on the morning when he arose from it. Theirs was the privilege of
receiving the earliest consolation from their risen Lord; theirs was the honor
of being first commissioned to announce his glorious resurrection to the world.
And even to furnish heroic confessors, devoted saints, and unshrinking martyrs
to the Church of Christ, has not been the exclusive honor of the bolder sex.

CHAP. XIV.
CONVERSATION. -- Hints suggested on the subject. -- On the tempers and
dispositions to be introduced in it. -- Errors to be avoided. -- Vanity under
various shapes the cause of those errors.

THE sexes will naturally desire to appear to each other, such as each believes
the other will best like; their conversation will act reciprocally; and each
sex will appear more or less rational as they perceive it will more or less
recommend them to the other. It is therefore to be regretted, that many men,
even of distinguished sense and learning, are so apt to consider the society of
ladies, as a scene in which to rest their understandings, rather than to
exercise them; while ladies in return, are too much addicted to make their
court by lending themselves to this spirit of trifling; they often avoid to
make use of what abilities they have; and affect to talk below their natural
and acquired powers of mind; considering it as a tacit and welcome flattery to
the understanding of men, to renounce the exercise of their own.

Now since tastes and principles thus mutually operate; men, by keeping up
conversation to its proper standard, would not only call into exercise the
powers of mind which women actually possess; but would even awaken in them new
energies which they do not know they possess; and men of sense would find their
account in doing this, for their own talents would be more highly rated by
companions who were better able to appreciate them. And, on the other hand, if
young women found it did not often recommend them in the eyes of those whom
they might wish to please, to be frivolous and superficial, they would become
more sedulous in correcting their own habits; whenever fashionable women
indicate a relish for instructive conversation, men will not be apt to hazard
what is vain or unprofitable; much less will they ever presume to bring forward
what is loose or corrupt, where some signal has not been previously given, that
it will be acceptable, or at least that it will be pardoned.

Ladies commonly bring into company minds already too much relaxed by petty
pursuits, rather than overstrained by intense application; the littleness of
the employments in which they are usually engaged, does not so exhaust their
spirits as to make them stand in need of that relaxation from company which
severe application or overwhelming business makes requisite for studious or
public men. The due consideration of this circumstance might serve to bring the
sexes more nearly on a level in society; and each might meet the other half
way; for that degree of lively and easy conversation which is a necessary
refreshment to the learned and the busy, would not decrease in pleasantness by
being made of so rational a cast as would yet somewhat raise the minds of
women, who commonly seek society as a scene of pleasure, not as a refuge from
intense thought or exhausting labor.

It is a disadvantage even to those women who keep the best company, that it is
unhappily almost established into a system, by the other sex, to postpone every
thing like instructive discourse till the ladies are withdrawn; their retreat
serving as a kind of signal for the exercise of intellect. And in the few cases
in which it happens that any important discussion takes place in their
presence, they are for the most part considered as having little interest in
serious subjects. Strong truths, whenever such happen to be addressed to them,
are either diluted with flattery, or kept back in part, or softened to their
taste; or if the ladies express a wish for information on any point, they are
put off with a compliment, instead of a reason; and are considered as beings
who are not expected to see and to judge of things as they really exist.

Do we then wish to see the ladies, whose opportunities leave them so
incompetent, and the modesty of whose sex ought never to allow them even to be
as shining as they are able; -- do we wish to see them take the lead in
metaphysical disquisitions? Do we wish them to plunge into the depths of
theological polemics, And find no end in wandering mazes lost?
Do we wish them to revive the animosities of the Bangorian controversy, or to
decide the process between the Jesuits and the five propositions of Jansenius?
Do we wish to enthrone them in the professor's chair, to deliver oracles,
harangues, and dissertations? to weigh the merits of every new production in
the scales of Quintilian, or to regulate the unities of dramatic composition by
Aristotle's clock? Or renouncing those foreign aids, do we desire to behold
them, inflated with their original powers, laboring to strike out sparks of
wit, with a restless anxiety to shine, which generally fails, and with a
labored affectation to please, which never pleases? Diseurs de bons mots,
fades caracteres!


All this be far from them! -- But we do wish to see the conversation of
well-bred women rescued from vapid common places, from uninteresting tattle,
from trite and hackneyed communications, from frivolous earnestness, from false
sensibility, from a warm interest about things of no moment, and an
indifference to topics the most important; from a cold vanity, from the
overflowings of self-love, exhibiting itself under the smiling mask of an
engaging flattery, and from all the factitious manners of artificial
intercourse. We do wish to see the time passed in polished and intelligent
society, considered among the beneficial, as well as the pleasant portions of
our existence, and not consigned over, as it too frequently is, to premeditated
trifling, or systematic unprofitableness. Let us not, however, be
misunderstood; it is not meant to prescribe that they should affect to talk on
lofty subjects, so much as to suggest that they should bring good sense,
simplicity, and precision into those common subjects, of which, after all, both
the business and the conversation of mankind is in a great measure made up.

It is too well known how much the dread of imputed pedantry keeps off any
thing that verges toward learned, and the terror of imputed enthusiasm, staves
off any thing that approaches to serious conversation, so that the two topics
which peculiarly distinguish us, as rational and immortal beings, are by
general consent in a good degree banished from the society of rational and
immortal creatures. But we might almost as consistently give up the comforts of
fire because a few persons have been burnt, and the benefit of water because
some others have been drowned, as relinquish the enjoyments of intellectual,
and the blessings of religious intercourse, because the learned world has
sometimes been infested with pedants, and the religious world with fanatics.

As in the momentous times in which we live, it is next to impossible to pass
an evening in company, but the talk will so inevitably revert to politics,
that, without any premeditated design, every one present shall infallibly get
to know to which side the other inclines; why, in the far higher concern of
eternal things, should we so carefully shun every offered opportunity of
bearing even a casual testimony to the part we espouse in religion? Why, while
we make it a sort of point of conscience to leave no doubt on the mind of a
stranger, whether we adopt the party of Pit or Fox, shall we choose to leave
it very problematical whether we belong to God or Baal? Why, in religion, as
well as in politics, should we not act like people who, having their all at
stake, cannot forbear now and then adverting for a moment to the object of
their grand concern, and dropping, at least, an incidental intimation of the
side to which they belong.

Even the news of the day, in such an eventful period as the present, may lend
frequent occasions to a woman of principle, to declare, without parade, her
faith in a moral Governor of the world; her trust in a particular Providence;
her belief in the Divine Omnipotence; her confidence in the power of God, in
educing good from evil, in his employing wicked nations, not as favorites but
instruments; her persuasion that present success is no proof of the divine
favor; in short, some intimation that she is not ashamed to declare that her
mind is under the influence of christian faith and principle. A general
concurrence in exhibiting this spirit of decided faith and holy trust, would
inconceivably discourage that pert infidelity which is ever on the watch to
produce itself: and, as we have already observed, if women, who derive
authority from their rank or talents, did but reflect how their sentiments are
repeated and their authority quoted, they would be so on their guard, that
general society might become a scene of general improvement, and the young, who
are looking for models on which to fashion themselves, would be ashamed of
exhibiting any thing like levity, or skepticism, or profaneness.

Let it be understood, that it is not meant to intimate that serious subjects
should make up the bulk of conversation; this, as it is impossible, would also
often be improper. It is not intended to suggest that they should be abruptly
introduced, or unsuitably prolonged; but only that they should not be
systematically shunned, nor the brand of fanaticism be fixed on the person who,
with whatever propriety, hazards the introduction of them. It is evident,
however, that this general dread of serious topics arises a good deal from an
ignorance of the true nature of religion; people avoid it on the principle
expressed by the vulgar phrase of the danger of playing with edge tools. They
conceive of it as something which involves controversy, and dispute, and
mischief; something of an inflammatory nature, which is to stir up ill humors;
as of a sort of party business which sets friends at variance. So much is this
notion adopted, that I have seen announced two works of considerable merit, in
which it was stipulated as an attraction, that religion, as being likely to
excite anger and party distinctions, should be carefully excluded. Such is the
worldly idea of the spirit of that religion, whose direct object it was to
bring "peace and good will to men!"

Women too little live or converse up to their understandings; and however we
have deprecated affectation or pedantry, let it be remembered, that both in
reading and conversing the understanding gains more by stretching, than
stooping. If by exerting itself it may not attain to all it desires, yet it
will be sure to gain something. The mind, by always applying itself to objects
below its level, contracts and shrinks itself to the size, and lowers itself to
the level, of the object about which it is conversant: while the mind which is
active expands and raises itself, grows larger by exercise, abler by diffusion,
and richer by communication.

But the taste of general society is not favorable to improvement. The
seriousness with which the most frivolous subjects are agitated, and the levity
with which the most serious are dispatched, bear a pretty exact proportion to
each other. Society too is a sort of magic lanthorn; the scene is perpetually
shifting. In this incessant change, the evanescent fashion of the present
minute, which, while in many it leads to the cultivation of real knowledge, has
also sometimes led even the gay and idle to the affection of mixing a
sprinkling of science with the mass of dissipation. The ambition of appearing
to be well-informed breaks out even in those triflers who will not spare time
from their pleasurable pursuits sufficient for acquiring that knowledge, of
which, however, the reputation is so desirable. A little smattering of
philosophy often dignifies the pursuits of the day, without rescuing them from
the vanities of the night. A course of lectures (that admirable assistant for
enlightening the understanding) is not seldom resorted to as a means to
substitute the appearance of knowledge for the fatigue of application; but
where this valuable help is attended merely like any other public exhibition,
and is not furthered by correspondent reading at home, it often serves to set
off the reality of ignorance with the affectation of skill. But instead of
producing in conversation a few reigning scientific terms, with a familiarity
and readiness, which Amaze the unlearned, and make the learned smile,
would it not be more modest even for those who are better informed, to avoid
the common use of technical terms whenever the idea can be as well conveyed
without them? For it argues no real ability to know the names of tools; the
ability lies in knowing their use: and while it is in the thing, and not in the
term, that real knowledge consists, the charge of pedantry is attached to the
use of the term, which would not attach to the knowledge of the science.

In the faculty of speaking well, ladies have such a happy promptitude of
turning their slender advantages to account, that there are many who, though
they have never been taught a rule of syntax, yet, by a quick facility in
profiting from the best books and the best company, hardly ever violate one;
and who often exhibit an elegant and perspicuous arrangement of style, without
having studied any of the laws of composition. Every kind of knowledge which
appears to be the result of observation, reflection, and natural taste, sits
gracefully on women. Yet on the other hand it sometimes happens, that ladies of
no contemptible natural parts are too ready to produce, not only pedantic
expressions, but crude notions; and still oftener to bring forward obvious and
hackneyed remarks, which float on the very surface of a subject, with the
imposing air of recent invention, and all the vanity of conscious discovery.
This is because their acquirements have not been woven into their minds by
early instruction; what knowledge they have gotten stands out as it were above
the very surface of their minds, like the appliquee of the embroiderer, instead
of having been interwoven with the growth of the piece, so as to have become a
part of the stuff. They did not, like men, acquire what they know while the
texture was forming. Perhaps no better preventive could be devised for this
literary vanity, than early instruction: that woman would be less likely to be
vain of her knowledge who did not remember the time when she was ignorant.
Knowledge that is burnt in, if I may so speak, is seldom obtrusive, rarely
impertinent.

Their reading also has probably consisted much in abridgments from larger
works, as was observed in a former chapter; this makes a readier talker, but a
shallower thinker, than the perusal of books of more bulk. By these scanty
sketches their critical spirit has been excited, while their critical powers
have not been formed. For in those crippled mutilations they have seen nothing
of that just proportion of parts, that skilful arrangement of the plan, and
that artful distribution of the subject, which, while they prove the master
hand of the writer, serve also to form the taste of the reader, far more than a
disjointed skeleton, or a beautiful feature or two can do. The instruction of
women is also too much drawn from the scanty and penurious sources of short
writings of the essay kind: this, when it comprises the best part of a person's
reading, makes a smatterer and spoils a scholar; for though it supplies current
talk, yet it does not make a full mind; it does not furnish a storehouse of
materials to stock the understanding, neither does it accustom the mind to any
trains of reflection: for the subjects, besides being each succinctly, and, on
account of this brevity, superficially treated, are distinct and disconnected:
they arise out of no concatenation of ideas, nor any dependent series of
deduction. Yet on this pleasant but desultory reading, the mind which has not
been trained to severer exercise, loves to repose itself in a sort of
creditable indolence, instead of stretching its powers in the wholesome labor
of consequent investigation. The writer cannot be supposed desirous of
depreciating the value of those many beautiful periodical essays which adorn
our language. But, perhaps, it might be better to regale the mind with them
singly, at different times, than to read at the same sitting, a multitude of
short pieces on dissimilar and unconnected topics, by way of getting through
the book.


I am not discouraging study at a late period of life, or even slender
knowledge; information is good at whatever period and in whatever degree it be
acquired. But in such cases it should be attended with peculiar humility: and
the new possessor should bear in mind, that what is fresh to her has been long
known to others; and she should therefore be aware of advancing as novel that
which is common, and obtruding as rare that which every body possesses. Some
ladies are eager to exhibit proofs of their reading, though at the expense of
their judgment, and will introduce in conversation quotations quite irrelevant
to the matter in hand, because they happen at the instant to recur to their
recollection, or were, perhaps, found in the book they have just been reading.
Unappropriate quotations or strained analogy may show reading, but they do not
show taste. That just and happy allusion which knows by a word how to awaken a
corresponding image, or to excite in the hearer the idea which fills the mind
of the speaker, shows less pedantry and more taste than bare citations; and a
mind imbued with elegant knowledge will inevitably betray the opulence of its
resources, even on topics which do not relate to science or literature. Well
informed persons will easily be discovered to have read the best books, though
they are not always detailing catalogues of authors. Though honey owes its
exquisite taste to the fragrance of the sweetest flowers, yet the skill of the
little artificer appears in this, that the delicious stores are so admirably
worked up, as not to taste individually of any of those sweets of the very
essence of which it is compounded. But true judgment will detect the infusion
which true modesty will not display; and even common subjects passing through a
cultivated understanding borrow a flavor of its richness. A power of apt
selection is more valuable than any power of general retention; and an apposite
remark, which shoots straight to the point, demands higher powers of mind than
an hundred simple acts of memory: for the business of the memory is only to
store up materials which the understanding is to mix and work up with its
native faculties, and which the judgment is to bring out and apply. But young
women who have more vivacity than sense, and more vanity than vivacity, often
risk the charge of absurdity to escape that of ignorance, and will even compare
two authors who are totally unlike, rather than miss the occasion to show that
they have read both.

Among the arts to spoil conversation, some ladies possess that of suddenly
diverting it from the channel in which it was beneficially flowing, because
some word used by the person who was speaking has accidentally struck out a new
train of thinking in their own minds, and not because the general idea
expressed has struck out a corresponding idea, which sort of collision is
indeed the way of eliciting the true fire. Young ladies, whose sprightliness
has not been disciplined by a correct education, consider how things may be
prettily said, rather than how they may be prudently or seasonably spoken; and
hazard being thought wrong, or rash, or vain, for the chance of being reckoned
pleasant. The flowers of rhetoric captivate them more than the justest
deductions of reason; and to repel an argument they arm themselves with a
metaphor. Those also who do not aim so high as eloquence, are often surprised
that you refuse to accept of a prejudice instead of a reason; they are apt to
take up with a probability in place of a demonstration, and cheaply put you off
with an assertion when you are requiring a proof. The same mode of education
renders them also impatient of opposition; and if they happen to possess
beauty, and to be vain of it, they may be tempted to consider that as an
additional proof of their being always in the right. In this case, they will
not ask you to submit your judgment to the force of their argument, so much as
to the authority of their charms.

The same fault in the mind, strengthened by the same cause, (a neglected
education,) leads lively women often to pronounce on a question without
examining it: on any given point they seldomer doubt than men; not because they
are more clear sighted, but because they have not been accustomed to look into
a subject long enough to discover its depths and its intricacies; and not
discerning its difficulties, they conclude that it has none. Is it a
contradiction to say, that they seem at once to be quick-sighted and
short-sighted? What they see at all, they commonly see at once; a little
difficulty discourages them; and, having caught a hasty glimpse of a subject,
they rush to this conclusion, that either there is no more to be seen, or that
what is behind will not pay them for the trouble of searching. They pursue
their object eagerly, but not regularly; rapidly, but not pertinaciously; for
they want that obstinate patience of investigation which grows stouter by
repulse. What they have not attained, they do not believe exists; what they
cannot seize at once, they persuade themselves is not worth having.

Is a subject of moment started in company? While the more sagacious are
deliberating on its difficulties, and viewing it under all its aspects, in
order to form a competent judgment before they decide, you will often find the
most superficial woman present determine the matter without hesitation. Not
seeing the perplexities in which the question is involved, she wonders at the
want of penetration in him whose very penetration keeps him silent. She
secretly despises the dull perception and slow decision of him who is patiently
untying the knot which she fancies she exhibits more dexterity by cutting. By
this shallow sprightliness, the person whose opinion was best worth having is
discouraged from delivering it, and an important subject is dismissed without
discussion, by this inconsequent flippancy and voluble rashness. It is this
abundance of florid talk, from superficial matter, which has brought on so many
of the sex the charge of inverting the Apostle's precept, and being swift to
speak, slow to hear.

For, if the great Roman Orator could observe, that silence was so important a
part of conversation, that "there was not only an art but an eloquence in it,"
how peculiarly does the remark apply to the modesty of youthful females! But
the silence of listless ignorance, and the silence of sparkling intelligence,
are two things almost as obviously distinct, as the wisdom and the folly of the
tongue. An inviolable and marked attention may show, that a woman is pleased
with a subject, and an illuminated countenance may prove that she understands
it, almost as unequivocally as language itself could do; and this, with a
modest question, is in many cases as large a share of the conversation as it is
decorous for feminine delicacy to take. It is also as flattering an
encouragement as men of sense require, for pursuing such topics in the presence
of women, which they would be more disposed to do, did they oftener gain by it
the attention which it is natural to wish to excite.

Yet do we not sometimes see an impatience to be heard (nor is it a feminine
failing only) which good breeding can scarcely subdue? And even when these
incorrigible talkers are compelled to be silent, is it not evident that they
are not listening to what is said, but are only thinking of what they
themselves shall say when they can seize the first lucky interval for which
they are so narrowly watching?

But conversation must not be considered as a stage for the display of our
talents, so much as a field for the exercise and improvement of our virtues; as
a means for promoting the glory of our Creator, and the good and happiness of
our fellow creatures. Well-bred and intelligent Christians are not, when they
join in society, to consider themselves as entering the lists like intellectual
prize-fighters, in order to exhibit their own vigor and dexterity, to
discomfit their adversary, and to bear away the palm of victory. Truth and not
triumph should be the object; and there are few occasions in life, in which we
are more unremittingly called upon to watch ourselves narrowly, and to resist
the assaults of various temptations, than in conversation. Vanity, jealousy,
envy, misrepresentation, resentment, disdain, levity, impatience, insincerity,
will in turn solicit to be gratified. Constantly to struggle against the desire
of being thought more wise, more witty, and more knowing, than those with whom
we associate, demands the incessant exertion of Christian vigilance, a
vigilance which the generality are so far from suspecting necessary in the
intercourse of common society, that cheerful conversation is rather considered
as an exemption and release from it, than as an additional obligation to it.

But society, as was observed before, is not a stage on which to throw down our
gauntlet, and prove our own prowess by the number of falls we give to our
adversary; so far from it, good breeding as well as Christianity, considers as
an indispensable requisite for conversation, the disposition to bring forward
to notice any talent in others, which their own modesty, or conscious
inferiority would lead them to keep back. To do this with effect requires a
penetration exercised to discern merit, and a generous candor which delights
in drawing it out. There are few who cannot converse tolerably on some one
topic; what that is, we should try to find out, and in general introduce that
topic, though to the suppression of any one on which we ourselves are supposed
to excel: and however superior we may be in other respects to the persons in
question, we may, perhaps, in that particular point, improve by them; and if we
do not gain information, we shall at least gain a wholesome exercise to our
humility and self-denied; we shall be restraining our own impetuosity; we
shall, if we take this course on just occasions only, and so as to beware lest
we gratify the vanity of others, be giving confidence to a doubting or
cheerfulness to a depressed spirit. And to place a just remark, hazarded by the
diffident, in the most advantageous point of view; to call the attention of the
inattentive, the forward and the self-sufficient, to some quiet person in the
company, who though of much worth, is perhaps of little note; these are
requisites for conversation, less brilliant, but far more valuable, than the
power of exciting bursts of laughter by the brightest wit, or of extorting
admiration by the most poignant sallies of ridicule.

For wit is of all the qualities of the female mind that which requires the
severest castigation; yet the temperate exercise of this fascinating quality
throws an additional luster round the character of an amiable woman; for to
manage with discreet modesty a dangerous talent, confers a higher praise than
can be claimed by those in whom the absence of the talent takes away the
temptation to misemploy it. To women, wit is a peculiarly perilous possession,
which nothing short of the sobermindedness of Christianity can keep in order.
Intemperate wit craves admiration as its natural aliment; it lives on flattery
as its daily bread. The professed wit is a hungry beggar, that subsists on the
extorted alms of perpetual panegyric; and like the vulture in the Grecian
fable, its appetite increases by indulgence. Simple truth and sober approbation
become tasteless and insipid to the palate, daily vitiated by the delicious
poignancies of exaggerated commendation. Under the above restrictions, however,
wit may be safely and pleasantly exercised; for chastised wit is an elegant and
well-bred, and not unfeminine quality. But humor, especially if it degenerate
into imitation, or mimicry, is very sparingly to be ventured on; for it is so
difficult totally to detach it from the suspicion of buffoonery, that a woman
will be likely to lose more of that delicacy which is her appropriate grace,
than she will gain in the eyes of the judicious, by the most successful display
of humor.

But if it be true that some women are too apt to affect brilliancy and display
in their own discourse, and to undervalue the more humble pretensions of less
showy characters; it must be confessed also, that some of more ordinary
abilities are now and then guilty of the opposite error, and foolishly affect
to value themselves on not making use of the understanding they really possess.
They exhibit no small satisfaction in ridiculing women of high intellectual
endowments, while they exclaim with much affected humility, and much real envy,
that they are thankful they are not geniuses. Now, though one is glad to hear
gratitude expressed on any occasion, yet the want of sense is really no such
great mercy to be thankful for; and it would indicate a better spirit, were
they to pray to be enabled to make a right use of the moderate understanding
they possess, instead of exposing with a visible pleasure the imaginary or real
defects of their more shining acquaintance. Women of the brightest faculties
should not only "bear those faculties meekly," but consider it as no
derogation, cheerfully to fulfill those humbler duties which make up the
business of common life, always taking into the account the higher
responsibility attached to higher gifts. While women of lower seize
should exert to the utmost such abilities as Providence has assigned them; and
while they should not deride excellencies which are above their reach, they
should not despond at an inferiority which did not depend on themselves; nor,
because God has denied them ten talents, should they forget that they are
equally responsible for the one he has allotted them, but set about devoting
that one with humble diligence to the glory of the Giver.

Vanity, however, is not the monopoly of talents: let not a young lady,
therefore, fancy that she is humble, merely because she is not ingenious.
Humility is not the exclusive privilege of dullness. Folly is as conceited as
wit, and ignorance many a time outstrips knowledge in the race of vanity.
Equally earnest competitions spring from causes less worthy to excite them than
wit and genius. Vanity insinuates itself into the female heart under a variety
of unsuspected forms, and seizes on many a little pass which was not thought
worth guarding.

Who has not seen as restless emotion agitate the features of an anxious
matron, while peace and fame hung trembling in doubtful suspense on the success
of a soup or a sauce, on which sentence was about to be pronounced by some
consummate critic, as could have been excited by any competition for literary
renown, or any struggle for contested wit? Nor was the illustrious hero of
Greece more effectually hindered from sleeping by the trophies of Miltiades,
than many a modish damsel by the eclipsing superiority of some newer decoration
exhibited by her more succesful friend.

There is another species of vanity in some women which disguises itself under
the thin veil of an affected humility; they will accuse themselves of some
fault from which they are remarkably exempt, and lament the want of some talent
which they are rather notorious for possessing. This is not only a clumsy trap
for praise, but there is a disingenuous intention, by renouncing a quality they
eminently possess, to gain credit for others in which they are really
deficient. All affectation involves a species of deceit. The Apostle when he
enjoins, not to think of ourselves more highly than we ought, does not exhort
us to think falsely of ourselves, but to think "soberly;" and it is worth
observing that in this injunction he does not use the word speak, but think,
inferring possibly, that it would be safer to speak little of ourselves or not
at all; for it is so far from being an unequivocal proof of our humility to
talk even of our defects, that while we make self the subject, in whatever way,
self-love contrives to be gratified, and will even be content that our faults
should be talked of, rather than that we should not be talked of at all. Some
are also attacked with such proud fits of humility, that while they are ready
to accuse themselves of almost every sin in the lump, they yet take fire at the
imputation of the slightest individual fault; and instantly enter upon their
own vindication as warmly as if you and not themselves, had brought forward the
charge. The truth is, they ventured to condemn themselves, in the full
confidence that you would contradict them; the last thing they intended was
that you should believe them, and they are never so much piqued and
disappointed as when they are taken at their word.

Of the various shapes and undefined forms into which vanity branches out in
conversation, there is no end. Out of a restless desire to please, grows the
spurious desire to astonish: from vanity as much as from credulity, arises that
strong love of the mavelous, with which the conversation of the ill-educated
abounds. Hence that fondness for dealing in narratives hardly within the
compass of possibility. Here vanity has many shades of gratification; those
shades will be stronger or weaker, whether the relater chance to have been an
eyewitness of the wonder she recounts; or whether she claim only the
second-hand renown of its having happened to her friend, or the still remoter
celebrity of its having been witnessed only by her friend's friend: but even
though that friend only knew the man, who remembered the woman, who actually
beheld the thing which is now causing admiration in the company, still self,
though in a fainter degree, is brought into notice, and the relater contrives
in some circuitous way to be connected with the wonder.

To correct this propensity to elevate and surprise The Rehearsal.
, it would be well in mixed society to abstain altogether from hazarding
stories, which though they may not be absolutely false, yet lying without the
verge of probability, are apt to impeach the credit of the narrator; in whom
the very consciousness that she is not believed, excites an increased eagerness
to depart still farther from the soberness of truth, and induces a habit of
vehement asseveration, which is too often called in to help out a questionable
point This is also a good rule in composition. An event, though it may actually
have happened, yet if it be out of the reach of probability, or contrary to the
common course of nature, will seldom be chosen as a subject by a writer of good
taste; for he knows that a probable fiction will interest the feelings more
than an unlikely truth. Verisimilitude is indeed the poet's truth, but the
truth of the moralist is of a more sturdy growth.
.

There is another shape, and a very deformed shape it is, in which loquacious
vanity shows itself; I mean, the betraying of confidence. Though the act be
treacherous, yet the fault, in the first instance, is not treachery, but
vanity. It does not so often spring from the mischievous desire of divulging a
secret, as from the pride of having been trusted with it. It is the secret
inclination of mixing self with whatever is important. The secret would be of
little value, if the revealing it did not serve to intimate our connection with
it; the pleasure of its having been deposited with us would be nothing, if
others may not know it has been so deposited. -- When we continue to see the
variety of serious evils this principle involves, shall we persist in asserting
that vanity is a slender mischief?

There is one offense committed in conversation of much too serious a nature to
be overlooked, or to be animadverted on without sorrow and indignation: I mean,
the habitual and thoughtless profaneness of those who are repeatedly invoking
their Maker's name on occasions the most trivial. It is offensive in all its
variety of aspects; -- it is very pernicious in its effects; -- it is a growing
evil; -- those who are most guilty of it, are from habit hardly conscious when
they do it; are not aware of the sin; and for both these reasons, without the
admonitions of faithful friendship, little likely to discontinue it. -- It is
utterly INEXCUSABLE; -- it has none of the palliatives of temptation which
other vices plead, and in that respect stands distinguished from all others
both in its nature and degree of guilt. -- Like many other sins, however, it is
at once cause and effect; it proceeds from want of love and reverence to the
best of Beings, and causes that want both in themselves and others. Yet with
all those aggravations, there is, perhaps, hardly any sin so frequently
committed, so seldom repented of, and so little guarded against. On the score
of impropriety too, it is additionally offensive, as being utterly repugnant to
female delicacy, which often affects to be shocked at swearing in a man. Now
this species of profaneness is not only swearing, but, perhaps, in some
respects, swearing of the worst sort; as it is a direct breach of an express
command, and offends against the very letter of that law which says in so many
words, THOU SHALL NOT TAKE THE NAME OF THE LORD THY GOD IN VAIN. It offends
against delicacy and good breeding; for those who commit it, little think of
the pain they are inflicting on the sober mind, which is deeply wounded when it
hears the holy name it loves dishonored; and it is as contrary to good
breeding to give pain as it is to true piety to be profane.

I would endeavor to give some faint idea of the grossness of this offense, by
an analogy (oh! how inadequate!) with which the feeling heart, even though not
seasoned with religion, may be touched. To such I would earnestly say: --
Suppose you had some beloved friend, -- to put the case still more strongly, a
departed friend -- a revered parent, perhaps, -- whose image never occurs
without awaking in your bosom sentiments of tender love and gratitude; how
would you feel if you heard this honored name bandied about with unfeeling
familiarity and indecent levity; or at best, thrust into every pause of speech
as a vulgar expletive? Does not your affectionate heart recoil at the thought?
And yet the hallowed name of your truest Benefactor, your heavenly Father, your
best Friend, who gives you all you enjoy, those very friends in whom you so
much delight, those very organs with which you dishonor him, is treated with
an irreverence, a contempt, a wantonness, with which you cannot bear the very
thought or mention of treating a human friend. His name is impiously, is
unfeelingly, is ungratefully singled out as the object of decided irreverence,
of systematic contempt, of thoughtless levity. It is used indiscriminately to
express anger, (...), grief, surprise, impatience; and what is almost still
more unpardonable than all, it is wantonly used as a mere unmeaning expletive,
which, being excited by no emotion, can have nothing to recommend it, unless it
be the pleasure of the sin.

Among the deep, but less obvious mischiefs of conversation, misrepresentation
must not be overlooked. Self-love is continually at work, to give to all we say
a bias in our own favor. The counteraction of this fault should be set about
in the earliest stages of education. If young persons have not been discouraged
in the natural, but evil, propensity to relate every dispute they have had with
others to their own advantage; if they have not been trained to the duty of
doing justice even to those with whom they are at variance; if they have not
been led to aim at a complete impartiality in their little narratives, and
instructed never to take advantage of the absence of the other party, in order
to make the story lean to their own side more than the truth will admit; how
shall we in advanced life look for correct habits, for unprejudiced
representations, for fidelity, accuracy, and unbiassed justice?

Yet, how often in society, otherwise respectable, are we pained with
narrations in which prejudice warps, and self-love blinds! How often do we see,
that withholding part of a truth answers the worst ends of a falsehood! How
often regret the unfair turn given to a business, by placing a sentiment in one
point of view, which the speaker had used in another! the letter of truth
preserved where its spirit is violated! a superstitious exactness scrupulously
maintained in the underparts of a detail, in order to impress such an idea of
integrity as shall gain credit, while the leading principle is designedly
mistated! nay, a new character given to a fact by a different look, tone, or
emphasis, which alters it as much as words could have done! the false
impression of a sermon conveyed, when we do not like the preacher, or when
through him we wish to make religion itself ridiculous! the avoiding of literal
untruths, while the mischief is better effected by the unfair quotation of a
passage divested of its context! the bringing together detached portions of a
subject, and making those parts ludicrous, when connected, which were perfect
in their distinct position! the insidious use made of a sentiment by
representing it as the opinion of him who had only brought it forward in order
to expose it! the relating opinions which had merely been put hypothetically,
as the avowed principles of him we would discredit! that subtle falsehood which
is so made to incorporate with a certain quantity of truth, that the most
skilful moral chemist cannot analyze or separate them! for a good
misrepresenter knows that a successful lie must have a certain infusion of
truth, or it will not go down. All that indefinable ambiguity and equivocation;
all that prudent deceit, which is rather implied than expressed; those more
delicate artifices of the school of Loyola and of Chesterfield, which allow us
when we dare not deny a truth, yet so to disguise and discolor it, that the
truth we relate shall not resemble the truth we heard! These and all the
thousand shades of simulation and dissimulation will be carefully guarded
against in the conversation of vigilant Christians.

Again, it is surprising to mark the common deviations from strict veracity
which spring, not from enmity to truth, not from intentional deceit, not from
malevolence or envy, or the least design to injure, but from mere levity,
habitual inattention, and a current notion that it is not worth while to be
correct in small things. But here the doctrine of habits comes in with great
force, and in that view no error is small. The cure of this disease in its more
inveterate stages being next to impossible, its prevention ought to be one of
the earliest objects of education. See the Chapter on the Use of Definitions.


The grievous fault of gross and obvious detraction which infects conversation,
has been so heavily and so justly condemned by divines and moralists, that the
subject is exhausted. But there is an error of an opposite complexion, which we
have before noticed, and against which the peculiar temper of the times
requires that young ladies of a better cast should be guarded. From the
narrowness of their own sphere of observation, they are sometimes addicted to
accuse of uncharitableness, that distinguishing judgment which, resulting from
a sound penetration and a zeal for truth, forbids persons of a very correct
principle to be indiscriminately prodigal of commendation without inquiry, and
without distinction. There is an affectation of candor, which is almost as
mischievous as calumny itself; nay, if it be less injurious in its individual
application, it is, perhaps, more alarming in its general principle, as it lays
waste the strong fences which separate good from evil. They know (though they
sometimes calumniate) that calumny is wrong; but they have not been told that
flattery is wrong also; and youth, being apt to fancy that the direct contrary
to wrong must necessarily be right, are apt to be driven into violent extremes.
The dread of being only suspected of one fault, makes them actually guilty of
the other; and to avoid the charge of harshness or of envy, they plunge into
insincerity. In this they are actuated either by an unsound judgment or an
unsound principle.

In this age of high-minded independence, when our youth are apt to set up for
themselves, and every man is too much disposed to be his own legislator without
looking, as his standard, to the established law of the land; and to set up for
his own divine, without looking to the revealed will of God; by a candor
equally vicious with our vanity, we are also complaisantly led to give the
latitude we take: and it is become too frequent a phrase in the mouths of our
tolerating young ladies, when speaking of their more erring and misled
acquaintance, to offer for them this flimsy vindication, that what they do is
right if it appear right to them: -- if they see the thing in that light, and
act up to it with sincerity, they cannot be materially wrong. But the standard
of truth, justice, and religion, must neither be elevated nor depressed, in
order to accommodate it to actual circumstances: it must never be lowered to
palliate error, to justify folly, or to vindicate vice. Good-natured young
people often speak favorably of unworthy, or extravagantly of common
characters, from one of these motives; either their own views of excellence are
low, or they speak respectfully of the undeserving, to purchase for themselves
the reputation of tenderness and generosity; or they lavish unsparing praise on
almost all alike, in the usurious hope of buying back universal commendation in
return; or in those captivating characters in which the simple and masculine
language of truth is sacrificed to the jargon of affected softness; and in
which smooth and pliant manners are substituted for intrinsic worth, the
inexperienced are too apt to suppose virtues, and to forgive vices. But they
should carefully guard against the error of making manner the criterion of
merit, and of giving unlimited credit to strangers for possessing every
perfection, only because they bring into company the engaging exterior of
alluring gentleness. They should also remember that it is an easy, but not an
honest way of obtaining the praise of candor, to get into the soft and popular
habit of saying of all their acquaintance, when speaking of them, that they are
so good! True Christian candor conceals faults, but it does not invent
virtues. It tenderly forbears to expose the evil which may belong to a
character, but it dares not ascribe to it the good which does not exist. To
correct this propensity to false judgment and insincerity, it would be well to
bear in mind, that while every good action, come from what source it may, and
every good quality, be it found in whomsoever it will, deserves its fair
proportion of distinct and willing commendation: yet no character is GOOD in
the true sense of the word which is not RELIGIOUS.

In fine -- to recapitulate what has been said, with some additional hints: --
Study to promote both intellectual and moral improvement in conversation;
labor to bring into it a disposition to bear with others, and to be watchful
over yourself; keep out of sight any prominent talent of your own, which, if
indulged, might discourage or oppress the feeble-minded. If you know any one
present to possess any particular weakness or infirmity, never exercise your
wit by maliciously inventing occasions which may lead her to expose or betray
it; but give as favorable a turn as you can to the follies which appear, and
kindly help her to keep the rest out of sight. Never gratify your own humor,
by hazarding what you suspect may wound any one present in their persons,
connections, professions in life, or religious opinions; and do not forget to
examine whether the laugh your wit has raised be never bought at this expense.
Give credit to those who, without your kindness, will get none; do not talk at
any one whom you dare not talk to, unless from motives in which the golden rule
will bear you out. Seek neither to shine nor to triumph; and if you seek to
please, take care that it be in order to convert the influence you may gain by
pleasing to the good of others. Cultivate true politeness, for it grows out of
true principle, and is consistent with the Gospel of Christ; but avoid those
feigned attentions which are not stimulated by goodwill, and those stated
professions of fondness which are not dictated by esteem. Remember, that the
praise of being thought amiable by strangers, may be bought too dear, if it be
bought at the expense of truth and simplicity: remember, that Simplicity is the
first charm in manner, as Truth is in mind; and could Truth make herself
visible, she would appear invested in Simplicity.

Remember also, that true good nature is the soul, of which politeness is only
the garb. It is not that artificial quality which is taken up by many when they
go into society, in order to charm those whom it is not their particular
business to please; and is laid down when they return home to those to whom to
appear amiable is a real duty. It is not that fascinating but deceitful
softness, which, after having acted over a hundred scenes of the most lively
sympathy and tender interest with every slight acquaintance; after having
exhausted every phrase of feeling, for the trivial sicknesses or petty sorrows
of multitudes who are scarcely known, leaves it doubtful whether a grain of
real feeling or genuine sympathy be reserved for the dearest connections; and
which dismisses a woman to her immediate friends with little affection, and to
her own family with little attachment.

True good nature, that which alone deserves the name, is not a holiday
ornament, but an every-day habit. It does not consist in servile complaisance,
or dishonest flattery, or affected sympathy, or unqualified assent, or
unwarrantable compliance, or eternal smiles. Before it can be allowed to rank
with the virtues, it must be wrought up from a humor into a principle, from an
occasional disposition into a habit. It must be the result of an equal and
well-governed mind, not the start of casual (...), the trick of designing
vanity, or the whim of capricious fondness. It is compounded of kindness,
forbearance, forgiveness, and self-denial; it seeks not its own, but must be
capable of making continual sacrifices of its own tastes, humors, and
self-love; but among the sacrifices it makes, it must never include its
integrity. Politeness on the one hand, and insensibility on the other, assume
its name and wear its honors; but they assume the honors of a triumph,
without the merit of a victory; for politeness subdues nothing, and
insensibility has nothing to subdue. Good nature of the true cast, and under
the foregoing regulations, is above all price in the common intercourse of
domestic society; for an ordinary quality, which is constantly brought into
action by the perpetually recurring though minute events of daily life, is of
higher value than more brilliant qualities which are more seldom called into
use. And, indeed, Christianity has given that new turn to the character of all
the virtues, that perhaps it is the best test of the excellence of many that
they have little brilliancy in them. The Christian Religion has degraded some
splendid qualities from the rank they held, and elevated those which were
obscure into distinction.

CHAP. XV.
On the danger of an ill-directed Sensibility.

IN considering the human character with a view to its improvement, it is
prudent to endeavor to discover the natural bent of the mind, and having found
it, to direct your force against that side on which the warp lies, that you may
lessen by counteraction the defect which you might be promoting, by applying
your aid in a contrary direction. But the misfortune is, people who mean better
than they judge, are apt to take up a set of general rules, good perhaps in
themselves, and originally gleaned from experience and observation on the
nature of human things, but not applicable in all cases. These rules they keep
by them as nostrums of universal efficacy, which they therefore often bring out
for use in cases to which they do not apply. For to make any remedy effectual,
it is not enough to know the medicine, you must study the constitution also; if
there be not a congruity between the two, you may be injuring one patient by
the means which are requisite to raise and restore another, whose temperament
is of a contrary description.

It is of importance in forming the female character, that those on whom this
task devolves should possess so much penetration as accurately to discern the
degree of sensibility, and so much judgment as to accommodate the treatment to
the individual character. By constantly stimulating and extolling feelings
naturally quick, those feelings will be rendered too acute and irritable. On
the other hand, a calm and equable temper will become obtuse by the total want
of excitement; the former treatment converts the feelings into a source of
error, agitation and calamity; the latter starves their native energy, deadens
the affections, and produces a cold, dull, selfish spirit; for the human mind
is an instrument which will lose its sweetness if strained too high, and will
be deprived of its tone and strength if not sufficiently, raised.

It is cruel to chill the precious sensibility of an ingenuous soul, by
treating with supercilious coldness and unfeeling ridicule every indication of
a warm, tender, disinterested, and enthusiastic spirit, as if it exhibited
symptoms of a deficiency in understanding or prudence. How many are apt to
intimate, with a smile of mingled pity and contempt, that when such a one knows
the world, that is, in other words, when she shall be grown cunning, selfish,
and suspicious, she will be ashamed of her present glow of honest warmth, and
of her lovely susceptibility of heart. May she never know the world, if the
knowledge of it must be acquired at such an expense! But to sensible hearts,
every indication of genuine feeling will be dear, for they will know that it is
this temper which, by the guidance of the Divine spirit, may make her one day
become more enamoured of the beauty of holiness; which, with the cooperation
of principle, and under its direction, will render her the lively agent of
Providence in diminishing the misery that is in the world; into which misery
this temper will give her a quicker intuition than colder characters possess.
It is this temper which, when it is touched and purified by a live coal from
the altar, Isaiah, vi. 6.
will give her a keener taste for the spirit of religion, and a quicker zeal in
discharging its duties. But let it be remembered likewise, that as there is no
quality in the female character which will be so likely to endanger the peace,
and to expose the virtue of the possessor; so there is none which requires to
have its luxuriances more carefully watched, and its wild shoots more closely
lopped.

For young women of affections naturally warm, but not carefully disciplined,
are in danger of incurring an unnatural irritability; and while their happiness
falls a victim to the excess of uncontrolled feelings, they are liable at the
same time to indulge a vanity of all others the most preposterous, that of
being vain of their very defect. They have heard sensibility highly commended,
without having heard any thing of those bounds and fences which were intended
to confine it, and without having been imbued with that principle which would
have given it a beneficial direction; conscious that they possess the quality
itself in the extreme, and not aware that they want all that makes that quality
safe and delightful, they plunge headlong into those sins and miseries from
which they conceitedly imagine, that not principle but coldness has preserved
the more sober-minded and well-instructed of their sex.

But as it would be foreign to the present design to expatiate on those
criminal excesses which are some of the sad effects of ungoverned passion, it
is only intended here to hazard a few remarks on those lighter consequences of
it, which consist in the loss of comfort without ruin of character, and the
privation of much of the happiness of life without involving any very
censurable degree of guilt or discredit. Let it, however, be incidentally
remarked, and let it be carefully remembered, that if no women have risen so
high in the scale of moral excellence as those whose natural warmth has been
conscientiously governed by its true guide, and directed to its true end; so
none have furnished such deplorable instances of extreme depravity as those
who, through the ignorance or the dereliction of principle, have been abandoned
by the excess of this very temper to the violence of ungoverned passions and
uncontrolled inclinations. Perhaps, if we were to inquire into the remote cause
of some of the blackest crimes which stain the annals of mankind, profligacy,
murder, and especially suicide, we might trace them back to this original
principle, an ungoverned Sensibility.

Notwithstanding all the fine theories in prose and verse to which this topic
has given birth, it will be found that very exquisite sensibility contributes
so little to happiness, and may yet be made to contribute so much to
usefulness, that it may, perhaps, be considered as bestowed for an exercise to
the possessor's own virtue, and as a keen instrument with which she may better
work for the good of others.

Women of this cast of mind are less careful to avoid the charge of unbounded
extremes, than to escape at all events the imputation of insensibility. They
are little alarmed at the danger of exceeding, though terrified at the
suspicion of coming short, of what they take to be the extreme point of
feeling. They will even resolve to prove the warmth of their sensibility,
though at the expense of their judgment, and sometimes also of their justice.
Even when they earnestly desire to be and to do right, they are apt to employ
the wrong instrument to accomplish the right end. They employ the passions to
do the work of the judgment; forgetting, or not knowing, that the passions were
not given us to be used in the search and discovery of truth, which is the
office of a cooler and more discriminating faculty; but that they were given to
animate us to warmer zeal in the pursuit and practice of truth, when the
judgment shall have pointed out what is truth.

Through this natural warmth, which they have been justly told is so pleasing,
but which, perhaps, they have not been told will be continually exposing them
to peril and to suffering, their joys and sorrows are excessive. Of this
extreme irritability, as was before remarked, the ill-educated learn to boast
as if it were a decided indication of superiority of soul, instead of laboring
to restrain it as the excess of a temper which ceases to be amiable, when it is
no longer under the control of the governing faculty. It is misfortune enough
to be born more liable to suffer and to sin, from this conformation of mind; it
is too much to nourish the evil by unrestrained indulgence; it is still worse
to be proud of so misleading a quality.

Flippancy, impetuosity, resentment, and violence of spirit, grow out of this
disposition, which will be rather promoted than corrected, by the system of
education on which we have been animadverting; in which system, emotions are
too early and too much excited, and tastes and feelings are considered as too
exclusively making up the whole of the female character: in which the judgment
is little exercised, the reasoning powers are seldom brought into action, and
self-knowledge and self-denial scarcely included.

The propensity of mind which we are considering, if unchecked, lays its
possessors open to unjust prepossessions, and exposes them to all the danger of
unfounded attachments. In early youth, not only love at first sight, but also
friendship, of the same sudden growth, springs up from an ill-directed
sensibility; and in after-life, women under the powerful influence of this
temper, conscious that they have much to be borne with, are too readily
inclined to select for their confidential connections, flexible and flattering
companions, who will indulge and perhaps admire their faults, rather than firm
and honest friends, who will reprove and would assist in curing them. We may
adopt it as a general maxim, that an obliging, weak, yielding, complaisant
friend, full of small attentions, with little religion, little judgment, and
much natural acquiescence and civility, is a most dangerous, though generally a
too much desired confidante: she soothes the indolence, and gratifies the
vanity of her friend, by reconciling her to her faults, while she neither keeps
the understanding nor the virtues of that friend in exercise; but withholds
from her every useful truth, which by opening her eyes might give her pain.
These obsequious qualities are the "soft green" Burke's "Sublime and Beautiful."
on which the soul loves to repose itself. But it is not a refreshing or a
wholesome repose: we should not select, for the sake of present ease a soothing
flatterer, who will lull us into a pleasing oblivion of our failings, but a
friend, who, valuing our soul's health above our immediate comfort, will rouse
us from torpid indulgence to animation, vigilance, and virtue.

An ill-directed sensibility also leads a woman to be injudicious and eccentric
in her charities; she will be in danger of proportioning her bounty to the
immediate effect which the distressed object produces on her senses: and she
will be more liberal to a small distress presenting itself to her own eyes,
than to the more pressing wants and better claims of those miseries of which
she only hears the relation. There is a sort of stage effect which some people
require for their charities; she will be apt also to desire, that the object of
her compassion shall have something interesting and amiable in it, such as
shall furnish pleasing images and lively pictures to her imagination, and
engaging subjects for description; forgetting, that in her charities, as well
as in every thing else, she is to be a "follower of Him who pleased not
himself;" forgetting, that the most coarse and disgusting object is as much the
representative of Him, who said, Inasmuch as ye do it to one of the least of
these, ye do it unto me, as the most interesting: nay the more uninviting and
repulsive cases may be better tests of the principle on which we relieve, than
those which abound in pathos and interest, as we can have less suspicion of our
motive in the latter case than in the former. But, while we ought to neglect
neither of these supposed cases, yet the less our feelings are caught by
pleasing circumstances, the less will be the danger of our indulging
self-complacency, and the more likely shall we be to do what we do for the sake
of Him who has taught us, that no deeds but what are performed on that
principle, shall be recompensed at the resurrection of the just.

But through the want of that governing principle which should direct her
sensibility, a tenderhearted woman, whose hand, if she be actually surrounded
with scenes and circumstances to call it into action, is Open as day to melting
charity;
nevertheless may utterly fail in the great and comprehensive duty of Christian
love, for she has feelings which are acted upon solely by local circumstances
and present events. Only remove her into another scene, distant from the wants
she has been relieving; place her in the lap of indulgence, so entrenched with
ease and pleasure, so immersed in the softness of life, that distress no longer
finds any access to her presence, but through the faint and dull medium of a
distant representation; remove her from the sight and sound of that misery
which, when present, so tenderly affected her -- she now forgets that misery
exists; as she hears but little, and sees nothing of want and sorrow, she is
ready to fancy that the world is grown happier than it was: in the meantime,
with a quiet conscience and a thoughtless vanity, she has been lavishing on
superfluities that money which she would cheerfully have given to a charitable
case, had she not forgotten that any such were in existence, because Pleasure
had blocked up the avenues through which misery used to find its way to her
heart; and now, when again such a case forces itself into her presence, she
laments with real sincerity that the money is gone which should have relieved
it.

In the meantime, perhaps, other women of less natural sympathy, but whose
sympathies are under better regulation, or who act from a principle which
requires little stimulus, have, by an habitual course of self-denial, by a
constant determination to refuse themselves unnecessary indulgences, and by
guarding against that dissolving PLEASURE which melts down the firmest virtue
that allows itself to bask in its beams, have been quietly furnishing a regular
provision for miseries, which their knowledge of the state of the world teaches
them are every where to be found, and which their obedience to the will of God
tells them it is their duty both to find out and to relieve; a general
expectation of being liable to be called upon for acts of charity, will lead
the conscientiously charitable always to be prepared.

On such a mind as we have been describing, Novelty also will operate with
peculiar force, and in nothing more than in the article of charity. Old
established institutions, whose continued existence must depend on the
continued bounty of that affluence to which they owed their origin, will be
sometimes neglected, as presenting no variety to the imagination, as having by
their uniformity ceased to be interesting, there is now a total failure of
those springs of mere sensitive feeling which set the charity a-going, and
those sudden emotions of tenderness and gusts of pity, which once were felt,
must now be excited by newer forms of distress. -- As age comes on, that
charity which has been the effect of mere feeling, grows cold and rigid, on
account also of its having been often disappointed in its high expectations of
the gratitude and subsequent merit of those it has relieved; and by withdrawing
its bounty, because some of its objects have been undeserving, it gives clear
proof that what it bestowed was for its own gratification; and now finding that
self-complacency at an end, it bestows no longer. Probably too the cause of so
much disappointment may have been, that ill choice of the objects to which
feeling, rather than a discriminating judgment has led. The summer showers of
mere sensibility soon dry up, while the living spring of Christian charity
flows alike in all seasons.

The impatience, levity, and fickleness, of which women have been somewhat too
generally accused, are perhaps in no small degree aggravated by the littleness
and frivolousness of female pursuits. The sort of education they commonly
receive, teaches girls to set a great price on small things. Besides this, they
do not always learn to keep a very correct scale of degrees for rating the
value of the objects of their admiration and attachment; but by a kind of
unconscious idolatry, they rather make a merit of loving supremely things and
persons which ought to be loved with moderation and in a subordinate degree the
one to the other. Unluckily, they consider moderation as so necessarily
indicating a cold heart and narrow soul, and they look upon a state of
indifference with so much horror, that either to love or hate with energy is
supposed by them to proceed from a higher state of mind than is possessed by
more steady and equable characters. Whereas it is in fact the criterion of a
warm but well-directed sensibility, that while it is capable of loving with
energy, it must be enabled, by the judgment which governs it, to suit and
adjust its degree of interest to the nature and excellence of the object about
which it is interested; for unreasonable prepossession, disproportionate
attachment, and capricious or precarious fondness, is not sensibility.

Excessive but unintentional flattery is another fault into which a strong
sensibility is in danger of leading its possessor. A tender heart and a warm
imagination conspire to throw a sort of radiance round the object of their
love, till people are dazzled by a brightness of their own creating. The
worldly and fashionable borrow the warm language of sensibility without having
the really warm feeling; and young ladies get such a habit of saying, and
especially of writing, such over obliging and flattering things to each other,
that this mutual politeness, aided by the self-love so natural to us all, and
by an unwillingness to search into our own hearts, keeps up the illusion, and
we get a habit of taking our character from the good we hear of ourselves,
which others assume, but do not very well know, rather than from the evil we
feel in ourselves, and which we therefore ought to be thoroughly acquainted
with.

Ungoverned sensibility is apt to give a wrong direction to its anxieties; and
its affection often falls short of the true end of friendship. If the object of
its regard happen to be sick, what inquiries! what prescriptions! what an
accumulation is made of cases in which the remedy its fondness suggests has
been successful! What an unaffected tenderness for the perishing body! Yet is
this sensibility equally alive to the immortal interests of the sufferer? Is it
not silent and at ease when it contemplates the dearest friend persisting in
opinions essentially dangerous; in practices unquestionably wrong? Does it not
view all this, not only without a generous ardour to point out the peril, and
rescue the friend; but if that friend be supposed to be dying, does it not even
make it the criterion of kindness to let her die undeceived? What a want of
true sensibility, to feel for the pain, but not for the danger of those we
love! Now see what sort of sensibility the Bible teaches! Thou shall not hate
thy brother in thine heart, but thou shall in any wise rebuke him, and shall
not suffer sin upon him Leviticus, xix. 17.
. But let that tenderness which shrinks from the idea of exposing what it loves
to a momentary pang, figure to itself the bare possibility, that the object of
its own fond affection may not be the object of its own fond affection may not
be the object of the Divine favor! Let it shrink from the bare conjecture,
that the familiar friend with whom it has taken sweet counsel, is going down to
the gates of death, unrepenting, unprepared, and yet unwarned.

But mere human sensibility goes a shorter way to work. Not being able to give
its friend the pain of hearing her faults or of knowing her danger, it works
itself up into the quieting delusion that no danger exists, at least not for
the objects of its own affection; it gratifies itself by inventing a salvation
so comprehensive as shall take in all itself loves with all their faults; it
creates to its own fond heart an ideal and exaggerated divine mercy, which
shall pardon and receive all in whom this blind sensibility has an interest,
whether they be good or whether they be evil.

In regard to its application to religious purposes, it is a test that
sensibility has received its true direction when it is supremely turned to the
love of God: for to possess an overflowing fondness for our fellow creatures
and fellow-sinners, and to be cold and insensible to the Essence of goodness
and perfection, is an inconsistency to which the feeling heart is awfully
liable. God has himself the first claim to the sensibility he bestowed. "He
first loved us:" this is a natural cause of love, He loved us while we were
sinners: this is a supernatural cause. He continues to love us though we
neglect his favors, and slight his mercies: this would wear out any earthly
kindness. He forgives us, not petty neglects, not occasional slights, but
grievous sins, repeated offenses, broken vows, and unrequited love. What human
friendship performs offices so calculated to touch the soul of sensibility?

Those young women in whom feeling is indulged to the exclusion of reason and
examination, are peculiarly liable to be the dupes of prejudice, rash
decisions, and false judgment. The understanding having but little power over
the will, their affections are not well poized, and their minds are kept in a
state ready to be acted upon by the fluctuations of alternate impulses; by
sudden and varying impressions; by casual and contradictory circumstances; and
by emotions excited by every accident. Instead of being guided by the broad
views of general truth, and having one fixed principle, they are driven on by
the impetuosity of the moment. And this impetuosity blinds the judgment as much
as it misleads the conduct; so that for want of a habit of cool investigation
and inquiry, they meet every event without any previously formed opinion or
rule of action. And as they do not accustom themselves to appreciate the real
value of things, their attention is as likely to be led away by the under parts
of a subject, as to seize on the leading feature. The same eagerness of mind
which hinders the operation of the discriminating faculty, leads also to the
error of determining on the rectitude of an action by its success, and to that
of making the event of an undertaking decide on its justice or propriety: it
also leads to that superficial and erroneous way of judging which fastens on
exceptions, if they make in one's own favor, as grounds of reasoning, while
they lead us to overlook received and general rules which tend to establish a
doctrine contrary to our wishes.

Open-hearted, indiscreet girls, often pick up a few strong notions, which are
as false in themselves as they are popular among the class in question: such
as, "that warm friends must make warm enemies;" -- that the generous love and
hate with all their hearts; -- that a reformed rake makes the best husband; --
that there is no medium in marriage, but that it is a state of exquisite
happiness or exquisite misery; with many other doctrines of equal currency and
equal soundness! These they consider as axioms, and adopt as rules of life.
From the two first of these oracular sayings, girls are in no small danger of
becoming unjust through the very warmth of their hearts: for they will get a
habit of making their estimate of the good or ill qualities of others, merely
in proportion to the greater or less degree of kindness which they themselves
have received from them. Their estimation of general character is thus formed
on insulated and partial grounds; on the accidental circumstance of personal
predilection or personal pique. Kindness to themselves or their friends
involves all possible excellence; neglect, all imaginable defects. Friendship
and gratitude can and should go a great way; but as they cannot convert vice
into into virtue, so they ought never to convert truth into falsehood. And it
may be the more necessary to be upon our guard in this instance, because the
very idea of gratitude may mislead us, by converting injustice, into the
semblance of a virtue. Warm expressions should therefore be limited to the
conveying a sense of our own individual obligations which are real, rather than
employed to give an impression of general excellence in the person who has
obliged us, which may be imaginary. A good man is still good, though it may not
have fallen in his way to oblige or serve us, nay, though he may have neglected
or even unintentionally hurt us: and sin is still sin, though committed by the
person in the world to whom we are the most obliged, and whom we most love.

We come next to that fatal and most indelicate, nay gross maxim, that a
reformed rake makes the best husband; an aphorism to which the principles and
the happiness of so many young women have been sacrificed. It goes upon the
preposterous supposition, not only that effects do not follow causes, but that
they oppose them; on the supposition, that habitual vice creates rectitude of
character, and that sin produces happiness: thus flatly contradicting what the
moral government of God uniformly exhibits in the course of human events, and
what Revelation so evidently and universally teaches.

For it should be observed, that the reformation is generally, if not always
supposed to be brought about by the all-conquering force of female charms. Let
but a profligate young man have a point to carry by winning the affections of a
vain and thoughtless girl; he will begin his attack upon her heart by
undermining her religious principles, and artfully removing every impediment
which might have obstructed her receiving the addresses of a man without
character. And while he will lead her not to hear without ridicule the mention
of that change of heart which Scripture teaches and experience proves the power
of Divine grace can work on a vicious character; while he will teach her to
sneer at a change which he would treat with contempt, because he denies the
possibility of so strange and miraculous a conversion; yet he will not scruple
to swear, that the power of her beauty has worked a revolution in his own loose
practices which is equally complete and instantaneous.

But supposing it possible that his reformation were genuine, it would even
then by no means involve the truth of her proposition, that past libertinism
insures future felicity; yet many a weak girl, confirmed in this palatable
doctrine by examples she has frequently admired of those surprising
reformations so conveniently effected in the last scene of most of our
comedies, has not scrupled to risk her earthly and eternal happiness with a
man, who is not ashamed to ascribe to the influence of her beauty that power of
changing the heart which he impiously denies to Omnipotence itself.

As to the last of these practical aphorisms, that there is no medium in
marriage, but that it is a state of exquisite happiness or exquisite misery;
this, though not equally sinful, is equally delusive: for marriage is only one
modification of human life, and human life is not commonly in itself a state of
exquisite extremes; but is for the most part that mixed and moderate state, so
naturally dreaded by those who set out with fancying this world a state of
rapture, and so naturally expected by those who know it to be a state of
probation and discipline. Marriage, therefore, is only one condition, and often
the best condition of that imperfect state of being which, though seldom very
exquisite, is often very tolerable; and which may yield much comfort to those
who do not look for constant transport. But unfortunately, those who find
themselves disappointed of the unceasing raptures they had anticipated in
marriage, disdaining to sit down with so poor a provision as comfort, and
scorning the acceptance of that moderate lot which Providence commonly bestows
with a view to check despondency and to repress presumption; give themselves up
to the other alternative; and, by abandoning their hearts to discontent, make
to themselves that misery with which their fervid imaginations had filled the
opposite scale.

The truth is, these young ladies are very apt to pick up their opinions, less
from the divines than the poets; and the poets, though it must be confessed
they are some of the best embellishers of life, are not quite the safest
conductors through it: for in traveling through a wilderness, though we avail
ourselves of the harmony of singing-birds to render the grove delightful, yet
we never think of following them as guides to conduct us through its labyrinths.

Those women, in whom the natural defects of a warm temper have been
strengthened by an education which fosters their faults, are very dextrous in
availing themselves of a hint, when it favors a ruling inclination, sooths
vanity, indulges indolence, or gratifies their love of power. They have heard
so often from their favorite sentimental authors, and their more flattering
male friends, that when Nature denied them strength, she gave them fascinating
graces in compensation; that their strength consists in their weakness; and
that they are endowed with arts of persuasion which supply the absence of
force, and the place of reason; that they learn, in time, to pride themselves
on that very weakness, and to become vain of their imperfections; till at
length they begin to claim for their defects, not only pardon, but admiration.
Hence they get to cherish a species of feeling which, if not checked,
terminates in excessive selfishness; they learn to produce their inability to
bear contradiction as a proof of their tenderness; and to indulge in that sort
of irritability in all that relates to themselves, which inevitably leads to
the utter exclusion of all interest in the sufferings of others. Instead of
exercising their sensibility in the wholesome duty of relieving distress and
visiting scenes of sorrow, that sensibility itself is pleaded as a reason for
their not being able to endure sights of woe, and for shunning the distress it
should be exerted in removing. That exquisite sense of feeling which God
implanted in the heart as a stimulus to quicken us in relieving the miseries of
others, is thus introverted, and learns to consider self not as the agent, but
the object of compassion. Tenderness is made an excuse for being hard-hearted;
and instead of drying the weeping eyes of others, this false delicacy reserves
its selfish tears for the more elegant and less expensive sorrows of the
melting novel or the pathetic tragedy.

When feeling stimulates only to self-indulgence; when the more exquisite
affections of sympathy and pity evaporate in sentiment, instead of flowing out
in active charity, and affording assistance, protection, or consolation to
every species of distress; it is an evidence that the feeling is of a spurious
kind; and instead of being nourished as an amiable tenderness, it should be
subdued as a fond and base self-love.

That idleness, to whose cruel inroads many women of fortune are unhappily
exposed, from not having been trained to consider wholesome occupation,
vigorous exertion, and systematic employment, as making part of the
indispensable duties of life, lays them open to a thousand evils of this kind,
from which the useful and the busy are exempted: and, perhaps, it would not be
easy to find a more pitiable object than a woman with a great deal of time and
a great deal of money on her hands, who, never having been taught the
conscientious use of either, squanders both at random, or rather moulders both
away, without plan, without principle, and without pleasure; all whose projects
begin and terminate in self: who considers the rest of the world only as they
may be subservient to her gratification; and to whom it never occurred, that
both her time and money were given for the gratification and good of others.

It is not much to the credit of the other sex, that they now and then lend
themselves to the indulgence of this selfish spirit in their wives, and cherish
by a kind of false fondness those faults which should be combated by good sense
and a reasonable counteraction: slothfully preferring a little false peace, the
purchase of precarious quiet, and the reputation of good nature, to the higher
duty of forming the mind, fixing the principles, and strengthening the
character of her with whom they are connected. Perhaps too, a little vanity in
the husband helps out his good nature; he secretly rewards himself for his
sacrifice by the consciousness of his superiority; he feels a self-complacency
in his patient condescension to her weakness, which tacitly flatters his own
strength: and he is, as it were, paid for stooping by the increased sense of
his own tallness. Seeing also, perhaps, but little of other women, he gets to
believe that they are all pretty much alike, and that, as a man of sense, he
must content himself with what he takes to be the common lot. Whereas, in
truth, by his misplaced indulgence, he has rather made his own lot than drawn
it; and thus, through an indolent despair in the husband of being able to
effect any improvement by opposition, it happens, that many a helpless,
fretful, and daudling wife acquires a more powerful ascendancy than the most
discreet and amiable woman; and that the most absolute female tyranny is
established by these sickly and capricious humors.

The poets again, who, to do them justice, are always ready to lend a helping
hand when any mischief is to be done, have contributed their full share toward
confirming these feminine follies: they have strengthened by adulatory maxims,
sung in seducing strains, those faults which their talents and their influence
should have been employed in correcting. When fair and youthful females are
complimented with being Fine by defect and delicately weak!
is not a standard of feebleness held out to them to which vanity will gladly
resort, and to which softness and indolence can easily act up, or rather (...)
down, if I may be allowed the expression?

When ladies are told by the same misleading, but to them high, authority, that
smiles and tears are the irresistible arms with which Nature has furnished them
for conquering the strong, will they not eagerly fly to this cheap and ready
artillery, instead of laboring to furnish themselves with a reasonable mind,
an equable temper, and a meek and quiet spirit?

Every animal is endowed by Providence with the peculiar powers adapted to its
nature and its wants; while none, except the human, by grafting art on natural
sagacity, injures or mars the gift. Spoilt women, who fancy there is something
more picquant and alluring in the mutable graces of caprice, than in the
monotonous smoothness of an even temper, and who also having heard much, as was
observed before, about their "amiable weakness, "learn to look about them for
the best succedaneum to strength, the supposed absence of which they sometimes
endeavor to supply by artifice. By this engine the weakest woman frequently
furnishes the converse to the famous reply of the French Minister, who, when he
was accused of governing the mind of that feeble Queen Mary de Medicis by
sorcery, replied, that the only sorcery he had used, was that influence which
strong minds naturally have over weak ones.

But though it be fair so to study the tempers, defects, and weaknesses of
others, as to convert our knowledge of them to the promotion of their benefit
and our own; and though it be making a lawful use of our penetration to avail
ourselves of the faults of others for "their good to edification;" yet all
deviations from the straight line of truth and simplicity; every plot
insidiously to turn influence to unfair account; all contrivances to extort
from a bribed complaisance what reason and justice would refuse to our wishes;
these are some of the operations of that lowest and most despicable engine,
selfish cunning, by which little minds sometimes govern great ones.

And unluckily, women from their natural desire to please, and from their
sometimes doubting by what means this grand end may be best effected, are in
more danger of being led into dissimulation than men; for dissimulation is the
result of weakness, and the refuge of doubt and distrust, rather than of
conscious strength, the dangers of which lie another way. Frankness, truth, and
simplicity, therefore, as they are inexpressibly charming, so are they
peculiarly commendable in women, and nobly evince that while the possessors of
them wish to please, (and why should they not wish it?) they disdain to have
recourse to any thing but what is fair, and just, and honorable to effect it;
that they scorn to attain the most desired end by any but the most lawful
means. The beauty of simplicity is indeed so intimately felt and generally
acknowledged by all who have a true taste for personal, moral, or intellectual
beauty, that women of the deepest artifice often find their account in assuming
an exterior the most foreign to their character, and by affecting the most
studied naivete. It is curious to see the quantity of art some people put in
practice in order to appear natural; and the deep design which is set at work
to exhibit simplicity. And indeed this feigned simplicity is the most
mischievous, because the most engaging of all the Proteus forms which
dissimulation can put on. For the most free and bold sentiments have been
sometimes hazarded with fatal success under this unsuspected mask. And an
innocent, quiet, indolent, artless manner, has been adopted as the most refined
and successful accompaniment of sentiments, ideas, and designs, neither artless
nor innocent.

CHAP. XVI.
On dissipation, and the modern habits of fashionable life.

PERHAPS the interests of true friendship, elegant conversation, mental
improvement, social pleasure, maternal duty, and conjugal comfort, never
received such a blow as when Fashion issued out that arbitrary and universal
decree, that every body must be acquainted with every body; together with that
consequent, authoritative, but rather inconvenient clause, that every body must
also go every where every night. The devout obedience paid to this law is
incompatible with the very being of friendship; for as the circle of
acquaintance expands, and it will be continually expanding, the affections will
be beaten out into such thin lamina as to leave little solidity remaining. The
heart which is continually exhausting itself in professions grows cold and
hard. The feelings of kindness diminish in proportion as the expression of it
becomes more diffuse and indiscriminate. The very traces of simplicity and
godly sincerity in a delicate female, wear away imperceptibly by constant
collision with the world at large. And perhaps no woman takes so little
interest in the happiness of her real friends, as she whose affections are
incessantly evaporating in universal civilities; as she who is saying fond and
flattering things at random to a circle of five hundred people every night.

The decline and fall of animated and instructive conversation has been in a
good measure effected by this barbarous project of assembling en mass. An
excellent prelate, The late Bishop of Horn.
with whose friendship the author was long honored, and who himself excelled
in the art of conversation, used to remark, that a few years had brought about
a great revolution in the manners of society; that it used to be the custom,
previously to going into company, to think that something was to be
communicated or received, taught or learnt; that the powers of the
understanding were expected to be brought into exercise, and that it was
therefore necessary to quicken the mind, by reading and thinking, for the share
the individual might be expected to take in the general discourse; but that
knowledge, and taste, and wit, and erudition, seemed now to be scarcely
considered as necessary materials to be brought into the pleasurable commerce
of the world; because now there was little chance of turning them to much
account; and therefore he who possessed them, and he who possessed them not,
were nearly on a footing.

It is obvious also that multitudinous assemblies are so little favorable to
that cheerfulness which it should seem to be their very end to promote, that if
there were any chemical process by which the quantum of spirits animal or
intellectual could be ascertained, the diminution would be found to have been
inconceivably great, since the transformation of man and woman from a social to
a gregarious animal.

But if it be true that friendship, society, and cheerfulness, have sustained
so much injury by this change of manners, how much more pointedly does the
remark apply to family happiness!

Notwithstanding the known fluctuation of manners and the mutability of
language, could it be foreseen, when the Apostle Paul exhorted married women to
be keepers at home, that the time would arrive when that very phrase would be
selected to designate one of the most decided acts of dissipation? Could it be
foreseen that when a fine lady should send out a notification that on such a
night she shall be AT HOME, these two significant words (besides intimating the
rarity of the thing) would present to the mind an image the most undomestic
which language can convey? My country readers, who may require to have it
explained that these two magnetic words now possess the powerful influence of
drawing together every thing fine within the sphere of their attraction, may
need also to be apprized, that the guests afterward are not asked what was
said by the company, but whether the crowd was prodigious, the rule for
deciding on the merit of a fashionable society not being by the taste or the
spirit, but by the score and the hundred. The question of pleasure, like a
Parliamentary question, is now carried by numbers. And when two parties modish,
like two parties political, are run one against another on the same night, the
same kind of mortification attends the leader of a defeated minority, the same
triumph attends the exulting carrier of superior numbers, in the one case as in
the other.

An eminent divine has said, that perseverance in prayer will either make a man
leave off sinning, or a continuance in sin will make him leave off prayer. This
remark may be accommodated to those ladies who, while they are devoted to the
enjoyments of the world, yet retain considerable solicitude for the instruction
of their daughters. But if they are really in earnest to give them a Christian
education, they must themselves renounce a dissipated life. Or if they resolve
to pursue the chase of pleasure, they must renounce this prime duty. Contraries
cannot unite. The moral nurture of a tall daughter can no more be administered
by a mother whose time is absorbed by crowds abroad, than the physical nurture
of her infant offspring can be supplied by her in a perpetual absence from
home. And is not that a preposterous affection which leads a mother to devote a
few months to the inferior duty of furnishing aliment to the mere animal life,
and then to desert her post when the more important moral and intellectual
cravings require sustenance? This great object is not to be effected with the
shreds and parings rounded off from the circle of a dissipated life; but in
order to its adequate execution, the mother should carry it on with the same
spirit and perseverance at home, which the father thinks it necessary to be
exerting abroad in his public duty or professional engagements.

The usual vindication (and in theory it has a plausible sound) which has been
offered for the large portion of time spent by women in acquiring ornamental
talents is, that they are calculated to make the possessor love home, and that
they innocently fill up the hours of leisure. The plea has indeed so promising
an appearance, that it is worth inquiring whether it be in fact true. Do we
then, on fairly pursuing the inquiry, discover that those who have spent most
time in such light acquisitions, are really remarkable for loving home or
staying quietly there? or that when there, they are sedulous in turning time to
the best account? I speak not of that rational and respectable class of women,
who, applying (as many of them do) these elegant talents to their true purpose,
employ them to fill up the vacancies of better occupations, and to embellish
the leisure of a life actively good. But do we generally see that even the most
valuable and sober part of the reigning female acquisitions leads their
possessor to scenes most favorable to the enjoyment of them? to scenes which
we should naturally suppose she would seek, in order to the more effectual
cultivation of such rational pleasures?

Would not those delightful pursuits, botany and drawing, for instance, seem
likely to court the fields, the woods, and gardens of the paternal seat, as
more congenial to their nature, and more appropriate to their exercise, than
barren watering places, destitute of a tree, or an herb, or a flower, and not
affording an hour's interval from successive pleasures, to profit by the scene
even if it abounded with the whole vegetable world, from the Cedar of Lebanon
to the Hyssop on the wall.

From the mention of watering places, may the author be allowed to suggest a
few remarks on the evils which have arisen from the general conspiracy of the
gay to usurp the regions of the sick; and from their converting the
health-restoring fountains, meant as a refuge for disease, into the resorts of
vanity for those who have no disease but idleness?

This inability of staying at home, as it is one of the most infallible, so it
is one of the most dangerous symptoms of the reigning mania. It would be more
tolerable, did this epidemic malady only break out, as formerly, during the
winter, or some one season. Heretofore, the tenantry and the poor, the natural
dependents on the rural mansions of the opulent, had some definite period to
which they might joyfully look forward for the approach of those patrons, part
of whose business in life it is to influence by their presence, to instruct by
their example, to sooth by their kindness, and to assist by their liberality,
those whom Providence, in the distribution of human lots, has placed under
their more immediate protection. Though it would be far from truth to assert
that dissipated people are never charitable, yet I will venture to say, that
dissipation is inconsistent with the spirit of charity. That affecting precept
followed by so gracious a promise, Never turn away thy face from any poor man,
and then the face of the Lord shall never be turned away from thee, cannot
literally mean that we should give to all, as then we should soon have nothing
left to give: but it seems to intimate the habitual attention, the duty of
inquiring out all cases of distress, in order to judge which are fit to be
relieved; now for this inquiry, for this attention, the dissipated have little
taste and less leisure.

Let a reasonable conjecture (for calculation would fail!) be made of how large
a diminution of the general good has been effected in this single respect, by
causes, which, though they do not seem important in themselves, yet make no
inconsiderable part of the mischief arising from modern manners: and I speak
now to persons who intend to be charitable. What a deduction will be made from
the aggregate of charity, by a circumstance apparently trifling, when we
consider what would be the beneficial effects of that regular bounty which must
almost unavoidably result from the evening walks of a great and benevolent
family among the cottages of their own domain: the thousand little acts of,
comparatively, unexpensive kindness which the sight of petty wants and
difficulties would excite; wants, which will scarcely be felt in the relation;
and which will probably be neither seen, nor felt, nor fairly represented, in
their long absences, by an agent. And what is even almost more than the good
done, is the habit of mind kept up in those who do it. Would not this habit,
exercised on the Christian principle, that "even a cup of cold water," given
upon right motives, shall not lose its reward; while the giving "all their
goods to feed the poor," without the true principle of charity, shall profit
them nothing; would not this habit, I say, be almost the best part of the
education of daughters It would be a pleasant summer amusement for our young
ladies of fortune, if they were to preside at such spinning feasts as are
instituted at Nun^ham for the promotion of virtue and industry in their own
sex. Pleasurable anniversaries of this kind would serve to combine in the minds
of the poor two ideas which ought never to be separated, but which they are not
very forward to unite, -- that the great wish to make them happy as well as
good. Occasional approximations of the rich and poor, for the purposes of
relief and instruction, and annual meetings for the purpose of innocent
pleasure, would do much toward wearing away discontent, and contribute to
reconcile the lower class to that state in which it has pleased God to place
them.
?

But transplant this wealthy and bountiful family periodically to the frivolous
and uninteresting bustle of the watering place; there it is not denied that
frequent public and fashionable acts of charity may make a part, (and it is
well they do) of the business and amusement of the day; with this latter,
indeed, they are sometimes good-naturedly mixed up. But how shall we compare
the regular systematical good these persons would be doing at their own home,
with the light, and amusing, and bustling bounties of the public place? The
illegal raffle at the toyshop, may relieve, it is true, some distress, but this
distress though it may be real, and though if real, it ought to be relieved, is
far less easily ascertained than the wants of the poor round a person's own
door, or the debts of a distressed tenant. How shall we compare the broad
stream of bounty which should be flowing through and refreshing whole
districts, with the penurious current of the subscription breakfast for the
needy musician, in which the price of the gift is taken out in the diversion,
and in which pleasure dignifies itself with the name of bounty? How shall we
compare the attention, and time, and zeal which would otherwise, perhaps, be
devoted to the village school, spent in hawking about benefit tickets for a
broken player, while the kindness of the benefactress, perhaps, is rewarded by
scenes in which her charity is not always repaid by the purity of the
exhibition?

Far be it from the author to wish to check the full tide of charity wherever
it is disposed to flow! Would she could multiply the already abundant streams,
and behold every source purified! But in the public resorts there are many who
are able and willing to give. In the sequestered, though populous village,
there is, perhaps only one affluent family: the distress which they do not
behold, will probably not be attended to: the distress which they do not
relieve will probably not be relieved at all: the wrongs which they do not
redress will go unredressed: the oppressed whom they do not rescue will sink
under the tyranny of the oppressor. Through their own rural domains too,
charity runs in a clearer current, and is under less suspicion of being
polluted by that muddy tincture which it is sometimes apt to contract in
passing through the impure soil of the world.

But to return from this too long digression: the old standing objection
formerly brought forward by the prejudices of the other sex, and too eagerly
laid hold on as a shelter for indolence and ignorance by ours, was, that
intellectual accomplishments too much absorbed the thoughts and affections,
took women off from the necessary attention to domestic duties, and
superinduced a contempt or neglect of whatever was useful. -- But it is
peculiarly the character of the present day to detect absurd opinions, and
expose plausible theories by the simple and decisive answer of experiment; and
it is presumed that this popular error, as well as others, is daily receiving
the refutation of actual experience. For it cannot surely be maintained on
ground that is any longer tenable, that acquirements truly rational are
calculated to draw off the mind from real duties. Whatever removes prejudices,
whatever stimulates industry, whatever rectifies the judgment, whatever
corrects self-conceit, whatever purifies the taste, and raises the
understanding, will be likely to contribute to moral excellence: to woman moral
excellence is the grand object of education; and of moral excellence, domestic
life is to woman the proper sphere.

Count over the list of females who have made shipwreck of their fame and
virtue, and have furnished the most lamentable examples of the dereliction of
family duties; and the number will not be found considerable who have been led
astray by the pursuit of knowledge. And if a few deplorable instances of this
kind be produced, it will commonly be found that there was little infusion into
the minds of such women of that correcting principle without which all other
knowledge only "puffs up."

The time nightly expended in late female vigils is expended by the light of
far other lamps than those which are fed by the student's oil; and if families
are to be found who are neglected through too much study in the mistress, it
will probably be proved to be Hoyle, and not Homer, who has robbed her children
of her time and affections. For one family which has been neglected by the
mother's passion for books, an hundred have been deserted through her passion
for play. The husband of a fashionable woman will not often find that the
library is the apartment the expenses of which involve him in debt or disgrace.
And for one literary slattern, who now manifests her indifference to her
husband by the neglect of her person, there are scores of elegant spendthrifts
who ruin theirs by excess of decoration.

May I digress a little while I remark, that I am far from asserting that
literature has never filled women with vanity and self-conceit; the contrary is
too obvious: but I will assert, that in general those whom books are supposed
to have spoiled, would have been spoiled in another way without them. She who
is a vain pedant because she has read much, has probably that defect in her
mind which would have made her a vain fool if she had read nothing. It is not
her having more knowledge, but less sense, which makes her insufferable; and
ignorance would have added little to her value, for it is not what she has, but
what she wants, which makes her unpleasant. These instances too furnish only a
fresh argument for the general cultivation of the female mind. The wider
diffusion of sound knowledge, would remove that temptation to be vain which may
be excited by its rarity.

But while we would assert that a woman of a cultivated intellect is not driven
by the same necessity as others into the giddy whirl of public resort; who but
regrets that real cultivation does not inevitably preserve her from it? No
wonder that inanity of character, that vacuity of mind, that torpid ignorance,
should plunge into dissipation as their natural refuge; should seek to bury
their insignificance in the crowd of pressing multitudes, and hope to escape
analysis and detection in the undistinguished masses of mixed assemblies! There
attrition rubs all bodies smooth, and makes all surfaces alike; thither
superficial and external accomplishments naturally fly as to their proper scene
of action; as to a field where competition in such trifles is in perpetual
exercise; where the laurels of admiration are to be won, where the trophies of
vanity may be carried off triumphantly.

It would indeed be matter of little comparative regret, if this corrupt air
were breathed only by those whose natural element it seems to be; but who can
forbear lamenting that the power of fashion attracts into this impure and
unwholesome atmosphere, minds also of a better make, of higher aims and ends,
of more ethereal temper? that it attracts even those who, renouncing enjoyments
for which they have a genuine taste, and which would make them really happy,
neglect society they love and pursuits they admire, in order that they may seem
happy and be fashionable in the chase of pleasures they despise, and in company
they disapprove! But no correctness of taste, no depth of knowledge, will
infallibly preserve a woman from this contagion, unless her heart be impressed
with a deep Christian conviction that she is responsible for the application of
knowledge as well as for the dedication of time.

This contagion is so deep, so wide, and fatal, that if I were called upon to
assign the predominant cause of the greater part of the misfortunes and
corruptions of the great and gay in our days, I should not look for it
principally in any obviously great or striking circumstance; not in the
practice of notorious vices, not originally in the dereliction of Christian
principle; but I should without hesitation ascribe it to a growing, regular,
systematic series of amusements; to an incessant, boundless, and not very
disreputable DISSIPATION. Other corruptions, though more formidable in
appearance, are yet less fatal in some respects, because they leave us
intervals to reflect on their turpitude, and spirit to lament their excesses;
but dissipation is the more hopeless, as by engrossing almost the entire life,
and enervating the whole moral and intellectual system, it leaves neither time
for reflection, nor space for self-examination, nor temper for the cherishing
of right affections, nor leisure for the operation of sound principles, nor
interval for regret, nor vigor to resist temptation, nor energy to struggle
for amendment.

The great master of the science of pleasure among the ancients, who reduced it
into a system, which he called the chief good of man, directed that there
should be interval enough between the succession of delights to sharpen
inclination; and accordingly instituted periodical days of abstinence; well
knowing that gratification was best promoted by previous self-denial. But so
little do our votaries of fashion understand the true nature of pleasure, that
one amusement is allowed to overtake another without any interval, either for
recollection of the past or preparation for the future. Even on their own
selfish principle, therefore, nothing can be worse understood than this
continuity of enjoyment: for to such a degree of labor is the pursuit carried,
that the pleasures exhaust instead of exhilarating, and the recreations require
to be rested from.

For, not to argue the question on the ground of religion, but merely on that
of present enjoyment; look abroad and see who are the people that complain of
weariness, listlessness, and dejection. You will not find them among the class
of such as are overdone with work, but with pleasure. The natural and healthful
fatigues of business may be recruited by simple and cheap gratifications; but a
spirit worn down with the toils of amusement, requires pleasures of poignancy;
varied, multiplied, stimulating!

It has been observed by medical writers, that that sober excess in which many
indulge, by eating and drinking a little too much at every day's dinner and
every night's supper, more effectually undermines the health, than those more
rare excesses by which others now and then break in upon a life of general
sobriety. This illustration is not introduced with a design to recommend
occasional deviations into gross vice, by way of a pious receipt for mending
the morals; but merely to suggest that there is a probability that those who
are sometimes driven by unresisted passion into irregularities which shock
their cooler reason, are more liable to be roused to a sense of their danger,
than persons whose perceptions of evil are blunted through a round of
systematical, unceasing, and yet not scandalous dissipation. And when I affirm
that this system of regular indulgence relaxes the soul, enslaves the heart,
bewitches the senses, and thus disqualifies for pious thought or useful action,
without having any thing in it so gross as to shock the conscience; and when I
hazard an opinion that this state is more formidable, because less alarming,
than that which bears upon it a more determined character of evil, I no more
mean to speak of the latter in slight and palliating terms, than I would
intimate, because the sick sometimes recover from a fever, but seldom from a
palsy, that a fever is therefore a safe or a healthy state.

But there seems to be an error in the first concoction, out of which the
subsequent errors successively grow. First then, as has been observed before,
the showy education of women tends chiefly to qualify them for the glare of
public assemblies: secondly, they seem in many instances to be so educated,
with a view to the greater probability of their being splendidly married:
thirdly, it is alleged in vindication of those dissipated practices, that
daughters can only be seen and admirers procured at balls, operas, and
assemblies: and that therefore, by a natural consequence, balls, operas, and
assemblies must be followed up without intermission till the object be
effected. For the accomplishment of this object it is that all this complicated
machinery had been previously set a-going, and kept in motion with an activity
not at all slackened by the disordered state of the system; for some machines,
instead of being stopped, go faster because the true spring is out of order;
the only difference being that they go wrong, and so the increased rapidity
adds only to the quantity of error.

It is also, as we have already remarked, an error to fancy that the love of
pleasure exhausts itself by indulgence, and that the very young are chiefly
addicted to it. The contrary appears to be true. The desire often grows with
the pursuit in the same degree as motion is quickened by the continuance of the
gravitating force.

First then, it cannot be thought unfair to trace back the excessive fondness
for amusement to that mode of education we have elsewhere reprobated. Few of
the accomplishments, falsely so called, assist the developement of the
faculties: they do not exercise the judgment, nor bring into action those
powers which fit the heart and mind for the occupations of life; they do not
prepare women to love home, to understand its occupations, to enliven its
uniformity, to fulfill its duties, to multiply its comforts: they do not lead to
that sort of experimental logic, if I may so speak, compounded of observation
and reflection, which makes up the moral science of life and manners. Talents
which have display for their object despise the narrow stage of home: they
demand mankind for their spectators, and the world for their theater.

While one cannot help shrinking a little from the idea of a delicate young
creature, lovely in person and engaging in mind and manners, sacrificing
nightly at the public shrine of Fashion, at once the votary and the victim; one
cannot help figuring to oneself how much more interesting she would appear in
the eyes of a man of feeling, did he behold her in the more endearing
situations of domestic life. And who can forbear wishing, that the good sense,
good taste, and delicacy of the men had rather led them to prefer seeking
companions for life in the almost sacred quiet of a virtuous home? There they
might have had the means of seeing and admiring those amiable beings in the
best point of view: there they might have been enabled to form a juster
estimate of female worth, than is likely to be obtained in scenes where such
qualities and talents as might be expected to add to the stock of domestic
comfort must necessarily be kept in the back ground, and where such only can be
brought into view as are not particularly calculated to insure the certainty of
home delights.

O! did they keep their persons fresh and new,
How would they pluck allegiance from men's hearts,
And win by rareness!
But by what unaccountable infatuation is it that men too, even men of sense,
join in the confederacy against their own happiness, by looking for their home
companions in the resorts of vanity? Why do not such men rise superior to the
illusions of fashions? why do they not uniformly seek her who is to preside in
their families in the bosom of her own? in the practice of every domestic duty,
in the exercise of every amiable virtue, in the exertion of every elegant
accomplishment? those accomplishments of which we have been reprobating, not
the possession, but the application? there they would find her exerting them to
their true end, to enliven business, to animate retirement, to embellish the
charming scene of family delights, to heighten the interesting pleasures of
social intercourse, and, rising to their noblest object, to adorn the doctrine
of God her Savior.

If, indeed, woman were more outside, form and face only, and if mind made up
no part of her composition, it would follow that a ball-room was quite as
appropriate a place for choosing a wife, as an exhibition room for choosing a
picture. But, inasmuch as women are not mere portraits, their value not being
determinable by a glance of the eye, it follows that a different mode of
appreciating their value, and a different place for viewing them antecedent to
their being individually selected, is desirable. The two cases differ also in
this, that if a man select a picture for himself from among all its exhibited
competitors, and bring it to his own house, the picture being passive, he is
able to fix it there: while the wife, picked up at a public place, and
accustomed to incessant display, will not, it is probable, when brought home,
stick so quietly to the spot where he fixes her; but will escape to the
exhibition-room again, and continue to be displayed at every subsequent
exhibition, just as if she were not become private property, and had never been
definitively disposed of.

It is the novelty of a thing which astonishes us, and not its absurdity:
objects may be so long kept before the eye that it begins no longer to observe
them; or may be brought into such close contact with it, that it does not
discern them. Long habit so reconciles us to almost any thing, that the
grossest improprieties cease to strike us when they once make a part of the
common course of action. This, by the way, is a strong reason for carefully
sifting every opinion and every practice before we let them incorporate into
the mass of our habits, after which they will be no more examined. -- Would it
not be accounted preposterous for a young man to say he had fancied such a lady
would dance a better minuet, because he had seen her behave devoutly at Church,
and therefore had chosen her for his partner? and yet he is not thought at all
absurd when he intimates that he chose a partner for life because he was
pleased with her at a ball. Surely the place of choosing and the motive of
choice, would be just as appropriate in one case as in the other, and the
mistake, if the judgment failed, not quite so serious.

There is, among the more elevated classes of society, a certain set of persons
who are pleased exclusively to call themselves, and whom others by a sort of
compelled courtesy are pleased to call, the fine world. This small detachment
consider their situation with respect to the rest of mankind, just as the
ancient Grecians did theirs; that is, as the Grecians thought there were but
two sorts of beings, and that all who were not Grecians were barbarians; so
this certain set conceives of society as resolving itself into two distinct
classes, the fine world and the people; to which last class they turn over all
who do not belong to their little coterie, however high their rank, or fortune,
or merit. Celebrity, in their estimation, is not bestowed by birth or talents,
but by being connected with them. They have laws, immunities, privileges, and
almost a language of their own; they form a kind of distinct cast, and with a
sort of esprit du corpse detach themselves from others, even in general society,
by an affectation of distance and coldness; and only whisper and smile in their
own little groups of the initiated; their confines are jealously guarded, and
their privileges are incommunicable.

In this society a young man loses his natural character, which, whatever it
might have been originally, is melted down and cast into the one prevailing
mould of Fashion; all the strong, native, discriminating qualities of his mind
being made to take one shape, one stamp, one superscription! However varied and
distinct might have been the materials which nature threw into the crucible,
plastic Fashion takes care that they shall all be the same, or at least appear
the same, when they come out of the mould. A young man in such an artificial
state of society, accustomed to the voluptuous ease, refined luxuries, soft
accommodations, obsequious attendance, and all the unrestrained indulgencies of
a fashionable club, is not to be expected after marriage to take very cordially
to a home, unless very extraordinary exertions are made to amuse, to attach,
and to interest him: and he is not likely to lend a very helping hand to the
happiness of the union, whose most laborious exertions have hitherto been
little more than a selfish stratagem to reconcile health with pleasure. Excess
of gratification has only served to make him irritable and exacting; it will of
course be no part of his project to make sacrifices, he will expect to receive
them: and what would appear incredible to the Paladins of gallant times, and
the Chevaliers Preux of more heroic days, even in the necessary business of
establishing himself for life, he sometimes is more disposed to expect
attentions than to make advances.

Thus the indolent son of fashion, with a thousand fine, but dormant qualities,
which a bad tone of manners forbids him to bring into exercise; with real
energies which that tone does not allow him to discover, and an unreal apathy
which it commands him to feign; with the heart of an hero, perhaps, if called
into the field, affects at home the manners of a Sybarite; and he who, with a
Roman, or what is more, with a British valor, would leap into the gulf at the
call of public duty, Yet in the soft and piping time of peace,
when fashion has resumed her rights, would murmur if a rose leaf lay double
under him.

The clubs above alluded to, as has been said, generate and cherish luxurious
habits, from their perfect ease, undress, liberty, and inattentions to the
distinctions of rank: they promote a love of play, and in short, every temper
and spirit which tends to undomesticate; and what adds to the mischief is, all
this is attained at a cheap rate compared with what may be procured at home in
the same style.

These indulgencies, and this habit of mind, imply so much gratification of the
passions, that a woman can never hope successfully to counteract the evil by
supplying at home gratifications in a superior degree, which are of the same
kind. If she should attempt this, in a little time she will find that those
passions, to which she has trusted for making pleasant the married life of her
husband, will crave the still higher pleasures of the club; and while these are
pursued, she will be consigned over to solitary evenings at home, or driven
back to the old dissipations.

To conquer the passion for club gratifications, a woman must not strive to
feed it with sufficient aliment in the same kind in her society, either at home
or abroad; she must supplant and overcome it by a passion of a different
nature, which Providence has kindly planted within us, I mean by inspiring him
with the love of fireside enjoyments. But to qualify herself for administering
these, she must cultivate her understanding and her heart, and her temper,
acquiring at the same time that modicum of accomplishments suited to his taste,
which may qualify her for possessing, both for him and for herself, greater
varieties of safe recreation.

One great cause of the want of attachment in these modish couples is, that by
living in the world at large, they are not driven to depend on each other as
the chief source of comfort. Now it is pretty clear, in spite of modern
theories, that the very frame and being of societies, whether great or small,
public or private, is jointed and glued together by dependence. Those
attachments which arise from, and are compacted by, a sense of mutual wants,
mutual affection, mutual benefit, and mutual obligation, are the cement which
secure the union of the family as well as of the state.

Unfortunately, when two young persons of the above description marry, the
union is sometimes considered rather as the end than the beginning of an
engagement: the attachment of each to the other is rather viewed as an object
already completed, than as one which marriage is to confirm more closely. But
the companion for life is not always chosen from the purest motive; she is
selected, perhaps, because she is admired by other men, rather than because she
possesses in an eminent degree those peculiar qualities which are likely to
constitute the individual happiness of the man who chooses her. Vanity usurps
the place of affection; and indolence swallows up the judgment. Not happiness,
but some easy substitute for happiness, is pursued; and a choice which may
excite envy, rather than produce satisfaction, is adopted as the means of
effecting it.

The pair, not matched but joined, set out separately with their independent
and individual pursuits; whether it made a part of their original plan or not,
that they should be indispensably necessary to each other's comfort, the sense
of this necessity, probably not very strong at first, rather diminishes than
increases by time; they live so much in the world, and so little together, that
to stand well with their own set continues the favorite project of each; while
to stand well with each other is considered as an under-part of the plot in the
drama of life. Whereas, did they start in the conjugal race with the fixed idea
that they were to look to each other for their chief worldly happiness, not
only principle, but prudence, and even selfishness, would convince them of the
necessity of sedulously cultivating each other's esteem and affection as the
grand means of promoting that happiness. But vanity, and the desire of flattery
and applause, still continue to operate. Even after the husband is brought to
feel a perfect indifference for his wife, he still likes to see her decorated
in a style which may serve to justify his choice. He encourages her to set off
her person, not so much for his own gratification as that his self-love may be
flattered, by her continuing to attract the admiration of those whose opinion
is the standard by which he measures his fame, and which fame is to stand him
in the stead of happiness. Thus is she necessarily exposed to the twofold
temptation of being at once neglected by her husband, and exhibited as an
object of attraction to other men. If she escape this complicated danger, she
will be indebted for her preservation not to his prudence, but to her own
principles.

In some of these modish marriages, instead of the decorous neatness, the
pleasant intercourse, and the mutual warmth of communication of the once social
dinner; the late and uninteresting meal is commonly hurried over by the languid
and slovenly pair, that the one may have time to dress for his club, and the
other for her party. And in these cold abstracted tetes-a-tetes, they often
take as little pains to entertain each other, as if the one was precisely the
only human being in the world in whose eyes the other did not feel it necessary
to appear agreeable.

(...) if these young and perhaps really amiable persons could struggle against
the imperious tyranny of fashion, and contrive to pass a little time together,
so as to get acquainted with each other; and if each would live in the lively
and conscientious exercise of those talents and attractions which they
sometimes know how to produce on occasions not quite so justifiable; they
would, I am persuaded, often find out each other to be very agreeable people.
And both of them, delighted and delighting, receiving and bestowing happiness,
would no longer be driven to the necessity of perpetually flying from home as
from the only scene which offers no possible materials for pleasure.

It may seem a contradiction to have asserted that beings of all ages, tempers,
and talents should with such unremitting industry follow up any way of life if
they did not find some enjoyment in it; yet I appeal to the bosoms of these
incessant hunters in the chase of pleasure, whether they are really happy. No.
-- In the full tide and torrent of diversion, in the full blaze of gaiety, The
heart distrusting asks if this be joy?
But there is an anxious restlessness excited by the pursuit, which, if not
interesting, is bustling. There is the dread and partly the discredit of being
suspected of having one hour unmortgaged, not only to successive, but
contending engagements; this it is, and not the pleasure of the engagement
itself, which is the object. There is an agitation in the arrangements which
imposes itself on the vacant heart for happiness. There is a tumult kept up in
the spirits which is a busy though treacherous substitute for comfort. The
multiplicity of solicitations sooths vanity. The very regret that they cannot
be all accepted has its charms; for dignity is flattered because refusal
implies importance, and pre-engagement intimates celebrity. Then there is the
joy of being invited when others are neglected; the triumph of showing one's
less modish friend that one is going where she cannot come; and the feigned
regret at being obliged to go, assumed before her who is half wild at being
obliged to stay away. These are some of the supplemental shifts for happiness
with which vanity contrives to feed her hungry followers; too eager to be nice.

In the succession of open houses, in which Pleasure is to be started and
pursued on any given night, the actual place is never taken into the account of
enjoyment: the scene of which is always supposed to lie in any place where her
votaries happen not to be. Pleasure has no present tense: but in the house
which her pursuers have just quitted, and in the house to which they are just
hastening, a stranger might conclude the slippery goddess had really fixed her
throne, and that her worshippers considered the existing scene, which they
seemed compelled to suffer, but from which they were eager to escape, as really
detaining them from some positive joy to which they were flying in the next
crowd; till, if he met them there, he would find the component parts of each
precisely the same. He would hear the same stated phrases interrupted, not
answered, by the same stated replies; the unfinished sentence driven adverse to
the winds by pressing multitudes; the same warm regret mutually exchanged by
two friends (who had been expressly denied to each other all the winter) that
they had not met before; the same soft and smiling sorrow at being torn away
from each other now; the same anxiety to renew the meeting, with perhaps the
same secret resolution to avoid it. He would hear described with the same
pathetic earnestness the difficulties of getting into this house, and the
dangers of getting out of the la^^! the perilous retreat of former nights,
effected amidst the shock of chariots and the clang of contending coachmen! a
retreat indeed effected with a skill and peril little inferior to that of the
ten thousand, and detailed with far juster triumph; for that which happened
only once in a life to the Grecian Hero occurs to these British heroines every
night. There is one point of resemblance, indeed, between them in which the
comparison fails; for the Commander, with a mauvaise honte at which a true
female veteran would blush, is remarkable for never naming himself.

With "mysterious reverence" I forbear to descant on those serious and
interesting rites, for the more august and solemn celebration of which Fashion
nightly convenes these splendid myriads to her more sumptuous temples. Rites!
which, when engaged in with due devotion, absorb the whole soul, and call every
passion into exercise, except indeed those of love, and peace, and kindness,
and gentleness. Inspiring rites! which stimulate fear, rouse hope, kindle zeal,
quicken dullness, sharpen discernment, exercise memory, inflame curiosity!
Rites! in short, in the due performance of which all the energies and
attentions, all the powers and abilities, all the abstraction and exertion, all
the diligence and devotedness, all the sacrifice of time, all the contempt of
ease, all the neglect of sleep, all the oblivion of care, all the risks of
fortune (half of which if directed to their true objects would change the very
face of the world): all these are concentrated to one point; a point in which
the wise and the weak, the learned and the ignorant, the fair and the
frightful, the sprightly and the dull, the rich and the poor, the Patrician and
Plebeian, meet in one common and uniform equality; an equality as religiously
respected in these solemnities, in which all distinctions are levelled at a
blow, and of which the very spirit is therefore democratical, as it is combated
in all other instances.

Behold four Kings in majesty revered,
With hoary whiskers and a forked beard;
And four fair Queens, whose hands sustain a flower,
The expressive emblem of their softer power;
Four Knaves in garbs succinct, a trusty band,
Caps on their heads, and halberts in their hand;
And party-colored troops, a shining train,
Drawn forth to combat on the velvet plain. Rape of the Lock.
.
CHAP. XVII.
On public amusements.

IT is not proposed to enter the long contested field of controversy as to the
individual amusements which may be considered as safe and lawful for those
women of the higher class who make a strict profession of Christianity. The
judgment they will be likely to form for themselves on this subject, and the
plan they will consequently adopt, will depend much on the clearness or
obscurity of their religious views, and on the greater or less progress they
have made in their Christian course. It is in their choice of amusements that
you get in some measure to know the real dispositions of mankind. In their
business, in the leading employments of life, their path is in a good degree
chalked out for them: there is in this respect a sort of general character
wherein the greater part, more or less, must coincide. But in their pleasures
the choice is voluntary, the taste is self-directed, the propensity is
independent; and of course the habitual state, the genuine bent and bias of the
temper, are most likely to be seen in those pursuits which every man is at
liberty to choose for himself.

When a truly religious principle shall have acquired such a degree of force as
to produce that conscientious and habitual improvement of time before
recommended, it will discover itself by an increasing indifference and even
deadness to those pleasures which are interesting to the world at large. A
woman under the predominating influence of such a principle, will begin to
discover that the same thing which in itself is innocent may yet be
comparatively wrong. She will begin to feel that there are many amusements and
employments which, though they have nothing censurable in themselves, yet if
they be allowed to entrench on hours which ought to be dedicated to still
better purposes; or if they are protracted to an undue length; or above all, if
by softening and relaxing her mind and dissipating her spirits, they so
indispose her for better pursuits as to render subsequent duties a burden,
become in that case clearly wrong for her, whatever they may be for others. Now
as temptations of this sort are the peculiar dangers of better kind of
characters, the sacrifice of such little gratifications as may have no great
harm in them, come in among the daily calls to self-denial in a Christian.

The fine arts, for instance, polite literature, elegant society, these are
among the lawful, and liberal, and becoming recreations of higher life; yet if
even these be cultivated to the neglect or exclusion of severer duties; if they
interfere with serious studies, or disqualify the mind for religious exercises,
it is an intimation that they have been too much indulged; and, under such
circumstances, it might be the part of Christian circumspection to inquire if
the time devoted to them ought not to be abridged. Above all, a tender
conscience will never lose sight of one safe rule of determining in all
doubtful cases: if the point be so nice that though we hope upon the whole
there may be no harm in engaging in it, we may at least be always quite sure
that there can be no harm in letting it alone. The adoption of this simple rule
would put a period to much unprofitable casuistry.

The principle of being responsible for the use of time once fixed in the mind,
the conscientious Christian will be making a continual progress in the great
art of turning time to account. In the first stages of her religion she will
have abstained from pleasures which began a little to wound the conscience, or
which assumed a questionable shape; but she will probably have abstained with
regret, and with a secret wish that conscience could have permitted her to keep
well with pleasure and religion too. But you may discern in her subsequent
course that she has reached a more advanced stage, by her beginning to neglect
even such pleasures or employments as have no moral turpitude in them, but are
merely what are called innocent. This relinquishment arises, not so much from
her feeling still more the restraints of religion, as from the improvement in
her religious taste. Pleasures cannot now attach her merely from their being
innocent, unless they are interesting also, and to be interesting they must be
consonant to her superinduced views. She is not contented to spend a large
portion of her time harmlessly, it must be spent profitably also. Nay, if she
be indeed earnestly pressing toward the mark, it will not be even enough for
her that her present pursuit be good, if she be convinced that it might be
still better. Her contempt of ordinary enjoyments will increase in a direct
proportion to her increased relish for those pleasures which religion enjoins
and bestows. So that at length if it were possible to suppose that an angel
could come down to take off as it were the interdict, and to invite her to
resume all the pleasures she had renounced, and to resume them with complete
impunity, she would reject the invitation, because she would despise, from an
improvement in her spiritual taste, those delights from which she had at first
abstained through fear. Till her will and affections come heartily to be
engaged in the service of God, the progress will not be comfortable; but when
once they are so engaged, the attachment to this service will be cordial, and
her heart will not desire to go back and toil again in the drudgery of the
world. For her religion has not so much given her a new creed, as a new heart,
and a new life.

As her views are become new, so her tempers, dispositions, tastes, actions,
pursuits, choice of company, choice of amusements, are new also; her employment
of time is changed; her turn of conversation is altered; old things are passed
away, all things are become new. In dissipated and worldly society, she will
seldom fail to feel a sort of uneasiness, which will produce one of these two
effects; she will either, as proper seasons present themselves, struggle hard
to introduce such subjects as may be useful to others; or, supposing that she
finds herself unable to effect this, she will, as far as she prudently can,
absent herself from all unprofitable kind of society. Indeed her manner of
conducting herself under these circumstances may serve to furnish her with a
test of her own sincerity. For while people are contending for a little more of
this amusement* and pleading for a little extension of that gratification, and
fighting in order that they may hedge in a little more territory to their
pleasure ground, they are exhibiting a kind of evidence against themselves,
that they are not yet renewed in the spirit of their mind.

It has been warmly urged as an objection to certain religious books, and
particularly against a recent work of high worth and celebrity, by a
distinguished layman Practical View, etc. by Mr. Wilberforce.
, that they have set the standard of self-denial higher than reason or even
than Christianity requires. These works do indeed elevate the general tone of
religion to a higher pitch than is quite convenient to those who are at
infinite pains to construct a comfortable and comprehensive plan, which shall
unite the questionable pleasures of this world with the promised happiness of
the next. I say it has been sometimes objected, even by those readers who on
the whole greatly admire the particular work alluded to, that it is
unreasonably strict in the preceptive and prohibitory parts; and especially
that it individually and specifically forbids certain fashionable amusements,
with a severity not to be found in the scriptures; and is scrupulously rigid in
condemning diversions against which nothing is said in the New Testament; each
objector, however, is so far reasonable, as only to beg quarter for her own
favorite diversion, and generously abandons the defense of those in which she
herself has no pleasure.

But these objectors do not seem to understand the true genius of Christianity.
They do not consider that it is the character of the Gospel to exhibit a scheme
of principles, of which it is the tendency to infuse such a spirit of holiness
as must be utterly incompatible, not only with customs decidedly vicious, but
with the very spirit of worldly pleasure. They do not consider that
Christianity is neither a table of ethics, nor a system of opinions, nor a
bundle of rods to punish, nor an exhibition of rewards to allure, nor a scheme
of restraints, nor merely a code of laws; but it is a new principle infused
into the heart by the word and the spirit of God, out of which principle will
inevitably grow right opinions, renewed affections, correct morals, and holy
habits, with an invariable desire of pleasing God, and a constant fear of
offending him. A real Christian, whose heart is once thoroughly imbued with
this principle, can no more return to the amusements of the world, than a
philosopher can be refreshed with the diversions of the vulgar, or a man be
amused with the recreations of a child. The New Testament is not a mere
statute-book: it is not a table where every offense is detailed, and its
corresponding penalty annexed: it is not so much a compilation, as a spirit of
laws: it does not so much prohibit every individual wrong practice, as suggest
a temper and general principle with which every wrong practice is incompatible.
It did not, for instance, so much attack the then reigning and corrupt
fashions, which were probably, like the fashions of other countries, temporary
and local; but it struck at that worldliness, which is the root and stock from
which all corrupt fashions proceed.

The prophet Isaiah, who addressed himself more particularly to the Israelitish
women, inveighed not only against vanity, luxury, and immodesty, in general;
but with great propriety blamed even those precise instances of each, to which
the women of rank in the particular country he was addressing were especially
addicted; nay, he enters into the minute detail Isaiah, chap. iii.
of their very personal decorations, and brings specific charges against their
levity and extravagance of apparel; meaning, however, chiefly to censure the
turn of character which these indicated. But the Gospel of Christ, which was to
be addressed to all ages, stations, and countries, seldom contains any such
detailed animadversions; for though many of the censurable modes which the
prophet so severely reprobated, continued probably to be still prevalent in
Jerusalem in the days of our Savior, yet how little would it have suited the
universality of his mission, to have confined his preaching to such local,
limited, and fluctuating customs! not but that there are many texts which
actually do define the Christian conduct as well as temper, with sufficient
particularity to serve as a condemnation of many practices which are pleaded
for, and often to point pretty directly at them.

Had Peter, on that memorable day when he added three thousand converts to the
Church by a single sermon, narrowed his subject to a remonstrance against this
diversion, or that public place, or the other vain amusement, it might indeed
have suited the case of some of the female Jewish converts who were at present;
but such restrictions as might have been appropriate to them, would probably
not have applied to the cases of the Parthians and Medes, of which his audience
was partly composed; or such as might have belonged to them would have been
totally inapplicable to the Cretes and Arabians; or again, those which suited
these would not have applied to the Elamites and Mesopotamians. By such partial
and circumscribed addresses, his multifarious audience, composed of all nations
and countries, would not have been, as we are told they were, "pricked to the
heart." But when he preached on the broad ground of general repentance and
remission of sins in the name of Jesus Christ, it was no wonder that they all
cried out What shall we do? These collected foreigners, at their return home,
must have found very different usages to be corrected in their different
countries; of course a detailed restriction of the popular abuses at Jerusalem,
would have been of little use to strangers returning to their respective
nations. The ardent Apostle, therefore, acted more consistently in
communicating to them the large and comprehensive spirit of the Gospel, which
should at once involve all their scattered and separate duties, as well as
reprove all their scattered and separate corruptions; for the whole always
includes a part, and the greater involves the less. Christ and his disciples,
instead of limiting their condemnation to the peculiar vanities reprehended by
Isaiah, embraced the very soul and principle of them all, in such exhortations
as the following: "Be ye not conformed to the world:" -- If any man love the
world, the love of the Father is not in him: -- The fashion of this world
passes away. Our Lord and his Apostles, whose future unlimited audience was to
be made up out of the whole world, attacked the evil heart, out of which all
those incidental, local, and popular corruptions proceeded.

In the time of Christ and his immediate followers, the luxury and intemperance
of the Romans had arisen to a pitch before unknown in the world; but as the
same Gospel which its Divine Author and his disciples were then preaching to
the hungry and necessitous, was afterward to be preached to high and low, not
excepting the Roman Emperors themselves; the large precept, Whether ye eat or
drink, or whatever you do, do all to the glory of God, was likely to be of more
general use, than any separate exhortation to temperance, to thankfulness, to
moderation as to quantity or expense; which last indeed must always be left in
some degree to the judgment and circumstances of the individual.

When the Apostle of the Gentiles visited the "Saints of Caesar's household,"
he could hardly fail to have heard, nor could he have heard without abhorrence,
of some of the fashionable amusements in the court of Nero. He must have
reflected with peculiar indignation on many things which were practiced in the
Circensian games: yet, instead of pruning this corrupt tree, and singling out
even the inhuman gladiatorial sports for the object of his condemnation, he
laid his axe to the root of all sin, by preaching to them that Gospel of Christ
of which "he was not ashamed;" and showing to them that believed, that it was
the power of God and the wisdom of God. It is somewhat remarkable, that about
the very time of his preaching to the Romans, the public taste had sunk to such
an excess of depravity, that the very women engaged in those shocking
encounters with the gladiators.

But, in the first place, it was better that their right practice should grow
out of the right principle; and next, his specifically reprobating these
diversions might have had this ill effect, that succeeding ages, seeing that
they in their amusements came somewhat short of those dreadful excesses of the
polished Romans, would only have plumed themselves on their own comparative
superiority; and on this principle, even the bull-fights of Madrid might have
had their panegyrists. The truth is, the Apostle knew that such abominable
corruptions could never subsist together with Christianity, and in fact, the
honor of abolishing these barbarous diversions, was reserved for Constantine,
the first Christian emperor.

Besides, the Apostles, by inveighing against some particular diversions might
have seemed to sanction all which they did not actually censure: and as, in the
lapse of time and the revolution of governments, customs change and manners
fluctuate; had a minute reprehension of the fashions of the then existing age
been published in the New Testament, that portion of scripture must in time
have become obsolete, even in that very same country, when the fashions
themselves should have changed. Paul and his brother Apostles knew that their
epistles would be the oracles of the Christian world, when these temporary
diversions would be forgotten. In consequence of this knowledge, by the
universal precept to avoid the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eye, and the
pride of life, they have prepared a lasting antidote against the principle of
all corrupt pleasures, which will ever remain equally applicable to the loose
fashions of all ages, and of every country, to the end of the world.

Therefore to vindicate diversions, which are in themselves unchristian, on the
pretended ground that they are not specifically condemned in the gospel, would
be little less absurd than if the heroes of New Market should bring it as a
proof that their periodical meetings are not condemned in Scripture, because
St. Paul, when writing to the Corinthians, did not speak against these, or
because in availing himself of the Isthmian games, as a happy illustration of
the Christian race, he did not drop any censure on the practice itself: a
practice which was indeed as much more pure than the races of Christian
Britain, as the moderation of being contented with the triumph of a crown of
leaves, is superior to that criminal spirit of gambling which iniquitously
enriches the victor by beggaring the competitor.

Local abuses, as we have said, were not the object of a book whose
instructions were to be of universal and lasting application. As a proof of
this, little is said in the Gospel of the then prevailing corruption of
polygamy; nothing against the savage custom of exposing children, or even
against slavery; nothing expressly against suicide or duelling; the last Gothic
custom, indeed, did not exist among the crimes of Paganism. But is there not an
implied prohibition against polygamy in the general denunciation against
adultery? Is not exposing of children condemned in that charge against the
Romans, that "they were without natural affection?" Is there not a strong
censure against slavery conveyed in the command to do unto others as you would
have them do unto you? and against suicide and duelling, in the general
prohibition against murder, which is strongly enforced by the solemn manner in
which murder is traced back to its first seed of anger, in the sermon on the
mount?

Thus it is clear, that when Christ sent the Gospel to all nations, he meant
that that Gospel should proclaim those prime truths, general laws, and
fundamental doctrines, which must necessarily involve the prohibition of all
individual, local, and inferior errors; errors which could not have been
specifically guarded against, without having a distinct Gospel for every
country, or without swelling the divine volume into such inconvenient length as
would have defeated one great end of its promulgation "To the poor the Gospel
is preached." Luke, vii. 22.
. And while its leading principles are of universal application, it must
always, in some measure, be left to the discretion of the preacher, and to the
conscience of the hearer, to examine whether the life and habits of those who
profess it are conformable to its spirit.

The same Divine Spirit which indicted the Holy Scriptures, is promised to
purify the hearts and renew the natures of repenting and believing Christians;
and the compositions it inspired are in some degree analogous to the
workmanship it effects. It prohibited the vicious practices of the apostolical
days, by prohibiting the passions and principles which rendered them
gratifying; and still working in like manner on the hearts of real Christians,
it corrects the taste which was accustomed to find its proper gratification in
the resorts of vanity; and thus effectually provides for the reformation of the
habits, and infuses a relish for rational and domestic enjoyments, and for
whatever can administer pleasure to that spirit of peace, and love, and hope,
and joy, which animates and rules the renewed heart of the true Christian.

But there is a portion of Scripture which, though to a superficial reader it
may seem but very remotely connected with the present subject, yet to readers
of another cast, seems to settle the matter beyond controversy: In the parable
of the great supper, this important truth is held out to us, that even things
good in themselves may be the means of our eternal ruin, by drawing our hearts
from God, and causing us to make light of the offers of the Gospel. One invited
guest had bought an estate, another had made a purchase equally blameless of
oxen; a third had married a wife, an act not illaudable in itself. They had all
different reasons; but they all agreed in this, to decline the invitation to
the supper. The worldly possessions of one, the worldly business of another,
and what should be particularly attended to, the love to his dearest relative,
of a third, (a love by the way not only allowed but commanded in Scripture)
were brought forward as excuses for not attending to the important business of
religion. The consequence, however, was the same to all. None of those which
were bidden shall taste of my supper. If then things innocent, things
necessary, things laudable, things commanded, become sinful, when by
unseasonable or excessive indulgence they detain the heart and affections from
God, how vain will all those arguments necessarily be rendered, which are urged
by the advocates for certain amusements, on the ground of their harmlessness;
if those amusements serve (not to mention any positive evil which may belong to
them) in like manner to draw away the thoughts and affections from all
spiritual objects!

To conclude; when this topic happens to become the subject of conversation,
instead of addressing severe and pointed attacks to young ladies on the sin of
attending places of diversion, would it not be better first to endeavor to
excite in them that principle of Christianity, with which such diversions seem
not quite compatible; as the physician, who visits a patient in an eruptive
fever, pays little attention to those spots which to the ignorant appear to be
the disease, except indeed so far as they serve as indications to let him into
its nature, but goes straight to the root of the malady? He attacks the fever,
he lowers the pulse, he changes the system, he corrects the general habit; well
knowing that if he can but restore the vital principle of health, the spots,
which were nothing but symptoms, will die away of themselves.

In instructing others we should imitate our Lord and his Apostles, and not
always aim our blow at each particular corruption; but making it our business
to convince our pupil that what brings forth the evil fruit she exhibits,
cannot be a branch of the true vine; we should thus avail ourselves of
individual corruptions, for impressing her with a sense of the necessity of
purifying the common source from which they flow -- a corrupt nature. Thus
making it our grand business to rectify the heart, we pursue the true, the
compendious, the only method of universal holiness.

I would, however, take leave of those amiable and not ill-disposed young
persons, who complain of the rigor of human prohibitions, and declare they
meet with no such strictness in the Gospel, by asking them, with the most
affectionate earnestness, if they can conscientiously reconcile their nightly
attendance at every public place which they frequent, with such precepts as the
following: Redeeming the time: -- "Watch and pray:" -- Watch, for ye know not
at what time your Lord comes: -- "Abstain from all appearance of evil:" -- Set
your affections on things above; -- Be ye spiritually minded: -- Crucify the
flesh with its affections and lusts? And I would venture to offer one
criterion, by which the persons in question may be enabled to decide on the
positive innocence and safety of such diversions; I mean, provided they are
sincere in their scrutiny and honest in their avowal. If on their return at
night from those places they find they can retire, and commune with their own
hearts; if they find the love of God operating with undiminished force on their
minds; if they can "bring every thought into subjection," and concentrate every
wandering imagination; if they can soberly examine into their own state of
mind: I do not say if they can do all this perfectly and without distraction;
(for who can do this at any time?) but if they can do it with the same degree
of seriousness, pray with the same degree of fervor, and renounce the world in
as great a measure as at other times; and if they can lie down with a peaceful
consciousness of having avoided in the evening that temptation which they had
prayed not to be led into in the morning, they may then more reasonably hope
that all is well, and that they are not speaking false peace to their hearts.
If I might presume to recommend a book which of all others exposes the
insignificance, vanity, littleness, and emptiness of the world, I should not
hesitate to name Mr. Law's Serious Call to a devout and holy Life. Few writers,
except Pascal, have directed so much acuteness of reasoning, and so much
pointed wit to this object. He not only makes the reader afraid of a worldly
life on account of its sinfulness, but ashamed of it on account of its folly.
Few men perhaps have had a deeper insight into the human heart, or have more
skilfully probed its corruptions: yet on points of doctrine his views do not
seem to be just; and his disquisitions are often unsound and fanciful; so that
a general perusal of his works would neither be profitable or intelligible. To
a fashionable woman immersed in the vanities of life, or to a busy man
overwhelmed with its cares, I know no book so applicable, or likely to exhibit
with equal force the vanity of the shadows they are pursuing. But even in this
work he is not a safe guide to evangelical light; and in many of his others he
is highly visionary and whimsical: and I have known some excellent persons who
were first led by this admirable genius to see the wants of their own hearts,
and the utter insufficiency of the world to fill up the craving void, who,
though they became eminent for piety and self-denial, have had their usefulness
abridged, and whose minds have contracted something of a monastic severity by
an unqualified perusal of Mr. Law. True Christianity does not call on us to
starve our bodies, but our corruptions. As the mortified Apostle of the holy
and self-denying Baptist, preaching repentance because the kingdom of Heaven is
at hand, Mr. Law has no superior. As a preacher of salvation on scriptural
grounds, I would follow other guides.


CHAP. XVIII.
A worldly spirit incompatible with the spirit of Christianity.

Is it not whimsical to hear such complaints against the strictness of religion
as we are frequently hearing, from beings who are voluntarily pursuing, as has
been shown in the preceding Chapters, a course of life which Fashion makes
infinitely more laborious? How really burdensome would Christianity be if she
enjoined such sedulous application, such unremitting labors, such a succession
of fatigues! if religion commanded such hardships and self-denial, such days of
hurry, such evenings of exertion, such nights of broken rest, such perpetual
sacrifices of quiet, such exile from family delights, as Fashion imposes, then
indeed the service of Christianity would no longer merit its present
appellation of being a reasonable service: then the name of perfect slavery
might be justly applied to that which we are told in the beautiful language of
our church, is a service of perfect freedom: a service, the great object of
which is to deliver us from the bondage of corruption into the glorious liberty
of the children of God.

A worldly temper, by which I mean a disposition to prefer worldly pleasures,
worldly satisfactions, and worldly advantages, to the immortal interests of the
soul; and to let worldly considerations actuate us instead of the dictates of
religion in the concerns of ordinary life; a worldly temper, I say, is not,
like almost any other fault, the effect of passion or the consequence of
surprise when the heart is off its guard. It is not excited incidentally by the
operation of external circumstances on the infirmity of nature; but it is the
vital spirit, the essential soul, the living principle of evil. It is not so
much an act, as a state of being; not so much an occasional complaint, as a
tainted constitution of mind. If it do not always show itself in extraordinary
excesses, it has no perfect intermission. Even when it is not immediately
tempted to break out into overt and specific acts, it is at work within,
stirring up the heart to disaffection against holiness, and infusing a kind of
moral disability to whatever is intrinsically good. It infects and depraves all
the powers and faculties of the soul; for it operates on the understanding by
blinding it to whatever is spiritually good; on the will, by making it averse
from God; on the affections, by disordering and sensualizing them; so that one
may almost say to those who are under the supreme dominion of this spirit, what
was said to the hosts of Joshua, "Ye cannot serve the Lord."

This worldliness of mind is not at all commonly understood, and for the
following reason: -- People suppose that in this world our chief business is
with the things of this world, and that to conduct the business of this world
well, that is, conformably to moral principles, is the chief substance of moral
and true goodness. Religion, if introduced at all into the system, only makes
its occasional, and if I may so speak, its holiday appearance. To bring
religion into every thing, is thought incompatible with the due attention to
the things of this life. And so it would be, if by religion were meant talking
about religion. The phrase, therefore, is: One cannot always be praying; we
must mind our business and social duties as well as our devotion. Worldly
business being thus subjected to worldly, though in some degree moral, maxims,
the mind during the conduct of business grows worldly; and a continually
increasing worldly spirit dims the sight and relaxes the moral principle on
which the affairs of the world are conducted, as well as indisposes the mind
for all the exercises of devotion.

But this temper, as far as relates to business, assumes the semblance of
goodness; so that those who have not right views are apt to mistake the
carrying on the affairs of life on a tolerably moral principle, for religion.
They do not see that the evil lies not in their so carrying on business, but in
their not carrying on the things of this life in subserviency to those of
eternity; in their not carrying them on with the unintermitting idea of
responsibility. The evil does not lie in their not being always on their knees,
but in their not bringing their religion from the closet into the world: in
their not bringing the spirit of the Sunday's devotions into the transactions
of the week: in not transforming their religion from a dry, and speculative,
and inoperative system, into a lively, and influential, and unceasing principle
of action.

Though there are, blessed be God! in the most exalted stations, women who
adorn their Christian profession by a consistent conduct; yet are there not
others who are laboring hard to unite the irreconcilable interests of earth
and heaven? who, while they will not relinquish one jot of what this world has
to bestow, yet by no means renounce their hopes of a better? who do not think
it unreasonable that their indulging in the fullest possession of present
pleasure should interfere with the most certain reversion of future glory? who,
after living in the most unbounded gratification of ease, vanity, and luxury,
fancy that heaven must be attached of course to a life of which Christianity is
the outward profession, and which has not been stained by any flagrant or
dishonorable act of guilt?

Are there not many who, while they entertain a respect for religion, (for I
address not the unbelieving or the licentious,) while they believe its truths,
observe its forms, and would be shocked not to be thought religious, are yet
immersed in this life of disqualifying worldliness? who, though they make a
conscience of going to the public worship once on a Sunday, and are
scrupulously observant of the other rites of the Church, yet hesitate not to
give up all the rest of their time to the very same pursuits and pleasures
which occupy the hearts and lives of those looser characters whose enjoyment is
not obstructed by any dread of a future account? and who are acting on the wise
principle of the children of this world in making the most of the present state
of being from the conviction that there is no other to be expected?

It must be owned, indeed, that faith in unseen things is at times sadly weak
and defective even in the truly pious; and that it is so, is the subject of
their grief and humiliation. O! how does the real Christian take shame in the
coldness of his belief, in the lowness of his seize! How deeply does he
lament that when he would do good, evil is present with him! -- that the life
he now lives in the flesh, is not, in the degree it ought to be, "by faith in
the son of God!" Yet one thing is clear; however weak his belief may seem to
be, it is evident that his actions are mainly governed by it; he evinces his
sincerity to others by a life in some good degree analogous to the doctrines he
professes: while to himself he has this conviction, that faint as his
confidence may be at times, yet at the worst of times he would not exchange
that faint measure of trust and hope for all the actual pleasures and
possessions of his most splendid acquaintance; and as a proof of his sincerity
he never seeks the cure of his dejection, where they seek theirs, in the world,
but in God.

But as to the faith of worldly persons, however strong it may be in
speculation, however orthodox their creed, one cannot help fearing that it is a
little defective in sincerity: for if there were in the mind a full persuasion
of the truth of revelation, and of the eternal bliss it promises, would it not
be obvious to them that there must be more diligence for its attainment? We
discover great ardor in carrying on worldly projects, because we believe the
good which we are pursuing is real, and will reward the trouble of the pursuit:
we believe that good to be attainable by diligence, and prudently proportion
our earnestness to this conviction: and therefore where we see persons
professing a lively faith in a better world, yet laboring little to obtain an
interest in it, can we forbear suspecting that their belief, not only of their
own title to eternal happiness, but of eternal happiness itself, is not well
grounded? and that, if they were to "examine themselves truly," the faith would
be found to be much of a piece with the practice?

Even that very taste for enjoyment which leads the persons in question to
possess themselves of the qualifications for the pleasures of the present
scene; that understanding which leads them to acquire such talents as may
enable them to relish the resorts of gaiety here, should induce those who are
really looking for a future state of happiness, to wish to acquire something of
the taste, and temper, and talents, which may be considered as qualifications
for its enjoyment. The neglect to do this must proceed from one of these two
causes; either they must think their present course a safe and proper course;
or they must think that death is to produce some sudden and surprising
alteration in the human character. But the office of death is to transport us
to a new state, not to transform us to a new nature: the stroke of death is
intended to effect our deliverance out of this world, and our introduction into
another; but it is not likely to effect any sudden and surprising or total
change in our hearts or our tastes: so far from this, that we are assured in
Scripture, that he that is filthy will be filthy still, and he that is holy
will be holy still. Though we believe that death will completely cleanse the
holy soul from its remaining pollutions, that it will exchange defective
sanctification into perfect purity, entangling temptation into complete
freedom, want and pain into health and fruition, doubts and fears into perfect
security, and oppressive weariness into everlasting rest; yet there is no magic
in the wand of death which will convert an unholy soul into a holy one. And it
is awful to reflect, that such tempers as have the allowed predominance here
will maintain it for ever; that such as the will is when we close our eyes upon
the things of time, such it will be when we open them on those of eternity. The
mere act of death no more fits us for heaven, than the mere act of the mason
who pulls down our old house fits us for a new one. If we die with our hearts
running over with the love of the world, there is no promise to lead us to
expect that we shall rise with them full of the love of God: death indeed will
show us to ourselves such as we are, but will not make us such as we are not:
and it will be too late to be acquiring self-knowledge when we can no longer
turn it to any account but that of tormenting ourselves. To illustrate this
truth still farther by an allusion familiar to the persons I address: the
drawing up the curtain at the theater, though it serves to introduce us to the
entertainments behind it, does not create in us any new faculties to understand
or to relish those entertainments: these must have been long in acquiring: they
must have been provided beforehand, and brought with us to the place, if we
would relish the pleasures of it; for the entertainment can only operate on
that taste we carry to it. It is too late to be acquiring when we ought to be
enjoying.

That spirit of prayer and praise, those dispositions of love, meekness, peace,
quietness, and assurance; that indifference to the fashion of a world which is
passing away; that longing after deliverance from sin, that desire of holiness,
together with all the specific marks of our having the fruits of the spirit
here, must surely make some part of our qualification for the enjoyment of a
world, the pleasures of which are all spiritual. And who can conceive any thing
comparable to the awful surprise of a soul long immersed in the indulgences of
vanity and pleasure, yet all the while lulled by the self-complacency of a
religion of mere forms: who, while it counted upon heaven as a thing of course,
had made no preparation for it! Who can conceive any surprise comparable to
that of such a soul on shutting its eyes on a world of sense, of which all the
objects and delights were so congenial to its nature, and opening them on a
world of spirits of which all the characters of enjoyment are of a nature new,
unknown, surprising, and specifically different? pleasures more inconceivable
to its apprehension and more unsuitable to its taste, than the gratifications
of one sense are to the organs of another, or than the most exquisite works of
genius to absolute imbecility of mind.

While we would with deep humility confess that we cannot purchase heaven by
any works or right dispositions of our own; while we gratefully acknowledge
that it must be purchased for us by Him who loved us, and washed us from our
sins in his blood; yet let us remember that we have no reason to expect we
could be capable of enjoying the pleasures of a heaven so purchased without
heavenly mindedness. When those persons who are apt to expect as much comfort
from religion as if their hearts were not full of the world, now and then, in a
fit of honesty or low spirits, complain that Christianity does not make them as
good and as happy as they were led to expect from that assurance, that great
peace have they who love the Lord, and that they who wait on him shall want no
manner of thing that is good; when they lament that the paths of religion are
not those "paths of pleasantness" they were led to expect; their case reminds
one of a celebrated physician, who used to say, that the reason why his
prescriptions, which commonly cured the poor and the temperate, did so little
good among his rich luxurious patients, was, that while he was laboring to
remove the disease by medicines, of which they only took drams, grains, and
scruples; they were inflaming it by a multiplicity of injurious aliments, which
they swallowed by ounces, pounds, and pints.

These fashionable Christians should be reminded, that there was no half
engagement made for them at their baptism; that they are not partly their own
and partly their Redeemer's. He that is bought with a price, is the sole
property of the purchaser. Faith does not consist merely in submitting the
opinions of the understanding, but the dispositions of the heart: religion is
not a sacrifice of sentiments, but of affections: it is not the tribute of fear
extorted from a slave, but the voluntary homage of love paid by a child.

Neither does a Christian's piety consist in living in retreat, and railing at
the practices of the world, while, perhaps, her heart is full of the spirit of
that world at which she is raising: but it consists in subduing the spirit of
the world and opposing its practices, even while her duty obliges her to live
in it.

Nor is the spirit or the love of the world confined to those only who are
making a figure in it; nor are its operations bounded by the precincts of the
metropolis, nor the limited regions of first-rate rank and splendour. She who
inveighs against the luxury and excesses of London, and solaces herself in her
own comparative sobriety, because her more circumscribed fortune compels her to
take up with the second-hand pleasures of successive watering-places, which
pleasures she pursues with avidity, is governed by the same spirit: and she
whose still narrower opportunities stint her to the petty diversions of her
provincial town, if she be busied in swelling and enlarging her smaller sphere
of vanity and idleness, however she may comfort herself with her own
comparative goodness, by railing at the unattainable pleasures of the
watering-place, or the still more unapproachable joys of the capital, is
governed by the same spirit: for she who is as vain, as dissipated, and as
extravagant as actual circumstances admit, would be as vain, as dissipated, and
as extravagant as the gayest objects of her invective now are, if she could
change places with them. It is not merely by what we do that we can be sure the
spirit of the world has no dominion over us, but by fairly considering what we
should probably do if more were in our power.

The worldly Christian, if I may be allowed such a contradiction in terms, must
not imagine that she acquits herself of her religious obligations by her mere
weekly oblation of prayer. There is no covenant by which communion with God is
restricted to an hour or two on the Sunday: she does not acquit herself by
setting apart a few particular days in the year for the exercise of a
periodical devotion, and then flying back to the world as eagerly as if she
were resolved to repay herself with large interest for her short fit of
self-denial; the stream of pleasure running with a more rapid current, from
having been interrupted by this forced obstruction. And the avidity with which
one has seen certain persons of a still less correct character than the class
we have been considering, return to a whole year's carnival, after the
self-imposed penance of a Passion week, gives a shrewd intimation that they
considered the temporary abstraction less as an act of penitence for the past,
than as a purchase of indemnity for the future. Such bare-weight protestants
prudently condition for retaining the Popish doctrine of indulgences, which
they buy, not indeed of the late spiritual court of Rome, but of that secret,
self-acquitting judge, which ignorance of its own turpitude, and of the strict
requirements of the divine law, has established supreme in the tribunal of
every unrenewed heart.

But the practice of self-examination is impeded with one clog, which renders
it peculiarly inconvenient to the gay and worldly: for the royal prophet (who
was, however, himself as likely as any one to be acquainted with the
difficulties peculiar to greatness) has annexed as a concomitant to communing
with our own heart, that we should "be still." Now this clause of the
injunction renders the other part of it not a little inconsistent with the
present habits of fashionable life, of which stillness is clearly not one of
the constituents. It would, however, greatly assist those who do not altogether
decline the practice, if they were to establish into a rule the habit of
detecting certain suspicious practices, by realizing them, as it were, to their
own minds, through the means of drawing them out in detail, and of placing them
before their eyes clothed in language; for there is nothing that so effectually
exposes an absurdity which has passed muster for want of such an inquisition,
as giving it shape and form. How many things which now work themselves into the
habit, and pass current, would then shock us by their palpable inconsistency!
Who, for instance, could stand the sight of such a debtor and creditor account
as this: -- Item; So many card-parties, balls and operas due to me in the
following year, for so many manuals and meditations paid beforehand during the
last six days in Lent? With how much indignation soever this suggestion may be
treated; whatever offense may be taken at such a combination of the serious and
the ludicrous; however we may revolt at the idea of such a composition with our
Maker, when put into so many words; does not the habitual course of some go
near to realize such a statement?

But "a Christian's race," as a venerable Prelate Bishop Hopkins.
observes; "is not run at so many heats," but is a constant course and progress
by which we are continually gaining ground upon sin, and approaching nearer to
the kingdom of God.

Am I then ridiculing this pious seclusion of contrite sinners? Am I then
jesting at that troubled spirit which God has declared is his acceptable
sacrifice? God forbid! Such reasonable retirements have been the practice, and
continue to be the comfort of some of the sincerest Christians; and will
continue to be resorted to as long as Christianity, that is, as long as the
world, shall last. It is well to call off the thoughts, even for a short time,
not only from sin and vanity, but even from the lawful pursuits of business,
and the laudable concerns of life; and, at times, to annihilate, as it were,
the space which divides us from eternity: It Is greatly wise to talk with our
past hours,
And ask them what report they bore to heaven,
And how they might have borne more welcome news.


Yet as to those who seek a short annual retreat as a mere form; who dignify
with the idea of a religious retirement a week in which it is rather
unfashionable to be seen in town; who retire with an unabated resolution to
return to the maxims, the pleasures, and the spirit of that world which they do
but mechanically renounce; is it not to be feared that such a short secession,
which does not even pretend to subdue the principle, but merely suspends the
act, may only serve to set a keener edge on the appetite for the pleasures they
are quitting? Is it not to be feared that the bow may fly back with redoubled
violence from having been unnaturally bent? that by varnishing over a life of
vanity with the transient externals of a formal and temporary piety, they may
the more dangerously skin over the troublesome soreness of a tender conscience,
by laying This flattering unction to the soul?
For is it not among the delusions of a worldly piety to consider Christianity
as a thing which cannot, indeed, safely be omitted, but which is to be got
over; a certain quantity of which is, as it were, to be taken in the lump, with
long intervals between the repetitions? to consider religion as imposing a set
of hardships, which must be occasionally encountered in order to procure a
peaceable enjoyment of the long respite? that these severe conditions thus
fulfilled, the acquitted Christian having paid the annual demand of a rigorous
requisition, she may now lawfully return to her natural state; and the old
reckoning being adjusted, she may begin a new score, and receive the reward of
her punctual obedience, in the resumed indulgence of those gratifications which
she had for a short time laid aside as a hard task to please a hard master: but
this task performed, and the master appeased, the mind may discover its natural
bent, in joyfully returning to the objects of its real choice? Whereas, is it
not clear on the other hand, that if the religious exercises had produced the
effect which it is the nature of true religion to produce, the penitent could
not return with her old genuine alacrity to those habits of the world, from
which the pious weekly manuals through which she has been laboring with the
punctuality of an almanac as to the day, and the accuracy of a beadroll as to
the number, was intended by the devout authors to rescue their reader?

I am far from insinuating that this literal sequestration ought to be
prolonged throughout the year, or that all the days of business are to be made
equally days of solemnity and continued meditation. This earth is a place in
which a much larger portion of a common Christian's time must be assigned to
action than to contemplation. Women of the higher class were not sent into the
world to shun society, but to improve it. They were not designed for the cold
and visionary virtues of solitudes and monasteries, but for the amiable, and
endearing, and useful offices of social life: they are of a religion which does
not impose idle austerities, but enjoins active duties; a religion of which the
most benevolent actions require to be sanctified by the purest motives; a
religion which does not condemn its followers to the comparatively easy task of
seclusion from the world, but assigns them the more difficult province of
living uncorrupted in it; a religion which, while it forbids them to "follow a
multitude to do evil," includes in that prohibition the sin of doing nothing,
and which moreover enjoins them to be followers of him who went about doing
good.

But may we not reasonably contend, that though the same sequestration is not
required, yet that the same spirit and temper which one hopes is thought
necessary by all during the occasional humiliation, must, by every real
Christian, be extended throughout all the periods of the year? And when that is
really the case, when once the spirit of religion shall indeed govern the
heart, it will not only animate her religious actions and employments, but will
gradually extend itself to the chastising her conversation, will discipline her
thoughts, influence her common business, and sanctify her very pleasures.

But it should seem that many, who entertain a general notion of Christian
duty, do not consider it as of universal and unremitting obligation, but rather
as a duty binding at times on all, and always on some. To the attention of such
we would recommend that very explicit address of our Lord on the subject of
self-denial, the temper directly opposed to a worldly spirit: And he said unto
them ALL, if any man will come after me, let him deny himself, and take up his
cross DAILY. Those who think self-denial not of universal obligation, will
observe the word all, and those who think the obligation not constant will
attend to the term daily. These two little words cut up by the root all the
occasional religious observances grafted on a worldly life; all transient,
periodical, and temporary acts of piety, which some would commute for habitual
thoughtlessness.

There is indeed scarcely a more pitiable being than one who, instead of making
her religion the informing principle of all she does, has only just enough to
keep her in continual fear; who drudges through her stinted exercises with a
superstitious kind of terror, while her general life shows that the love of
holiness is not the governing principle in her heart: who seems to suffer all
the pains and penalties of Christianity, but is a stranger to that liberty
wherewith Christ has made us free. Let it not be thought a ludicrous invention,
if the author hazard the producing a real illustration of these remarks, in the
instance of a lady of this stamp, who, returning from church on a very cold
day, and remarking with a good deal of self-complacency how much she had
suffered in the performance of her duty, comforted herself with emphatically
adding, that she hoped however it would answer.

But there is no permanent comfort in any religion, short of that by which the
diligent Christian strives that all his actions shall have the love of God for
their motive, and the glory of God, as well as his own salvation, for their
end; while to go about to balance one's good and bad actions one against the
other, and to take comfort in the occasional predominance of the former, while
the cultivation of the principle from which they should spring is neglected, is
not the road to all those peaceful fruits of the spirit to which true
Christianity conducts the humble and penitent believer.

But I am aware that a better cast of characters than those we have been
contemplating; that even the amiable and the well-disposed, who, while they
want courage to resist what they have too much principle to think right, and
too much sense to justify, will yet plead for the palliating system, and accuse
these remarks of unnecessary rigor. They will declare that really they are as
religious as they can be; they wish they were better; they have little
satisfaction in the life they are leading, yet they cannot break with the
world; they cannot fly in the face of custom; it does not become individuals
like them to oppose the torrent of fashion. Beings so interesting, abounding
with engaging qualities; who not only feel the beauty of goodness, but
reverence the truths of Christianity, and are awfully looking for a general
judgment, one is grieved to hear lament "that they only do as others do," when
they are perhaps themselves of such rank and importance that if they would
begin to do right, others would be brought to do as they did. One is grieved to
hear them indolently assert, that they wish it were otherwise, when they
possess the power to make it otherwise, by setting an example which they know
would be followed. One is sorry to hear them content themselves with declaring,
that they have not the courage to be singular, when they must feel, by seeing
the influence of their example in worse things, that there would be no such
great singularity in piety itself, if once they became sincerely pious.
Besides, this diffidence does not break out on other occasions. They do not
blush to be quoted as the opposers of an old mode or the inventors of a new
one. Nor are they equally backward in being the first to appear in a strange
fashion, such an one as often excites wonder, and sometimes even offends
against delicacy. Let not then diffidence be pleaded as an excuse only on
occasions wherein courage would be virtue.

Will it be thought too harsh a question if we venture to ask these gentle
characters who are thus intrenching themselves in the imaginary safety of
surrounding multitudes, and who say we only do as others do, whether they are
willing to run the tremendous risk of consequences, and to fare as others fare?.

But while these plead the authority of Fashion as a sufficient reason for
their conformity to the world, one who has spoken with a paramount authority
has positively said, "Be ye not conformed to the world." Nay, it is urged as
the very badge and distinction by which the character opposite to the Christian
is to be marked, that the friendship of the world is enmity with God.

Temptation to conform to the world was never perhaps more irresistible than in
the days which immediately preceded the Deluge. And no man could ever have
pleaded the fashion in order to justify a criminal assimilation with the
reigning manners, with more propriety than the Patriarch Noah. He had the two
grand and contending objects of terror to encounter which we have; the fear of
ridicule, and the fear of destruction; the dread of sin, and the dread of
singularity. Our cause of alarm is at least equally pressing with his; for it
does not appear, even while he was actually obeying the Divine command in
providing the means of his future safety, that he saw any actual symptoms of
the impending ruin. So that in one sense he might have truly pleaded as an
excuse for slackness of preparation, "that all things continued as they were
from the beginning;" while many of us, though the storm is begun, never think
of providing the refuge* though we have had a fuller revelation, have seen
Scripture illustrated, prophecy fulfilling, with every awful circumstance that
can either quicken the most sluggish remissness, or confirm the feeblest faith.

Besides, the Patriarch's plea for following the fashion was stronger than you
can produce. While you must see that many are going wrong, he saw that none
were going right. All flesh had corrupted his way before God; whilst, blessed
be God! you have still instances enough of piety to keep you in countenance.
While you lament that the world seduces you, (for every one has a little world
of his own,) your world perhaps is only a petty neighborhood, a few streets
and squares; but the Patriarch had really the contagion of a whole united world
to resist; he had literally the example of the whole face of the earth to
oppose. The "fear of man" also would then have been a more pardonable fault,
when the lives of the same individuals who were likely to excite respect or
fear was prolonged many ages, than it can be in the short period now assigned
to human life. How lamentable then that opinion should operate so powerfully
when it is but the breath of a being so frail and so short-lived, That he does
cease to be,
Ere one can say he is.
You who find it so difficult to withstand the individual allurement of one
modish acquaintance, would if you had been in the Patriarch's case have
concluded the struggle to be quite ineffectual, and sunk under the supposed
fruitlessness of resistance. Myself, would you not have said? or at most my
little family of eight persons can never hope to stop this torrent of
corruption; I lament the fruitlessness of opposition; I deplore the necessity
of conformity with the prevailing system; but it would be a foolish presumption
to hope that one family can effect a change in the state of the world. In your
own case, however, it is not certain to how wide an extent the hearty union of
even fewer persons in such a cause might reach: at least is it nothing to do
what the Patriarch did? was it nothing to preserve himself from the general
destruction? was it nothing to deliver his own soul? was it nothing to rescue
the souls of his whole family?

A wise man will never differ from the world in trifles. It is certainly a mark
of a sound judgment to comply with it whenever we safely can; such compliance
strengthens our influence by reserving to ourselves the greater weight of
authority on those occasions, when our conscience obliges us to differ. Those
who are prudent will cheerfully conform to all its innocent usages; but those
who are Christians will be scrupulous in (...) which are really innocent
previous to their conformity to them. Not what the world, but what the Gospel
calls innocent will be found at the grand scrutiny to have been really so. A
discreet Christian will take due pains to be convinced he is right before he
will presume to be singular: but from the instant he is persuaded that the
Gospel is true, and the world of course wrong, he will no longer risk his
safety by following multitudes, or his soul by staking it on human opinion. All
our most dangerous mistakes arise from our not constantly referring our
practice to the standard of scripture, instead of the mutable standard of human
opinion, by which it is impossible to fix the real value of characters. For
this latter standard in some cases determines those to be good who do not run
all the lengths in which the notoriously bad allow themselves. The Gospel has
an universal, the world has a local standard of goodness: in certain societies
certain vices alone are dishonorable, such as covetousness and cowardice;
while those sins of which our Savior has said, that they which commit them
"shall not inherit the kingdom of God," detract nothing from the respect some
persons receive. Nay, those very characters whom the Almighty has expressly
declared "He will Judge Hebrews, xiii. 4.
," are received, are admired, are caressed, in that which calls itself the best
company.

But to weigh our actions by one standard now, when we know they will be judged
by another hereafter, would be reckoned the height of absurdity in any
transactions but those which involve the interests of eternity. "How read
thou?" is a more specific direction than any comparative view of our own habits
with the habits of others: and at the final bar it will be of little avail that
our actions have risen above those of bad men, if our views and principles
shall be found to have been in opposition to the Gospel of Christ.

Nor is their practice more commendable, who are ever on the watch to pick out
the worst actions of good men, by way of justifying their own conduct on the
comparison. The faults of the best men, for there is not a just man upon the
earth who sins not, can in no wise justify the errors of the worst: and it
is not invariably the example of even good men that we must take for our
unerring rule of conduct: nor is it by a single action that either they or we
shall be judged; for in that case who could be saved? but it is by the general
prevalence of right principles and good habits; by the predominance of holiness
and righteousness, and temperance in the life, and by the power of humility,
faith and love in the heart.

CHAP. XIX.
On the leading doctrines of Christianity. -- The corruption of human nature.
-- The doctrine of redemption. -- The necessity of a change of heart, and of
the divine influences to produce that change. -- With a sketch of the Christian
character.

THE author having in this little work taken a view of the false notions often
imbibed in early life from a bad education, and of their pernicious effects;
and having attempted to point out the respective remedies to these; she would
now draw all that has been said to a point, and declare plainly what she humbly
conceives to be the source whence all these false notions, and this wrong
conduct really proceed: The prophet Jeremiah shall answer: It is because they
have forsaken the fountain of living waters, and have hewn out to themselves
cisterns, broken cisterns that can hold no water. It is an ignorance past
belief of what Christianity really is: the remedy, therefore, and the only
remedy that can be applied with any prospect of success, is RELIGION, and by
Religion she would be understood to mean the Gospel of Jesus Christ.

It has been before hinted, that Religion should be taught at an early period
of life; that children should be brought up in the nurture and admonition of
the Lord. The manner in which they should be taught has likewise with great
plainness been suggested; that it should be done in so lively and familiar a
manner as to make Religion amiable, and her ways to appear, what they really
are, ways of pleasantness. And a slight sketch has been given of the genius of
Christianity, by which her amiableness would more clearly appear. But this,
being a subject of such vast importance, compared with which every other
subject sinks into nothing; it seems not sufficient to speak on the doctrines
and duties of Christianity in detached parts, but it is of importance to point
out, though in a brief manner, the mutual dependence of one doctrine upon
another, and the influence which these doctrines have upon the heart and life,
so that the duties of Christianity may be seen to grow out of its doctrines: by
which it will appear that Christian virtue differs essentially from Pagan: it
is of a quite different kind: the plant itself is different, it comes from a
different root, and grows in a different soil.

It will be seen how the humbling doctrine of the corruption of human nature,
which has followed from the corruption of our first parents, makes way for the
bright display of redeeming love. How from the abasing thought that we are all
as sheep going astray, every one in his own way: that none can return to the
shepherd of our souls, except the Father draw him: that the natural man cannot
receive the things of the spirit, because they are spiritually discerned: how
from this humiliating view of the helplessness, as well as the corruption of
human nature, we are to turn to that animating doctrine, the offer of divine
assistance. So that, though human nature will appear from this view in a deeply
degraded state, and consequently all have cause for humility, yet not one has
cause for despair: the disease indeed is dreadful, but a physician is at hand,
both able and willing to save us: though we are naturally without strength, our
help is laid upon one that is mighty.

We should observe then, that the doctrines of our Savior are, if I may so
speak, like his coat, all woven into one piece. We should get such a view of
their reciprocal dependence as to be persuaded that without a deep sense of our
own corruptions we can never seriously believe in a Savior, because the
substantial and acceptance belief in Him must always arise from the conviction
of our want of Him; that without a firm persuasion that the Holy Spirit can
alone restore our fallen nature, repair the ruins of sin, and renew the image
of God upon the heart, we never shall be brought to serious, humble prayer for
repentance and restoration; and that, without this repentance there is no
salvation: for though Christ has died for us, and consequently to Him alone we
must look as a Savior, yet he has himself declared that he will save none but
true penitents.

ON THE DOCTRINE OF HUMAN CORRUPTION.
To come now to a more particular statement of these doctrines. -- When an
important edifice is about to be erected, a wise builder will dig deep, and
look well to the foundations, knowing that without this the fabric will not be
likely to stand. The foundation of the Christian religion, out of which the
whole structure may be said to arise, appears to be the doctrine of the fall of
man from his original state of righteousness; and of the corruption and
helplessness of human nature, which are the consequences of this fall, and
which is the natural state of every one born into the world. To this doctrine
it is important to conciliate the minds, more especially of young persons, who
are peculiarly disposed to turn away from it as a morose, unamiable, and gloomy
idea: they are apt to accuse those who are more strict and serious, of
unnecessary severity, and to suspect them of thinking unjustly ill of mankind.
Some of the reasons which prejudice the inexperienced against the doctrine in
question appear to be the following.

Young persons themselves have seen little of the world. In pleasurable society
the world puts on its most amiable appearance; and that softness and urbanity
which prevail, particularly amongst persons of fashion, are liable to be
mistaken for more than they are really worth. The opposition to this doctrine
in the young, arises partly from ingenuousness of heart, partly from a habit of
indulging themselves in favorable suppositions respecting the world, rather
than of pursuing truth, which is always the grand thing to be pursued; and
partly from the popularity of the tenet, that every body is so wonderfully good!

This error in youth has however a still deeper foundation, which is their not
having a right standard of moral good and evil, in consequence of their already
partaking of the very corruption which is spoken of; they are therefore apt to
have no very strict sense of duty, or of the necessity of a right and religious
motive to every act.

Moreover, young people usually do not know themselves. Not having yet been
much exposed to temptation, owing to the prudent restraints in which they have
been kept, they little suspect to what lengths in vice they themselves are
liable to be transported, nor how far others actually are carried who are set
free from those restraints.

Having laid down these as some of the causes of error on this point, I proceed
to observe on what strong grounds the doctrine itself stands.

Profane history abundantly confirms this truth: the history of the world being
in fact little else than the history of the crimes of the human race. Even
though the annals of remote ages lie so involved in obscurity, that some degree
of uncertainty attaches itself to many of the events recorded, yet this one
melancholy truth is always clear, that most of the miseries which have been
brought upon mankind, have proceeded from this general depravity.

The world we now live in furnishes abundant proof of this truth. In a world
formed on the deceitful theory of those who assert the innocence and dignity of
man, almost all the professions, since they would have been rendered useless by
such a state of innocence, would not have existed. Without sin we may nearly
presume there would have been no sickness; so that every medical professor is a
standing evidence of this sad truth. Sin not only brought sickness but death
into the world; consequently every funeral presents a more irrefragable
argument than a thousand sermons. Had man persevered in his original integrity,
there could have been no litigation, for there would be no contests about
property in a world where none would be inclined to attack it. Professors of
law, therefore, from the attorney who prosecutes for a trespass, to the pleader
who defends a criminal, or the judge who condemns him, loudly confirm the
doctrine. Every victory by sea or land should teach us to rejoice with
humiliation, for conquest itself brings a terrible, though splendid attestation
to the truth of the fall of man.

Even those who deny the doctrine, act universally more or less on the
principle. Why do we all secure our houses with bolts, and bars, and locks? Do
we take these steps to defend our lives or property from any particular fear?
from any suspicion of this neighbor, or that servant, or the other invader?
No: -- It is from a practical conviction of the common depravity; from a
constant, pervading, but undefined dread of impending evil arising from the
sense of general corruption. Are not prisons built, and laws enacted, on the
same practical principle?

But not to descend to the more degraded part of our species. Why in the
fairest transaction of business is nothing executed without bonds, receipts,
and notes of hand? Why does not a perfect confidence in the dignity of human
nature abolish all these securities; if not between enemies, or people
indifferent to each other, yet at least between friends and kindred, and the
most honorable connections? Why, but because of that universal suspicion
between man and man, which, by all we see, and hear, and feel, is become
interwoven with our very make? Though we do not entertain any individual
suspicion, nay, though we have the strongest personal confidence, yet the
acknowledged principle of conduct has this doctrine for its basis. I will take
a receipt, though it were from my brother, is the established voice of mankind;
or, as I have heard it more artfully put, by a fallacy of which the very
disguise discovers the principle, Think every man honest, but deal with him as
if you knew him to be otherwise. And as, in a state of innocence, the beasts,
it is presumed, would not have bled for the sustenance of man, so their
parchments would not have been wanted as instruments of his security against
his fellow man. Bishop Butler distinctly declares this truth to be evident,
from experience as well as Revelation, "that this world exhibits as idea of a
RUIN;" and he will hazard much who ventures to assert that Butler defended
Christianity upon principles unconsonant to reason, philosophy, or sound
experience.


But the grand arguments for this doctrine must be drawn from the Holy
Scriptures: and these, besides implying it almost continually, expressly assert
it; and that in instances too numerous to be all of them brought forward here.
Of these may I be allowed to produce a few? God saw that the wickedness of man
was great, and that every imagination of the thoughts of his heart was only
evil continually: -- God looked upon the earth, and behold, it was corrupt; for
all flesh had corrupted his way upon the earth. And it repented the Lord that
he had made man on the earth, and it grieved him at his heart. (...).
This is a picture of mankind before the flood; and the doctrine receives
additional confirmation in Scripture, when it speaks of the times which
followed after that tremendous judgment had taken place. The Psalms abound in
lamentations on the depravity of man. They are all gone aside; there is none
that does good, no not one. -- In thy sight, says David, addressing the Most
High, "shall no man living be justified." Job, in his usual lofty strain of
interrogation, asks, What is man that he should be clean, and he that is born
of a woman that he should be righteous? Behold the heavens are not clean in His
sight, how much more abominable and filthy is man, who drinks iniquity like
water?

Nor do the Scriptures speak of this corruption as arising only from occasional
temptation, or from mere extrinsic causes. The wise man tells us, that
foolishness is bound up in the heart of a child: the prophet Jeremiah assures
us, the heart is deceitful above all things, and desperately wicked: and David
plainly states the doctrine: Behold, I was shapen in iniquity, and in sin did
my mother conceive me. Can language be more explicit?

The New Testament corroborates the Old. Our Lord's reproof of Peter seems to
take the doctrine for granted: Thou savourest not the things that be of God but
those that be of man; clearly intimating, that the ways of man are opposite to
the ways of God. And our Savior, in that affecting discourse to his disciples,
observes to them that, as they were by his grace made different from others,
therefore they must expect to be hated by those who were so unlike them. And it
should be particularly observed, as another proof that the world is wicked,
that our Lord considered " the world" as opposed to him and to his disciples.
If ye were of the world, the world would love its own; but I have chosen you
out of the world, therefore the world hates you. John, xv. 19.
St. John, writing to his Christian church, states the same truth: We know that
we are of God, and the whole world lies in wickedness.

Man in his natural and unbelieving state is likewise represented as in a state
of guilt, and under the displeasure of Almighty God. He that believes not the
Son shall not see life; but the wrath of God abides on him.

Here, however, if it be objected, that the heathen who never heard of the
Gospel will not assuredly be judged by it; the Savior's answer to such curious
inquirers concerning the state of others is, Strive to enter in at the strait
gate. It is enough for us to believe that God will judge all men according to
their opportunities. But with whatever mercy he may judge those who, living in
a land of darkness, are without knowledge of his revealed law, our business is
not with them, but with ourselves. It is our business to consider what mercy he
will extend to those who, living in a Christian country, abounding with means
and ordinances, where the Gospel is preached in its purity; it is our business
to inquire how he will deal with those who shut their eyes to its beams, who
close their ears to its truths. For an unbeliever, who has passed his life in
the meridian of Scripture light, or for an outward but unfruitful professor of
Christianity, I know not what hope the Gospel holds out.

The natural state of man is again thus described: The carnal mind is enmity
against God; (awful thought!) for it is not subject to the law of God, neither
indeed can be. So then they that are in the flesh cannot please God. What the
Apostle means by being in the flesh, is evident by what follows; for speaking
of those whose hearts were changed by Divine grace, he says, But ye are not in
the flesh, but in the spirit, if so be that the Spirit of God dwell in you:
that is, you are now not in your natural state: the change that has passed on
your minds by the influence of the Spirit of God is so great, that your state
may properly be called being in the spirit. It may be further observed that the
same Apostle, writing to the churches of Galatia, tells them, that the natural
corruption of the human heart is continually opposing the spirit of holiness
which influences the regenerate. The flesh lusts against the spirit, and the
spirit against the flesh, and these are contrary the one to the other: which
passage by the way, at the same time that it proves the corruption of the
heart, proves the necessity of divine influences. And the Apostle, with respect
to himself, freely confesses and deeply laments the workings of this corrupt
principle: O wretched man that I am! etc.

It has been objected by some who have opposed this doctrine, that the same
Scriptures which speak of mankind as being sinners, speak of some as being
righteous; and hence they would argue, that though this depravity of human
nature may be general, yet it cannot be universal. This objection when,
examined, serves only, like all other objections against the truth, to
establish that which it was intended to destroy. For what do the Scriptures
assert respecting the righteous? That there are some whose principles, views,
and conduct, are so different from the rest of the world, and from what theirs
themselves once were, that these persons are honored with the peculiar title
of the "sons of God." But no where do the Scriptures assert that even these are
sinless; on the contrary their faults are frequently mentioned; and persons of
this class are moreover represented as those on whom a great change has past:
as having been formerly "dead in trespasses and sins;" but as "being now called
out of darkness into light;" as " translated into the kingdom of God's dear
Son;" as "having passed from death to life." And St. Paul put this matter past
all doubt, by expressly asserting, that they were all by nature the children of
wrath even as others.

It might be well to ask certain persons who oppose the doctrine in question,
and who also seem to talk as if they thought there were many sinless people in
the world, how they expect that such sinless people will be saved? (though
indeed to talk of an innocent person being saved is a palpable contradiction in
terms; it is talking of curing a man already in health.) "Undoubtedly," such
will say, they will be received into those abodes of bliss prepared for the
righteous. -- But be it remembered, there is but one way to these blissful
abodes, and that is, through Jesus Christ: For there is none other name given
among men whereby we must be saved. If we ask whom did Christ come to save? the
Scripture directly answers, He came into the world to save sinners: -- His name
was called Jesus, because he came to save his people from their sins. When St.
John was favored with a heavenly vision, he tells us, that he beheld a great
multitude which no man could number, of all nations, and kindred, and people,
and tongues, standing before the throne, and before the Lamb, clothed with
white robes: that one of the heavenly inhabitants informed him who they were:
These are they who come out of great tribulation, and have washed their robes,
and made them white in the blood of the Lamb; therefore are they before the
throne of God, and serve Him day and night in his Temple; and He that sits
on the throne shall dwell among them; they shall hunger no more, neither thirst
any more, neither shall the sun light on them, nor any heat; for the Lamb which
is in the midst of them shall feed them, and shall lead them to living
fountains of waters, and God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes.

We may gather from this description what these glorious and happy beings once
were: they were sinful creatures: their robes were not spotless: They had
washed them, and made them white in the blood of the Lamb. They are likewise
generally represented as having been once a suffering people: they came out of
great tribulation. They are described as having overcome the great tempter of
mankind, "by the blood of the Lamb*:" as they who "follow the Lamb wheresoever
he goes:" as redeemed from among men. Rev. xiv. 4.
And their employment in the regions of bliss is a farther confirmation of the
doctrine of which we are treating. The great multitude, etc. etc. we are told,
stood and cried with a loud voice, Salvation to our God, who sits upon the
throne, and to the Lamb! Here we see they ascribe their salvation to Christ,
and consequently their present happiness to his atoning blood. And in another
of their celestial anthems, they say in like manner: Thou wast slain, and have
redeemed us to God by Thy blood, out of every kindred, and tongue, and people,
and nation. Rev. v. 9.


By all this it is evident, that men of any other description than redeemed
sinners must gain admittance to heaven some other way than that which the
Scriptures point out; and also that when they shall arrive there, so different
will be their employment, that they must have an anthem peculiar to themselves.

Nothing is more adapted to the casting down of high imaginations, and to
promote humility, than this reflection, that heaven is always in Scripture
pointed out not as the reward of the innocent, but as the hope of the penitent.
This, while it is calculated to "exclude boasting," the temper the most
opposite to the Gospel, is yet the most suited to afford comfort; for were
heaven promised as the reward of innocence, who could attain to it? but being,
as it is, the promised portion of faith and repentance, who is compelled to
miss it?

It is urged that the belief of this doctrine of our corruption produces many
ill effects, and therefore it should be discouraged. -- That it does not
produce those ill effects, when not misunderstood or partially represented, we
shall attempt to show: at the same time let it be observed, if it be really
true we must not reject it on account of any of these supposed ill
consequences. Truth may often be attended with disagreeable effects, but if it
be truth it must still be pursued. If, for instance, treason should exist in a
country, every one knows the disagreeable effects which will follow such a
conviction; but our not believing such treason to exist, will not prevent such
effect following it; on the contrary, our believing it may prevent the
consequences.

It is objected, that this doctrine debases human nature, and that finding
fault with the building is only another way of finding fault with the
architect. To the first part of this objection it may be remarked, that if man
be really a corrupt, fallen being, it is proper to represent him as such: the
fault then lies in the man, and not in the doctrine, which only states the
truth. As to the inference which is supposed to follow, namely, that it throws
the fault upon the Creator, it proceeds upon the false supposition that man's
present corrupt state is the state in which he was originally created: and also
that God has left him unavoidably to perish in it, whereas although "in Adam we
die, in Christ we shall be made alive."

It is likewise objected, that as this doctrine must give us such a bad opinion
of mankind, it must consequently produce ill will, hatred, and suspicion. But
it should be remembered, that it gives us no worse an opinion of other men than
it gives us of ourselves; such views of ourselves have a very salutary effect,
inasmuch as they have a tendency to produce humility; and humility is not
likely to produce ill will to others, for only from pride comes contention:
and as to the views it gives us of mankind, it represents us as follow
sufferers; and surely the consideration that we are companions in misery is not
calculated to produce hatred. The truth is, these effects have actually
followed from a false and partial view of the subject.

Old persons who have seen much of the world, and who have little religion, are
apt to be strong in their belief of man's actual corruption; but not taking it
up on Christian grounds, this belief in them shows itself in a narrow and
malignant temper; in uncharitable judgment, and harsh opinions.

Suspicion and hatred also are the uses to which Rochefaucault and the other
French philosophers have converted this doctrine: their acute minds intuitively
found the corruption of man, and they saw it without its concomitant and
correcting doctrine: they allowed man to be a depraved creature, but disallowed
his high original: they found him in a low state, but did not conceive of him
as having fallen from a better. They represent him rather as a brute than an
apostate; not taking into the account that his present degraded nature and
depraved faculties are not his original state: that he is not such as he came
out of the hands of his Creator, but such as he has been made by sin. Nor do
they know that he has not even now lost all remains of his primitive dignity,
but is still capable of a restoration more glorious Than is dreamt of in their
philosophy.
Perhaps, too, they know from what they feel, all the evil to which man is
inclined; but they do not know, for they have not felt, all the good of which
he is capable by the superinduction of the divine principle: thus they asperse
human nature instead of representing it fairly, and in so doing it is they who
calumniate the great Creator.

The doctrine of corruption is likewise accused of being a gloomy, discouraging
doctrine, and an enemy to joy and comfort. Now suppose this objection true in
its fullest extent. Is it any way unreasonable that a being fallen into a state
of sin, under the displeasure of Almighty God, should feel seriously alarmed at
being in such a state? Is the condemned criminal blamed because he is not
merry? And would it be esteemed a kind action to persuade him that he is not
condemned in order to make him so?

But this charge is not true in the sense intended by those who bring it
forward. Those who believe this doctrine are not the most gloomy people. When,
indeed, any one by the influence of the Holy Spirit is brought to view his
state as it really is, a state of guilt and danger, it is natural that fear
should be excited in his mind, but it is such a fear as impels him "to flee
from the wrath to come:" it is such a fear as moved Noah to prepare an ark to
the saving of his house. Such an one will likewise feel sorrow; not however the
sorrow of the world which works death, but that godly sorrow which works
repentance: such an one is in a proper state to receive the glorious doctrine
we are next about to contemplate; namely,

THAT GOD SO LOVED THE WORLD, THAT HE GAVE HIS ONLY BEGOTTEN SON, THAT
WHOSOEVER BELIEVED ON HIM SHOULD NOT PERISH, BUT HAVE EVERLASTING LIFE.
Of this doctrine it is of the last importance to form just views, for as it is
the only doctrine which can keep the humble penitent from despair, so, on the
other hand, great care must be taken that false views of it do not lead us to
presumption. In order to understand it rightly, we must not fill our minds with
our own reasonings upon it, which is the way in which some good people have
been misled, but we must betake ourselves to the Scriptures, wherein we shall
find the doctrine stated so plainly as to show that the mistakes have not
arisen from a want of clearness in the scriptures, but from a desire to make it
bend to some favorite notions. While it has been rejected by some, it has been
so mutilated by others, as hardly to retain any resemblance to the Scripture
doctrine of redemption. We are told in the beautiful passage last quoted its
source, -- the love of God to a lost world: -- who the Redeemer was -- the Son
of God: -- the end for which this plan was formed and executed. -- That
whosoever believed in him should not perish, but have everlasting life. There
is nothing surely in all this to promote gloominess. If kindness and mercy have
a tendency to win and warm the heart, here is every incentive to joy and
cheerfulness. Christianity looks kindly toward all, and with peculiar
tenderness on such, as, from humbling views of their own unworthiness, might be
led to fancy themselves excluded: -- we are expressly told, that "Christ died
for all:" -- that he tasted death for every man: -- that he died for the sins
of the whole world. Accordingly he has commanded that his Gospel should be
preached to every creature; which is in effect declaring that not a single
human being is excluded; for to preach the Gospel is to offer a Savior: -- and
the Savior in the plainest language offers himself to all, -- declaring to
"all the ends of the earth" -- look unto me and be saved. It is therefore an
undeniable truth, that no one will perish for want of a Savior, but for
rejecting him.

But to suppose that because Christ has died for the "sins of the whole world,"
the whole world will therefore be saved, is a most fatal mistake: in the same
book which tells us that "Christ died for all," we have likewise this awful
admonition: Strait is the gate, and few there be that find it; which, whether
it be understood of the immediate reception of the Gospel, or of the final use
which was too likely to be made of it, gives no encouragement to hope that all
will entitle themselves to its reward. And whilst it declares that "there is no
other name whereby we may be saved but the name of Jesus;" it likewise declares

THAT "WITHOUT HOLINESS NO MAN SHALL SEE THE LORD."
It is much to be feared that some, in their zeal to defend the Gospel
doctrines of free grace, have materially injured the Gospel doctrine of
holiness: stating, that Christ has done all in such a sense, as that there is
nothing left for us to do. -- But do the Scriptures hold out this language? --
Come, for all things are ready, is the Gospel call; in which we may observe,
that at the same time that it tells us that all things are ready, it
nevertheless tells us that we must " come." Food being provided for us will not
benefit us except we partake of it. -- It will not avail us that "Christ our
passover is sacrificed for us," unless "we keep the feast." -- We must make use
of the fountain which is opened, if we would be purified. All, indeed, who are
athirst are invited to take of the waters of life freely; but if we feel no "
thirst;" if we do not drink, their saving qualities are of no avail.

It is the more necessary to insist on this in the present day, as there is a
worldly and fashionable, as well as a low and sectarian Antinomianism: there
lamentably prevails in the world an unwarranted assurance of Salvation, founded
on a slight, vague, and general confidence in what Christ has done and suffered
for us, as if the great object of his doing and suffering had been to
emancipate us from all obligations to duty and obedience; and as if, because he
died for sinners, we might therefore safely and comfortably go on to live in
sin, contenting ourselves with now and then a transient, formal, and unmeaning
avowal of our unworthiness, our obligation, and the all sufficiency of his
atonement. By this quit-rent, of which all the cost consists in the
acknowledgment, the sensual, the worldly, and the vain, hope to find a refuge
in heaven, when driven from the enjoyments of this world. But this indolent
Christianity is no where taught in the Bible. The faith inculcated there is not
a lazy, professional faith, but that faith which "produces obedience," that
faith which "works by love," that faith of which the practical language is --
" Strive that you may enter in;" -- "So run that you may obtain;" -- So fight
that you may lay hold on eternal life: -- that faith which directs us "not to
be weary in well doing;" -- which says, " Work out your own salvation:" --
never forgetting at the same time that it is God which works in us both to
will and to do. -- Are those rich supplies of grace which the Gospel offers;
are those abundant aids of the spirit which it promises, tendered to the
slothful? -- No. -- God will have all his gifts improved. Grace must be used,
or it will be withdrawn. The Almighty thinks it not derogatory to his free
grace to declare, that those only who do his commandments have right to the
tree of life. And the Scriptures represent it as not derogatory to the
sacrifice of Christ, to follow his example in well-doing. The only caution is,
that we must not work in our own strength, nor bring in our contribution of
works as if in aid of the supposed deficiency of His merits.

For we must not in our over-caution fancy, that because Christ has redeemed us
from the curse of the law, we are therefore without a law. In acknowledging
Christ as a deliverer, we must not forget that he is a lawgiver too, and that
we are expressly commanded "to fulfill the law of Christ:" if then we wish to
know what his laws are, we must "search the Scriptures," especially the New
Testament; there we shall find him declaring

THE ABSOLUTE NECESSITY OF A CHANGE OF HEART AND LIFE;
Our Savior says, that except a man be born again, he cannot see the kingdom
of God: that it is not a mere acknowledging His authority, calling him "Lord,
Lord," that will avail any thing, except we Do what He commands: that any thing
short of this is like a man building his house upon the sands, which, when the
storms come on, will certainly fall. In like manner the Apostles are
continually enforcing the necessity of this change, which they describe under
the various names of "the new man; Ephesians, iv. 24.
" -- the new creature; Galatians, vi. 15.
-- a transformation into the image of God; 2 Corinthians, xii.
-- "a participation of the divine nature. 2 Peter, i. 4.
" Nor is this change represented as consisting merely in a change of religious
opinions; nor in exchanging gross sins for those which are more sober and
reputable; nor in renouncing the sins of youth, and assuming those of a quieter
period of life; nor in leaving off evil practices because men are grown tired
of them, or find they injure their credit, health, or fortune; nor does it
consist in inoffensiveness and obliging manners, nor indeed in any merely
outward reformation.

But the change consists in being renewed in the spirit of our minds; in being
conformed to the image of the Son of God; in being called out of darkness into
His mavelous light. And the whole of this great change, its beginning,
progress, and final accomplishment, for it is represented as a gradual change,
is ascribed to

THE INFLUENCE OF THE HOLY SPIRIT.
We are perpetually reminded of our utter inability to help ourselves, that we
may set the higher value on those gracious aids which are held out to us. We
are taught that we are not sufficient to think any thing as of ourselves, but
our sufficiency is of God. And when we are told that if we live after the
flesh, we shall die, we are at the same time reminded, that it is through the
spirit that we must mortify the deeds of the body. We are likewise cautioned
that we "grieve not the Holy Spirit of God:" that we "quench not the Spirit."
By all which expressions, and many others of like import, we are taught that,
while we are to ascribe with humble gratitude every good thought, word, and
work, to the influence of the Holy Spirit, we are not to look on such
influences as superseding our own exertions: and it is plain that we may reject
the gracious offers of assistance, since otherwise there would be no occasion
to caution us not to do it. The Scriptures have illustrated this in terms which
are familiar indeed, but which are therefore only the more condescending, and
endearing. Behold, I stand at the door and knock. If any man hear my voice and
open the door, I will come in to him, and will sup with him, and he with me.
Observe, it is not said if any man will not listen to me, I will force open the
door. But if we refuse admittance to such a guest, we must abide by the
consequences.

This sublime doctrine of divine assistance is the more to be prized, not only
on account of our own helplessness, but from the additional consideration of
the powerful adversary with whom the Christian has to contend: an article of
our faith by the way, which is growing into general disrepute among the politer
classes of society. Nay, there is a kind of ridicule attached to the very
suggestion of the subject, as if it were exploded on full proof of its being an
absolute absurdity, utterly repugnant to the liberal spirit of an enlightened
age. And it requires no small neatness of expression and periphrastic ingenuity
to get the very mention tolerated. -- I mean the Scripture doctrine of the
existence and power of our great spiritual enemy. It is considered by the
fashionable skeptic as a vulgar invention, which ought to be banished with the
belief in dreams, and ghosts, and witchcraft: -- by the fashionable Christian,
as an ingenious allegory, but not as a literal truth; and by almost all, as a
doctrine which, when it happens to be introduced at Church, has at least
nothing to do with the pews, but is by common consent made over to the aisles,
if indeed it must be retained at all.

May I, with great humility and respect, presume to suggest to our divines that
they would do well not to lend their countenance to these modish curtailments
of the Christian faith; nor to shun the introduction of this doctrine when it
consists with their subject to bring it forward. A truth which is seldom
brought before the eye, imperceptibly grows less and less important; and if it
be an unpleasing truth, we grow more and more reconciled to its absence, till
at length its intrusion becomes offensive, and we learn in the end to renounce
what we at first only neglected. Because some coarse and ranting enthusiasts
have been fond of using tremendous terms with a violence and frequency, which
might make it seem to be a gratification to them to denounce judgments and
anticipate torments, can their coarseness or vulgarity make a true doctrine
false, or an important one trifling? If such preachers have given offense by
their uncouth manner of managing an awful doctrine, that indeed furnishes a
caution to treat the subject more discreetly, but it is no just reason for
avoiding the doctrine. For to keep a truth out of sight because it has been
absurdly handled or ill-defended, might in time be assigned as a reason for
keeping back, one by one, every doctrine of our holy Church; for which of them
has not had imprudent advocates or weak champions?

Be it remembered that the doctrine in question is not only interwoven by
allusion, implication, or direct assertion throughout the whole Scripture, but
that it stands prominently personified at the opening of the New as well as the
Old Testament. The devil's temptation of our Lord, in which he is not
represented figuratively, but visibly and palpably, stands on the same ground
of authority with other events which are received without repugnance. And it
may not be an unuseful observation to remark, that the very refusing to believe
in an evil spirit, may be considered as one of his own suggestions; for there
is not a more dangerous illusion than to believe ourselves out of the reach of
illusions, nor a more alarming temptation than to fancy that we are not liable
to be tempted.

But the dark cloud raised by this doctrine will be dispelled by the cheering
certainty that our blessed Savior having himself been tempted like as we are,
is able to deliver those who are tempted.

But to return. -- From this imperfect sketch we may see how suitable the
religion of Christ is to fallen man! How exactly it meets every want! No one
needs now perish because he is a sinner, provided he be willing to forsake his
sins; for Jesus Christ came into the world to save sinners: and He is now
exalted to be a Prince and a Savior, to give repentance and forgiveness of
sin. Which passage, be it observed, may be considered as pointing out to us the
order in which he bestows his blessings; he gives first repentance, and then
forgiveness.

We may likewise see how much the character of a true Christian rises above
every other: that there is a wholeness, an integrity, a completeness in the
Christian character: that a few natural, pleasing qualities, not cast in the
mould of the Gospel, are but as beautiful fragments, or well-turned single
limbs, which for want of that beauty which arises from the proportion of parts,
for want of that connection of the members with the living head, are of little
comparative excellence. There may be amiable qualities which are not Christian
graces: and the Apostle, after enumerating every separate article of attack or
defense with which a Christian warrior is to be accoutred, sums up the matter
by directing that we put on "the whole armor of God." And this completeness is
insisted on by all the Apostles. One prays that his converts may stand perfect
and complete in the whole will of God: another enjoins that they be perfect and
entire, wanting nothing.

Now we are not to suppose that they expected any convert to be without faults;
they knew too well the constitution of the human heart; but Christians must
have no fault in their principle; their views must be direct, their proposed
scheme must be faultless; their intention must be single; their standard must
be lofty; their object must be right; their mark must be the high calling of
God in Christ Jesus. -- There must be no allowed evil, no warranted defection,
no tolerated impurity. Though they do not rise as high as they ought, nor as
they wish, in the scale of perfection, yet the scale itself must be correct,
and the desire of ascending perpetual: they must count the degrees they have
already attained as nothing. Every grace must be kept in exercise, conquests
once made over an evil propensity must not only be maintained but extended. And
in truth, Christianity so comprises contrary, and as it may be thought
irreconcilable excellences, that those which seem so incompatible as to be
incapable by nature of being inmates of the same breast, are almost necessarily
involved in the Christian character.

For instance; Christianity requires that our faith be at once fervent and
sober; that our love be both ardent and lasting; that our patience be not only
heroic but gentle: she demands dauntless zeal and genuine humility; active
services and complete self-renunciation; high seize in goodness, with
deep consciousness of defect; courage in reproving, and meekness in bearing
reproof; a quick perception of what is sinful; with a willingness to forgive
the offender; active virtue ready to do all, and passive virtue ready to bear
all. -- We must stretch every faculty in the service of our Lord, and yet bring
every thought into obedience to Him: while we aim to live in the exercise of
every Christian grace, we must account ourselves unprofitable servants: we must
strive for the crown, yet receive it as a gift, and then lay it at our Master's
feet: while we are busily trading in the world with our Lord's talents, we must
"commune with our heart, and be still:" while we strive to practice the purest
disinterestedness, we must be contented though we meet with selfishness in
return; and while laying out our lives for the good of mankind, we must submit
to reproach without murmuring, and to ingratitude without resentment. And to
render us equal to all these services, Christianity bestows not only the
precept, but the power; she does what the great poet of Ethics lamented that
Reason could not do, she lends us arms as well as rules.

For here, if not the worldly and the timid, but the humble and the
well-disposed should demand with fear and trembling, Who is sufficient for
these things? Revelation makes its own reviving answer: "My grace is sufficient
for thee."

It will be well here to distinguish that there are two sorts of Christian
professors, one of which affect to speak of Christianity as if it were a mere
system of doctrines, with little reference to their influence on life and
manners; while the other consider it as exhibiting a scheme of human duties
independent on its doctrines. For though the latter sort may admit the
doctrines, yet they contemplate them as a separate and disconnected set of
opinions, rather than as an influential principle of action. -- In violation of
that beautiful harmony which subsists in every part of Scripture between
practice and belief, the religious world furnishes two sorts of people, who
seem to enlist themselves, as if in opposition, under the banners of Saint Paul
and Saint James, as if those two great champions of the Christian cause had
fought for two masters. Those who affect respectively to be the disciples of
each, treat faith and works as if they were opposite interests, instead of
inseparable points. Nay, they go farther, and set Saint Paul at variance with
himself.

Now instead of reasoning on the point, let us refer to the Apostle in
question, who definitively settles the dispute. The Apostolical order and
method in this respect deserve notice and imitation; for it is observable that
the earlier parts of most of the Epistles abound in the doctrines of
Christianity, while those latter chapters, which wind up the subject, exhibit
all the duties which grow out of them, as the natural and necessary productions
of such a living root. But this alternate mention of doctrine and practice,
which seemed likely to unite, has on the contrary formed a sort of line of
separation between these two orders of believers, and introduced a broken and
mutilated system. Those who would make Christianity consist of doctrines only,
dwell, for instance, on the first eleven chapters of the Epistle to the Romans,
as containing exclusively the sum and substance of the Gospel. While the mere
moralists, who wish to strip Christianity of her lofty and appropriate
attributes, delight to dwell on the twelfth chapter, which is a table of
duties, as exclusively as if the preceding chapters made no part of the sacred
Canon. But Paul himself, who was at least as sound a theologian as any of his
commentators, settles the matter another way, by making the duties of the
twelfth grow out of the doctrines of the antecedent eleven, just as any other
consequence grows out of its cause. And as if he suspected that the indivisible
union between them might possibly be overlooked, he links the two distinct
divisions together by a logical "therefore," with which the twelfth begins: --
"I beseech you therefore," (that is, as the effect of all I have been
inculcating,) that you present your bodies a living sacrifice, acceptable to
God, etc. and then goes on to enforce on them, as a consequence of what he had
been preaching, the practice of every Christian virtue. This combined view of
the subject seems, on the one hand, to be the only means of preventing the
substitution of Pagan morality for Christian holiness; and on the other, of
securing the leading doctrine of justification by faith, from the dreadful
danger of Antinomian licentiousness; every human obligation being thus grafted
on the living stock of a divine principle.

CHAP. XX.
On the duty and efficacy of prayer.

IT is not proposed to enter largely on a topic which has been exhausted by the
ablest pens. But as a work of this nature seems to require that so important a
subject should not be overlooked, it is intended to notice in a slight manner a
few of those many difficulties and popular objections which are brought forward
against the use and efficacy of prayer, even by those who would be unwilling to
be suspected of impiety and unbelief.

There is a class of objectors who strangely profess to withhold homage from
the Most High, not out of contempt, but reverence. They affect to consider the
use of prayer as derogatory to the omniscience of God, asserting that it looks
as if we thought he stood in need of being informed of our wants; and as
derogatory to his goodness, as implying that he needs to be put in mind of them.

But is it not enough for such poor frail beings as we are to know, that God
himself does not consider prayer as derogatory either to his wisdom or
goodness? And shall we erect ourselves into judges of what is consistent with
the attributes of HIM before whom angels fall prostrate with self-abasement?
Will he thank such defenders of his attributes, who, while they profess to
reverence, scruple not to disobey him? It ought rather to be viewed as a great
encouragement to prayer, that we are addressing a Being, who knows our wants
better than we can express them, and whose preventing goodness is always ready
to relieve them.

It is objected by another class, and on the specious ground of humility too,
though we do not always find the objector himself quite as humble as his plea,
that it is arrogant in such insignificant beings as we are to presume to lay
our petty necessities before the Great and Glorious God, who cannot be expected
to condescend to the multitude of trifling and even interfering requests which
are brought before him by his creatures. These and such like objections arise
from mean and unworthy thoughts of the Great Creator. It seems as if those who
make them considered the Most High as such an one as themselves; a Being, who
can perform a certain quantity of business, but who would be overpowered with
an additional quantity. Or at best, is it not considering the Almighty in the
light, not of an infinite God, but of a great man, of a minister, of a king,
who, while he superintends great and national concerns, is obliged to neglect
small and individual petitions, because he cannot spare that leisure and
attention which suffice for every thing? They do not consider him as that
infinitely glorious Being who, while he beholds at once all that is doing in
heaven and in earth, is at the same time as attentive to the prayer of the poor
destitute, as present to the sorrowful sighing of the prisoner, as if these
forlorn creatures were the objects of his undivided attention.

These critics, who are for sparing the Supreme Being the trouble of our
prayers, and, if I may so speak without profaneness, would relieve Omnipotence
of part of his burden, by assigning to his care only such a portion as may be
more easily managed, seem to have no conception of his attributes.

They forget that infinite wisdom puts him as easily within reach of all
knowledge, as infinite power does of all performance: that he is a Being in
whose plans complexity makes no difficulty, and multiplicity no confusion: that
to ubiquity distance does not exist; that to infinity space is annihilated;
that past, present, and future, are discerned more accurately at one glance of
his eye, to whom a thousand years are as one day, than a single moment of time
or a single point of space can be by ours.

To the other part of the objection founded on the supposed interference (that
is, irreconcilableness) of one man's petitions with those of another, this
answer seems to suggest itself: first, that we must take care that when we ask,
we do not "ask amiss;" that, for instance, we ask chiefly, and in an
unqualified manner, only for spiritual blessings to ourselves and others; and
in doing this the prayer of one man cannot interfere with that of another.
Next, in asking for temporal and inferior blessings, we must qualify our
petition even though it should extend to deliverance from the severest pains,
or to our very life itself, according to that example of our Savior: Father,
if it be possible, let this cup pass from me. Nevertheless, not my will, but
thine, be done. By thus qualifying our prayer, we exercise ourselves in an act
of resignation to God; we profess not to wish what will interfere with his
benevolent plan, and yet we may hope by prayer to secure the blessing so far as
it is consistent with it. Perhaps the reason why this objection to prayer is so
strongly felt, is the too great disposition to pray for merely temporal and
worldly blessings, and to desire them in the most unqualified manner, not
submitting to be without them, even though the granting them should be
inconsistent with the general plan of Providence.

Another class continue to bring forward, as pertinaciously as if it had never
been answered, the exhausted argument, that seeing God is immutable, no
petitions of ours can ever change Him: that events themselves being settled in
a fixed and unalterable course, and bound in a fatal necessity, it is folly to
think that we can disturb the established laws of the universe, or interrupt
the course of Providence by our prayers: and that it is absurd to suppose these
firm decrees can be reversed by any requests of ours.

Without entering into the wide and trackless field of fate and free will, from
which pursuit I am kept back equally by the most profound ignorance and the
most invincible dislike, I would only observe, that these objections apply
equally to all human actions as well as to prayer. It may therefore with the
same propriety be urged, that seeing God is immutable and his decrees
unalterable, therefore our actions can produce no change in Him or in our own
state. Weak as well as impious reasoning. It may be questioned whether the
modern French and German philosophers might not be prevailed upon to
acknowledge the existence of God, if they might make such an use of his
attributes. The truth is, and it is a truth discoverable without any depth of
learning, all these objections are the offspring of pride. Poor, short-sighted
man cannot reconcile the omniscience and decrees of God with the efficacy of
prayer; and, because he cannot reconcile them, he modestly concludes they are
irreconcilable. How much more wisdom as well as happiness results from an
humble christian spirit! Such a plain practical text as, Draw near unto God,
and he will draw near unto you, carries more consolation, more true knowledge
of his wants and their remedy to the heart of a penitent sinner, than all the
tomes of casuistry which have puzzled the world ever since the question was
first set afloat by its original propounders.

And as the plain man only got up and walked, to prove there was such a thing
as motion, in answer to the philosopher who denied it: so the plain Christian,
when he is borne down with the assurance that there is no efficacy in prayer,
requires no better argument to repel the assertion than the good he finds in
prayer itself.

All the doubts proposed to him respecting God, do not so much affect him as
this one doubt respecting himself: If I regard iniquity in my heart, the Lord
will not hear me. For the chief doubt and difficulty of a Christian consists,
not so much in a distrust of God's ability and willingness to answer the prayer
of the upright, as in a distrust of his own uprightness, and of the quality of
the prayer which he offers up.

Let the subjects of a dark fate maintain a sullen, or the slaves of a blind
chance a hopeless silence, but let the child of a compassionate Almighty Father
supplicate his mercies with an humble confidence, inspired by the assurance,
that the very hairs of his head are numbered. Let him take comfort in that
individual and minute attention, without which not a sparrow falls to the
ground, as well as in that heart-cheering promise, that, as the eyes of the
Lord are over the righteous, so are his ears open to their prayers. And as a
pious Bishop has observed, Our Savior has as it were hedged in and enclosed
the Lord's Prayer with these two great fences of our faith, God's willingness
and his power to help us: the preface to it assures us of the one, which, by
calling God by the tender name of "Our Father," intimates his readiness to help
his children: and the animating conclusion, "Thine is the power," rescues us
from every unbelieving doubt of his ability to help us.

A Christian knows, because he feels, that prayer is, though in a way to him
inscrutable, the medium of connection between God and his rational creatures;
the means appointed by him to draw down his blessings upon us. The Christian
knows, that prayer is the appointed means of uniting two ideas, one of the
highest magnificence, the other of the most profound lowliness, within the
compass of imagination; namely, that it is the link of communication between
the High and Lofty One who inhabiteth eternity, and that heart of the contrite
in which he delights to dwell. He knows that this inexplicable union between
Beings so unspeakably, so essentially different, can only be maintained by
prayer.

The plain Christian, as was before observed, cannot explain why it is so; but
while he feels the efficacy, he is contented to let the learned define it; and
he will no more postpone prayer till he can produce a chain of reasoning on the
manner in which he derives benefit from it, than he will postpone eating till
he can give a scientific lecture on the nature of digestion: he is contented
with knowing that his meat has nourished him; and he leaves to the philosopher,
who may choose to defer his meal till he has elaborated his treatise, to starve
in the interim. The Christian feels better than he is able to explain, that the
functions of his spiritual life can no more be carried on without habitual
prayer, than those of his natural life without frequent bodily nourishment. He
feels renovation and strength grow out of the use of the appointed means, as
necessarily in the one case as in the other. He feels that the health of his
soul can no more be sustained, and its powers kept in continued vigor by the
prayers of a distant day, than his body by the aliment of a distant day.

But there is one motive to the duty in question, far more constraining to the
true believer than all others that can be named; more imperious than any
arguments on its utility, than any convictions of its efficacy, even than any
experience of its consolations. Prayer is the command of God; the plain,
positive, repeated injunction of the Most High, who declares, "He will be
inquired of." This is enough to secure the obedience of the Christian, even
though a promise were not, as it always is, attached to the command. But in
this case the promise is as clear as the precept: " Ask, and ye shall receive;"
-- Seek, and ye shall find: this is enough for the plain Christian. As to the
manner in which prayer is made to coincide with the general scheme of God's
plan in the government of human affairs; how God has left himself at liberty to
reconcile our prayer with his own predetermined will, the Christian does not
very critically examine, his precise and immediate duty being to pray and not
to examine; and probably this being among the secret things which belong to
God, and not to us, it will lie hidden among those numberless mysteries which
we shall not fully understand till faith is lost in sight.

In the mean time it is enough for the humble believer to be assured, that the
Judge of all the earth is doing right: it is enough for him to be assured in
that word of God "which cannot lie," of numberless actual instances of the
efficacy of prayer in obtaining blessings and averting calamities, both
national and individual; it is enough for him to be convinced experimentally,
by that internal evidence which is perhaps paramount to all other evidence, the
comfort he has received from prayer when all other comforts have failed: -- and
above all, to end with the same motive with which we began, the only motive
indeed which he requires for the performance of any duty, -- it is motive
enough for him, that thus says the Lord. For when a serious Christian has once
got a plain unequivocal command from his Maker on any point, he never suspends
his obedience while he is amusing himself with looking about for subordinate
motives of action. Instead of curiously analyzing the nature of the duty, he
considers how he shall best fulfill it: for on these points at least it may be
said without controversy, that the ignorant (and here who is not ignorant?)
have nothing to do with the law but to obey it.

Others there are who perhaps not controverting any of these premises, yet
neglect to build practical consequences on the admission of them; who neither
denying the duty nor the efficacy of prayer, yet go on to live either in the
irregular observance or the total neglect of it, as appetite, or pleasure, or
business, or humor, may happen to predominate; and who by living almost
without prayer, may be said "to live almost without God in the world." To such
we can only say, that they little know what they lose. The time is hastening on
when they will look upon those blessings as invaluable, which now they think
not worth asking for. O that they were wife! that they understood this! that
they would consider their latter end!

There are again others, who it is to be feared, having once lived in the habit
of prayer, yet not having been well-grounded in those principles of faith and
repentance on which genuine prayer is built, have by degrees totally
discontinued it. "They do not find," say they, that their affairs prosper the
better or the worse; or perhaps they were unsuccessful in their affairs even
before they dropped the practice, and so had no encouragement to go on. They do
not know that they had no encouragement; they do not know how much worse their
affairs might have gone on, had they discontinued it sooner, or how their
prayers helped to retard their ruin. Or they do not know that perhaps "they
asked amiss," or that, if they had obtained what they asked, they might have
been far more unhappy. For a true believer never "restrains prayer," because he
is not certain he obtains every individual request; for he is persuaded that
God, in compassion to our ignorance, sometimes in great mercy withholds what we
desire, and often disappoints his most favored children by giving them, not
what they ask, but what he knows is really good for them. The froward child, as
a pious prelate Bishop Hall.
observes, cries for the shining blade, which the tender parent withholds,
knowing it would cut his fingers.

Thus to persevere when we have not the encouragement of visible success, is an
evidence of tried faith. Of this holy perseverance Job was a noble instance.
Defeat and disappointment rather stimulated than stopped his prayers. Though in
a vehement strain of passionate eloquence he exclaims, I cry out of wrong, but
I am not heard: I cry aloud, but there is no judgment: yet so persuaded was he
of the duty of continuing this holy importunity, that he persisted against
human hope, till he attained to that pitch of unshaken faith, by which he was
enabled to break out into that sublime apostrophe, Though he slay me, I will
trust in him.

But may we not say that there is a considerable class, who not only bring none
of the objections which we have stated against the use of prayer; who are so
far from rejecting, that they are exact and regular in the performance of it:
who yet take it up on as low ground as is consistent with their ideas of their
own safety; who, while they consider prayer as an indispensable form, believe
nothing of that change of heart which it is intended to produce? Many who yet
adhere scrupulously to the letter, are so far from entering into the spirit of
this duty, that they are strongly inclined to suspect those of hypocrisy who
adopt the true scriptural views of prayer. Nay, as even the Bible may be so
wrested as to be made to speak almost any language in support of almost any
opinion, these persons lay hold on Scripture itself to bear them out in their
own slight views of this duty; and they profess to borrow from it the ground of
that censure which they cast on the more serious Christians. Among the many
passages which have been made to convey a meaning foreign to its original
design, none has been seized upon with more avidity by such persons than the
pointed censures of our Savior on those "who for a pretense make long
prayers;" as well as on those who use vain repetitions, and think they shall be
heard for much speaking. Now the things here intended to be reproved, were the
hypocrisy of the Pharisees and the ignorance of the heathen, together with the
error of all those who depended on the success of their prayers, while they
imitated the deceit of the one or the folly of the other. But our Savior never
meant those severe reprehensions should cool or abridge the devotion of pious
Christians, to which they do not apply.

More or fewer words, however, so little constitute the value of prayer, that
there is no doubt but one of the most affecting specimens on record is the
short petition of the Publican; full fraught as it is with that spirit of
contrition and self-abasement which is the very principle and soul of prayer.
And this perhaps is the best model for that sudden lifting up of the heart
which we call ejaculation. But I doubt, in general, whether the few hasty words
to which these frugal petitioners would stint the scanty devotions of others,
will be always found ample enough to satisfy the humble penitent, who, being a
sinner, has much to confess; who, hoping he is a pardoned sinner, has much to
acknowledge. Such an one perhaps cannot always pour out the fullness of his
soul within the prescribed abridgments. Even the sincerest Christian, when he
wishes to find his heart warm, has often to lament its coldness. Though he feel
that he has received much, and has therefore much to be thankful for, yet he is
not able at once to bring his wayward spirit into such a posture as shall fit
it for the solemn business; for such an one has not merely his form to repeat,
but he has his peace to make. A devout supplicant too will labor to affect and
warm his mind with a sense of the attributes of God, in imitation of the holy
men of old. Like Jehosaphat, he will sometimes enumerate the power, and the
might, and the mercies of the Most High, in order to stir up the sentiments of
awe and gratitude, and humility in his own soul. 2 Chronicles. xx. 5, 6.
He has the example of his Savior, whose heart dilated with the expression of
the same holy affections: I thank thee, O Father, Lord of heaven and earth. A
heart thus warmed with divine love cannot always scrupulously limit itself to
the mere business of prayer, if I may so speak. The humble supplicant, though
he be no longer governed by a love of the world, yet grieves to find that he
cannot totally exclude it from his thoughts. Though he has on the whole, a deep
sense of his own wants, and of God's abundant fullness to supply them, yet when
he most wishes to be rejoicing in those strong motives for love and gratitude,
alas! even then he has to mourn that his thoughts are gone astray after some
trifle lighter than vanity itself. The best Christian is but too liable, during
the temptations of the day, to be ensnared by "the lust of the eye, and the
pride of life," and is not always brought without effort to reflect that he is
but dust and ashes. How can even good persons, who are just come perhaps from
listening to the flattery of their fellow-worms, acknowledge before God,
without any preparation of the heart, that they are miserable sinners? They
require a little time, to impress on their own souls the solemn confession of
sin they are making to Him, without which brevity and not length might
constitute hypocrisy. Even the sincerely pious have in prayer grievous
wanderings to lament, from which others mistakingly suppose the advanced
Christian to be exempt. Such wanderings that, as an old divine has observed, it
would exceedingly humble a good man, could he, after he had prayed, be made to
see his prayers written down, with interlineations of all the vain and
impertinent thoughts which had thrust themselves in amongst them. So that such
an one will indeed, from a sense of these distractions, feel deep occasion with
the prophet to ask forgiveness for the iniquity of his holy things: and would
find cause enough for humiliation every night, had he to lament the sins of his
prayers only.

We know that such a brief petition as, Lord help my unbelief, if the
supplicant be in so happy a frame, and the prayer be darted with such strong
faith that his very soul mounts with the petition, may suffice to draw down a
blessing which may be withheld from the more prolix petitioner: yet, if by
prayer we do not mean a mere form of words, whether they be long or short; if
the true definition of prayer be, that it is the desire of the heart; if it be
that secret communion between God and the soul which is the very breath and
being of religion; then is the Scripture so far from suggesting that short
measure of which it is accused, that it expressly says, "Pray without ceasing:"
-- "Pray evermore:" -- I will that men pray every where; -- Continue instant in
prayer.

If such "repetitions" as these objectors reprobate, stir up desires as yet
unawakened, for vain repetitions are such as awaken or express no new desire,
and serve no religious purpose, then are "repetitions" not to be condemned. And
if it be true that our Savior gave the warning against long prayers in the
sense these allege; if he gave the caution against vain repetitions in the
sense these believe; then he broke his own rule in both instances: for once we
are told he continued all night in prayer to God. And again, in a most awful
crisis of his life, it is expressly said, He prayed the third time using the
same words. Matt. xxvi. 44.


But as it is the effect of prayer to expand the affections as well as sanctify
them, the benevolent Christian is not satisfied to commend himself alone to the
Divine favor. The heart which is full of the love of God, will overflow with
love to its neighbor. All that are near to himself he wishes to bring near to
God. Religion makes a man so liberal of soul, that he cannot endure to restrict
any thing, much less divine mercies, to himself: he spiritualizes the social
affections, by adding intercessory to personal prayer: for he knows, that
petitioning for others is one of the best methods of exercising and enlarging
our love and charity toward them. It is unnecessary to produce any of the
numberless instances with which Scripture abounds, on the efficacy of
intercession: I shall confine myself to a few observations on the benefits it
brings to him who offers it. -- When we pray for the objects of our dearest
regard, it purifies love: when we pray for those with whom we have worldly
intercourse, it smooths down the swellings of envy, and bids the tumults of
ambition subside: when we pray for our country, it sanctifies patriotism: when
we pray for those in authority, it adds a divine motive to human obedience:
when we pray for our enemies, it softens the savageness of war, and mollifies
hatred into sorrow. And we can best learn, nay, we can only learn, the
difficult duty of forgiving those who have offended us, when we bring ourselves
to pray for them to Him whom we ourselves daily offend. When those who are the
faithful followers of the same Divine Master pray for each other, the
reciprocal intercession best realizes that beautiful idea of the Communion of
Saints.

Some are for confining their intercessions only to the good, as if none but
persons of merit were entitled to our prayers. Merit! who has it? Desert! who
can plead it? in the sight of God, I mean. Who shall bring his own piety, or
the piety of others, in the way of claim before a Being of such transcendent
holiness, that the heavens are not clean in his sight? And if we wait for
perfect holiness as a preliminary to prayer, when shall such erring creatures
pray at all to HIM who charge the Angels with folly!

In closing this little work with the subject of intercessory prayer, may the
Author be allowed to avail herself of the feeling its suggests to her own
heart? And while she earnestly implores that Being, who can make the meanest of
his creatures instrumental to his glory, to bless this humble attempt to those
for whom it was written, may she, without presumption entreat that this work of
Christian Charity may be reciprocal, and that those who peruse these pages, may
put up a petition for her, that in the great day to which we are all hastening,
she may not be found to have suggested to others what she herself did not
believe, or to have recommended what she did not desire to practice? In that
awful day of everlasting decision, may both the reader and the writer be
pardoned and accepted, not for any works of righteousness which they have done,
but through the merits of the GREAT INTERCESSOR.

THE END.

