A SERMON, PREACHED AT ARUNDEL, JANUARY 12, 1800: ON THE DEATH OF George
Washington.

BY SILAS MOODY, A. M. PASTOR OF THE CHURCH IN SAID TOWN.

PUBLISHED BY SPECIAL REQUEST.

PORTSMOUTH, (NEW HAMPSHIRE,) PRINTED AT THE UNITED STATES' ORACLE OFFICE, BY
CHARLES PIERCE, FEBRUARY, 1800.

GEORGE WASHINGTON,
Was born February 11, (old style) 1732, in the state of Virginia: He was
appointed Commander in Chief of the American Armies, in 1775; Resigned his
Commission in 1783; Was chosen President of the United States in 1789; Resigned
the Presidency, 1796; Died at Mount Vernon, between the hours of 10 and 11,
Saturday Evening, the 14th December, 1799.

A SERMON
II. KINGS, II. CHAP. 12 VERSE. And Elisha saw it, and he cried, my Father, my
Father! the Chariot of Israel, and the Horsemen thereof. And he saw him no
more; and he took hold of his own Clothes and rent them in two pieces.
MY FATHER, MY FATHER! The Chariot of Israel, and the Horsemen thereof: --
This is the pathetic cry of Elisha, on the removal of Elijah from his head, by
a whirlwind into heaven, never more to be seen! He very sensibly felt the loss;
he bitterly lamented it, by expressions and actions, indicating great agitation
of mind; and the deepest sorrow of heart: He lift up his voice and wept: He
took hold of his clothes, and rent them in pieces; intimating, the sincerity of
his affection to his departed friend; the affliction of his bleeding heart at
the mournful event.

My Father, my Father! The words experts the light in which he viewed him, as
standing in the relation of a kind and tender Father, who had administered to
his instruction, protection, and comfort. The repetition of the terms, my
Father, my Father! shows the fullness of his heart; his delight, his melancholy
delight in using the name, my Father, my dear Father, is no more!

The Chariot of Israel, and the Horsemen thereof. What an encomium is this,
upon Elijah, as a public blessing? Chariots and Horsemen were used as means in
defense of the country: Elijah is here considered as equal to all the armies of
Israel; to their Chariots and Horsemen prepared for war, in respect to his
influence and beneficence; and Elisha laments that this, the glory and defense
of Israel, was departed; is extremely affected at the public loss, sustained by
such a serious, melancholy Providence.

These words may serve to suggest some thoughts, and excite sentiments and
affections in our hearts, proper to be cherished on the present occasion for
which they are chosen, viz. To improve the Providence of GOD in the removal of
GEORGE WASHINGTON by death. Who, has been a Father and friend to our country;
and who, in the important stations he filled as President and General, was as
the Chariots and Horsemen of our Israel; instrumental as our political savior.

The Lord JEHOVAH must be acknowledged as the supreme Governor among the
nations; to use such means as he pleases to plant and build them up; and it
becomes us to take notice of the operations of his hands; to notice the
instruments he raises up, and blesses for the good of his people; to give
honor, to whom honor is due, and also, sincerely to regret the loss of such, as
have been Fathers and Benefactors to us.

I. Let us consider the goodness of GOD to his people, in appearing for them
under national troubles, and raising up men of distinguished abilities and
accomplishments, to be public blessings. II. We should seriously notice the
Providence in their removal by death, and lament the loss of them.
These propositions, if largely discussed, would open an extensive field for
meditations, and lead me to further reflections upon the interposition of
heaven in our behalf heretofore, than I have time at present to make; and, to
give a minute detail of the character of our late beloved President and
General, which may be more proper for an historian to describe, than for the
preacher to relate.

But let us attend to some general thoughts that arise from the observations
made on the text.

I. Consider the goodness of GOD to his people, in appearing for them under
national troubles, and raising up men of distinguished abilities and
accomplishments, to be public blessings.

In this case, Elijah was raised up to be a special blessing to the t^^ tribes
of Israel: He acted indeed principally in the ecclesiastical line, as a prophet
of the LORD, to instruct and reform the people: but in this way he entered upon
the most direct method to become a benefactor; for righteousness exalts a
nation; and in righteousness alone, shall it be established. And we find him
giving most salutary counsel to kings, how to conduct for the peace and
happiness of the country.

It was in a time of affliction, of great distress among the people, when GOD
raised him up to be an eminent blessing to them. For, after the ten tribes had
broken off from the house of David; their kings, for political reasons, seduced
the people, and restrained them from attending the stated worship of GOD at
Jerusalem; whereupon they fell into idolatry. This provoked the LORD to expose
them to the will of their enemies, who grievously oppressed them.

If we look back from this period to preceding ages of the Jewish Nation, we
shall find their history will furnish us with many instances of the LORD'S
appearing for their deliverance, when reduced to extremities. Presently after
their settlement in the promised land, their enemies devised against them, to
deprive them of their privileges, to rob them of the fruits of their labor, and
make slaves of them; but when they cried unto the Lord, he had pity on them: He
raised up and qualified with eminent talents, those who rescued them and
wrought great salvation; Men to be Judges, Counselors and Generals of Armies.

The book of Judges contains an history of diverse instances of this kind,
which is worthy perusing at this time, that our reflections may excite pious
affections of soul, to that God, who is so gracious in interposing, to redress
the grievances of his people.

A very memorable instance on sacred record, is that of David's being raised
from keeping sheep, to be the head of the states or tribes of Israel. The
nation at this period, was in the utmost distress and affliction. The
government was dissolved, or exercised in the most arbitrary, tyrannical
manner. Civil war among themselves; the enemy entering into the heart of the
country. Without were fightings, within were fears, and great perplexities.
David appeared by the appointment of God; and meeting the suffrages of the
people: the enemy from abroad was subdued; Peace restored at home; the union of
the tribes cordially affected and cemented; the government established and
secured, and a foundation laid for the most flourishing kingdom and happy
people, in the next reign, that can be found in the annals of history.

And have not we experienced, are not we living witnesses of the great goodness
of GOD to us, as a nation, in raising up for us, in time of extremity, a
deliverer, in the person of GEORGE WASHINGTON, our late beloved President and
General? Though many have done worthily, and have honor from their
fellow-citizens; yet none, I trust, will think we mean to derogate from them,
when we say he has excelled them all: considering the important stations he so
illustriously filled for the public good.

The Father of the spirits of all flesh brought him upon the stage of action,
and gave him to this people, when there was special need of his aid and
assistance. The extremity and distresses of the country at that period, are so
recent, that they cannot be effaced from our minds, and therefore I need not at
present recapitulate them. Only to instance, that our liberties were abridged
and privileges wrested from our hands; our dear earned property siezed and
plundered; our lives threatened; yea many of our friends and countrymen slain by
the sword! in these extremities, when our eyes were unto the LORD of heaven and
earth; he sent forth a deliverer, furnished with abilities for the important
services designed in providence. As he had a large field to act in, many
difficulties to encounter, and hardships to endure* He was blessed with a
capacious mind; accurate judgment, to discern men and things; an happy talent
at diction; princely dignity of soul; great fortitude, tempered with
moderation, condescension and meekness; with unwearied patience and
perseverance, fitted to preside in council to the greatest advantage; and lead
forth an host against the enemy with happy success. Being chosen of GOD and man
to be the savior of his country, he was endowed with accomplishments, through
the smiles of heaven, to obtain the important object. Scarce ever perhaps, so
many eminent gifts and talents, entered into the character of one person, as in
General WASHINGTON. Such majesty and condescension! which fitted him to perform
great and illustrious deeds with honor; and the common actions of life, with so
much affability and ease. Considering his tenderness and affection for the
people; and benefactions to the country: with what propriety may we adopt the
language of my text? My Father my Father! the Chariot of Israel and the
Horsemen thereof. As a Father, he engaged without stipend or reward, only a
bare support of his household, to act as General of the united forces of
America against the enemy. What pure disinterested benevolence prompted and
animated him to undertake in such an important department; and endure
incredible hardships and severest trials, with astonishing patience almost of a
christian Martyr? Of this condescension and parental affection to such as are
in the lower walks of life, I was witness to a very delicate instance. Riding
into a populous town in the midst of thousands, who received him with the
greatest cordiality and joy: -- He alighted at the place of his lodgings, and
immediately went forth to a gate fronting the main-street, to attend a
procession of youth, members of the several schools: Who were arranged in
divisions, preceded by their respective Instructors. While they paid their
humble respects to him, he bowed to them with a most amiable smile: And his
countenance, the Index of the soul, showed the affection and tenderness of a
Father indeed -- The impressions of such a scene, I believe, will never be
effaced from the grateful hearts of those who were present.
And such was his same and influence, may we not say, they were equal to an
army of Chariots and Horsemen?

It may be further worthy remarking the goodness of GOD; and in honor to him
whom he raised up in our behalf; that he was not atheistical or deistical in
his principles, to influence the people to forsake the worship of the true GOD;
like Jeroboam, who headed the separation from the arbitrary King of Judah. But
he showed a profound reverence for the Deity, a regard for the divine oracles,
and the institutions of holy worship, and earnestly recommended us by repeated
proclamations, humbly to acknowledge our dependence on the care and blessing of
Heaven, for all desired prosperity and happiness. What an happy circumstance is
it, at this day of increasing infidelity, that one of WASHINGTON's station and
influence, has appeared to check its progress? Who by his counsil and example
has given his testimony in behalf of our holy religion? A religion accompanied
with full evidences of its divinity; tending to refine and purify the human
nature; and raise it to the highest glory and felicity: A religion designed and
calculated to promote our best good in time and eternity. To this religion, the
GREAT WASHINGTON subscribed, and earnestly recommended to the people in his
affectionate farewell Address, when he retired from public, to private life!
and yet some of an inferior rank, glory in their infidelity, as though wisdom
must live and die with them.

But WASHINGTON is no more!

This great and illustrious personage is withdawn from this theater of action
to receive, we trust, a glorious reward in heaven. But though taken from our
sight, affectionate thoughts of him are not erased from our minds. His memory
is deeply recorded in the grateful hearts of millions. His illustrious
achievements, his eminent services are immortalized, they are imprinted in
indelible characters, to be read and known of all; to be conveyed down from
parents to children, to the latest posterity.

What thankfulness, does it become us to cherish in our hearts to the blessed
GOD, for raising up so seasonably for us, such a public benefactor? and should
not we be deeply impressed at the same time with unfeigned grief at the loss of
so great a blessing?

The Lord gave, and the Lord has taken away! let us subscribe, blessed be the
name of the Lord: and say, that he is holy and righteous in so doing; humbly
submiting to the rebuke of providence.

Let us not despise the chastening of the Lord, nor faint under his
corrections; but make those reflections, which become us as men and christians.

II. We ought to take serious notice of the Providence in the removal of
eminent benefactors by death, and regret the loss of them.

It is true they are but men, and like men they die; agreeably to the sentence
passed upon all the human race: yet, as the gift of such men is a great
blessing; the removal of them is a frown of Providence. There is so much virtue
taken from the earth, that cannot well be spared; there is such an useful
example removed from our eyes, which is needed to stimulate survivors. And
though the chief design of their being raised up, may be answered; yet in their
retirement, their counsels and prayers might be beneficial: in their removal,
so much of our glory is departed; so much of our defense taken away, and
proportionably we are left feeble and exposed.

Nature dictates, scripture precepts and examples confirm the sentiment, that
the loss of our fathers and public benefactors, should be seriously noticed and
lamented by survivors.

As natural affections prompt to mourn the loss of dear kindred; painfully to
lament the vacancy left in the heart; so social affections and such*as arise
from benefits received, will excite symphathetic sensations in the grateful
soul.

Gratitude and due respect to the living will lament the dead. Those tender
feelings of soul will be sensibly touched; and springs of sorrow burst forth in
correspondent expressions. Ingratitude is a principle of the basest kind, a
bitter root of iniquity superlatively great! When there arose a King in Egypt
that knew not Joseph, who had been the father of the country, and the greatest
benefactor the nation ever enjoyed; the most barbarous plan was laid, and
executed in part, that could enter the depraved heart of man, to conceive of.
But gratitude and esteem for worthy deeds, and worthy characters, call forth to
view whatever has a tendency to embalm their memories, and convey their names
down to posterity with sweet perfume. Thus David felt for his dear friend
deceased. "I am distressed for thee, my brother Jonathan; very pleasant have
thou been unto me." II. Samuel, 1. 26.


As nature dictates and invites to mourn on such occasions, so scripture
teaches the propriety, and gives instances of seriously noticing such scenes.
The sons of Jacob mourned at his death with a great and fore lamentation,
insomuch that the neighboring nations took notice of it as a grievous mourning.
When Moses died, the children of Israel held thirty days mourning at the
affecting providence. "All Judah and Jerusalem mourned for Josiah," at his
decease. "And Jeremiah the prophet lamented him." He penned a funeral dirge on
the occasion: "And all the singing men, and singing women, spoke of Josiah in
their lamentations, and made them an ordinance in Israel;" behold, "they are
written in the Lamentations."

To weep, is human; is christian; is GODLIKE. "JESUS wept." It evidences a
tender heart, impressed with pious and virtuous affections. It is an honor to a
people to express a sense of their loss of great benefactors in solemn
mourning. It shows that they are not barbarous and uncivilized; but
enlightened, well informed, benevolent, virtuous. It will get them a name and
praise in the world. And when sincerely done, will meet the approbation of
Heaven.

Decent mourning for the loss of worthy characracters, is sanctioned by divine
authority; and though it no way affects the dead, it may benefit the living. In
cherishing pious reflections on the Providence, their melting hearts are made
more susceptible of divine impressions, in exciting humbleness of mind, and
serious meditations on their own frailty.

If great men, and the mighty are fallen, surely then may we say, men of low
degree are vanity, and must be laid in the dust; also in attending such scenes,
it may serve to call off our dependence from the creature, the most exalted;
and place our trust in GOD, who, only has immortality. "Put not your trust in
Princes, nor in the son of man, in whom there is no help. His breath goes
forth, he returns to his earth; in that very day his thoughts perish. Happy
is he that has the GOD of Jacob for his help; whose hope is in the LORD his
GOD." 146 Psalm, 3, 4, 5.
Again further, in reflecting upon the respect shown to worthy characters, and
who have deserved well of their country, it may stimulate survivors to worthy
deeds themselves, to go and do likewise. To be influenced principally by the
praise of men, is too servile, and dangerous; yet, a proper degree is
animating, and may not be hurtful or ensnaring; provided a sense of duty, and
the honor that comes from GOD only be uppermost in the heart.

As the eye affects the heart, funeral processions, and outward forms of
mourning, may serve to excite tender feelings in the soul. A sort of mechanical
influence will arise from associating with mourners, and viewing their faces
bedewed with unfeigned tears. We shall weep, with those that weep. Hence, such
impressions will be made, as cannot be easily effaced from the mind, and will
tend to excite serious reflections, that may be very useful in future life.

We honor our deceased friends, when we imitate their virtues, and follow them
so far as they followed CHRIST our divine Redeemer. In this, we show greater
respect to their memories and esteem for their merits; than by repeated
lamentations, clothed in sackcloth, and shedding tears on their graves. --
Though dead, yet speaking, they cry; whatsoever things are true, honest, just
and pure; whatsoever things are lovely, and of good report; if there be any
virtue, if there be any praise, think on these things. Similar to this, our
father and friend WASHINGTON, when living, counseled us, and exemplified in
his conduct. Among all the honors shown him at his decease, shall we deny him
that which is the greatest of all? Will we refuse to imitate his virtues; his
piety, his benevolence, and his public spirit.

In commemorating the loss of great and useful men, such as the late beloved
General WASHINGTON; while we give honor to whom honor is due, we are better
instructed, than to use servile adulation, like slaves, who live on the breath
of their Lords; or like the heathen, who deified their heroes and revered them
as Gods. Doubtless many of the heathen gods originated from the people,
extolling the characters of their generals and emperors to an excessive height,
and placing them above the stars.

But our religion teaches us, that there is but one GOD, supreme over all. That
all gifts and accomplishments are derived from him; and those who are furnished
with them, should be honored for God's sake, whose servants they are; should be
honored for their own sakes, when improving and using their talents well; and
the remov^^ of them by death, should be sincerely lamented for our own sakes,
that we are deprived of so great a blessing.

"A Prince and great man is fallen this day," in our Israel. "The LORD has
taken away the mighty man, and the man of war, and the Judge, and the prudent
and ancient. But let us not mourn as those that have no hope; but trust in the
LORD who has the (...) of the spirit, to raise up in succession* (...) to
preside and rule over us, as shall fear GOD and work righteousness.

As the sons of the Prophets said, "the spirit of Elijah does rest on Elisha."
Thanks be to GOD, that such an happy portion of the spirit of our deceased
General, and late President, does rest on his successor, who is now the supreme
magistrate of the Union. The LORD bless him!

Though we are bereaved of one who was a Father to the country, and many years
our political head, yet our GOD lives, and blessed be his name. Let us by a
pious conduct secure his favor and blessing. Our Redeemer lives forever more.
Let us submit to him as the Captain of our Salvation; as the Leader and
Commander of the People. Let us be his pious, humble, and peaceable subjects;
who is the Prince of peace. Let us be good soldiers of JESUS CHRIST; fight
under his banner the good fight of faith; then he will lead us on to Glory;
where death will be swallowed up in victory; immortal honors crown our Heads,
and ineffable felicity rejoice our Hearts.

AMEN.

