AN ADDRESS TO THE CITIZENS OF NEW YORK, WHO ASSEMBLED IN THE BRICK
PRESBYTERIAN CHURCH, TO CELEBRATE THE TWENTY-THIRD ANNIVERSARY OF American
Independence.

By SAMUEL L. MITCHILL.

NEW YORK: PRINTED AND SOLD BY GEORGE F. HOPKINS, AT WASHINGTON'S HEAD, 84
MAIDEN-LANE. 1800.

New York, 15 th July, 1799. CITIZEN,
WE are deputed in behalf of the General Society of Mechanics and Tradesmen;
the Tammany Society, or Columbian Order; the Democratic, and NewYork Coopers'
Society, to present you their united thanks for your Oration, delivered before
them on the 4th inst. the Anniversary of American Independence, and to request
of you a copy of the same for publication.

With respect, We are your friends and fellow citizens, William King, Mechanic
Society. John P. Pearss, Corns. C. Van-Alen, Tam. Society or Columb. Order.
John Mersereau, Democrat. Society. John Utt, Coopers' Society.

To Dr. SAMUEL L. MITCHILL.



ADDRESS.
Citizens! Republicans! Friends!
IT is a laudable custom, which some part of the human race has adopted, of
setting apart anniversary days for the commemoration of great or interesting
events. It has been believed or found, that there is some exercise of the
understanding, some association of ideas, favorable on the celebration of such
times and seasons, to the happiness of those who engage in it. This disposition
to increase pleasurable emotion, has accordingly been frequently indulged in
private life. For this reason it seems to be, that some individuals, who
conceive their birth to be an event worth rejoicing at, devote the anniversary
of the day on which it happened, to feasting and mirth. And some of those who
consider their nuptial union as a subject of lasting joy, are fond of bringing
to recollection, once at least in a twelvemonth, the transactions of their
wedding day. -- The annual observance of appointed days, has, for a similar
reason, been enjoined by synods and churches. And thus it is that the nativity,
the death and the resurrection of Christ, are, among some of the professors of
his religion, brought occasionally to mind, and made the theme of particular
contemplation. A larger number of human beings employ something more than
common salutation and greeting on the first day of January, when, according to
the generally received computation of time, they enter the threshold of the new
year. Nor have governments and legislatures been wanting in their attention to
the setting apart and keeping of particular days.

THUS, in England, the celebration of the 5th of November in a particular
manner was calculated to foster the aversion of the nation to popery, and to
strengthen what was called the protestant interest. The observance, and with
particular ceremonies too, of the day when the first Charles, named Stuart,
though since dignified with the titles of saint and martyr, was put to death,
is calculated to inspire a hatred of political revolutions, and to cherish a
reverence for monarchy. And the devoting the birth day of their sovereign to
the feast, the song and the dance, has a powerful effect in conciliating their
tempers to his person and family, and opposing the machinations of any
pretender to the throne.

FOR the purpose of commemorating and celebrating what is deemed in this land a
great, an interesting event, is this body of citizens now assembled; to
withdraw themselves a little from the ordinary concerns of life, and reflect
upon that declaration of their representatives in the continental Congress,
whereby they asserted and finally obtained their Independence. You are all
agreed that the acquirement of this Independence, is a blessing. Then it
becomes you to be thankful for it; and it is equally incumbent on you to
preserve it, and to permit no one to take it away from you or even to incroach
upon it.

INDEPENDENCE! -- This is a high-sounding word; and to one who considers what a
feeble, oftentimes what a miserable, and always what a dependent creature man
is, it is curious, and it will be useful to inquire what sort of Independence
this is which the people of these States declare that they possess, and which
they boast of so loudly.

As to the general influence of light, heat, and the physical elements, which
compose and actuate the universe and every part of it, these citizens are as
dependent on them, as any other denomination of mortal men.

IN like manner are they dependent upon that intellectual, designing and
organizing power, which gave law to the atoms of which natural beings are
composed, and assigned to each its sphere of action, its relations and
affinities. This power they ought always to acknowledge, and not affect in the
wantonness or the folly of their limited intellects, to doubt of its
superintending providence, or to deny, with the modern epicureans, the
existence of its influence. It is a sign of great weakness, and I suspect of
depravity, for a people to declare themselves independent of the great
governing principle in nature.

BUT you have declared that you possess Political Independence; and that your
confederacy consists of free, sovereign, and independent States. But your bare
declaration did not make the thing so. Still, as the government of that country
on which you were dependent as provinces and colonies, at length agreed to your
declaration, you were emancipated from your civil bondage, and were gradually
acknowledged by the sovereigns of different countries on the globe, as fit to
be classed among their number.

THE meaning, then, of the term Independence, is, that you are not, any longer,
dependent on Great Britain. It does not refer to other countries, because you
never were dependent on them. Thirteen subordinate governments, situated along
the Atlantic coast of North America, and forming parts of the British Empire,
were thus severed from the political power which claimed them, and put in a
condition to undertake the arduous business of self-government.

As the slave, who, after years of wrangling and contention with his master, at
length obtains a manumission, is watched by his neighbors to learn how he
behaves himself in his new situation; or, as the minor, escaping from the
tutelage of parents and guardians, is looked at by his acquaintances, that they
may judge how his lately acquired freedom influences his moral and religious
conduct; so was the attention of the civilized world fixed on this land, in
which thirteen discontented servants of the British household, were discharged
from their obligations and connections at once, and turned out together to
provide for themselves.

THEY had at a very early day discovered that absolute Independence was neither
desirable nor to be obtained. Unless therefore, they could depend upon each
other, they found they never could become independent of Great Britain. They of
course came to an agreement, expressed in very vague and general terms, to
stand by each other in the quarrel, and be friends forever after. Although the
articles of this confederation were put together in a hurry, and in a time of
danger too, they answered tolerably well the purpose for which they were
intended, until an accommodation with the common enemy, loosened the bonds of
their compact with each other, and left every member at leisure to consult his
own private views and interest. This will appear from a view of the state of
society between the peace of Paris in 1783, and the adoption of the federal
constitution of 1787.

AT first, a greater part of the States conducted themselves in such a manner
as to make it evident, they meant to be as much as possible independent of
their own late friends and immediate neighbors. And the old articles of
association had been so far violated, that they possessed really very little of
obligatory power. A system of jealous and illiberal policy, was forming in
different parts of the American territory, which threatened dissolution to the
little government there was, and anarchy throughout society. The same temper
which one State manifested toward another, was exhibited by the citizens
respectively toward the governments under which they dwelt. There was a
backwardness to pay debts, to perform contracts, and to do public spirited and
generous acts. Individuality and selfishness had taken hold of so many members
of society, that a refusal to furnish quotas for the public service, and a
stamping upon paper the real value of gold and silver, and the passing of laws
for the immediate and personal benefit of the representatives, to the almost
total disregard of the interests of their constituents, had become transactions
of frequent occurrence; -- such was the progress of these dissocial notions of
independence. Our country would first be independent of Great Britain; then,
each State would be independent of each other; next, every inhabitant would be
as independent as possible of his government; and lastly, the members of
society be equally independent of each other. Sentiments of distrust and
malevolence had gone so far as to disfigure society with somewhat of the
ferocious air of barbarism. Had these ideas been carried further, they must
have terminated in the lawless and capricious liberty prevalent among savages,
or the sullen, worthless and perfect independence enjoyed by hermits in their
caves.

BUT before practical independence had been carried to these lengths, the
inconveniences endured in society, had taught our people, that human happiness
was of a social quality, and best promoted and secured by an attention to the
relation arising from the mutual wants and dependences of men.

SUCH were the first essays of this liberated people, in government. The
history of legislative proceedings in every State in the Union, evinces
numerous regulations of a local and partial kind, inadequate to the great
purposes of general good, and frequently defective or erroneous, from a want of
knowledge and experience in the citizens, what it best behoved them to do.

IT had been expected by many benevolent and speculative men, that these
American governments were to exhibit a beautiful, instructive and successful
example of republican principles operating upon a great scale. They seem to
have believed a new reign of virtue and justice about to be established on
earth. Their imaginations becoming enthusiastic on a favorite subject, had
presented to them several millions of men, separated by an ocean from all
connection with Europe, and surrounded on the land side by a country still in a
state of nature, growing up peaceably and by themselves, in the practice of
every private and public virtue. Here, they fondly believed, proof
demonstrative would be afforded, to the confusion of all doubting aristocrats
and unbelieving monarchists, that representative and democratic governments
were the best in the world. On this continent, in short, the people of the
Eastern Hemisphere were to behold as from a vast amphitheatre, the inhabitants
of the West, constructing their governments by plans as they constructed their
houses, realizing the projects and schemes of the Philosophers, and reducing to
practice the theories and visions of the Sages.

THERE is something so agreeable to the mind in all this, that perhaps every
person who has not been taught otherwise by observation and experience, dwells
with delight on the contemplation of human excellence and perfectibility. He
pictures new Edens, blooming in the deserts, modern Paradises overspreading
whole islands and continents, and their inhabitants occupied solely in the
works of innocence and peace. Even HE who addresses you, in his days of youth
and inexperience, looked with as much ardor as any of them all, for the
fulfillment of some of these expectations. Judge then, with what reluctance,
what repugnance, what anguish, his own acquaintance with mankind forced him to
abandon one fine and glittering notion after another, until almost the whole,
after having been detected to be delusions, were discarded from his stock of
practical knowledge.

FOR, he became fully satisfied, that man was a very different being from that
pure, upright, disinterested and virtuous creature, which the framers of
hypotheses upon his nature and government had supposed him to be; but, on the
contrary, as his sense of real wants and necessities made him in "some degree"
dependent on his neighbors, so a misinterpretation or abuse of the relations
thence proceeding, led him to the commission of wrongs and injuries, by
depending "too much" upon them.

MAN thus becomes a rapacious and overbearing animal, prone to take to himself
the property of another; fond of subjecting to his own control the will of
another. This temper is molded up with the clay of which he consists; it is
nourished by the breath which he draws; it sticks to him until the sand of his
hourglass is run out. In saying this, I am not peevishly calling him a Centaur,
or by any other monstrous appellation. The simple denomination of the animal I
am describing, is MAN.

A COLLECTION of such creatures as these, discover that, with all the
imperfections and vices of their nature, they can live better in society than
in solitude. But knowing that each member of the association has a portion of
the devil in the flesh, they find it necessary to lay down rules for preventing
the injustice, and redressing the wrong, which every person is liable and
likely to receive from those who may choose to molest him. This constitutes the
business of legislation; and the carrying legislative regulations in effect,
may be termed government. When a people have little or nothing to do in forming
the governmental regulations under which they live, they are said to be
governed by others; when, on the other hand, their laws are enacted and
enforced by their own body or their representatives, they are said to govern
themselves. The former are despotic, the latter free governments.

GREAT disputes have arisen, which of the two forms is preferable. Both sides
of the controversy have had their advocates and champions. The weight of reason
and argument is undoubtedly in favor of the right of men to govern themselves;
and yet the practice of a major part of the human species at all times, has
been directly the contrary; surrendering the reins and putting them into the
hand of another.

THERE is one case, indeed, in which a despotic government will by every one be
conceded to be the best. And this is where the governing power is incomparably
more wise and virtuous than the beings to whom rule is given. A sovereignty,
therefore, in which perfect goodness was blended with irresistible strength,
would quell the turbulence of human dispositions, repress unjustifiable
attempts of each upon the other, and effect a heavenly establishment upon earth.

BUT man either refuses such a government, if offered him, and rebels against
it; or declares that he knows of no such sovereign, to take the management and
administration of civil and criminal affairs. He therefore spurns at all
pretensions set up by beings, call them Kings, Princes, or what you please, not
less imperfect, and to the full as vicious as himself, and treats their
authority as an usurpation of the privileges of their fellow men, and as
founded in violence and in fraud. What (...) more strong or crafty neighbor to
lord it (...)

SINCE, then, it is the lot of man to live in society, and since the strong
will oppress the weak, and the cunning take advantage of the simple, it has
been found deducible from experience, that the great object for which
legislative government is founded, was to provide for the protection of all,
against the physical force and beguiling stratagems of all.

IN adjusting the mode of carrying this provision into effect, there has been a
display of the whole corporeal and intellectual force of man. And in proportion
as the governing power has acquired more or less ascendancy over the body of
the people, have they been subjected to an absolute sway, where all they had to
do, was to obey, or to a mixed authority, in which some influence of their own
tempered the will of their masters. -- In settling the question, who should
diclate and who submit, the greater part of the wars which have distracted
society, have been undertaken, in every period of history. In the greater part,
the body of inhabitants have either surrendered their privileges in a
considerable degree to the few, or the few have been successful in wresting
them away. This change has, however, in many instances, been progressive and
gradual; human beings frequently require a great while to be taught; they are
fitter to be governed by others than to govern themselves.

THE forms of government you have adopted, on the setting up of Independence,
was that of Representative or Democratic Republics. And these, it was said by
political philanthropists, were to exhibit more talents, more virtue, more
justice, more every thing that was good, than had ever been brought into
operation before. And this, I fondly hope, the experience of this country will
realize.

YET, I apprehend there have been some mistakes generally entertained
concerning republics and republicans. By the latter term, I mean not this or
that party among them, but the collective body of their citizens.

THUCIDYDES, who wrote with the fidelity of an oracle of truth, has given such
a description of popular rage and fury, in the republics of ancient Greece, as
almost makes one weep to read it. The energy of the Greek language, directed by
the mind of such an historian, was scarcely adequate to convey an idea of the
unbridled license and enormity of their conduct. And this man did not compile
from ancient records, or from fancy; he noted the manners of his own times, and
described his own countrymen, acute indeed and intelligent, but unruly,
perfidious and ungovernable, as they were.

THIS character given by Thucidydes has been very little regarded. It contains
too much truth and candor to tickle the ears; and I came not here to tickle the
ears of any man. But a sophism or false maxim of Montesquieu has been much
dwelt upon, and quoted as a high authority on the subject. Because the writer
had expressed in his book, that Virtue was the governing principle of a
democratic or popular government, it has been taken for granted by that class
of his readers, that really republicans were a more virtuous class of beings
than other folks. -- He had been nearer the mark, had he said the principle of
a republic was suspicion or distrust, bottomed upon high notions of personal
importance.

FROM this idea of self-importance proceed several traits of republican
character, which are verified by all history and observation.

1st. It is prone to pride. The man who possesses great personal independence,
and attaches a high value to the enjoyment of it, naturally enough feels proud
of his privileges, and considers himself as a being of much consequence.
Republicans, therefore, easily persuade themselves they, as free citizens, are
of a better order than the subjects of monarchies. Such a sentiment is the
natural consequence of the doctrine that every individual is a sovereign, or at
least possesses a portion of the sovereignty. -- This should be counteracted by
inculcating habits of moderation and respect for others, in the education of
youth.

2d. IT is given exceedingly to perversion and misrepresentation. That freedom
of speech and of the press so much contended for in republican governments, is
employed more than half the time in uttering and disseminating falsehoods of
various sorts. Fabrications constantly mislead and perplex the mind.
Misstatements beguile and lead astray even those who are serious seekers after
truth. The contriving and spreading false news, grows to be a considerable
branch of business. Satire and invective, on account of their poignancy, are
relished better than any other sort of composition. And this depraved habit of
mind gives to many the highest gratification, when meditating the destruction
of a private or a public character. What adds to the mass of misrepresentation
is, that to defeat the object of one set of lies, there must be an equal
quantity of counter-lies put in circulation. The consequence of which is, that
when any thing is heard, the first impression it makes is that of a falsehood;
to be received as true, further proof is required. Thus lying is the rule; and
a solitary truth now and then, forms the exception. The mint where this sort of
circulating medium is coined, is night and day at work; the amount of pieces
issued among the people is incalculable, and it is very peculiar, that whether
the material is noble or base, fair or unsightly, light or heavy, the stamp of
falsehood never fails to impress a value and give it currency. -- This
propensity ought to be opposed by training up young persons to the practice of
candor and honesty, to the utter rejection of all cunning and duplicity.

3d. It is often engaged in the strife of parties. Whether governments are
administered by usurpers or by duly elected representatives, there is always
found to be a class of disappointed, or envious, or querulous persons, who
amuse themselves with finding fault with almost every thing that is going on.
And it is not an unfrequent occurrence, that the number of the discontented is
nearly an equal part of the society. It sometimes happens too, that the
majority really behave foolishly or wickedly, and then their opponents have
good cause for blame. Now and then the balance of party, which is kept near a
poise, nods a little one way or the other, and the contending bodies by turns
preponderate. If the grumbling party succeeds, then all, in their estimation,
goes well; but they who have failed in their projects of preferment and
ambition, then treat the new administration with the same reproach and censure
with which they (...) ^alled before. Generally speaking, all this noise (...)
less from a regard for any thing morally or politically good, than a struggle
between a parcel of high-minded republicans, who shall get the upper hand; who
shall possess the ruling power. -- In these contentions, it but too often
happens, that rancors and bitterness are let loose upon society, and neighborly
civilities interrupted by crimination and malice. It is a pity that the
exercise of freedom leads to all this; but there seems to be no method of
helping it, until man shall be new modelled or born again.

4th. It delights to meddle in other peoples affairs. The orator Demosthenes
upbraided the Athenians for going about the streets, asking each other "What
news?" when they ought to have been employed in more important matters: and it
was remarked by St. Paul when he was there, that the same people and the
strangers who were at Athens, spent their time in nothing else "but either to
tell or to hear some new thing." And this restless and inquisitive republic,
was always interfering in the concerns of the surrounding nations. One while
the prevailing party would wage war with Xerxes, or send a detachment to assist
the younger Cyrus in ascending the throne of Persia; at another time the king
of Egypt had left an unsettled government, and the ever-ready Athenians must go
and regulate the succession of his crown. Now, expeditions must be undertaken
to subdue or colonize the shores of Thrace; and then again their meddlesome
enterprise will build new cities and establish other governments, situation of
the ancient people, along the coasts of Sicily. They were at intervals, engaged
in bloody and inveterate civil wars with Argos, Corinth, Sparta and Thebes; and
when they had no foreign strife to engage in, they would quarrel, abuse,
ostracise and murder each other. Their intestine divisions and their venality,
finally made them a prey to the tyrant of Macedonia. -- I have been the more
particular in stating these parts of the Athenian conduct, that I might show
what an ancient republic truly was, as well as make it evident, that the same
intermeddling and impertinent spirit has invariably influenced similar forms of
government in all succeeding times.

WHAT has been observed of this celebrated state of Greece, is in some degree
true of all the commonwealths, both above and below the isthmus of the
Peloponnesus; though I think, upon the whole, none was quite so bad as Athens.
The same perverse and reprehensible temper of intermeddling with their
neighbors affairs, distinguishes the public conduct of Rome and Carthage. -- To
pass over less memorable examples, is not the republic of France a case in
point? As the states of Belgium, of Flanders, of Switzerland, of the Grisons,
and of Italy, have already sunk beneath her strokes; while Portugal, Spain,
Austria, Russia, and the Germanic empire itself are threatened with
revolutions; and where, through the whole space from Britain to Belgium, it is
proclaimed that a new order of things is to commence.

IS there not something of the like disposition in another republic, situated
many degrees nearer the setting sun than the one just described, or than the
Atlantic Island of Plato? Does she not make the ocean which separates her from
these scenes of confusion, but a more commodious and rapid means of intercourse
with the states of Europe? Does she not enter into friendships and quarrels
with the same temper and spirit, as nearly as circumstances will permit, that
other republics have done? Do not her citizens call themselves great, powerful
and enlightened? Are they not also vain, restless and ambitious, like other
free people? Are they not grasping at the wealth of the four quarters of the
earth, and preparing to fight and destroy all who interrupt them in the
acquirement of it? And in addition to the existing engagements, are not
overtures of some sort, making or made with the Sultan of the Asias, and the
Czar of the Russias? It is deemed ignoble for a people who think of themselves
as that people thinks, to enjoy the pittance of a country the mere garden spot
embraced by the Missisippi, the St. Lawrence and the Atlantic, and the trifles
it affords for the cultivator or manufacturer; yes, they must burst from their
land of inglorious ease and retirement, and prove to indifferent or forgetful
Europe, their flag, too, can ride triumphant over the waves, and their guns
also strike terror into their foes. -- It is a problem not yet solved in
politics, to make republicans stay at home and confine themselves to their own
business.

5th. It is notorious for ingratitude. -- Distinguished merit or excellence in
republics, always begets an extraordinary portion of envy; though the invidious
man himself admires and acknowledges the distinguished and excellent qualities
which he hates. In a free government, where so many of the inhabitants are
competit^^^, and vie with each other for all places of honor and profit, the
disappointed candidates frequently feel somewhat of splenetic sourness toward
their successful rivals: and when a man goes out of office, and thereby loses
his importance, it gives to abundance of the citizens considerable pleasure to
behold the magistrate or the legislator reduced to the common level. Has he
acted faithfully in the fields of war and worn himself out in campaigning? Too
often has it happened that poor and unsupported veterans have suffered in
neglect. Has he toiled in the legislature, in a judiciary, or an executive
office, and grown gray with employment? He is probably dismissed as dull or
superannuated, and told, when he receives his last quarter's salary, the
republic has no further need of his services, and he must help himself for the
future as well as he can. Has he equitable claims upon the public benevolence
or bounty? He is told that the State is poor, the finances low, the treasury
exhausted, and that really, if the funds were in a better condition, it is very
questionable whether a due regard to economy would not prevent the
representatives from voting money for such purposes. -- Amid the succession of
new sovereigns who administer by turns the public affairs, though the most
distinguished services are performed, hardly any body feels any thing more than
a faint sentiment of approbation, terminating, perhaps, in a vote of thanks.
The stern and genuine republican principle is, that the citizen has done no
more than his duty, and he ought not to have an extraordinary requital for
that. -- A little empty praise might be expected by the meritorious petitioner,
but that republican economy inculcates to be sparing even of that. -- Since the
shells doomed Aristides the just to banishment, and the hemlock devoted
Socrates the good to death, republics have labored under this cruel imputation,
which it is yours, by a generous and liberal conduct, to wipe away.

SUCH is the native temper of republican man, in ancient as well as modern
days. A people actuated by motives like these just enumerated, were to
establish in America and support more than a dozen different governments, and
afterward to confederate the whole, for certain general purposes, into one.
When all things are fairly taken into account and considered, I think they have
done wonders. More of a spirit of compromise and accommodation was manifested
in framing and ratifying the federal constitution, than I recollect to have
been shown in any analagous case, through the whole course of history.

IT appears then, that besides the abovementioned dependence upon your
neighbors, the physical constitution of nature, and your God, that you depend
further for your enjoyment and security upon the state governments under which
you respectively live, and the government paramount of the nation, extending
its influence over and beyond them all. And your Independence of Great Britain,
is qualified by a dependence upon this double object of your allegiance. Under
these several provisos, or with these modifications and restrictions, is
imparted to the American people whatever of Independence they possess. And, in
all conscience, this is enough, if it could be preserved from further
limitation and curtailing.

BUT who shall limit and curtail the Independence of these States? Shall any
foreign power dare to interpose in their internal concerns, and wheedle them
out of so precious a possession? No. It is not probable, to my judgment at
least, that their Independence is endangered either from the secret intrigues
or open assaults of any of the belligerent nations. According to my conceptions
of things, it is equally idle to suppose the citizens of the United States will
submit to the domination of France, or surrender their treaties and charters
and be re-annexed to England. It heats my blood, and disturbs the moderation of
my temper, so determined am I for Independence, even to hear people talk
hypothetically about the loss of it, or conceive in imagination that such an
event is possible.

IF that Independence should ever fail, which God of his infinite grace and
mercy avert! the failure will arise from their own misconduct. And there appear
but two sources whence such an evil may be dreaded; these are the inordinate
appetite for wealth, and what naturally flows from it, the gradual
encroachments on the rights of persons.

AND first, of the lust after property. A certain amount of the things of this
world, is necessary to every creature that inhabits it. The wants of man are
more numerous than those of any other animal. To supply these, a large portion
of his talents and industry are bestowed. But the mere supplying of the wants
of nature, is by no means sufficient for him. Man has a faculty of mind
denominated taste; and this exercises itself in contriving the conveniences and
ornaments of living. The houses, furniture, dress, food, drink and equipage, of
people in civilized society, and more especially in what is called polite life,
bear a thousand marks of this. In providing the means of gratifying these few
natural, and this incalculable number of artificial or acquired wants, it is
soon discovered by the collector of wealth, that money is power; that power
gives the possessor of it importance, and that importance begets respect. Large
property creates numerous and extensive dependences in others, upon him to whom
it belongs; and gives him a right or pretext under color of law, to control or
direct their wills. He, in some measure, affords them subsistence, and of
course at the time of an election he can influence their votes. -- Talents, or
high endowments of mind, also confer on their possessor, power. But these are
rarities that fall to the lot of comparitively a few; while there are scarcely
any capacities so weak or ordinary, as not to be adequate to the acquirement of
property. They, therefore, who cannot succeed by the difficult acquisition of
superior understanding, find it frequently in their power to accomplish their
views by the amassing of silver and gold. The power of these engines in the
hands of a cunning man, is immense. They give him a standing and consideration
in society, which neither his education, manners, virtue nor experience anywise
entitle him to.

THE many advantages attendant on wealth, invite multitudes of competitors for
the favors of fortune; and the procuring of a large amount of what is termed
"this world's goods," grows to be the ruling passion of the mind. Wealth is no
longer considered as the means of ministering to the wants and comforts of
life; it is sought after as the instrument of power. Each vies with his
neighbor, who shall become most powerful by its aid, until the passion
degenerates into the most sordid avarice. Of the remarkable effects of
republican avarice, the late aristocratic governments of the United Netherlands
and of Venice afford sad, though instructive examples. -- Thus the reason in
plain wherefore the thirst of wealth is so insatiable in free governments. Let
the commercial and treasure-hunting citizens of Columbia ponder on these
things, and beware! -- The prophet Ezekiel wept over the mercantile successes
of Tyrus; if the good man was to visit the seaports of America, would he not
behold equal matter for lamentation? Yet the voice of the people and their
government is loud and unanimous for commerce. Their inclinations and habits
are adapted to trade and traffic. From one end of the continent to the other,
the universal roar is, Commerce! Commerce! at all events, Commerce! -- Peace,
citizens, you shall have it, and together with it the probable hazard of yellow
sever, warfare, monied influence.

SECONDLY. Of the violations of the rights of persons. The ancient doctrine of
common law, was, that the person of the subject should be considered sacred,
except on the commission of crimes. And in no instance before the granting of
Magna Charta, was the arresting of the person permitted for nonperformance of
a civil contract. Such is the venerable law of the land; and that great bulwark
of our liberties declares, among other things, that no freeman shall be
imprisoned but by the law of the land. Yet, notwithstanding the practice of the
English nation for ages, and the declaration of Magna Charta to the contrary,
the Parliaments, yielding to the prevailing mercantile notions, agreed that the
taking of the goods or other property of a debtor, was not a full satisfaction
to the creditor; and after a variety of expedients, the voice of a commercial
nation grew too strong and loud to be resisted, that the creditor might arrest
the person of the man who owed him money, and deprive him of his liberty, until
he gave securities for answering, or for liquidating the demand. Thus was the
freedom of the subject considered of less importance than a small sum of money,
and a regard to the rights of kings preferred to the solemn and inviolable
reverence formerly shown to the rights of persons. From England, whose statute
laws were once the laws of this land, the Americans borrowed the practice of
depriving a fellow creature of his freedom for failing to discharge a civil
obligation, even when not charged with any design to deceive. And although the
stable doctrine of the common law leans as strongly against the practice here
as in England, still our legislatures have as little hesitation as their
parliaments, to innovate upon the ancient practice by statute, and to consider
it lawful, that a freeman, a citizen of a free and republican government, one
of the sovereign people, might be deprived of his franchise, obstructed in the
exercise of his civil and social duties, and reduced to a state of imprisonment
which is a species of slavery; and all this without the commission of any crime
or suspicion of having disturbed the peace of society, because, having been
indebted to his neighbor in a sum of money, he had not been punctual in the
payment of it! The manly and independent spirit of our Saxon ancestors would
never have endured this! They loved money less, and liberty more, than their
descendants.

IF the citizens of free governments treat their fellow citizens in the manner
just described, there can be no wonder that they should reduce to their entire
subjection the persons and wills of others when they conveniently could. The
ancient republicans were remarkable for the number of slaves they kept, and
many of the citizens no less remarkable for the severity and cruelty with which
they treated them. Even the moderate and benevolent Cicero, who has written so
many fine things concerning the rights, duties, and privileges of man; composed
these very pieces amidst a household of slaves: and, after his example, we need
not be surprised to find so many sturdy republicans and fierce supporters of
liberty and equality, thinking themselves perfectly justifiable in subjecting
the natives of Africa and their descendants to uncontrouled dominion, and in
buying and selling them like the beasts of the field. They who are apprehensive
of overgrown and wide-spreading tyranny in governments, would act consistently
if they would extirpate the roots and scyons of it which sprout up in their own
families. It would better become the dignity of a free and enlightened people
to act otherwise than is frequently done among us toward imprisoned debtors
and other slaves. One evil paves the way to another. If these aggressions of
the rights of persons are persisted in, more and more may be expected in the
progress of society. Some of you may, on an alleged critical state of public
affairs, be impressed for seamen, and all of you deprived of the benefit of the
habeas corpus act.

IT is by bringing to mind annually, at appointed times and appropriate places,
the dangers which threaten the liberties of mankind, secretly as well as
openly, that the genuine temper of freedom is to be preserved. I have,
therefore, discoursed to my audience, at this time, with less ornament and less
flattery than it was in my power to have employed. But I did not come here to
deliver you a speech full of flourishes and declamation. I came to talk to my
fellow citizens about Independence, in which was involved some of the failings
and imperfections of a republican government; a form of government which is,
nevertheless, preferable upon the whole, by a great difference, to any other
devised by the wisdom of man. And to this, in substance as well as in form, it
will be happy if the citizens of these states shall determine to adhere,
improving and amending as they go along. For they may be assured, that virtue
is the foundation and rock upon which a republic ought to be built; and, that a
government erected on such a basis will be enabled to withstand all the winds
and the floods which may assail it; while every other superstructure, sounded
upon any other bottom than of virtue, is as unstable as sand, and will
immediately be washed away. In speaking on these subjects, I have expressed
myself in love and tenderness, even as if I was disclosing some blemish in the
character or conduct of my dearest connection. Bear with me then, and endeavor
with me to profit by the considerations offered. Remember the day of
Independence, and keep it strictly. Bear in mind the practice of the people of
Syracuse. After the Syracusans had obtained their celebrated victory over the
Athenians, a tree was hung round with arms by way of trophy. This formality was
annually repeated in Syracuse in commemoration of their deliverance, and the
custom has descended from generation to generation for more than twenty-two
hundred years! The solemn procession, which used to be held in former days, has
indeed ceased; but a tree is erected on the first of May before the
senate house, and during the whole month no man is allowed to arrest a debtor.
And, until lately, those citizens who were at that time under arrest were set
free, that they might partake of the public joy, and endeavor to satisfy their
creditors. -- May the tree of Independence, which was planted in America in
1776, thrive with perennial and unfading verdure, and afford to all the
generations to come the shade of tranquillity and the fruit of happiness? But
that it may do this, you must take care that no enemy or false friend assail
it, but some of the most expert and skilful among yourselves must take in hand
the pruning-hook, and trim off a portion of its wild and wanton luxuriance. It
will stand the better and live the longer, for having some of its burdensome
overgrowth lopped away. Thus will it transcend all other trees in vigor and
beauty.

RALLY round it, then, and with one accord determine, that the foreign or
hostile invader, who shall but touch a twig or leaf of it, shall suffer the
severest punishment that can be inflicted by REPUBLICAN VENGEANCE.

FINIS.

