OCCASIONAL ESSAYS ON THE Yellow Fever, Containing a number of remarkable
relative facts, as well as some encouraging ideas, that those cities of
America, which for more than ninety successive years, had been generally
preserved from the dreadful evil, may by the divine blessing on wise and
prudent measures, experience in future, a similar preservation from the dire
calamities of a mortal pestilence.

Addressed to those who have not forgotten what has happened, within a few
years, among their friends and fellow citizens.

BY A PHILADELPHIAN.

Philadelphia, PRINTED BY JOHN ORMROD, No. 41, Chesnut-street. 1800.

PHILADELPHIA, December, 1799.
AN historical account of a great mortality in the capital of England in the
last Century, being truly affecting even to the present time, it is not to be
wondered at, that what was certainly known to a resident in a large city in the
Year 1793, should attract a more particular attention: -- Some of the
circumstances relating to those events, as well as others of different years,
have been publicly noticed at various periods; but as in the course of time it
has appeared more and more necessary to investigate the causes of our late
calamities a succession of occasional Essays have been offered to a New Jersey
Printer, which as they have met a friendly reception, and the statement of
facts with no contradiction, I have believed it right to have them re-published
in a pamphlet, in this City; being on a subject which I conceive, is of very
great importance, to the numerous Inhabitants of the principal Cities in my
native Country. -- As to any pecuniary motives of gain with respect to this
publication, they are altogether out of the question on the part of the present
writer, who freely offers all the profits, if any, to the Managers of the
Pennsylvania Hospital, for the benefit of that noble Institution, having still
in respectful remembrance, the honorable example, and charitable disposition of
its first Founders, of every rank and denomination.

To investigate the truth on an important subject I believe may be of very
interesting consequence, and I can truly say I have wished to do it in the
following Essays in such a manner, as to give no just occasion of offense to a
single member of the whole community.

A PHILADELPHIAN.
Note......In case the neat profits which may possibly accrue from this
publication, should amount to any thing worth attention, the writer expresses a
wish, that they may be applied to the purchase of shares of the Schuylkill
permanent bridge, provided that work should be carried on in the manner
publicly proposed, but as before agreed, those shares to be and remain, with
all their produce, for the benefit of the Pennsylvania Hospital, without any
reserve whatever.



FOR THE FEDERALIST, OR NEW JERSEY GAZETTE.
IN the early part of the present week, I borrowed of a friend several of the
latest papers published in that remarkable city, which, however healthy and
prosperous in former times, has lately been afflicted with a most grievous and
mortal sickness. In one of those papers, dated the 19th instant, was inserted a
part of a letter from Philadelphia, mentioning that in that city and New York,
more than twenty printers have fallen victims to the terrible calamity which
has desolated those places. On first seeing another paper, dated the 20th
instant, I observed it was surrounded by a black mark, which I supposed was an
indication of mourning for some remarkable person, or perhaps a beloved friend
of the printers, who had made his exit; and among the deaths I soon read the
respected name of SEPTIMUS CLAYPOOLE, one of the Proprietors of the American
Daily Advertiser. This to me was not like the transient tidings of a newspaper;
it fixed upon my mind, and occurred to me that the youth was dear to his
relations and friends; and as one of the Editors of a conspicuous paper, he is
to be regretted as a public loss. That printer is the last of those, of whom I
had any personal knowledge, who have fallen victims to the mortal calamity in
the present year. The number of that class in particular, has been very great,
and even greater in proportion than the number of physicians of the last year,
concerning whom there was published a short memorial, dated in the month of
October, 1797, in the city of Philadelphia. These things have been, and they
cannot now be recalled; but as I have taken notice of another observation in
the letter alluded to, I think there will be no impropriety in continuing a few
remarks. The writer of that letter, after mentioning some things relating to
the business of printers, concludes with the following sentiment. As nothing
but flight can save, if the fever appears at another season, I shall consider
it as a bounden duty to avoid it. Hard alternative! Grievious indeed will it
be, if thousands and tens of thousands of the inhabitants of our great cities
should be obliged to fly from them so frequently as has lately happened. For my
part, I wish for better things, and hope my countrymen will consider the case
as it really is. The people of Philadelphia and Kensington do know, that the
disorder there has been imported in the years 1793, 1797, and 1798, having had
the most undeniable proofs of this truth, as well as of the melancholy and
distressing consequences.

To try to remove the cause then, appears to be the important object, and the
proper and reasonable means of such removal I wish to see promoted, in order
that, if it be the will of Providence, the effects may cease; and for this
purpose, I am willing, in a candid and modest manner, to give some of my
sentiments, having no objection to hear the sentiments of others, on a subject
of so much consequence.

If then it should be thought too much to suspend the trade altogether from the
sickly Islands during the summer months, I think at the very least, the vessels
from those islands should be unloaded at a proper distance from the city,
suppose 40 or 50 miles; and in this case, a proper range of stores should be
erected to receive their cargoes; which, after being suitably inspected, might
in proper time be transported from thence in other smaller vessels, and in such
a manner as probably to prevent all danger; and that for the same reason, the
vessels from those Islands should not, on any account, approach the city in the
summer months, but should take in their loading, when outward bound, at the
distance above alluded to. This appears to me to be quite practicable, and not
very difficult; but some may say, it would be attended with a great expense. Be
it so; but what would the expense be, in comparison of raising buildings on the
commons for thousands of the inhabitants, and maintaining them with every
necessary, under very disagreeable circumstances, and at a distance from their
homes.

As to danger from the dire disorder; as to the loss of lives in consequence of
it; as to the immense risk of property by the general desertion of the city;
these are not included in the account relating to the expense before alluded
to; and in fact, such dangers and distresses are at this time too well known to
require any further explanation.

If these transient hints should be acceptable, they are freely offered, and I
conclude this imperfect essay with making a short remark on another subject.

In another of the papers, dated the 20th instant, I saw a complaisant encomium
on the charity and benevolence of the Philadelphians toward the "suffering
poor;" a benevolence, as the writer says, "disinterested, and unchecked by
narrow prejudice." This encomium was under the New York head; and although that
writer has due credit for his intention, yet it is certainly just, to view this
matter in a more extensive light, for the liberality of numbers in different
states, deserves to be acknowledged in a proper manner; and if I am rightly
informed, the thanks of the public, on behalf of the distressed, are partly
due, even to individuals of different nations, who, as well as others, have
contributed voluntarily on the truly mournful occasion.

New Jersey, October 23 d. 1798. POSTSCRIPT.
The writer of the foregoing, apologizes for making a short remark, on one of
the subjects of the Essay, which was written at a time when the lists of
mortality were terrible, and although many thousands had deserted the city, no
doubt, their sympathetic feelings were then alive on the truly melancholy
occasion: At such a time, it might be well supposed, that a comparatively small
sacrifice of interest would be as nothing in the scale, and that therefore, it
was unworthy of such a cause to limit the sacrifice in too precise a manner.
But after a certain period, the contagion had ceased, and the danger was
apparently over. After which, to talk of storing cargoes at a considerable
distance from the city, might appear to some, a frightful requisition, and the
suggestion of such an idea, unreasonable and improper.

Now, if such an objection should arise, I wish to obviate it by the following
explanation. I believe, that almost every article contained in pipes,
hogsheads, barrels, or boxes, would require but a short delay, with respect to
transportation in shallops, or river vessels, to the city. -- As to storage of
dangerous articles of merchandise, they would be few in number, and I really
apprehend, such storage, at a proper distance, would be attended with no great
difficulty, in comparison with an occasion of such an extraordinary magnitude.
But with respect to the vessels from the sickly Islands, I am more and more
confirmed in the opinion, that if they approach a city in the summer months, we
have much reason to dread, that a renewal of the causes of our late calamities,
may again produce the like effects, and increase the sorrows of thousands and
tens of thousands, not only in one city, but possibly, at different times, in
all the largest cities of America. I have not used the word "permitted," in the
above paragraph, lest it should be liable to a misconstruction, sincerely
wishing that by the judicious and friendly conduct of owners of vessels, their
Captains, and mariners, united with other benevolent exertions, we may have the
joyful occasion, to thank providence, in future time, for our preservation from
the Yellow Fever, and all its dreadful concomitants.



IN the New Jersey Gazette, of September 23d. 1799, there were re-published, a
number of Observations on a pamphlet, which appeared in the Summer of the
present year, on the subject of the origin of the Yellow Fever. The Writer of
those "Observations" professedly differs from the author of the pamphlet on
that subject; but at the same time, shows a proper respect for "his benevolent
intentions," as well as his acknowledged abilities; in regard to which, the
present writer, hopes a similar disposition will be also manifested from
another quarter, by a short expression in the latter part of the following
request.

FOR THE FEDERALIST, OR NEW JERSEY GAZETTE.
ONE of the Refugees from the distresses of the city of Philadelphia, in the
year 1798, conveyed a few thoughts on the origin of the calamities of that
period, to the printer of the Federalist, which were readily accepted and
published in his paper, dated the 29th, of October last year; and as the same
writer has again experienced a friendly asylum on the Eastern side of the
beloved Delaware, he believes it right to request, as an additional favor, that
the enclosed piece, (which he never saw, until it was printed in the
Philadelphia Gazette of the 19th ultimo,) may be inserted in the Trenton paper,
being a performance so modestly worded, and so well adapted to the sentiments
of a great number of his respectable fellow-citizens, that he doubts not, a
much more extensive publicity, than has yet happened, will be very acceptable
to them, as well as to the present writer; who admires the Essay, not only on
account of the respect it shows to an eminent Physician, but also for its
valuable contents and intrinsic merits.

New Jersey, September 12th, 1799.

The "observations" then follow, which were written by a "A Citizen," who,
(whether I have any personal knowledge of him or not) agrees with me in a
belief, that "from frequent and various considerations of the subject, the
cloud may at length be dispelled, and truth with all its important consequences
may appear." With respect to docks, gutters, common-sewers, etc. they have been
so long in use in Philadelphia, that I omit all the remarks of that writer
concerning them, not because I think them improper in his performance, but
being well known in our city, the inhabitants are left to judge of them without
a comment. As to the constitution of the atmosphere, it may be briefly
remarked, that some of our latter summers, in which the fever has appeared,
have been incomparably cooler than some of those of former years, so that what
the writer says on that subject I believe is undeniable.

He then proceeds to give his opinion of the origin of the disorder; this he
does in a serious manner, and for which I refer to the "Observations;" as well
as for other particulars. The same writer approves of the use of a Ventilator,
and thinks that every vessel should carry one, though that would not be
sufficient to prevent the introduction of putrid cargoes.

As to the contagious nature of the disorder, it appears to me, that when we
read of thousands of victims in one city only, it is sufficient to convince us
of that particular.

I hope to be excused for this cursory manner of noticing the performance
alluded to, but in order to do it a small degree of justice, and to show some
of the valuable sentiments of the writer, in his own language, I insert the two
last paragraphs of the "Observations," viz.

"Although I differ from the Doctor, with regard to the origin of the disorder,
I nevertheless am of opinion, that the state of the atmosphere may be very much
affected by local causes; and that one state of it may be much more favorable
to its propagation than another: Prudence therefore certainly dictates, that we
should diligently use every means that may have a tendency to purify the
atmosphere of the city. For however great may be our precautions, etc. [Be it
so yet the following is a good copy of the sentiments of the present writer.]

FOR THE FEDERALIST, OR NEW JERSEY GAZETTE.
IF the unaccountable and discouraging ideas of a small part of my fellow
citizens, were any thing like realities, with respect to local causes of the
late calamities, how miserably depreciated in my view, would be my native city:
It would appear to me like a place unfit to be inhabited, and where its native
sons could not expect a settled residence. But as I have said before, I hope
for better things; I hope my countrymen will at length consider the case as it
really is, and know that proofs almost innumerable might be adduced, to show
that the mortal fever, which has often been the means of desolating our
greatest cities, has been imported.

This is a sentiment expressed in the language of encouragement by the writer,
who calls himself, " A citizen." That writer, in a sensible performance
published in the Philadelphia Gazette, of the 19th ult. and re-published in the
Trenton Federalist, No. 64. has this opinion, "That if the sources of
importation were properly guarded, our happiness would neither be disturbed,
nor our prosperity blighted by so awful and dreadful a pestilence as yellow
fever." That such a calamity has been permitted to afflict the once happy
Philadelphia, at diverse periods, is now notorious even in distant countries;
and the distresses thereby occasioned, have caused the feeling sympathy of many
of their inhabitants; some of whom (it appears, by British publications) have
shown themselves desirous to investigate the cause, as well as to consider the
probable means of prevention, by a comparison with what has happened in other
lands.

I desire not at this time to enlarge on their recent observations on the
subject, nor to say much on those innumerable proofs of importation, many of
which I should think, must now be so manifest to every reflecting mind, that to
enter on particulars of that sort, would be like attempting to inform others of
what they already knew. I shall just mention that several instances of persons
who have been taken from different vessels, at several wharves, to the
hospital, and dying there, are among the numerous striking evidences of
importation.

When I consider those indubitable facts, relative to the capital of England in
the last century, I think them worthy of attention at this distant period. It
appears that in the year 1665, there was a dreadful pestilence in the city of
London, that in the year 1666, the fatal disorder extended to a small town in
Derbyshire, that the origin of their calamities was incontrovertable in both
places; and that from those periods to the present time, nothing of the sort
has happened in either of those situations: I say, when I consider those cases,
I am strongly induced to hope, that under the favor of a superintending
providence, and such reasonable exertions as may be made by my fellow citizens,
such calamities may be, likewise, averted in future from my native city; and
that Philadelphia may again reassume its former character, as a place of health
and safety, not only for those who may remain there, but for tens of thousands
of the scattered refugees, who to avoid the dangerous sickness, have thought it
best to desert their proper dwellings, and leave them without inhabitants.

These wishes, I believe, are not incompatible with a friendly disposition,
toward the trading part of my fellow citizens; whose interests, I would desire
should be properly considered; their disadvantages compensated, for some
inconveniences; and that the honor of endeavoring to save the city, in future
time from a dire calamity, might be their best reward.

To avoid prolixity, I shall just refer to a remembrance of what happened in
the year 1798, respecting Baltimore, Wilmington, etc. and conclude this essay
with some of the circumstances relating to the town in Derbyshire, before
alluded to, of which the following is an exact copy of what was written in
Philadelphia, some time since, on that memorable occasion, viz:

"In the European magazine for July 1793, there is a remarkable account of a
pestilence in a town called Eyam, in Derbyshire; some of the particulars
relating to it, are as follow: In the year 1666, one year after the plague in
London, "this fatal disease visited seventy-six families, out of which two
hundred and fifty-six persons died." The disease broke out in the spring of
1666, and ceased at the beginning of October in the same year. It was supposed
to have been brought from the metropolis in some woollen cloths that were
purchased in that city soon after the plague of 1665, and which had not been
sufficiently ventilated and fumigated. By the persuasion and authority of the
excellent rector, William Mompeson, the inhabitants were prevailed upon to
remain within a certain district; and to the lasting honor of the earl of
Devonshire, then resident at Chatsworth, six or seven miles from Eyam, it
appears that he caused provisions and the necessaries of life, to be placed on
the hills at regular times, and appointed places, to which the inhabitants
resorted and carried them away. M. Seward, the last rector, the father of the
elegant poetess of his name, preached a centenary sermon upon the plague in
1766, in the parish church of Eyam, composed with such power of description,
and such a pathetic appeal to the feelings of his auditors, (many of whom had
lost some of their ancestors by that dreadful visitation) that he was
continually interrupted by the exclamations and tears of his audience."

Such a sermon on so melancholy an occasion, the present writer believes to
have been consistent with the christian character; a character disposed (as it
ought to be) to treat a very serious subject with due solemnity.

The consideration that so dreadful a calamity had not been permitted to visit
the nation for one hundred years, must have been a cause of admiration to the
pathetic preacher, as well as to his much affected auditors; who, it is
probable, were struck with a benevolent sense of gratitude (on this account) to
the all wise disposer of events, on behalf of their beloved country.

New Jersey, September 30.
FOR THE FEDERALIST, OR NEW JERSEY GAZETTE.
AS it may appear by a late publication, that the present writer was born in
the city of Philadelphia, he presumes he has a right to know something of that
city for a course of years, having actually resided there more than half a
century. He again presents his respects to the New Jersey Printer, and with an
acknowledgment of his late civilities, is willing to offer him the following
observations.

In the early part of my time, I was informed by history, that soon after the
first settlement of Pennsylvania, a terrible disorder, similar to that which
has been experienced to be of a contagious nature, and of a mortal tendency,
was truly dreadful to the inhabitants of the capital. That calamity happened in
the year 1699, when the city was thinly settled; and I believe no man ever
suggested an idea, that the disease of that period was occasioned, either from
the filthiness of the place, or the insalubrity of the air or climate. Very
different from such an idea was the experience of my ancestors and of my
cotemporaries, who had reason to know that Philadelphia was justly esteemed a
healthy situation, and that it was frequently resorted to by numerous enfeebled
foreigners, who knew its established character and although strangers in the
country, were willing to acknowledge its due credit in that respect.

Until 1793, it is also well known, that the citizens were never much alarmed
in the whole course of the present century, even, with an imported contagion.
The calamity of that year was so new to the people; the sailors died so fast at
the lodging houses near the river; and the terror was soon so great among the
inhabitants, that any thing like a suitable enquiry appeared impracticable;
such in fact was the rapidity of distress in the neighborhood of a certain
vessel, and such was the danger of communication in that infected part of the
city, that it required the spirit of a Howard in any man to visit his nearest
friend. The disorder proceeded, and it may be well remembered, that the deaths
were from 80 to 100 for many successive days.

In that calamitous time it was my lot to dwell in different parts of the
afflicted city, and I cannot but remember many of the mournful scenes of that
awful period. Notwithstanding the dreadful mortality above hinted at, the city
of Philadelphia was favored to enjoy again its natural state of health and
safety, in the years 1794. 95, and 96, although the imported fever prevailed in
a terrible manner in the city of New York in the year 1795; concerning which
the most ample proofs could be produced, as well as that it again prevailed in
Philadelphia in the year 1797. Much has been written on those occasions; and
enough might be also said to prove in the clearest manner, that the disorder
was again imported in the present year 1799. On the last occasion I shall avoid
particulars at the present time; but if the printer is willing to give his
subscribers a copy of what was written as long since as last December,
respecting the year 1798, he is welcome to the following for that purpose, as
it may serve for one of the memorials on a very important subject, videlicet.

"When I consider the recent public loss of those respectable physicians
Francis Bows Sayer, and Samuel Cooper, as well as many others of different
professions and worthy characters in the grand community, it seems as if words
were wanting to express a proper sense of that "immense mass of distress,"
which never fails to accompany a mortal epidemic. These words "immense mass of
distress," I have taken the liberty to borrow from a former publication, as
they appear to me to convey an extensive idea of the nature of a disease, for
the prevention of which, it ought to be the wish of every humane mind that
there may be an union with respect to the most important object.

To prevent, if possible, the importation, I believe to be a consideration
worthy of the first attention; and in this line, I have now to rejoice in the
success of the city of Baltimore in the present year, as it appears by the most
credible information to have escaped the general contagion. While several other
cities were in a grievous state of affliction, the inhabitants of Baltimore
were blessed with the enjoyment of health, and were pursuing their business
without material interruption, under the peculiar favor of a well directed
caution. I repeat it, that I rejoice in their welfare, and congratulate them on
the subject, that the yellow fever, that dire disease, has lately made no
progress within their borgers.

At City-Point, in Virginia, the case was different; the disease was imported
there; and some of the particulars of that importation are as follows:

It appears that the ship Nestor, Capt. Rogers, arrived from Liverpool, about
the middle of July; that she delivered her dry goods in excellent order; and
that another part of her cargo being the article of salt, together with other
circumstances, were the most evident proofs of that vessel having arrived at
the port of Philadelphia in the most wholesome state, and as free from every
kind of suspicion of any disease as, perhaps, any vessel whatever from other
parts of Britain.

That ship, the Nestor, nevertheless, was so unfortunate as to lay in the
neighborhood of one or more of those vessels which were suspected to have
brought the fever; certain it is, that a young man who came in the Nestor and
was said to have been on board one of the vessels, was taken sick and died, and
a material difficulty occured respecting his butrial. Not long after, when the
captain was collecting his freight, he mentioned his difficulty to this
purpose; that his vessel was intended for Virginia to take in a load of
tobacco; but observed, that he did not know what was the matter with his
people; they sickened in such a manner that he was afraid they could not
proceed on the voyage. It so happened, however, that the attempt was made; that
on the voyage there were three or four deaths, and on their arrival at
City-Point, in Virginia, about the number of ten men, who were employed on
board, were taken sick and died; and by public accounts it appears that the
mortality spread in a very terrible manner at that unfortunate place, where if
it had not been for the arrival of the Nestor with the yellow fever, it is very
probable the inhabitants of City-Point might have been as free from that
calamity as the inhabitants of Baltimore, or even of the most northern climate.

Other particulars respecting that importation might be easily adduced, but the
material facts in that case, as well as those respecting a number of other
places, where the disorder has appeared, have been so evident and so notorious,
that it may be thought almost needless to mention them: Even the town of
Lamberton is another proof of importation, and the more remarkable, as the
situation is much higher than many other towns, yet when the disease was lately
brought there, it is well known that there was a very considerable mortality
among the inhabitants in comparison with the smallness of their numbers.

Such facts, it is believed, deserve to be published on a subject so truly
interesting to the people of America.

With respect to Philadelphia and Kensington, so much has been said on the
subjeet alluded to, that it requires a caution to avoid a needless repetition;
but it may be truly observed respecting those places, that the great mortality
which prevailed there, has not been secreted from the public knowledge, nor has
it been wished by numbers of the most sensible inhabitants to secret the manner
of its introduction.

I shall just add, that notwithstanding my opinion is so fully manifested on
the origin of our late calamities, yet I am so far from an unfriendly
disposition toward well adapted waterworks for public utility, that when my
countrymen appeared disposed to proceed with an extensive canal, my wishes were
united for their success, even from the river Delaware to Norris-Town on the
river Schuylkill; and in fact, so much was I interested in that expectation as
to have believed, that a part of that canal might have been brought into
eminent public usefulness before this time.

A PHILADELPHIAN.
December 1, 1798. NOTE. It appears that Capt. Rogers left the ship Nestor at
Philadelphia, and that she was navigated by another captain from thence, in the
disasterous voyage to City-Point in Virginia.



FOR THE FEDERALIST, OR NEW JERSEY GAZETTE. [ Further remarks tending to prove
the importation of the YELLOW-FEVER.]
AT the time when the account was written relative to the ship Nestor, perhaps
it was hardly possible to ascertain many particulars concerning the young man,
who came in that vessel, and was one of the earliest known victimes of the
mortal fever, which prevailed in Philadelphia in the year 1798: But as I had
occasion some time after to be at the Hospital-Island, I had an opportunity of
conversing with the principal overseer at that place, and on asking him,
whether he knew any thing of a young man who was said to have been brought
there near the commencement of the fever, he immediately recollected the
circumstance, and complaisantly showed me the original order for the admission
of "David Perington, who had arrived in the ship Nestor, Captain Joshua Rogers,
from the port of Liverpool:" The order was dated the 30th of July, 1798;" and I
was further informed, that the young man was brought there a corpse; that the
captain attended the burial with much affection; and as it was understood they
were brothers in law as well as fellow passengers, I doubt not, it was one of
those scenes of sincere affliction, of which such extraordinary numbers were
soon exhibited to surviving friends.

The foregoing shows something of what happened as a commencement of the
calamity of the year 1798; and what follows is equally certain with respect to
the present year 1799.

As early as the 9th of July last, I heard from a very respectable
fellow-citizen, that there was one or more vessels from the Havana, at the
still-house wharf. Soon after, it was whispered that there were several
suspicious cases of the yellow fever in that neighborhood; and soon the
evidences became too manifest to be disputed by reasonable men: Among other
cases the following was so notorious, as early as the 19th of July, that it was
thought worthy of particular observation, viz.: A pump maker (a man of
property) whose place of residence was near the still-house wharf, had been to
New York, and on his arrival from thence the 12th of the month, he heard that
several of his family were sick; and being justly apprehensive of the nature of
the disorder, he very prudently (as I believe) thought it best to lodge at the
house of one of his friends, with a determination to take, if possible, what
might remain of his family the next morning, to a place of his own, about six
miles from the city. Some of the particulars of this case it appears were
these: A young girl, daughter of the family was first affected; her mother very
ill soon afterward with the fever; a young woman, a seamstress in the house,
taken sick; a journeyman had also sickened, and died within a few days, and a
young man an apprentice, about 19 years of age was (at the time of his master's
arrival) extremely ill, and also died on the 13th, of whom it is said, to the
credit of his character, that he had kindly attended his mistress in her
distress.

Such it appears were the circumstances of that afflicted family; but with
respect to those who removed, it seems they all recovered, and it is supposed
are still survivors, in remembrance of that melancholy period. As I do not know
that I have ever seen the person, who was so honorably attentive to the care of
his family, I do not mention his name, though that might be readily inserted,
if necessary, as well as some other particulars, the remarkable consequences of
a dreadful infectious disease.

Having said thus much about the apparent beginning of the sickness this year.
I intend to make but few remarks relating to its progress. It is not to be
doubted that from the time above mentioned, the disorder was lurking in several
places near the southern boundaries of the city; but the weather being
generally cool, it did not spread for some time with much terror to the
inhabitants, who were anxiously hoping it might subside; but in the latter part
of the last summer month there was a fresh alarm; a number of well known cases
then occured, and thousands of people soon removed from the city.

Wilmington and Kensington have been happily preserved in the present year, in
which, perhaps no instances of contagion in either place have occured, although
the mortality in both was very great, in proportion to numbers, in the year
1798.

With regard to New York, I shall just observe, that on the liberal scale of
general friennship, it seems this year to have been an equal subject for
commiseration with my native city, and I have no doubt the calamities of both
places have originated from importation, the common cause. I leave it to others
to investigate the latter circumstances relating to that city; but with all due
regard to a certain writer, of a respectable character, I take the liberty to
show a confirmation of my opinion, that the yellow fever was imported into
New York, in the year 1795, by the following information from a printed work,
viz.

"It appears that a person who attended the ship Caroline from Hispaniola, was
taken ill of the fever the 25th of July, but recovered. That, On the same day
four persons from on board the ship William, from Liverpool, were taken ill
with fever, attended with yellow skin, and other terrible symptoms, and all
died within seven days."

"It may be observed that this ship and the Caroline lay at opposite sides of
the same wharf, at the same time, in unloading their cargoes. On the same day
the owner of the ship Connecticut was siezed with the fever, from which he
recovered; and about the same time one of the mates, the steward, and two of
the hands, were siezed, in the same way and all died." Benjamin Pain,
custom-house officer, was likewise attacked on the 25th; he died on the 30th.
W.F's clerk, occupied in a store on the next wharf to where the Caroline lay,
was taken on the 26th and died a few days afterward. A Jenkins, at the head of
the wharf was attacked on the 30th or 31st and died; a few days afterward
several of his family were taken sick, and the disorder began to spread through
the surrounding neighborhood."

I conclude this essay with believing, that after such facts as those, which
have been fairly exhibited, it might be thought entirely superfluous to add
another proof of importation, especially as in the sultry weather of the year
1794, it is well known to the present writer, that the cities of Philadelphia
and New York, were then esteemed as places of health and safety, not only for
their regular inhabitants, but also for passengers in general: and with respect
to the city of New York, it is not remembered that a single case of sickness
was heard of for several days, by one of those who at that particular period
was an accidental and friendly visitor.

A PHILADELPHIAN.
New Jersey, Nov. 22, 1799.
FINIS

