Dr. OSGOOD's SERMON, ON THE Death of General Washington.

A DISCOURSE, DELIVERED DECEMBER 29, 1799, THE LORD'S DAY IMMEDIATELY FOLLOWING
THE MELANCHOLY TIDINGS OF THE LOSS SUSTAINED BY THE NATION IN THE Death OF ITS
MOST EMINENT CITIZEN, GEORGE WASHINGTON, Who departed this life on the 14th
instant, AETAT. 68.

BY DAVID OSGOOD, D. D. PASTOR OF THE CHURCH IN MEDFORD.

Published in compliance with a vote of the Town, to furnish each family with a
copy, together with the Farewell Address of the late President, in one book.

Printed by SAMUEL HALL, No. 53, Cornhill, BOSTON. 1800.

11. SAMUEL, iii.38. KNOW YE NOT THAT THERE IS A PRINCE AND A GREAT MAN FALLEN
THIS DAY IN ISRAEL?


YOU cannot hear these words, my Brethren, without thinking of an event, which,
as the tidings of it fly from one messenger to another, from one city to
another, and from one state to another, spreads a gloom throughout this widely
extended continent, and throws a whole nation into the deepest mourning. Like
the shock of an earthquake, or thunder from heaven, sudden and unexpected, we
have heard the alarming intelligence, that WASHINGTON is dead. -- What concern
and grief overwhelm the minds of all virtuous citizens! In our American Israel
is fallen a prince, eminent and distinguished above all the other princes of
the age; a man great in whatever can contribute to the excellence, dignity, and
greatness of the human character, above all the other great men who dwell upon
the face of the earth. Since the exit of the inspired leaders of God's ancient
Israel, it may be doubted, whether, among the generals, heroes, and statesmen,
who have since passed over the stage of life, and filled the world with the
glory of their names and exploits, so finished a character as the father of his
country, whom we this day lament, has departed from these regions of mortality.

At all times, and through every age, a few men are distinguished from the
common mass of their species, and, as compared with others, are denominated
great. On account of eminence in several different respects, this appellation
is given. In vulgar apprehension, great riches and power entitle their
possessors to be called great men. Speaking of Abner, David, in the text, calls
him a prince and a great man, because he was exalted, not only above his
fellow-citizens in general, but above all the other high officers under the
crown, having been, through a great part of his life, captain of the host,
entrusted, under Saul, and afterward under his son, with the chief command of
the armies of Israel. In this high station, he was universally known; and had
acquired a weight of character, and an extent of influence, in the affairs of
the nation, beyond that of any other citizen. His fall "must have inspired
every mind with grave and serious reflections. A great man fallen! and fallen
by so unexpected and so surprising a treachery; and in the eye of a great
revolution, seemingly dependent upon his fate!" Yet it must be remembered, that
his was a worldly greatness only, without any mixture, or, at least,
predominance of real goodness. This great man had deliberately opposed himself
to the known will of the great God; and had sported with the lives of his
brethren. He was not ignorant of the divine designation of David to the throne
of Israel; yet, through motives of interest and ambition, had made himself
strong for the house of Saul. Putting himself at the head of this numerous and
powerful faction, he commenced a civil war; and, for a series of years,
compelled the nation to endure its calamities. "It is true, that he was now
returned to his duty; but it is as true, that he returned to it now, as he
departed from it before, upon a pique, and from motives of ambition, interest,
and revenge." By such principles was this captain of the host influenced, even
in his best actions, and when he projected schemes for the public peace and
prosperity. Still he was a great man in the estimation of the world, and had
the power of a prince among the tribes of Israel.

SIMILAR to his, has been the character of no small proportion of the great men
of the earth, through every successive age. From the bustle and noise which
they have made in the world; from their victories and triumphs; from the
changes and revolutions which their counsels or exploits have effected in the
affairs of states and nations, they have been denominated great. History
informs us of Alexander the great, of Pompey the great, of Charlemagne, Lewis
the fourteenth, and the late Frederick; but when their characters are analyzed,
the principles and motives of their conduct are scrutinized, what are they
better than the great man in the text? They stand, it is true, as on an
eminence, above the rest of their species, the objects of general homage and
admiration. The glory of their names, and the splendour of their achievements,
are preserved in the annals of history, and handed down with eclat from one
generation to another. We are dazzled with the luster that surrounds them. When
thus viewed at a distance, we admire their abilities, the vastness and extent
of their schemes, their reach of thought, their penetration, their quick
discernment of every advantage, their dexterity in seizing it; their
perseverance, intrepidity, and success. But, upon a closer inspection of their
characters, of their governing principles and views, the tendency of their
plans, and the nature of the means by which they were prosecuted, our reason
and judgment must withhold from them the approbation of the heart. We see these
great men pursuing the same kind of policy, and influenced by the same passions
and interested views, so apparent in the conduct of Abner. Whether they
meditated peace or war, the tranquillity or disturbance of the world, the
prosperity or devastation of countries; still interest, ambition, or revenge
was their leading motive. While they governed nations and commanded armies, it
often appeared, that they had no command over themselves. After gaining
victories, taking citadels, and subduing countries, by having no rule over
their own spirits, by setting no bounds to their ambition and cupidity, their
minds resembled the ruin which they had spread, a city broken down and without
walls, constantly exposed to the ravages of exorbitant desires and lawless
passions.

BUT though this want of self-government has been the common defect in the
character, not only of the great heroes and conquerors of the world, but of its
great politicians and statesmen, by whose counsels the affairs of nations and
empires have been directed; yet, through the mercy of God, there have been some
exceptions, some who have been good as well as great, whose great abilities
have been accompanied with great virtues; and who have risen to eminence and
distinction by the joint display of both. At the head of armies, and at the
helm of government, there have been some, who, in the height of their
elevation, amidst all the allurements of interest, pride, ambition, and
sensuality; while covered with glory, invested with power, and abounding in
wealth, have yet shown themselves able to control their passions, to moderate
their desires, to forego all selfish views, and preserve a character for piety,
benevolence, disinterestedness, justice, meekness, temperance, purity; in
short, for whatever is amiable, lovely, and praiseworthy in religion, morals,
and manners. Amidst the greatest difficulties, embarrassments, and dangers of
their public stations, their minds have been superior to fear, to mean
compliances, unworthy concessions, or dishonorable expedients. Firm and
constant to the principles of rectitude and patriotism, they have uniformly
conducted with integrity and uprightness. The vicissitudes of fortune effected
no change in their character or manners: they were the same, both in prosperity
and in adversity. Undismayed at the most formidable prospects, and
uncontaminated amidst the strongest temptations to corruption; no bribe could
seduce them, no terror could overawe them. They were never melted by pleasure
into effeminacy, nor sunk by misfortunes into despondency. In every situation,
they steadily persevered in discharging what they apprehended to be their duty,
without being swayed by the applause or censures of the world, when these would
have seduced them from following the dictates of conscience. Though they were
far from despising the opinions of their fellow-men, yet, considering
themselves accountable to God, and making his approbation their chief and
ultimate aim; in comparison with this, it was a small thing with them to be
judged by man's judgment. It was their great concern to be faithful to the
Being whom they devoutly worshipped, and to the principles of the religion
which they seriously and sincerely professed. Abounding in benevolence toward
mankind in general, they were faithful to their friends, generous to their
enemies, easily touched with compassion for the poor, the unfortunate and
distressed; apparently insensible to little ill offices toward, and uncandid
strictures upon, themselves; often self-denying with respect to smaller private
interests and pleasures, but always zealous and ardent in whatever concerned
the public welfare. In their private deportment and public conduct, they
displayed dignity and magnanimity, without pride; humility, without meanness;
justice, without partiality, harshness or severity; liberality, without
profusion; courage, without rashness or presumption. With a nice sense of
propriety, they did every thing in the best manner, and at the most suitable
season. Wary and circumspect, though not artful or designing, they were wise
and penetrating in discovering and eluding the snares of enemies and opponents;
sagacious and prudent in foreseeing and guarding against dangers and accidents;
never exposing themselves, or the cause with which they were entrusted, to any
risk, detriment, or embarrassment, which could be decently and honorably
avoided. Composed on the greatest occasions, and respectable on the least; they
were simple in their manners, though manly in their feelings. Their looks never
deceived; their word inspired confidence; their professions were always the
effusions of their hearts.

CHARACTERS, like these, my brethren, will bear the closest scrutiny. The more
minutely you examine them, the more rigidly you try them by the test of reason,
truth, and rectitude, the more you will be constrained, in your hearts, to
admire, reverence, esteem, and love them. The luster of their most splendid
actions, instead of being lessened, is heightened and increased by taking into
view, the excellence of their motives.

SOME such characters, my hearers, through the different ages, and among the
different nations of the world, have exalted and adorned human nature, and shed
a benign influence on human affairs. So seldom, indeed, has been their
appearance, that they have been mere phoenomena in the earth. With such a
phoenomenon, however, in its most full and perfect state, it has pleased the
Almighty to bless, honor, and distinguish the inhabitants of this new world,
above all modern nations. Nay, I do not remember to have read in any volume of
profane history, whether ancient or modern, nor even in the fictions of
romance, of a single character so exempt from every spot of vice, every shade
of weakness or indiscretion; so complete in the abilities of a General, in the
talents of a Statesman, in the virtues of a Citizen, and, in all other
respects, equal to Him, who, at the call of his country, headed our armies
through the long series of trying scenes, which attended our revolution; whose
influence saved our all from being lost by division; held together, or, at
least, was the most important tie in preventing the disjunction and dissolution
of the first slender and ill-cemented union of these states; who presided on
the great occasion, when, by an ameliorated national compact, they were
consolidated; when the admirable machine of our present general government was
constructed; who put this machine in motion, and, through the course of eight
years, so guided its operations, as to enable his fellow-citizens fully to
enjoy all its signal advantages; and after having retired, with the utmost
dignity and honor, from the cares of state, to spend the short remains of life
in preparation for its closing scene; foreign violence and intrigue, combined
with the turbulent, malignant spirit of domestic faction, rearing their gorgon
form, and menacing the fair fabric which his labors had been so instrumental
in raising, his patriotic ardour grew indignant; stepping back from his beloved
retreat, he again brandished his sword; and, with all the majesty of
heaven-inspired virtue, frowned on the rebel-rout of "demons let loose." At
this awful juncture, Divine Providence removed him from a world no longer
worthy of such goodness.

IT remains, that we mourn, as we ought, the fall of this great and good man in
our Israel. Not for his sake personally, indeed, have we any occasion, or ought
we, to lament. From his work of righteousness on earth, he is released, that he
may enjoy its reward in heaven. But for ourselves, and our country, we have
abundant reason to weep, exclaiming at his departure, my father, my father! the
chariot of Israel, and the horsemen thereof. To the living, the loss of such a
treasure is incalculable. To him, the virtuous and good, all enlightened and
true patriots, all the friends of real liberty, not only in America, but
throughout Europe, looked up, as to a kind of head and exemplar; especially at
the present eventful and alarming era, when the name of liberty, the rights of
man, and the nature of good government, are so dreadfully misunderstood, and so
horribly abused; when so heavy a cloud overspreads the civilized world, and the
blind hurricane of revolution continues its devastation. Our own government had
indeed, upon his retreat, devolved upon able and faithful men; but still he
continued as a pillar for its support. The weight of his opinion, and the
influence of his example, were highly important in the balance against the
novel and strange opinions so predominant at the present moment. What may ensue
upon the loss of such a prop, we cannot but be apprehensive. We know it to be
one of the methods of Divine Providence, when heavy calamities are in store for
any people, previously to remove from among them, those who would stand in the
gap, and be instrumental in warding them off. Previous to the misery and ruin
of his ancient people, because their tongue and their doings were against the
Lord, it was threatened, that the Lord, the Lord of hosts, would take away from
Judah and Jerusalem, the mighty man, and the man of war; the judge and the
prophet, the prudent and ancient, the honorable man and the counselor. In
fulfillment of this denunciation, a seemingly premature death was allotted to
the eminently good Josiah, on purpose that so meritorious a character might no
longer avert or delay the deserved punishment of a sinful people; and in mercy
to himself, that he might neither know nor share in their miseries. It is
mentioned as a proof, both of the guilt and stupidity of the incorrigibly
wicked, that they lay it not to heart; nor consider that the righteous are
taken away from the evil to come.

NOTHING, my brethren, can be more proper or reasonable, more prudent or
interesting to ourselves, than that our grief and boding fears, on the present
melancholy occasion, should induce us to forsake all our evil habits and
practices; and rouse us to a sincere repentance and thorough amendment. To this
we are called by the voice of providence, not in a single event only, but by a
continued series of awful dispensations. For a long time past, the judgments of
Heaven, in their most tremendous form, have been abroad in the earth. We cannot
hope ultimately to escape them, unless we speedily learn righteousness. To
this, as the only way of safety, natural reason and conscience prompt us, and
divine revelation most earnestly exhorts us. In this way we are allowed to
hope, that our peace and tranquillity may yet be lengthened out and prolonged.

WHEN we consider the absolute dependence of the universe of creatures upon its
great Author; how he superintends all human affairs, changing times and
seasons, suspending on high the invisible balance, containing the fates of
nations, often giving to slight occurrences the power of turning this balance;
of setting up kings and kingdoms, and then of putting them down; of enlarging
and increasing the nations, and then of straitening them again; and that at
what time he speaks concerning a nation or kingdom, to build and to plant it,
or to pluck up, pull down and destroy it; all shall be done according to his
counsels; that all the commotions and revolutionary movements in every country,
and among every people throughout the earth, with their hidden springs and
causes, as well as their visible consequences and effects, are irresistibly
controled and unerringly directed by his universal providence, so as exactly to
accomplish the destinations of his will; when we think of these things, we
cannot but feel how much it concerns us, both as individuals and as a nation,
to be in a state of favor with this omnipotent Ruler.

IF we sin against him, he has many ways in which to make us feel the effects
of his displeasure. It is not by death only, that he deprives such a people of
their benefactors, of those good rulers who shield them from calamities. As it
is he who gives wisdom to the wise, and knowledge to them who know
understanding -- who are skilful in the times, and in what Israel ought to do;
as all the abilities of good rulers are from him, so he has threatened to
withhold these blessings from a disobedient people, to infatuate their public
counsels, rendering their diviners mad, causing the wisdom of their wise men to
perish, and the understanding of their prudent men to be hidden; suffering all
their affairs, through intestine division and the violence of faction, to
become embroiled, and to fall into such confusion, that there shall be no peace
or safety to him that goes out, or to him that comes in. A sorer judgment, or a
greater misery, can hardly be conceived, than a people thus set loose from
order and government, and abandoned to the misrule of their passions and the
rage of parties.

AMONG the many rich blessings, which Heaven has poured upon the people of
these United States, through the medium of a WASHINGTON, one of the first
magnitude has been our preservation from this misery. With what unwearied
efforts, through the whole course of his public life, did he labor, night and
day, to save us from being wrecked on this fatal rock? To the very last, he was
so apprehensive of our continued hazard in this respect, that, in his farewell
address, there is no other topic which he labors with such copious and
persuasive eloquence. Indeed, it is the chief and main object of the address,
to impress our minds with a sense of the infinite importance of our continued
union; and to put us upon our guard against the causes and circumstances which
may possibly occasion division. He tells us, that "the government, which
constitutes us one people, is a main pillar in the edifice of our independence,
the support of our tranquillity at home, our peace abroad; of our safety; of
our prosperity; of that very liberty which we so highly prize." He warns us,
that, "as this is the point in our political fortress, against which the
batteries of internal and external enemies will be most constantly and actively
(though often covertly and insidiously) directed, it is of infinite moment that
we properly estimate the immense value of our national union, to our collective
and individual happiness; that we cherish a cordial, habitual, and immovable
attachment to it; accustoming ourselves to think and speak of it as the
palladium of our political safety and prosperity; watching for its preservation
with jealous anxiety; discountenan^^^g whatever may suggest a suspicion, that
it can, in (...) event, be abandoned; and indignantly frowning upon the first
dawning of every attempt to alienate any portion of our country from the rest,
or to enfeeble the sacred ties which now link together the various parts." In
short, no dying father ever enjoined love and union upon his children with more
tender solicitude, more affectionate earnestness, or more pathetic anxiety.

NOW he is gone, forever gone, must not his sage advice, his most interesting,
solemn, and paternal counsels, return upon the reflecting minds of a bereaved
nation with redoubled force and energy, penetrate all hearts, and have a
permanent, a perpetual influence upon their conduct? Shall they not be handed
down to posterity, as a legacy more precious than any other inheritance from
the best of ancestors; and through successive generations, be regarded with
that filial reverence, and strict observance, with which the descendants of
Jonadab, the son of Rechab, continued, through a course of ages, to obey the
more abitrary and apparently less important injunctions of their father?

SUCH a deference to them in general will be secured, if one part of them in
particular, I mean that which urges the necessity of religious principle, be
generally felt, and duly estimated. "Of all dispositions and habits," says this
venerable and unequalled patriot, "which lead to political prosperity, religion
and morality are indispensable supports. In vain would that man claim the
tribute of patriotism, who would labor to subvert these great pillars of human
happiness, these firmest props of the duties of men and citizens. The mere
politician, equally with the pious man, ought to respect and cherish them. A
volume could not trace all their connexions with private and public felicity.
It is substantially true, that morality is a necessary spring of popular
government. Reason and experience both forbid us to expect, that national
morality can prevail in the exclusion of religious principle." From such a
personage, how important, especially in the present times, is this testimony to
the usefulness and necessity of religion!

WHAT he here, by precept, so forcibly urges upon us, he has, in the most
alluring and engaging manner, exemplified in his own practice. On religious
principle, as their grand basis, we have every reason to believe, his own great
character, illustrious virtues, and extensive usefulness, were built. No other
foundation ever did, or can sustain so noble and finished a structure.

GREAT men, indeed, there have been, of whose religion we have yet reason to
doubt. But from what were their greatness and celebrity derived? from the high
station, perhaps, to which birth, court-favour, popular prejudice, corruption,
usurpation, or even violence succeeded in raising them; from excellence in some
particular profession, art, science, or branch of knowledge; from a lucky
discovery or useful invention; or, it may be, from the mere caprice of fortune,
in making them her chosen favorites; from some splendid action, which chance
gave them the opportunity of performing; from an occational display of
abilities in a particular situation, or during a certain portion of their
lives. Not a few have blazed forth for a moment, and received, for a while, the
applause of the public; who have, afterward, dwindled and sunk into forgotten
obscurity. But no man, I will venture to affirm, not animated and supported by
religious principle, ever passed a long life of incessant labor in the highest
public stations, diversified with ever varying and constantly trying scenes;
and yet, through his whole progress, conducted with such wisdom, diligence,
fidelity and disinterestedness, as uniformly to dignify and adorn each
successive station, and every vicissitude of condition; reflecting to the last,
a steady, undiminished luster in the eyes of an admiring and applauding world.

MY brethren, it is incumbent upon us this day, with hearts glowing with
gratitude, most devoutly to thank God, not only for the success and prosperity
which he has already conferred upon our nation, through the instrumentality of
its now departed friend, but for the great benefits which we may hope still to
derive from the influence of that example of wisdom, patriotism, virtue, and
religion, which, as his falling mantle, we still retain. What could have been
more important to us, after our national and solid union under one general
government, than the having of such a character for our first chief magistrate;
the excellence of whose measures, counsels, and manner of administration, might
serve as a model for his successors in office. Indeed, his diligence, prudence,
faithfulness, and integrity, are a model for all public officers, of every
grade and description, from the highest to the lowest. In what he was, they may
see what they ought to be. Nay, from the manner in which he presided at the
head of the nation, we may all learn how we ought to preside in our respective
families, and maintain order, peace, unity, virtue, and religion, in our
houses. In no way can we so honor his memory, as by the imitation of his
virtues. This too will be the proper improvement of that melancholy
dispensation of providence which has removed him from us. If, as a people, we
copy after that example of rectitude and goodness which he has set us, we may
hope that Heaven will continue to bless us with a succession of rulers
resembling him. But, what is yet infinitely more important to us individually,
by this only can we have a rational hope of dwelling forever hereafter with
him, and others like him, in the general assembly of the spirits of just men
made perfect. The memorial of virtue is immortal. It is known with God and with
men. When it is present, men take example at it; and when it is gone, they
desire it. It wears a crown and triumphs forever, striving for undefiled
rewards.

FINI^
The Legacy of the Father of his Country. ADDRESS OF GEORGE WASHINGTON, ON
DECLINING BEING CONSIDERED A CANDIDATE FOR THE PRESIDENCY OF THE UNITED STATES.
TO THE PEOPLE OF THE UNITED STATES.
FRIENDS AND FELLOW-CITIZENS,
THE period for a new election of a citizen, to administer the executive
government of the United States, being not far distant, and the time actually
arrived, when your thoughts must be employed in designating the person, who is
to be clothed with that important trust, it appears to me proper, especially as
it may conduce to a more distinct expression of the public voice, that I should
now apprise you of the resolution I have formed, to decline being considered
among the number of those, out of whom a choice is to be made.

I beg you, at the same time, to do me the justice to be assured, that this
resolution has not been taken without a strict regard to all the considerations
appertaining to the relation, which binds a dutiful citizen to his country; and
that, in withdrawing the tender of service which silence in my situation might
imply, I am influenced by no diminution of zeal for your future interest; no
deficiency of grateful respect for your past kindness: but am supported by a
full conviction that the step is compatible with both.

The acceptance of, and continuance hitherto in office, to which your suffrages
have twice called me, have been a uniform sacrifice of inclination to the
opinion of duty, and to a deference for what appeared to be your desire. I
constantly hoped, that it would have been much earlier in my power,
consistently with motives which I was not at liberty to disregard, to return to
that retirement, from which I had been reluctantly drawn. The strength of my
inclination to do this, previous to the last election, had even led to the
preparation of an address to declare it to you; but mature reflection on the
then perplexed and critical posture of affairs with foreign nations, and the
unanimous advice of persons entitled to my confidence, impelled me to abandon
the idea.

I rejoice, that the state of your concerns, external as well as internal, no
longer renders the pursuit of inclination incompatible with the sentiment of
duty, or propriety: and am persuaded, whatever partiality may be retained for
my service, that, in the present circumstances of our country, you will not
disapprove my determination to retire.

The impressions, with which I first undertook the arduous trust, were
explained on the proper occasion. In the discharge of this trust, I will only
say, that I have, with good intentions, contributed toward the organization
and administration of the government, the best exertions of which a very
fallible judgment was capable. Not unconscious, in the out-set, of the
inferiority of my qualifications, experience in my own eyes, perhaps still more
in the eyes of others, has strengthened the motives to diffidence of myself:
and every day the increasing weight of years admonishes me more and more, that
the shade of retirement is as necessary to me as it will be welcome. Satisfied
that if any circumstances have given peculiar value to my services, they were
temporary, I have the consolation to believe, that, while choice and prudence
invite me to quit the political scene, patriotism does not forbid it.

In looking forward to the moment, which is intended to terminate the career of
my public life, my feelings do not permit me to suspend the deep acknowledgment
of that debt of gratitude which I owe to my beloved country, for the many
honors it has conferred upon me; still more for the steadfast confidence with
which it has supported me; and for the opportunities I have thence enjoyed of
manifesting my inviolable attachment, by services faithful and persevering,
though in usefulness unequal to my zeal. If benefits have resulted to our
country from these services, let it always be remembered to our praise, and as
an instructive example in our annals, that under circumstances in which the
passions, agitated in every direction, were liable to mislead, amidst
appearances sometimes dubious, vicissitudes of fortune, often discouraging in
situations, in which not unfrequently want of success has countenanced the
spirit of criticism -- the constancy of your support was the essential prop of
the efforts, and a guarantee of the plans, by which they were effected.
Profoundly penetrated with this idea, I shall carry it with me to my grave, as
a strong incitement to unceasing vows, that Heaven may continue to you the
choicest tokens of its beneficence -- that your union and brotherly affection
may be perpetual -- that the free Constitution, which is the work of your
hands, may be sacredly maintained -- that its administration, in every
department, may be stamped with wisdom and virtue -- that, in fine, the
happiness of the people of these States, under the auspices of liberty, may be
made complete, by so careful a preservation and so prudent a use of this
blessing, as will acquire to them the glory of recommending it to the applause,
the affection, and adoption of every nation which is yet a stranger to it.

Here, perhaps, I ought to stop. But solicitude for your welfare, which cannot
end but with my life, and the apprehension of danger natural to that
solicitude, urge me, on an occasion like the present, to offer to your solemn
contemplation, and to recommend to your frequent review, some sentiments, which
are the result of much reflection, of no inconsiderable observation, and which
appear to me all-important to the permanency of your felicity as a people. --
These will be offered to you with the more freedom, as you can only feel in
them the disinterested warnings of a parting friend, who can possibly have no
personal motive to bias his counsel. Nor can I forget, as an encouragement to
it, your indulgent reception of my sentiments on a former, and not dissimilar
occasion.

Interwoven as is the love of liberty with every ligament of your hearts, no
recommendation of mine is necessary to fortify or confirm the attachment.

The unity of government, which constitutes you one people, is also now dear to
you. It is justly so; for it is a main pillar in the edifice of your real
independence; the support of your tranquillity at home, your peace abroad; of
your safety; of your prosperity; of that very liberty which you so highly
prize. But, as it is easy to foresee, that from different causes, and from
different quarters, much pains will be taken, many artifices employed, to
weaken in your minds the conviction of this truth; as this is the point in your
political fortress, against which the batteries of internal and external
enemies will be most constantly and actively (though often covertly and
insidiously) directed, it is of infinite moment that you should properly
estimate the immense value of your National Union, to your collective and
individual happiness; that you should cherish a cordial, habitual, and
immovable attachment to it; accustoming yourselves to think and speak of it as
of the palladium of your political safety and prosperity; watching for its
preservation with jealous anxiety; discountenancing whatever may suggest even a
suspicion that it can in any event be abandoned; and indignantly frowning upon
the first dawning of every attempt to alienate any portion of our country from
the rest, or to enfeeble the sacred ties which now link together the various
parts.

For this, you have every inducement of sympathy and interest. Citizens, by
birth or choice, of a common country, that country has a right to concentrate
your affections. The name of AMERICAN, which belongs to you in your national
capacity, must always exalt the just pride of patriotism, more than any
appellation derived from local discriminations. With slight shades of
difference, you have the same religion, manners, habits, and political
principles. You have, in a common cause, fought and triumphed together; the
Independence and Liberty you possess are the work of joint councils, and joint
efforts, of common dangers, sufferings and successes.

But these considerations, however powerfully they address themselves to your
sensibility, are greatly outweighed by those which apply more immediately to
your interest. Here every portion of our country finds the most commanding
motives for carefully guarding and preserving the union of the whole.

The North, in an unrestrained intercourse with the South, protected by the
equal laws of a common government, finds in the productions of the latter,
great additional resources of maritime and commercial enterprise, and precious
materials of manufacturing industry. The South, in the same intercourse,
benefiting by the agency of the North, sees its agriculture grow, and its
commerce expand. Turning partly into its own channels the seamen of the North,
it finds its particular navigation invigorated; and while it contributes, in
different ways, to nourish and increase the general mass of the national
navigation, it looks forward to the protection of a maritime strength, to which
itself is unequally adapted. The East, in a like intercourse with the West,
already finds, and, in the progressive improvement of interior communications,
by land and water, will more and more find a valuable vent for the commodities
which it brings from abroad, or manufactures at home. The West derives from the
East supplies requisite to its growth and comfort; and, what is perhaps of
still greater consequence, it must of necessity owe the secure enjoyment of
indispensable outlets for its own productions to the weight, influence, and the
future maritime strength of the Atlantic side of the Union, directed by an
indissoluble community of interest as one nation. Any other tenure, by which
the West can hold this essential advantage, whether derived from its own
separate strength, or from an apostate and unnatural connection with any foreign
power, must be intrinsically precarious.

While, then, every part of our country thus feels an immediate and particular
interest in Union, all the parts combined cannot fail to find, in the united
mass of means and efforts, greater strength, greater resource, proportionably
greater security from external danger, a less frequent interruption of their
peace by foreign nations; and, what is of inestimable value! they must derive
from Union an exemption from those broils and wars between themselves, which so
frequently afflict neighboring countries, not tied together by the same
government; which their own rivalships alone would be sufficient to produce,
but which opposite foreign alliances, attachments, and intrigues would
stimulate and imbitter. Hence, likewise, they will avoid the necessity of those
overgrown military establishments, which, under any form of government, are
inauspicious to liberty, and which are to be regarded as particularly hostile
to Republican Liberty. In this sense it is, that your Union ought to be
considered as a main prop of your liberty; and that the love of the one ought
to endear to you the preservation of the other.

These considerations speak a persuasive language to every reflecting and
virtuous mind, and exhibit the continuance of the UNION as a primary object of
a patriotic desire. Is there a doubt, whether a common government can embrace
so large a sphere? Let experience solve it. To listen to mere speculation, in
such a case, were criminal. We are authorized to hope, that a proper
organization of the whole, with the auxiliary agency of governments for the
respective subdivisions, will afford a happy issue to the experiment. It is
well worth a fair and full experiment. With such powerful and obvious motives
to Union, affecting all parts of our country, while experiment shall not have
demonstrated its impracticability, there will always be reason to distrust the
patriotism of those, who in any quarter may endeavor to weaken its bands.

In contemplating the causes which may disturb our Union, it occurs as matter
of serious concern, that any ground should be furnished for characterising
parties, by Geographical discriminations -- Northern and Southern -- Atlantic
and Western -- whence designing men may endeavor to excite a belief, that
there is a real difference of local interests and views. One of the expedients
of party to acquire influence, within particular districts, is to misrepresent
the opinions and aims of other districts. You cannot shield your selves too
much against the jealousies and heart-burnings which spring from these
misrepresentations: they tend to render alien to each other those who ought to
be bound together by fraternal affection. The inhabitants of our western
country have lately had a useful lesson on this head: they have seen, in the
negotiation by the Executive, and in the unanimous ratification by the Senate,
of the treaty with Spain, and in the universal satisfaction at that event,
throughout the United States, a decisive proof how unfounded were the
suspicions, propagated among them, of a policy in the general government and in
the Atlantic states unfriendly to their interests in regard to the Missisippi:
they have been witnesses to the formation of two treaties, that with
Great Britain and that with Spain, which secure to them every thing they could
desire, in respect to our foreign relations, toward confirming their
prosperity. Will it not be their wisdom to rely, for the preservation of these
advantages, on the UNION by which they were procured? Will they not henceforth
be deaf to those advisers, if such there are, who would sever them from their
brethren, and connect them with aliens?

To the efficacy and permanency of your Union, a government for the whole is
indispensable. No alliances, however strict, between the parts, can be an
adequate substitute; they will inevitably experience the infractions and
interruptions which all alliances, in all times, have experienced. Sensible of
this momentous truth, you have improved upon your first essay, by the adoption
of a constitution of a government, better calculated than your former, for an
intimate Union, and for the efficacious management of your common concerns.
This government, the offspring of your own choice, uninfluenced and unawed,
adopted upon full investigation and mature deliberation, completely free in its
principles, in the distribution of its powers, uniting security with energy,
and containing within itself a provision for its own amendment, has a just
claim to your confidence and your support. Respect for its authority,
compliance with its laws, acquiescence in its measures, are duties enjoined by
the fundamental maxims of true liberty. The basis of our political systems is
the right of the people to make and to alter their constitutions of government.
But, the constitution which at any time exists, till changed by an explicit and
authentic act of the whole people, is sacredly obligatory upon all. The very
idea of the power and the right of the people to establish government,
presupposes the duty of every individual to obey the established government.

All obstructions to the execution of the Laws, all combinations and
associations, under whatever plausible character, with the real design to
direct, control, counteract, or awe the regular deliberation and action of the
constituted authorities, are destructive of this fundamental principle, and of
fatal tendency. They serve to organize faction, to give it an artificial and
extraordinary force; to put in the place of the delegated will of the nation,
the will of a party, often a small, but artful and enterprising minority of the
community; and, according to the alternate triumphs of different parties, to
make the public administration the mirror of the ill-concerted and incongruous
projects of faction, rather than the organ of consistent and wholesome plans,
digested by common councils and modified by mutual interests.

However combinations, or associations, of the above description, may now and
then answer popular ends, they are likely, in the course of time and things, to
become potent engines, by which cunning, ambitious, and unprincipled men will
be enabled to subvert the power of the people, and to usurp for themselves the
reins of government; destroying afterward the very engines which have lifted
them to unjust dominion.

Toward the preservation of your government, and the permanency of your
present happy state, it is requisite, not only that you steadily discountenance
irregular opposition to its acknowledged authority, but also that you resist,
with care, the spirit of innovation upon its principles, however specious the
pretexts. -- One method of assault may be to effect, in the forms of the
constitution, alterations which will impair the energy of the system, and thus
to undermine what cannot be directly overthrown. In all the changes, to which
you may be invited, remember, that time and habit are at least as necessary to
fix the true character of government, as of other human institutions; that
experience is the surest standard, by which to test the real tendency of the
existing constitution of a country; that facility in changes, upon the credit
of mere hypothesis and opinion, exposes to perpetual change, from the endless
variety of hypothesis and opinion; and remember, especially, that for the
efficient management of your common interest, in a country so extensive as
ours, a government of as much vigor as is consistent with the perfect security
of liberty, is indispensable. Liberty itself will find in such a government,
with powers properly distributed and adjusted, its surest guardian. It is,
indeed, little else than a name, where the government is too feeble to
withstand the enterprises of faction, to confine each member of the society
within the limits prescribed by the laws, and to maintain all in the secure and
tranquil enjoyment of the rights of person and property.

I have already intimated to you, the danger of parties in the state, with
particular reference to the founding of them on geographical discriminations.
Let me now take a more comprehensive view, and warn you, in the most solemn
manner, against the baneful effects of the spirit of party, generally.

This spirit, unfortunately, is inseparable from our nature, having its root in
the strongest passions of the human mind. It exists, under different shapes, in
all governments -- more or less stifled, controled, or repressed; but in those
of the popular form, it is seen in its greatest rankness, and is truly their
worst enemy.

The alternate domination of one faction over another, sharpened by the spirit
of revenge, natural to party dissension, which, in different ages and
countries, has perpetrated the most horrid enormities, is itself a frightful
despotism: but this leads at length to a more formal and permanent despotism.
The disorders and miseries, which result, gradually incline the minds of men to
seek security and repose in the absolute power of an individual; and, sooner or
later, the chief of some prevailing faction, more able or more fortunate than
his competitors, turns this disposition to the purposes of his own elevation,
on the ruins of Public Liberty.

Without looking forward to an extremity of this kind, (which nevertheless
ought not to be entirely out of sight), the common and continual mischiefs of
the spirit of party are sufficient to make it the interest and duty of a wise
people to discourage and restrain it.

It serves always to distract the Public Councils, and enfeeble the Public
Administration. It agitates the community with ill-founded jealousies and false
alarms; kindles the animosity of one part against another, and foments,
occasionally, riot and insurrection. It opens the door to foreign influence and
corruption, which find a facilitated access to the government itself through
the channels of party passions. Thus the policy and will of one country are
subjected to the policy and will of another.

There is an opinion, that parties in free countries are useful checks upon the
administration of the government, and serve to keep alive the spirit of
Liberty. This, within certain limits, is probably true; and in governments of a
monarchical cast, patriotism may look with indulgence, if not with favor, upon
the spirit of party. But in those of the popular character, in governments
purely elective, it is a spirit not to be encouraged. From their natural
tendency, it is certain, there will always be enough of that spirit for every
salutary purpose. And there being constant danger of excess, the effort ought
to be, by force of public opinion, to mitigate and assuage it: a fire not to be
quenched, it demands uniform vigilance to prevent its bursting into a flame,
lest, instead of warming, it should consume.

It is important, likewise, that the habits of thinking, in a free country,
should inspire caution, in those entrusted with its administration, to confine
themselves within their respective constitutional spheres, avoiding in the
exercise of the powers of one department to encroach upon another. The spirit
of encroachment tends to consolidate the powers of all the departments in one;
and thus to create, whatever be the form of Government, a real despotism. A
just estimate of that love of power, and proneness to abuse it, which
predominates in the human heart, is sufficient to satisfy us of the truth of
this position. The necessity of reciprocal checks in the exercise of the
political power, by dividing and distributing it into different depositories,
and constituting each the guardian of the public weal against invasions by the
others, has been evinced by experiments, ancient and modern; some of them in
our country, and under our own eyes. To preserve them, must be as necessary as
to institute them. If, in the opinion of the people, the distribution or
modification of the constitutional powers be in any particular wrong, let it be
corrected by an amendment in the way which the constitution designates: but let
there be no change by usurpation; for though this, in one instance, may be the
instrument of good, it is the customary weapon, by which free governments are
destroyed. The precedent must always greatly overbalance, in permanent evil,
any partial or transient benefit which the use can at any time yield.

Of all the dispositions and habits, which lead to political prosperity,
Religion and Morality are indispensable supports. In vain would that Man claim
the tribute of Patriotism, who would labor to subvert these great pillars of
human happiness, these firmest props of the duties of Men and Citizens. -- The
mere politician, equally with the pious man, ought to respect and to cherish
them. A volume could not trace all their connexions with private and public
felicity. Let it simply be asked, where is the security for property, for
reputation, for life, if the sense of religious obligation desert the oaths
which are the instruments of investigation in courts of justice? and let us
with caution indulge the supposition, that Morality can be maintained without
Religion. Whatever may be conceded of the influence of refined education on
minds of peculiar structure, reason and experience both forbid us to expect
that national Morality can prevail in exclusion of religious principle.

It is substantially true, that virtue or morality is a necessary spring of
popular government. The rule, indeed, extends, with more or less force, to
every species of free government. Who that is a sincere friend to it, can look
with indifference upon attempts to shake the foundation of the fabric?

Promote, then, as an object of primary importance, institutions for the
general diffusion of knowledge. In proportion as the structure of a government
gives force to public opinion, it is essential that public opinion should be
enlightened.

As a very important source of strength and security, cherish public credit.
One method of preserving it, is to use it as sparingly as possible; avoiding
occasions of expense by cultivating peace; but remembering also, that timely
disbursements, to prepare for danger, frequently prevent much greater
disbursements to repel it: avoiding, likewise, the accumulation of debt, not
only by shunning occasions of expense, but by vigorous exertions, in time of
peace, to discharge the debts which unavoidable wars may have occasioned, not
ungenerously throwing upon posterity the burden which we ourselves ought to
bear. The execution of these maxims belongs to your representatives, but it is
necessary that public opinion should cooperate. To facilitate to them the
performance of their duty, it is essential that you should practically bear in
mind, that toward the payment of debts there must be revenue; that to have
revenue, there must be taxes; and none can be devised, which are not, more or
less, inconvenient and unpleasant; that the intrinsic embarrassment inseparable
from the selection of the proper objects (which is always a choice of
difficulties) ought to be a decisive motive for a candid construction of the
conduct of the government in making it, and for a spirit of acquiescence in the
measures for obtaining revenue, which the public exigencies may at any time
dictate.

Observe good faith and justice toward all nations; cultivate peace and
harmony with all: Religion and Morality enjoin this conduct; and can it be,
that good policy does not equally enjoin it? It will be worthy of a free,
enlightened, and (at no distant period) a great nation, to give to mankind the
magnanimous and too novel example of a people always guided by an exalted
justice and benevolence. Who can doubt, that in the course of time and things,
the fruits of such a plan would richly repay any temporary advantages which
might be lost by a steady adherence to it? Can it be, that Providence has not
connected the permanent felicity of a nation with Virtue? The experiment, at
least, is recommended by every sentiment which ennobles human nature. Alas! is
it rendered impossible by its vices?

In the execution of such a plan, nothing is more essential than that
permanent, inveterate antipathies against particular nations, and passionate
attachments for others, should be excluded; and that, in the place of them,
just and amicable feelings toward all should be cultivated. The nation which
indulges toward another an habitual hatred, or an habitual fondness, is in
some degree a slave. It is a slave to its animosity or to its affection, either
of which is sufficient to lead it astray from its duty and its interest.
Antipathy in one nation against another, disposes each more readily to offer
insult and injury, to lay hold of slight causes of umbrage, and to be haughty
and intractable, when accidental or trifling occasions of dispute occur.

Hence frequent collisions, obstinate, envenomed and bloody contests. The
nation, prompted by ill will and resentment, sometimes impels to war the
government, contrary to the best calculations of policy. The government
sometimes participates in the national propensity, and adopts through passion
what reason would reject; at other times, it makes the animosity of the nation
subservient to projects of hostility, instigated by pride, ambition, and other
sinister and pernicious motives. The peace often, sometimes perhaps the
liberty, of nations has been the victim.

So, likewise, a passionate attachment of one nation for another produces a
variety of evils. Sympathy for the favorite Nation, facilitating the illusion
of an imaginary common interest, in cases where no real common interest exists,
and infusing into one the enmities of the other, betrays the former into a
participation in the quarrels and wars of the latter, without adequate
inducement or justification. It leads also to concessions to the favorite
nation of privileges denied to others, which is apt doubly to injure the nation
making the concessions, by unnecessarily parting with what ought to have been
retained, and by exciting jealousy, ill will, and a disposition to retaliate,
in the parties from whom equal privileges are withheld: and it gives to
ambitious, corrupted, or deluded citizens (who devote themselves to the
favorite nation) facility to betray, or sacrifice the interests of their own
country, without odium, sometimes even with popularity; gilding, with the
appearances of a virtuous sense of obligation, a commendable deference for
public opinion, or a laudable zeal for public good, the base or foolish
compliances of ambition, corruption, or infatuation.

As avenues to foreign influence in innumerable ways, such attachments are
particularly alarming to the truly enlightened and independent patriot. How
many opportunities do they afford to tamper with domestic factions, to practice
the arts of seduction, to mislead public opinion, to influence or awe the
public counsels; such an attachment of a small or weak, toward a great and
powerful nation, dooms the former to be the satellite of the latter.

Against the insidious wiles of foreign influence (I conjure you to believe me,
fellow citizens), the jealousy of a free people ought to be constantly awake;
since history and experience prove, that foreign influence is one of the most
baneful foes of republican government. But that jealousy, to be useful, must be
impartial; else it becomes the instrument of the very influence to be ^^^ided,
instead of a defense against it. Excessive partiality for one foreign nation,
and excessive dislike of another, cause those whom they actuate to see danger
only on one side, and serve to veil, and even second the arts of influence on
the other. Real patriots, who may resist the intrigues of the favorite, are
liable to become suspected and odious; while its tools and dupes usurp the
applause and confidence of the people, to surrender their interests.

The great rule of conduct for us, in regard to foreign nations, is, in
extending our commercial relations, to have with them as little political
connection as possible. So far as we have already formed engagements, let them
be fulfilled with perfect good faith. Here let us stop.

Europe has a set of primary interests, which to us have none, or a very remote
relation. Hence she must be engaged in frequent controversies, the causes of
which are essentially foreign to our concerns. -- Hence, therefore, it must be
unwise in us to implicate ourselves, by artificial ties, in the ordinary
vicissitudes of her politics, or the ordinary combinations and collisions of
her friendships or enmities.

Our detached and distant situation invites and enables us to pursue a
different course. If we remain one people, under an efficient government, the
period is not far off, when we may defy material injury from external
annoyance; when we may take such an attitude as will cause the neutrality, we
may at any time resolve upon, to be scrupulously respected; when belligerent
nations, under the impossibility of making acquisitions upon us, will not
lightly hazard the giving us provocation; when we may choose peace or war, as
our interest, guided by justice, shall counsel.

Why forego the advantages of so peculiar a situation? Why quit our own, to
stand upon foreign ground? Why, by interweaving our destiny with that of any
part of Europe ^^tangle our peace and prosperity in the toils of European
ambition, rivalship, interest, humor, or caprice?

It is our true policy to steer clear of permanent alliances, with any portion
of the foreign world; so far, I mean, as we are now at liberty to do it; for
let me not be understood, as capable of patronizing infidelity to existing
engagements. I hold the maxim no less applicable to public than to private
affairs, that honesty is always the best policy. I repeat it, therefore, let
those engagements be observed in their genuine sense. But, in my opinion, it is
unnecessary, and would be unwise to extend them.

Taking care always to keep ourselves, by suitable establishments, on a
respectable defensive posture, we may safely trust to temporary alliances for
extraordinary emergencies.

Harmony, liberal intercourse with all nations, are recommended by policy,
humanity, and interest. But even our commercial policy should hold an equal and
impartial hand; neither sending or granting exclusive favors or preferences;
consulting the natural course of things; diffusing and diversifying, by gentle
means, the streams of commerce, but forcing nothing; establishing, with powers
so disposed, in order to give trade a stable course, to define the rights of
our merchants, and to enable the government to support them, conventional rules
of intercourse, the best that present circumstances and mutual opinion will
permit, but temporary, and liable to be, from time to time, abandoned or
varied, as experience and circumstances shall dictate; constantly keeping in
view, that it is folly in one nation to look for disinterested favors from
another; that it must pay, with a portion of its independence, for whatever it
may accept under that character; that, by such acceptance, it may place itself
in the condition of having given equivalents for nominal favors, and (...)
being reproached with ingratitude for not giving more. There can be no greater
error than to expect, or calculate upon real favors from nation to nation. It
is an illusion which experience must cure, which a just pride ought to discard.

In offering to you, my countrymen, these counsels of an old affectionate
friend, I dare not hope they will make the strong and lasting impression I
could wish; that they will control the usual current of the passions, or
prevent our nation from running (...) course which has hitherto marked the
destiny of nations: but if I may even flatter myself, that they may be
productive of some partial benefit, some occasional good; that they may now and
then recur to moderate the fury of party spirit, to warn against the mischiefs
of foreign intrigue, to guard against the impostures of pretended patriotism;
this hope will be a full recompense for the solicitude for your welfare, by
which they have been dictated.

How far, in the discharge of my official duties, I have been guided by the
principles which have been delineated, the public records, and other evidences
of my conduct, must witness to you and to the world. To myself, the assurance
of my own conscience is, that I have at least believed myself to be guided by
them.

In relation to the still subsisting war in Europe, my Proclamation of the 22d
of April, 1795, is the index to my plan. Sanctioned by your approving voice,
and by that of your Representatives in both Houses of Congress, the spirit of
that measure has continually governed me; uninfluenced by any attempts to deter
or divert me from it.

After deliberate examination, with the aid of the best lights I could obtain,
I was well satisfied that our country, under all the circumstances of the case,
had a right to take, and was bound in duty and interest to take a neutral
position. ^^^^ng taken it, I determined, as far as should (...) on me, to
maintain it, with moderation.

The considerations which (...) the right to hold this conduct, it is not
necessary on this occasion to detail. I will only observe, that according to my
understanding of the matter, that right, so far from being denied by any of the
belligerent powers, has been virtually admitted by all.

The duty of holding a neutral conduct may be inferred, without any thing more,
from the obligation which justice and humanity impose on every nation, in cases
in which it is free to act, to maintain inviolate the relations of peace and
amity toward other nations.

The inducements of interest for observ^^^ that conduct will best be referred
to your own reflections and experience. With me, a predominant motive has been
to endeavor to gain time to our country to settle and mature its yet recent
institutions, and to progress without interruption, to that degree of strength
and consistency, which is necessary to give it, humanly speaking, the command
of its own fortunes.

Though in reviewing the incidents of my administration, I am unconscious of
intentional error; I am nevertheless too sensible of my defects not to think it
probable that I may have committed many errors. Whatever they may be, I
fervently beseech the Almighty to avert or mitigate the evils, to which they
may tend. I shall also carry with me the hope that my country will never cease
to view them with indulgence; and that after forty-five years of my life
dedicated to its service, with (...) upright zeal, the faults of incompetent
abilities will be consigned to oblivion, as myself must soon be to the mansions
of rest.

Relying on its kindness in this as in other things, and actuated by that
fervent love toward it, which is so natural to a man who ^^ews in it the
native soil of himself and his prog^^^^ ^s for several generations; I
anticipate with plea^^^ expectation that retreat, in which I promise (...)
realize, without alloy, the sweet enjoyment of (...), in the midst of my
fellow-citizens, the benign influence of good laws under a free government --
the ever favorite object of my heart, and the happy reward, as I trust, of our
mutual cares, labors and dangers.

G. Washington.
United States, 17 th Sep. 1796.

