Mr. NILES's SERMON COMMEMORATING THE DEATH OF GEORGE WASHINGTON.

THE VANITY OF MAN CONSIDERED IN A SERMON DELIVERED FEBRUARY 22d, 1800,
COMMEMORATING THE DEATH OF GEORGE WASHINGTON, LATE PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED
STATES.

BY SAMUEL NILES, PASTOR OF THE CHURCH IN ABINGTON.

I said ye are Gods; but ye shall die like men. BOSTON: Printed by JOHN and
THOMAS FLEET, CORNHILL. MDCCC.

ERRATA.
Page 6, line 12, for this read their. l. 23, after than, supply on.

P. 10, l. 11, from the bottom, for advances r. advance.

P. 11, l. 7, for from read form. l. 10, for beams read beam.

P. 14, l. 19, dele vain before pleasures. l. 4, from bot. for complexions r.
complexion.

P. 15, l. 10, for his read its. l. 21, supply a period after conscience.

P. 16, l. 6, for respect read respects. l. 18, supply a period after mite.
line 2, from the bottom, for may read might.

P. 18, line 9, from bot. for starving read strangling. line 3, from bot. after
return, supply a period.

P. 19, line 11, from the bottom after princes, begin a new paragraph. line 4,
from bot. after immortal, supply note of admiration.

P. 20, line 21, for declamatory read declaratory. for rights read right. line
6, from the bottom, after splendour, a period. line 5, from bot. for found read
forced.

P. 21, line 14, from bot. grave completes the paragraph.

P. 22, line 22, for prayers read prayer. line 5, from the bottom, for moral
read morals.

A SERMON, etc.
PSALM XXXIX, 5th. Verily every man at his best state is altogether vanity.


THESE words in glowing colors describe the debility of man. Man who was made
in the image of his Maker, lord of the lower creation, and formed to future
existence, is vain as the vapor, nay, in his best state is altogether vanity.
This truth is forcible in application to man in the highest degree of human
glory. Diversity of circumstance, though in other respects it may precede
diversity of consequence, yet here, makes no difference between the judge on
the bench, and the culprit at the bar, the victor in triumph, and the
vanquished in despair, the king on his throne and the beggar at the gate. The
text is conceived in the most expressive language. Verily, is a term frequently
used by the best instructor, and most accurate judge of human language. It is
employed to substantiate the truth beyond contradiction. When our Lord ushers
in a declaration with "verily, verily I say unto you" all ground of doubt is
instantly removed. Such an introduction more than invites prevailing opinion,
it lays special claim to unbounded confidence: It demands the assent of
judgment in such a manner, as to exclude the desire of other evidence. Thus,
with the inspired penman of the psalm from which our text is chosen. This
single word from him is more decisive than a thousand arguments from reason
without the guidance of inspiration. The former is clothed with divine
authority, while the latter, like the source whence they proceed are often
delusive.

HAVING furnished such ground of confidence, the psalmist proceeds to a
description, which applies to the human race without exception: The first and
the last, the greatest and the least are equally implicated. However the
different gradations of human life may exhibit men in different attitudes of
pursuit, employment and enjoyment; yet a perfect coincidence is formed by the
deep inscription of vanity on all. And lest we entertain the apprehension, that
great men may be vain, in such instances only, wherein, even they are sometimes
unwise, the text circumscribes our contemplation by the narrow limits of this
most happy and prosperous condition. The best and most happy state of man, in
exclusion of every consideration less desirable, invites our meditation. And
even here, a veil is drawn over all his greatness. Here, he is not partially
vain; but vanity in the abstract.

IF the strong expressions of our text, were indulged by the license of poets,
and if for that reason, the plain and literal meaning of the terms may not be
admitted; yet, the passage is full of instruction, and demands our most serious
consideration; and seldom, if ever, more than the present solemn, and sorrowful
occasion, an occasion, originating from an event in which the citizens of
America are deeply interested: For Washington the great is not able to continue
by reason of death. Washington, the father of his country, the defender of her
rights, the protector of millions, is no more! He, who frowned on tyrants, and
bade boundless ambition submit to the mild mandates of liberty and law, has
fallen, greatly fallen, in unequal combat with the king of terrors. He, who
bore no distant resemblance to the wise king of Israel, in circumstances of
ease, and affluence at home, at his country's call, forsook domestic
endearments, and in jeopardy of life, entering the high places of the field,
engaged in a contest, which, though righteous in itself, was however dubious in
event, and pregnant with danger, and death, in all the dreadful forms of
retribution to reputed rebels. That man, who by the sacrifice of his property
and gratuitous devotedness of his time and talents, to the cause of his
country, who, by the wisdom of his counsels, and prowess of his arms, gathered
laurels of renown, which shall continue with unfading luster to the latest
posterity, who commanded the proud kings of the east "to be still, and they
obeyed him." Washington, the boast of America, the dread of tyrants, and the
envy of the world, has, in the course of divine providence, furnished a
striking illustration of our text, "verily, every man at his best state is
altogether vanity."

Two questions are suggested by this text for consideration.

I. What is the best state of man?

II. Why is mere vanity predicated of man in such a state?

1. WHAT is the best state of man? Different states are preferred according to
the different taste or relish of such as make the preference: But the real
goodness of a state depends not on opinion. It is founded on the original rule
of right, and like that remains unalterable. The best state of man, is that
wherein he can enjoy the highest and most permanent felicity. A rational mind
without enjoyment is unavoidably miserable. Entire destitution of pleasure, and
pain when unbiassed reason excites reflection is absolutely impossible. Heaven
and hell cannot be realized with indifference. The subject is too serious to
admit of trifling. Eternal joy and endless woe, by the necessity of our nature,
afford happiness or misery in the contemplation: But misery is not an object to
be chosen. Disinterested malevolence has no existence. Enjoyment is therefore
inseparable from the best state of man. And by how much the more refined and
permanent the enjoyment is, by so much the more desirable the state of the
happy subject.

BUT the concurrence of several things, is essential to such enjoyment.

1. A clear and lively apprehension of truth. The propriety of this remark,
depends not on the complexion of your creed. Whether christian or pagan, the
observation still remains. Nothing within the limits of pure revelation, and
absolute atheism can furnish an exception. Diversity of opinion, cannot produce
substantial joy, from unfounded systems. Ignorance indeed, may flatter a
deluded conscience to the joyful subversion of right and wrong, but all that
seeming happiness, which results from ignorance, will instantly vanish in the
light of truth. Hay and stubble, may better endure devouring flame, than false
joys abide the breath of his mouth, and the brightness of his appearing, who is
truth itself. Idle dreams may delude the hungry, but wakeful reflection will
substantiate his misery. Many will be repulsed with the argument in their mouth
"have we not prophesied in thy name and in thy name done many wonderful works."
Clear conviction will detect the guilt of apprehending, that we may do God
service by the slaughter of his friends. St. Paul is not the only illustration
of this truth. The hope of thousands has been slain by the light of law, and
thousands yet unborn will happily experience the same death. "This is life
eternal to know Thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent.
Except ye believe that I am he ye shall die in your sins."

But 2d. Such enjoyment requires communion in happiness. The highest and most
permanent felicity, is not selfish and mercenary. It results not from partial
prosperity in opposition to general enjoyment. Benevolence, which is the source
of the most high, refined, and permanent gratification, is without partiality.
It is utterly a stranger to private or sinister views. It knows no confinement
within the extensive limits of the greatest possible felicity. Soaring above
the highest exertion of partial affection the subject of benevolence is lost in
the boundless ocean of infinite delight. To contemplate the solid and
substantial pleasure of others, will cause the good man to sing for joy.
Dictated by the temper of his own heart he knows to weep with those who weep,
and to rejoice with such as do rejoice. The pleasure which such enjoy in
communicating happiness where it is within their power, and rejoicing in that
blessedness which is infinitely above them, is the spring of every benevolent
exertion. But for this, what motive to action which the enlightened conscience
can approve? What virtue in drudging like an ox, in hard and laborious
exertion, in reprobation of general felicity? For approbation or reprobation of
this great object is essential to every moral exercise. Here a state of
neutrality is utterly unknown. "He that is not with me is against me," is the
declaration of him who taught as never man did.

"GLORY to God in the highest, peace on earth, and good will to man," is the
genuine expression of true benevolence, and not confined to such, as were
educated in heaven. The ardent flame is caught in the breast of some below; its
fervor is felt, and seen in effusions of a similar nature. Job, in his own
vindication, replies to the reproachful language of his friends.

If I have withholden the poor from his desire, or have caused the eyes of the
widow to fail, or have eaten my morsel by myself alone, and the fatherless have
not eaten thereof.

If I have seen any perish for want of clothing, or have seen the poor without
covering.

If his loins have not blessed me, and if he were not warmed with the fleece of
my sheep.

If I have lift my hand against the fatherless.

Then let my arm fall from my shoulderblade and let my arm be broken from the
bone.

BUT the psalmist has described the same temper in language if possible still
more expressive. "If I forget thee O Jerusalem; let my right hand forget her
cunning. If I do not remember thee, let my tongue cleave to the roof of my
mouth, if I prefer not Jerusalem above my chief joy."

THIS affection, like a bond of union, cementing every inhabitant of the best
state of man, opens a source of joy which is unspeakable and full of glory.
Complete gratification of all such desires is the natural, and necessary
consequence. They enstamp on the subject the moral image of the great Creator,
and God will fulfill the desires of such as fear him. Nor is it possible for
Omnipotence to do otherwise unless the unchangeable put on mutability.

3. THE highest and most permanent enjoyment is progressive.

IF the powers of the human mind are capable of progression, in knowledge,
benevolence, and enjoyments, that state must be preferable to all others, where
such progression is ensured. But that the mind is thus capable, has never been
denied. Here, an opponent is not apprehended. Everlasting forgetfulness, the
last resort of boasted, but blinded reason, should the dream be realized, can
furnish no objection to advances in felicity, while consciousness may endure.
The decision of the rest, falls not within the present field. It will be
clearly seen in the light of the general judgment. The appeal lies, to that
awful tribunal. To the real christian, progressive information, and increasing
enjoyment, are most animating considerations. His views extend beyond the
narrow limits of human life, and contemplate ages, in unnumbered millions,
rolling on from high to higher gradations of perfect enjoyment; attended in
each progressive step, with retrogade motion in deep abasement. The objects
which give him pleasure shall remain forever, and in his apprehension, like the
rising light, shine brighter and brighter, in endless day. "Blessed are the
pure in heart for they shall see God." To such a mind, enjoyment will ever keep
pace with increasing information, the heart will no longer maintain warfare
with the understanding. The will, and affections will from a perfect
coincidence with the enlightened dictates of conscience, and the soul, like the
mote which plays in the sunbeams, be lost in the immensity of divine
complacency. Every increasing desire, will be satisfied in drinking of the
rivers of God's pleasure. Every benevolent mind, will be filled with the
fullness of God.

BUT has such a state ever fallen to the lot of man? Where is the chart of the
happy country? What the terms of naturalization, and how shall admittance to
the new Jerusalem be procured?

WE cheerfully reply, that the existence of such a state, is clearly described
by the infallible pen of divine inspiration. Nor, is it a work of difficulty to
ascertain the terms of admittance. The right of citizenship is offered "without
money and without price." "The spirit and the bride say come, and let him who
hears say come, and whosoever will let him come and take of the waters of
life freely." Hungering for the bread, and thirsting for the waters of life,
are the only prerequisites to entering the gates into the holy city.

ADMITTANCE however will not be granted, to such as desire to purloin their
master's goods, or embezzle his property. Here, "the thief breaks not through
to steal:" But one of two reasons can induce the wish to go to heaven, the one
to serve God, and the other to be served of him. But whether shall I be God's
servant, or shall he be mine, are questions not less remote than heaven and
hell, nor is there a greater resemblance in the tempers whence they proceed. He
only who "hates his life for Christ's sake shall find it:" When the eye
becomes single, then, and not till then, in that proportion, and no other, can
the body be full of light. We "cannot serve two masters." A relish of heart for
that enjoyment which results from unreserved devotedness to God, prepares the
soul to participate in the joy of its Lord, and that to a degree which eye has
not seen, ear heard, neither has it entered into the heart of man to conceive.
Happy are they, who are in such a case, yea happy, is that man whose God is the
Lord. But "man in his best state is altogether vanity."

II. Why is vanity predicated of man in such a state?

1. BECAUSE he is a creature. Creatures in their highest exaltation possess a
derived existence, and have no claim either to its mode or continuance. The
power which made is able to destroy. The most dignified of Adam's race, if
reduced to the most abject state, would suffer no injury at the hand of his
maker. But, vanity is deeply inscribed on that man who is kept not by any thing
in the nature of his existence, but by mighty power, from constant vicisitude.

But 2. EVERY man in his best state is altogether vanity, because wholly
dependent. Dependence is the necessary consequence of creation. A creator,
dependent on his creatures, is not a greater solecism, than creatures,
independent of the creator. Created existence must have a beginning, and for
that reason must be dependent. The dependence of creatures, extends through
every part and period of their existence. The laws of nature which regulate the
whole, are no other, than established modes of constant, divine operation,
whereby the God of nature, upholds and governs all.

"By his own power were all things made,
By him supported all things stand,
He is the whole creation's head,
And angels fly at his command."
"HAVE ye not known? Have ye not heard, has it not been told you from the
beginning, have ye not understood from the foundation of the earth? It is he
that sits on the circle of the earth and the inhabitants thereof are as
grasshoppers, that stretches out the heavens as a curtain and spreads them,
as a tent to dwell in -- that brings the princes to nothing, yea that makes
the judges of the earth as vanity." The dependence of man for intelligence, and
other powers of moral action, has seldom, if ever been denied. "Who has made
thee to differ from another? and what have thou which thou have not received?"
are questions, which on other ground, will admit of no reply. But because in
the exercise of mental powers, men are subjects of praise or blame, many
suppose the independent exertion of self-determining power, to be absolutely
necessary. To wave the difficulty of ascertaining precisely, what is meant by
self-determining power, we are led to suppose that such power never did, and
never will exist in heaven or on earth. Nor can we conceive that any advantage
could be derived, from its existence. For the exertion of such power must
either be, or not be, under the direction of the will. If it be under the
direction of the will, then the will governs the power, and not the power the
will. In this case, the exertion of the power would be the effect, and not the
cause, of previous volition. One act of the will has therefore already taken
place without the aid of self-determining power. It remains for others to show
why succeeding actions may not exist in the same manner. But if on the other
hand, the power of self-determination, be not under the direction of the will,
it can add nothing to the freedom of human volition.

FOR the effect, is necessarily under the control of the cause, and not the
cause of the effect. And is such control consistent with free volition? Where
then is the objection against the doctrine of necessity? In the former case,
what is the respect in which, the existence of such a power, would be
advantageous? And what, in the latter, not mischievous? Is control by a power,
distinct from intelligence, and will, and conscience, preferable, to the
government of infinite benevolence? As this will not be pretended man is a
free, but controlled agent, acting when acted upon, and therefore, required to
work out his own salvation with fear and trembling; for it is God who works
in him to will and to do of his own good pleasure. Every man therefore, in his
best state is altogether vanity. He is the clay. God is the potter. For the
king's heart is in God's hand, and he turns it whithersoever he will, as the
rivers of water are turned. All nations are before him as nothing, and they are
counted by him less than nothing, and vanity. But the text has been
misrepresented.

THE inspired writer had no reference to the moral character, and future state
of man. The riches and vain pleasures of time are vain, and for this reason
every man in his best state is altogether vanity. Be it so.

THIS objection, if admitted, will suggest the following considerations.

1. THE best state of man is still that wherein he may enjoy the highest, and
most permanent felicity. The reason already assigned, will apply to this
construction, with equal propriety. A lower state of enjoyment can no more
claim the preference to an higher, than a state of misery to them both.

2, SUCH enjoyments vary, according to the infinite variety of human passions
and appetites. The same objects will afford both pleasure and pain, to minds of
different complexions, and even to the same mind, under different
circumstances. The veteran hero may exult in triumph, while the tender mother,
and helpless orphan are filled with anguish, in confused noise of battle and
garments rolled in blood. The pleasures of philosophic investigation may feed
the soul of Newton, but famish the painful desires of sensual delight. The
sublime pleasure of liberal donation, to cause the widow's heart to sing for
joy, and pour the balm of consolation on the wounded breast, puts the sordid
miser on the rack. The groanings of the prisoner, are music to the tyrant; but
plant a dagger in the bosom of compassion. Ambition lugs a heavy load, where
sober reason finds his element. Mordecai mourns while Haman triumphs. Avarice
starves in rich abundance, while prodigality riots in lawless profusion.
Jarring passions, in endless variety, exclude all rule of universal
prescription. The best state of man however, on this construction will,
probably, depend much on the following circumstances. A strong and penetrating
mind, furnished with extensive information, a firm constitution, enlivened with
the vigor of youth, affluent fortune under the direction of a generous heart,
courteous condescension, in exalted station, undaunted courage, and a stupid
conscience* the united influence of these, may raise the mind above the highest
degree of animal gratification. Intellectual contemplation, unknown to the most
exalted brute, may refine the pleasures of man, and complete his greatness. But
here the application of our text meets no resistance. Every man in his best
state is altogether vanity. For,

1. HE still remains a creature, and therefore dependent. Behold they are all
vanity, their work is vain. Surely men of low degree are vanity, and men of
high degree are a lie, to be laid in the balance, they are altogether lighter
than vanity. The instrument in the hand of the workman is far less vain, than
the most exalted man, in the hand of his maker. The saw is no more dependent
than the man who shakes it.

2. VANITY is inscribed on the best state of man, because he is of yesterday
and knows nothing. The wisdom of man is foolishness with God. And compared even
with creatures in superior grades of existence.

The highest wisdom found in human shape,
Can scarce distinguish Newton from an ape. The beauty of this sentiment as
expressed by Mr. Pope* will remain unimpaired, notwithstanding any alteration
for the worse

THE boasted information of man, however in some respect extensive, yet in
others, is confined by very narrow limits. The highest seize in the
knowledge of former things, leave man profoundly ignorant of the present.

ASIDE from objects of faith, a very few facts fall within his acquaintance,
and even these so involved in mystery, as to baffle all attempts at
explanation. The deepest researches have not disclosed the hidden essence of a
fly. The party-colored leaf of a tulip, puts human wisdom at defiance, not
less than endless duration. The ascent of vapor, and falling of a shower,
submit not to the investigation of man. Philosophic science is baffled in the
dissection of a mite* the vegetation of a plant, derides the reason of the
great, and teaches boasted wisdom to learn her weakness. But if present objects
elude the most accurate researches of indefatigable application, how much more
the future? Heterogeneous operations concur, to substantiate that system, which
will unfold with increasing magnitude to eternity. The growth of an hair, the
fall of a sparrow are constituent parts, not less essential than the rise and
fall of empires.

NOTHING is made in vain. The straying of an ass, prepares the way for Saul the
son of Kish to be anointed king over Israel. Childish dreams led on to most
stupendous scenes; which, illustrating the faithfulness of God, and displaying
the riches of his grace, may excite the exclamation, "all these things are
against me;" while pride, and envy surpassed all bounds, in the rapid progress
of their ruin. Haman exults, while preparation was making for his exaltation on
a gibbet.

WITHOUT aid of revelation, probable conjecture is the only clue to future
scenes; and revelation itself leaves many things unrevealed. Predictions are
best expounded in the event. The time, and place, and circumstances, under
which we are to live and die, are to be learnt by experience. To unwind the
intricacies of the labyrinth without the guidance of a thread, is far less
difficult, than to unfold the events of the next succeeding moment, without the
assistance of prophetic science. Boast not thyself of tomorrow, for thou
know not what a day may bring forth.

BUT the unstable nature of terrestial things puts the truth of our text,
beyond the reach of contradiction. The decided voice of experience, excludes
the possibility of a doubt.

THE beams of prosperity often give place to darkness more palpable than that
of Egypt. Riches make to themselves wings, and reduce even the perfect man of
Uz to a dunghill. The proud king of Babylon is turned out to eat grass like an
ox, and Pharaoh and his host are drowned in the red sea. How sudden and awful
the transition! Storms of fire and brimstone, on the devoted cities of Sodom
and Gomorrah, were not more unexpected, and the flood might as easily yield to
resistance. Vigorous youth, affluent fortune, extensive information, exalted
station, and universal esteem, serve to brighten the scene, and render the
inscription still more legible. How is the mighty fallen! is the momentary cry
of such, as must furnish the next example, while a stupid conscience may admit
a kind of enjoyment, which in an hour must yield to the gnawing of that worm,
which shall never die. Pride and insensibility, as they prepare for, so they
often precede* the most surprising overthrow.

I WILL pursue, I will overtake, my lust shall be satisfied -- Thou did blow
with thy wind, the sea did cover them, they sank like lead in the midst of the
sea. The words are too plain to require, and the sentiment too sublime to
license a comment.

NEBUCHADNEZZAR is separated from his kingdom, and driven from men, to dwell
with the beasts of the field, while the words were in his mouth, Is not this
great Babylon which I have built, for the house of the kingdom, by the might of
my power, and for the honor of my majesty? Belshazzer, refusing instruction
from the example of his father, fell a sacrifice to lust of his own heart, in
the night of sordid indulgence. Sennacherib found a speedy, full and
everlasting reply to the impious enquiry, "How much less, shall your God be
able to deliver you out of my hand." Faithful admonitions of conscience
interpret the hand writing and realize the truth, that where much is given,
much is also required.

A sense of just retribution for abused favor, excites the bitter lamentation
"a wounded spirit who can bear." The accumulated wealth of Peru, will rather
enhance, than mitigate the anguish. The gaudy trappings of the great, and
impious adoration of millions reproach the unhappy man, for withholding honor
from whom honor is due. Lively apprehensions of deserved punishment in rapid
approach, embitter the comforts of life, and sometimes produce the preference
of starving and death.

DID such reflections proceed from an enthusiastic heart, or distracted brain,
yet the truth of our doctrine is learnt.

4: FROM the original sentence, "dust art thou and unto dust thou shall
return," faithful monuments hand down to posterity, the previous existence of
millions now no more. The great congregation of the dead, proclaim in silent,
but emphatic language, that "man in his best estate is altogether vanity." The
mortality of man, is so clearly taught in the book of God, and exemplified by
daily observation, that infidelity itself is unable to resist the evidence.

INFIDELITY here, is but another name for the most consummate madness. One
generation passes away and another comes, the latter supplying the place of
the former, in quick and surprising succession. The momentary state of man, is
illustrated by the most striking examples. The diligence of the post, the
passing of the shadow, the velocity of the shuttle, do but faintly represent
the more rapid progress of human life. Man is like unto vanity, his days are as
a shadow which passes away. Lord make me to know mine end, the measure of my
days what it is, that I may know how frail I am.

BEHOLD, thou have made my days as an hand's breadth, and my age is as nothing
before thee. Vanity of vanities all is vanity.

IMPROVEMENT.
1. WE learn the folly of reliance on creatures, "I have said ye are Gods, and
all of you children of the most high; but ye shall die like men and fall like
one of the princes." The event which gave rise to the present solemnity, is
full of instruction. If powers of intelligence, acquisition of knowledge,
accumulation of wealth, indefatigable application, accuracy to investigate,
wisdom to project, resolution to prosecute, patience to persevere, patriotism,
bravery, and the ardent wish of millions, could bribe the king of terrors,
Washington had been immortal, the exigence of his country, furnished early
opportunity to display the illustrious virtues, which adorned the American
hero. By the wisdom of his councils, the broken remains of Braddock's army were
conducted in safe retreat to domestic enjoyments. The valor of his youth,
impressed a grateful country with sentiments of esteem, which time did not
obliterate. The shade of retirement could not conceal his increasing greatness.
Oppression rose in defiance of a brave, but injured people. Heaven unites their
suffrages in the man, whom heaven had prepared. At the call of his country, and
like the victorious son of Jesse, in solemn appeal to the God of armies --
Washington provided; with little more than a sling and stone, repelled the
assault of the enemy, and constrained the invincible George the 3d. King of
Great Britain, France and Ireland, to acknowledge a superior, and relinquish the
unequal combat. United America, rose in acclamation of honor to their leader.

NEITHER modern principles of liberty and equality, nor the still more
unwarrantable thirst of domination, formed any part of his political system. To
rescue the invaded rights of man, to vindicate the violated restraints of
constitutional compact, to resist the progress of the declamatory act, claiming
the usurped rights of the British Parliament, to tax America in all cases
whatever, to snatch his country from the jaws of oppression, and diffuse the
blessing of liberty and peace. These were the motives which unsheathed his
sword, directed its object, and insured its return.

THE charms of monarchy, in his newly emancipated country, when displayed
clearly within view, and placed fully within his reach, were rejected with a
magnanimity, I had almost said, peculiar to himself. Here the soul of
Washington shone forth in meridian splendour, the commanding accents of his
tongue found conviction on his troops, checked the rashness of designing men,
and taught an injured army, flushed with conquest, to subdue itself.

GENERAL WASHINGTON was called to the helm of government on a boisterous ocean,
and tempestuous season. The administration of a new, and untried form of
government, produced complaints which many had apprehended. A decided majority,
in some of the States, had rejected, while a large minority in others, had
obstructed the adoption of the federal constitution. The vibration of some,
from liberty to licentiousness, had diffused the spirit of disorganization, and
licensed resistance to government. The same measures, and that too from the
same bodies, became the object both of petition and remonstrance.

PRESSING solicitations of an opposite nature, and from different directions,
proclaimed certain destruction to his country if each were not gratified --
gratification of all was impossible. Unavoidable disappointment found the
utterance of reproach. And all this, on the supposition that government, had
been administered with absolute perfection, which can hardly be admitted,
while, every man in his best state is altogether vanity. But in such an
important crisis of public affairs, is not the man yet to be born, who could
weather the storm of contending passions, with more dignity to himself, or
safety to the public? George Washington was made for most important service,
has accomplished like an hireling his day, and passed from the theater of life,
to a permanent state of existence beyond the grave. The obscurity of the
speaker has secluded him, from such means of information as others possess,
relative to the moral or religious character of this great man. He is
authorized however, from authentic documents, to say, that General Washington
was a believer in the christian Religion, in a sense which many professing
christians do reject. In a circular letter to the governor of each state, at
the close of the war, we find the following remarkable words. "The free
cultivation of letters, the unbounded extent of commerce, the progressive
refinement of manners, the growing liberality of sentiment, and above all, the
pure and divine light of revelation, have had a meliorating influence on
mankind, and increased the blessings of society." -- And in the close of the
same letter he adds. "I now make it my earnest prayer, that God would have you,
and the state over which you preside, in his holy protection, that he would
incline the hearts of the citizens to cultivate a spirit of subordination to
government, to entertain a brotherly love and affection for one another, for
their fellow citizens of the United States at large, and particularly for their
brethren, who have served in the field; and finally that he would most
graciously be pleased, to dispose us all to do justice, to love mercy, and to
demean ourselves with that charity, humility and pacific temper of mind, which
were the characteristics of the divine author of our blessed religion, without
an humble imitation of whose example, we can never be an happy nation."

THE example here held forth for imitation is that of the Lord Jesus Christ,
whom many others represent as a mere creature; but General Washington believes
him to be the independent and eternal God. He is the "divine Author of our
blessed religion." The ardent prayers that God would most graciously be
pleased, to dispose us all to do justice, love mercy and to demean ourselves
with that charity, humility, etc. -- and incline our hearts to subordination to
government, and brotherly love," etc. clearly implies, that we are previously
disinclined to such duties, that divine exertion is necessary to produce the
disposition to perform them, and that such exertion is not a debt which we may
demand; but the gift of grace which might justly be withholden. By grace are ye
saved through faith and that not of yourselves it is the gift of God. But the
scriptural creed, pure moral and extensive usefulness of the Author of this
prayer, can furnish no ground of ultimate reliance.

HIS breath was in his nostrils, and he has returned to dust from whence he
came. Put not your trust in princes, nor in the son of man, his breath goes
forth, he returns to the earth, in that very day his thoughts perish.

2. LET your mourning be attended with the twofold duty of submission and
prayer. The Lord gave, the Lord has taken away. It becomes United America, to
subscribe a cordial, amen. There were sufficient reasons why the benefactor of
his country should live, the ^^re sufficient reasons why he should not. Known
unto God are all his works from the creation of the world. Omnipotence is able
to raise up others to supply his place. His place is already supplied. Commit
your cause unto the Lord and he will accomplish it. Pray for the prosperity of
Zion, and God will make your rulers wise like angels of light.

3. WHAT matter of consolation, the Lord God Omnipotent forever lives. The Lord
reigns let the earth rejoice, let the multitude of the isles be glad thereof.
Let the vanity of man excite to unbounded confidence in the Lord Jehovah, who
is immutably the same from and to eternity, whose name is a strong tower into
which the righteous do run and are safe.


