POLITICAL HAPPINESS OF NATIONS; AN ORATION.

DELIVERED AT THE CITY OF NEW YORK, ON THE FOURTH JULY, TWENTY FOURTH
ANNIVERSARY OF AMERICAN INDEPENDENCE.

By ELIHU PALMER.

THE PRESS -- THE FRIEND OF LIBERTY AND THE SCOURGE OF TYRANTS.

AN ORATION, etc.
CITIZENS,
THE anniversary which is this day celebrated by the American people, is no
less powerful in its effects, than it is important in its nature and principle.
The recognition of that grand thought, the recollection of that immortal
sentiment, which gave birth to a change so essential to the dignity and
character of man, will become one of the most effectual means of giving to the
cause of liberty a durable triumph, and of annihilating the despotism of
antiquity. The celebration of this day, is not intended as a business of
festivity alone; it includes the resuscitation of some of the finest feelings
that ever warmed the human heart -- of some of the noblest sentiments, that in
any age have emanated from the mind of man.

Posterity which took no active part in the accomplishment of this great event,
can feel its weight only by the recital of its history, by the development of
its principles, by the magnitude of its effects.

Impressions made upon the human mind, either by interesting facts, or
important principles, are durable in their consequences; they mould the moral
temperament of intelligent life; they inspire the heart with a justifiable
enthusiasm; they impel the mind to discard error and venerate truth, and to
form individual conduct upon the basis of eternal justice. The subject in this
point of view is doubly interesting; for while it does justice to the imminent
virtues of revolutionary characters, it animates, it exalts, and inspires with
a love of genuine republicanism, the juvenile mind throughout the American
country.

Cold hearted, misanthropic, or tyrannical men have endeavored to cast a gloom
over the subject, to envelope it in clouds of awful mystery, and tarnish its
purity, its glory and excellence by prophetic maledictions, the object of which
is destruction to the sentiment of equal right and the total subversion of
liberty throughout the globe. If there be in nature a single human being who
merits universal execration, it is that wretch, finished in wickedness, who
deliberately contends for bondage interminable, and whose aggregate faculties
are devoted to the accomplishment of such fatal and malignant design -- He is a
monster in human shape whom posterity will reject -- whom they will renounce
with the most pointed asseverations, that such specimen of moral deformity
certainly never disgraced a race of intellectual agents.

The enemies of liberty in every country have employed the same detestable
argument for the purpose of perpetuating the depotism of antiquity. Innovations
it is said are dangerous and destructive; the institutions of former ages have
been sanctioned by time and authority -- they have been venerated by our
ancestors -- they have been respected by wise and great men, and a desire to
subvert them is indicative only of a restless and turbulent spirit, whose
element is the confused and disordered state of the moral world. Innovations it
is said are dangerous and destructive, it ought not to be considered harsh or
severe, to declare that such objection can be attributed to no other source
than ignorance or tyranny. To what do we owe the present state of human
improvement? to what causes shall we ascribe national dignity and happiness so
far as they have already been realized in any country? what is it that has the
elevated enjoyments of civilized life -- to purity of thought, sublimity of
conception, strength of mind, extension of science, love of justice,
augmentation of felicity, and that combination of circumstances, that
discernable connection of cause and effect, which has already mitigated his
sufferings, and improved his character -- to what are all these effects to be
attributed? they are not the requests of despotism, for despotism is obdurate
and inflexible -- they are not the effects of any regular system, whose
operation has been unbroken under the cruel reign of ancient tyranny -- they
are not the effect of any kind of benevolent plans, which have been generated
in the councils of church or state -- no, they are results to be ascribed to
sources entirely different; they are effects exhibited by unfortunate man,
struggling under the pressure of innumerable misfortunes, and powerfully
contending against the accumulated evils of his existence; they are the results
of suffering humanity, rising in all the awfulness of just resentment against
its oppressors. These oppressors, these tyrants of antiquity had destined the
human race to a state of hopeless bondage; they had organized a system of moral
and political wickedness, which had nearly accomplished what was included in
the tyrannical wish of the execrable Galigula, for mankind seemed to have but
one neck, on which the compound despotism of the earth had set its foot, and
swore upon the alter of vengeance that efforts and energies should hence forth
be unavailing.

But necessity is the mother of invention, and nature in many cases exerts a
preternatural strength, productive of the most astonishing effects. This has
been literally true in the great work of human improvement; the warfare has
been unequalled -- it was the intellect of man rising against the despotism of
the globe -- it was the fire of human genius that burst upon the world, that
proclaimed liberty to the human race, science to man, justice to nations, and
immortality to the venerable cause of truth. It is however the character of
power to believe itself invulnerable and eternal; this foolish but abominable
dogma, became one of the most powerful causes of the overthrow of ancient
institutions. The intellectual energy of individuals, had been secretly
preparing, for a long time, the means by which the world was to be emancipated
from slavery; but these philanthropists were objects of the most virulent
persecution -- they were called innovaters, disorganisers and enemies to the
venerable institutions of antiquity.

Galileo asserted the sphericity of the earth, and he fell a victim to the
resentment of superstition -- the clergy laid their pious and holy hands upon
this innovating philosophy (...) threw him into prison, and (...) in the world
that the earth was flat and not of a globular figure -- ignorance and
superstition joined the general cry, and the beautiful system of nature was
most dreadfully distorted by the incontrovertible argument of authority.

After a lapse however of many years, superstition consented to restore the
earth to its globular form, and nature in this respect was once more set right.
Political philosophers and philanthropists; who first bad the courage* to call
in question the divinity of monarchy, experienced similar persecutions, and to
the charges brought against them there seemed to be no end. When the justice
and political utility of revolutions were first asserted, their abettors were
considered, in they view of monarchy, as beings whose existence ought to he
immediately sacrificed to the preservation of order and good government, This
opinion, so fatal to the improvement of the human race, is still advocated in
our own country.

In the commencement of the American revolution, bold, righteous, and
unqualified assertions were made against the principles and the existence of
monarchy; it was considered as a species of government unjust and detestable,
and its advocates the enemies of the human race. We have lived, however, to
witness the most evident marks of attachment to this kind of government, by
some American citizens, (...) not inconsiderable agents in the revolutionary
war.

The mortal blow given to the ancient despotism of France, has been a subject
of lamentation among some of the most zealous friends of order and good
government in the United States. Plans have been conceived, and attempts have
been made, to establish a most intimate connection between this country and the
dying monarchy of Britain, but the success of these iniquitous efforts, it is
to be hoped, (...) terminated, and the republican spirit of seventy-six about
to revive in the western world. The revolution in America, and the revolution
in France, are two of the most important national events that history ever
recorded!. They are events whose moral, scientific, and political effects
cannot be calculated. It is however conjectured, by some citizens of upright
intentions, that the glory of these revolutions will soon fade away, and the
political world take a retrogade motion toward ignorance, monarchy, and war.
An opinion of this kind, may perhaps result from a constitutional temperament,
to which no censure ought, to be attached; but it is an opinion most strongly
opposed by the argument of facts, and the scientific predicament of the world.

Three centuries ago, timidity and apprehension might have been well attached
to (...) reasoning on this subject; but the art of printing, the press is the
grand instrument, it (...) lever by which to raise the world in an incalculable
height. The (...) understanding diffusing through (...) the infinite variety of
its (...) of antiquity must and (...) upon the altar of truth and human (...)
society did not possess an instrument (...) ^^^kind, working with such vast
mechanical ^^^^^er, the liberty of society, and the science (...) man, would no
doubt, be considered in part, as chimeras of the imagination, to (...)
substantial reality could ever be attached. It has been (...) for the human
(...) that despotism did not perceive (...) to which science was (...) late to
prevent the fall.

The press in the hands of (...) ^^^losophy, has wrought (...) but very (...)
effects in the political would it has the (...) of attacking error, and
undermining tyranny, while its operation is unknown and undiscovered. The
monarchies of the ancient hemisphere, have always believed, that it was force
only by which they could defend their existence, and that force alone colud
subvert it. -- Armies and military pomp, abundance of warlike stores, and
savage ferocity -- these were the instruments of preserving their glory, these
the only means of rendering durable these privileged systems, which held in
dreadful bondage the mass of mankind, while a few individuals elevated
themselves upon the ruin of every thing valuable in the character of man.
Science (...) at their folly, and the conscious security in which they reposed
-- the prophetically pointed to an era of human history, in which the wicked
glory of these corrupt institutions of antiquity, should fade away before the
blazing torch of liberty, and the effulgent light, which should one day beam
upon the world, from the meridian sun of reason, whose rays were to be
conducted by the liberty of the press, through the darkest abodes of
intellectual existence.

At the present period of the world, aristocracy and despotism of every kind,
are exhibiting a vast struggle to save themselves from endless destruction. The
liberty of the press is attacked in the freest and most republican countries,
and there is not at this moment a single free press upon the surface of the
globe. Anti-republicanism has raised a hue and cry, and set on foot a crusade
against the immortality of reason, and the divinity of thought! The abettors of
antique systems of vice, ignorance, and tyranny are continually vociferating
against the liberty of the press; against the doctrine of equal rights; against
the capacity of the people to govern themselves; against the universal
extension of science, and the triumphant reign of human reason. In our own
country some Liliputian efforts have been made to annihilate the glorious
effects of the American revolution, but they are like to terminate in smoke,
and full a sacrifice to the just resentment of an injured people. The (...)
^^^^itutional and arbitrary measures of the federal government, have been
partially abandoned, by those who were their first abettors, and the political
temperament of the high toned monmonarchist is ameliorated, and begins to
coincide with the republican sentiments of the great body of the people.

The shackles which have been imposed upon the press, the unjust and
unconstitutional restraints, which have been laid upon individual citizens, are
destined to a state of speedy destruction, and the resuscitation of the spirit
of liberty will be more splendid and triumphant. Persecution serves only to
create friends, when the persecution is known to be unjust. No citizen of the
United States, however, of an upright and enlightened mind, will contend for
any other liberty of the press, than that which is founded on the principle of
eternal justice. The individual that asserts a falsehood is criminal; the press
that propagates lies and calumny is criminal also upon the same ground, and for
the same reason. But in the liberty of the press, ought to be included an
indisputable right to declare truth, both of a moral and political kind, and
the government that punishes for the promulgation of truth, is unjust -- nay
more, it is probably conscious of guilt, conscious of its own wicked designs
and tyrannical machinations. Whenever government attempts the suppression of
free opinion, either written, spoken or printed, and is soon obliged to abandon
that attempt, it is evidence that substantiate the wickedness as well as the
folly of that government -- it proves that the despotic plan was premature,
that the sentinel of liberty has sounded the alarm -- that the people are still
active and vigilant, and that they will consign to oblivion or infamy the
promoters of such nefarious schemes.

In seventeen hundred and seventy-six, the people of the United States declared
in the most spirited manner against all foreign tyranny or despotism whatever;
in the year eighteen hundred, they are about to exercise the same holy right,
and perform the same solemn duty against their domestic oppressors. These are
two great epochs in political history; at the one was renounced forever the
monarchical powers of the ancient hemisphere; at the other we are led to hope
from the increasing spirit of republicanism, that domestic plans of aristocracy
will be crushed to atoms by the united energies of a free and independent
nation.

France is a component part of the great subject of revolutions; she has
astonished the world by her genius, her efforts and national energies -- the
events in her history will overwhelm the most profound contemplation of the
greatest philosopher! Thirty millions of people said, with an awful and
tremendous voice unto ancient despotism, depart ye cursed and it was seen no
more! The political changes which we have been called to contemplate, since the
commencement of that important revolution, are undoubtedly connected with many
deplorable events, and many treacherous and detestable actions; nor does the
genuine republican, at the present moment, discover much reason to rejoice at
the internal organization of the government of France; but the revolution in
the aggregate, the revolution in its principal, is the object of attachment and
admiration. -- It is impossible to argue failure in the final issue, from any
temporary circumstance, which in the progress of such a vast national change
might have been exhibited. The best friends to France and to its revolution in
this country, have more than once trembled for her existance; but these clouds
which covered the inrapturing truths of futurity have been dissipated, and the
resplendant sun of liberty discovered to be still rising toward the true
political meridian. Hope is ever augmented in proportion as man has been able
to dissipate his fears, or to rise above his misfortunes. Prediction in regard
to the future fate of France, would be liable to many of the objections to
which prophecies have been justly exposed in every age of the world. It can be
nothing more than a calculation of probability, in regard to future events,
from what has already happened on similar occasions. It would not be difficult,
however, to offer strong reasons against the retrogradation of society, from
the operation of causes now existing, which perhaps no despotism, or possible
current of events, can avert or destroy. The press, the extensive developement
of principal, and the scientific condition of the world, form very strong
barriers against the tenacity or encroachments of monarchy, against the
perpetuity of ignorance, against the slavery of man.

The destruction of all ancient republics is frequently advanced as an argument
against the durable continuance of those of modern times. It ought to be
perceived by the calm and independent inquirer, that the analogy does not hold,
and the deduction is false. The discovery and application of an equitable
principle of representation, together with the universal diffusion of
knowledge, by means of the art of printing, are circumstances unknown to
ancient republics -- at least the one wholly unknown, and the other but
imperfectly understood, and very partially applied to the social state. But the
principal of equal representation, and the constant augmentation of useful
science, by the art of printing, form a new ground of hope to the philanthropic
politician. It is impossible from the nature of the case, that either of these
should ever be destroyed, they reciprocally guarantee each others existence. A
free representation will guard the rights of the press, and the press will
diffuse that information among the people, which is necessary to preserve the
right of representation. Aristocracy will no doubt obtrude its malignant
efforts, and produce a temporary diminution in the beneficial results of these
two important discoveries; but in the present state of society it is scarcely
possible that such despotic efforts should be either durable or efficacious.
Human science is extending itself into every part of the world; it has already
revived the hopes of one third of the human race, and its character bears a
most indubitable relation to the emancipation of the whole. The number of
writers, upon subjects which include the developement of the most important
moral and and political principles, is constantly increasing -- the number of
those who think and speak with freedom, upon the most interesting topics, is
every day becoming greater and greater; and to this source of human improvement
no limits can be assigned -- it is indefinite and incalculable; and its moral,
philosophical, and political effects upon intelligent life, will one day strike
with horror the oppressors of the human race. In France, in England, and in
Germany, in the United States and several other countries, the philosopher and
politician has been employed, assiduously employed during the last half
century, in the cause of oppressed and unfortunate man -- in the cause of truth
and human happiness -- in the cause of reason, nature and eternal justice. The
doctrines of former ages, the institutions of antiquity, the cruel and the
abominable tyranny of superstition, the unjust and detestible nature of
monarchy, the odious combination of church and state, with all their
concomitant evils and dreadful consequences; all these were considered, by
moral and political philosophers, as belonging to the same class of calamities;
in short, that Pandora's box had been opened upon the world, and that the
character of intellectual existence was to be restored or acquired by
diversified modes of attack upon all the destructive realities and malignant
phantoms of antiquity! But power intimidated intellect, and compelled it to
work in silence -- this compulsion, however, was probably favorable to the
final issue of the business, the total subversion of a double despotism, which
for many ages had held in a state of hopeless bondage, the moral and physical
existence of man. The idea's thus conceived, and the efforts made by
philosophers, for the renovation of human society, against the friends of
liberty and of though it, in the ancient hemisphere.

The illuminati in Europe have been represented as a vicious combination of
persons, whose object was the destruction of all the governments and religions
of the world. If the writers against the illuminati, mean by governments the
monarchies of Europe, and by religion popular superstition, or systems founded
upon the supposed existence of a mysterious intercourse between beings of the
earth and celestial powers, they have undoubtedly been right in this respect;
for these are the kind of governments and religions, against whose existence
reason and philosophy ought to direct their energies; but if they mean by
governments, the establishment of a political system, upon the firm principles
of social and republican justice, and by religion, the idea of simple theism,
and the immortality of moral virtue; the charge is false, and their
publications a calumny against reason and the rights of human nature. But it is
not of importance in what point of view, either superstition or monarchy may
consider the efforts of enlighted men, for the improvement of the human species
-- it is the duty of him who possesses talents, and has combined with them the
practical disposition, to benefit the world, to face all dangers, and encounter
every difficulty. The performance of the duties which individuals owe to
society, should become more faithful in proportion to the necessity of the
case, and the utility of result; the state of the world, furnishes, therefore,
a fresh stimulus to exertion, among the advocates of moral and political
science. If liberty prevail throughout the globe, the necessity of human
energy, in this great cause, would be diminished; and if love of moral virtue
were universal, the duty of opposing error would be proportionably lessened.
But calculation of action, is generally made upon ground totally different --
upon principles directly opposite, and this has kept the world in flavery,
ignorance, and misery.

It is necessary to the thorough reformation of human society, that minds
capable of aiding progressive improvement, should investigate the connection
which subsists between the different species of errors, by which the world for
four thousand years past, has been held in a state of barbarous and despotic
subjection. The sciences, the arts, the innumerable improvements that have
imbellished human life, harmonize and form one grand system, whose effect
constitutes the felicity and the dignity of intellectual existence; in the same
manner, and for similar reasons, the whole groupe of ancient errors, the
complicated association and application of the ideas of former institutions,
present the incontrovertible necessity of analising the principles, of
disorganising the system, and examining minutely the influence which each part
has produced, and how far this influence is to be condemned or applauded by
reason. The systems of former ages, political, literary, and moral, ought to be
subjected to the most scrutinizing investigation by the intellectual powers of
man. It is probable that society would experience the most important benefits
from an effort of this kind, since the present state of knowledge will scarcely
furnish any strong reason against the utility of such inquiry and decision. The
political system is so full of errors, so glaringly absurd, so oppressive and
despotic, that those only who are interested in its unrighteous spoils and
profits, will ever attempt to vindicate its absurdity. If stubborn facts did
not stare us in the face, it ought to be considered as an insult in this
country, to offer arguments in favor of the equal rights of man; but so long
as a fragment of social injustice remains, so long as error of any kind exists,
it is the duty of every free citizen, to raise his voice, feeble as it is, in
the cause of political liberty, and the general interests of mankind. We
celebrate this day, our emancipation from the British monarchy -- it is well,
it is vastly useful and important; but have we made thorough work of the
change? does nothing remain to be done? are our constitutions perfect, and are
our laws constitutional? are our political establishments consistent in
themselves, do the principles harmonize? have we not declared that all men are
born free and equal: and is there a single state in the union, in which this
important, this immutable principle of justice, is reduced to practice?

The object of the American revolution, was liberty and the augmentation of
human happiness, The political lethargy, which has been subsequent to this
revolution, has resulted from a variety of causes and among these ignorance of
the principles of government, avarice, and commercial speculation are the most
prominent and destructive. But the activity of mind, and the progress of
science are the sources to which benevolence will resort, and on which it must
ultimately rest its hopes, for the cure of such direful calamities.

The antagonists of political, literary, and moral improvement are, tyranny,
ignorance, and superstition. Tyranny or despotism opposes itself to the
progress of political liberty, with the most ferocious and envenomed animosity,
with the most savage fury and unrelenting cruelty. Ignorance abhors science and
contemns its blessings; it calumniates the character of its advocates, and
throws difficulties innumerable in the way of active genius, and the ardent and
unremitting efforts of those benevolent philosophers, who have devoted
themselves to the best interests of mankind. Superstition is the enemy of all
virtue and of all truth. She is resentful and persecuting -- the promoter of
ignorance and the abettor of tyranny, in all ages. These powerful causes have
operated most destructively upon the political happiness of nations -- they
have generated endless scenes of mischief and corruption -- killed the energy
of thought, and tarnished the glory of intellectual existence. A treatise which
should specify in the clearest manner, and with the most indubitable evidence,
the diversified operation of these causes upon the moral and political
condition of the human race, would be one of the most valuable bequests, which
an individual could leave to unhappy man, who groans incessantly under a weight
of ignorance and misery. The most cursory view of the situation of human
society, would furnish to sensibility the strongest ground of lamentation, and
to intellect, the most forcible motives to exertion. The principles by which
the political happiness of nations is to be effected, have been partially
developed by the friends of man, and partially applied to the renovation of the
social state; but while this fact is perceived and admitted, it is also
contended, that there is a vast field for activity in prospect, and that the
theory has, in a very few instances, only realized the practical nature of the
case. Despotism has buried the world (...) and ignorance knows not the means
(...) this despotism is to be removed or destroyed. -- Knowledge is absolutely
necessary, it will be said, to the acquisition and the durable continuance of
liberty; but if the nations of the world should wait till they are well
informed before they (...) their chains, their slavery would be eternal. It is
the character of despotism to perpetuate ignorance -- it abhors the light of
^^^ence, and well it may, for its rays have already burnt to a cinder, one of
the most powerful despotisms of antiquity. If the chains of despotism were
broken, the means of cultivating science would be established, the reign of
reason would commence, republican virtue would gloriously triumph over the
vices of ancient governments, and peace, truth, and national happiness become
the unalienable inheritance of the human race.

Anticipations of this kind cannot be considered as the results of a disordered
imagination, or calculations in opposition to the evidence of facts. The
enthusiastic encomiums, which have been bestowed on the golden ages of
antiquity, are the dreams of folly or fanaticism -- they have no foundation in
truth, and the development of useful principle, substantiates this assertion.
When despotism and superstitions (...) to calumniate human reason, its energy
will be considered divine, and the immortality of truth will stand upon that
firm basis, (...) substantial foundation, which bids (...) to the malignant
power of despots, (...) insane and ferocious resentment of ecclesiastical
domination. Then will commence the absolute reign of reason, and the triumph of
republican glo^^^^. Human nature will concentre all its (...) and combine all
its faculties, in augmenting the felicity of the world.

FINIS.

