AN ORATION, DELIVERED AT CHESTERFIELD, ON THE 4th OF JULY, 1800, THE
ANIVERSARY OF American Independence:

By BENJAMIN PARSONS, ATTORNEY AT LAW.

PUBLISHED AT THE REQUEST OF THE AUDIENCE.

PRINTED AT NORTHAMPTON, (MASSACHUSETTS) BY WILLIAM BUTLER. MDCCC.

ORATION
WE are assembled, my friends, not to celebrate the birth day of a monarch, a
despot, a scourge to mankind; nor, with insanity, to rush into intoxication and
madness, to the disgrace of humanity; but for the laudable purpose, of
commemorating, with rational joy and rejoicing, the birthday of our Nation; to
enjoy the luxury, of reflecting upon the great achievements of the sons of
America, and the signal delivery, and bounty of Providence, granted by the
establishment of our Independence: to meditate upon all, that has been done
for us, as a nation and a people, and, with a prophetic zeal, to anticipate the
continuance, and increase of our National glory, honor, and Independence, until
all earthly glory shall cease.

ON such a momentous occasion, the mind seems to be lost and overwhelmed in the
magnitude of the subject! A succession of remarkable events, glorious
achievement: and Providential deliverances, rush upon the mind! and we would
fain, at once, take a view of all things, present, past, and to come; consider
the rise and progress of all nations, that have been, that are, or shall be;
and the natural and moral causes of their rise and fall, their glory or
disgrace. But on this theme, the philosophic and devout mind might dwell, with
delight, through its whole existence: And at this time, nothing more than a few
hints, on the rise, progress, and state of our own country can be expected. And
although nothing new, or original should be offered on a subject, so often the
theme of the most learned and eloquent; yet a bare repetition of the remarkable
events and providence, respecting our nation, may tend to inspire us with a
love of virtue, our neighbor and our Country: and a reverence for "the author
of every good and perfect gift."

TWO centuries have not yet passed away, since this whole country, these now
united, flourishing States, were an entire wilderness. Where now moves the
lofty steed, and roll the carriage wheels, were, then, no more than wild
beast's range, or Indian paths. Where now are erected stately domes and
magnificent edifices, were then no more than haunts for beasts, or Indian
wig-warms. Where, now are settled the sons and daughters of reason, virtue and
science, were then no more than beasts of prey, or savages, more ferocious than
those beasts. Where now are many worshipers of the true God, were then only
beings, who paid a mock homage to the Sun, the Moon, the Stars, or other
inferior supposed divinities. Where, are now heard, with rapture, the improved
band of bold, enlivening, martial music, and the softer notes of sacred, social
harmony; was then naught but bestial howl, or Indian yell. And what was then an
uncultivated wilderness, is now converted to pleasant fields and delightful
gardens. And where were then no laws, no governing, or directing principle, are
now formed constitutions, laws and principles of virtue and morality, which
outvie the Nations of the World. And the causes and means, which have led to
this amazing difference, are worthy of consideration, and at this time, to
advert to some of the principles, may not be improper.

THAT rage for uniformity of Religion, which prevailed in the reign of James
the first, and the severe laws made against nonconformist, were the immediate
causes of the first emigration to America. Our ancestors, the first settlers of
this country, fired with indignation, at the severe restraints laid on them by
unconscionable laws; and that they might escape persecution, and establish a
pure church, resolved at all hazards, to quit their native country, and attempt
a settlement, in the then wilderness of America: Their ardent love for civil
and religious liberty, inspired them, with more than Roman magnanimity and
heroism; and they cheerfully committed themselves to the "rude mercy of the
winds and the waves," relying upon the rectitude of their intentions, and
putting their trust in him, who commands the sea and the tempest.

TO attempt to paint, in true colors, the hardships, dangers and distresses,
our forefathers endured, by reason of want, sickness, and Indian barbarity,
would be too painful a task for this joyful occasion. Suffice it now, to say,
that supported, and encouraged, by their love for civil and religious liberty,
and a reliance on providential aid, they endured, with transport, all fatigues
and sufferings; they persevered, they were providentially preserved: and from
them have descended a people of the first rank among the nations of the earth.

THE strength, wealth, population and resources of the colonies were not,
however, generally known in Great Britain, until the commencement of the war of
seventeen hundred and fifty five. This country being, in a great measure, the
seat of that war, the military genius and abilities of the people began to be
displayed. And although it was thought, the war terminated gloriously for
Great Britain, yet the nation was thereby loaded with an immense debt. Hence
originated that iniquitous system of American taxation, which was madly entered
upon, and continued with a black catalogue of oppressive measures, from the era
of the stamped act, to the final disunion of the Colonies from the Mother
Country.

AT this age, and in this country, where political knowledge is so generally
diffused, and the rights of man so well understood, it is unnecessary, it would
be impertinent, to bring a single argument, to waste a breath of time, in
showing, that these oppressive measures toward America, were, in every point
of view, unreasonable and unjustifiable; that they were the offspring of
tyranny oppression, and madness; and that the Americans had they tamely
submitted, to such encroachments, on their rights and privileges, would have
been lost to all sense of liberty, and the rights of man: they would have
disgraced themselves and their worthy ancestors, whose spirits must have risen,
and justly accused them of baseness and timidity, and bestowed upon them the
vile epithet of contented slaves; posterity would have cursed them; and they
would have become the scorn and derision of the World. But Americans could not
thus disgrace themselves, their ancestors, and their posterity. Their cause for
resistance was just: and with one mind, "they resolved to die freemen, rather
than live slaves."

HUMBLE petitions and remonstrances for redress of grievances were at first,
preferred to the crown, and continued, to no effect, together with some
military, defensive operations, to the ever memorable day of July, seventeen
hundred seventy six: when the Congress of these States, as if directed by
unerring wisdom, pronounced that glorious, solemn, sublime Declaration of
Independence, which gave birth to our Nation! Nations listened, with
astonishment to the sound; and Heaven approved the deed!

TO give a history of the Revolutionary War, at this time, cannot be expected;
and is not necessary. We may, however at one view, see, that it was by the
wisdom of our councils; by the virtue and firmness of the people; by the
bravery and good conduct of our soldiers; by the assistance of a foreign
Nation, whom we then considered our friend; by the judgment and prudence of our
Leader and more especially by the blessing, and the mighty arm of the Lord,
that we were brought to Peace, Independence and Glory: that we burst the bands
of slavery, and became an Independent Nation, to the astonishment of the world!
though at the expense of much blood and suffering. Well then, may our country
be dear to us; for it was purchased, by the services, sufferings, toils, and
dangers of our greatest and best citizens: It was bought, by the blood of
WARREN, MERCER, MONTGOMERY, and many other distinguished heroes, in the cause
of Freedom.

At the happy conclusion of the war, for a while, all was joy and rejoicing in
our Land: But it was not long, before murmerings and discontents arose among
the people; and those very men, who resisted, with firmness, the foreign
invaders of their rights and privileges, manifested a disposition to encroach
upon the rights of each other, and destroy the peace and happiness of society
in America. As soon as the pressures of the war were over, and that kind of
enthusiasm for liberty had abated, which for a while produced a patriotism and
unanimity, which answered the purposes of energetic laws; the old confederation
was found too weak and insufficient, to preserve our nation in a state of
tranquillity. Discord and confusion began to prevail in our land, and the
demon, insurrection, with her envenomed wings, sat brooding over the offspring
of our National Destruction. The passions and prejudices of the people were
stronger than armies, and more dangerous to the Independence and good
government of America. The friends of virtue, of civil and religious liberty
were alarmed; and at lenth, roused from their lethargy, procured the adoption
of the Federal Constitution, which immediately reestablished order and public
credit in our nation; and to this day stands the administration of the
political World. It was formed by the collected wisdom of America, upon the
experience of ages; and its excellence has been uniformly acknowledged, by the
friends of virtue, good government, and order, throughout the world.

YET the enemies of our country, of virtue and religion, have continually made
violent oppositions to this excellent government, and the just administration
thereof. Disappointed Ambition has ever been sowing the seeds of discord and
contention in our land; and contriving every diabolical plan, that could be
devised, to poison the minds of the honest, ignorant and uninformed, against
the best government, and the best administration in the world! Every species of
immorality, impiety, irreligion and Jacobinism, have conspired together, to
undermine our happy Constitution; to bring into contempt the worthy
administrators of our Laws; and to place in office, men, opposed to our
government, and the happifying principles of religion and morality; to stir up
insurrections against the general government; and to poison that fountain of
virtue, by which all free governments are supported. And even a foreign nation
has had the insolence, to interfere in our national concerns, to disturb our
union and happiness, and to attempt to bring about a revolution in America. And
the danger from this quarter was great, for she was a nation, for whom we had
much charity and affection, on account of the services she had rendered us, in
our revolution, and her fair pretentions, in the beginning of her own. For,
having received some sparks of true liberty from this country, France began
with high professions of reforming her government and religion, and
establishing the rights of man in her own nation. But she soon leaped the
bounds of liberty, moderation, and reason, and, without any color of
justification, invaded the rights and liberties of free and independent states;
and, with satanic madness, strove to annihilate every system of religion and
morality; to revolutionize, demoralize, and Jacobinize the world.

HENCE slaughter, devastation, and horrors, spread through Europe: and
threatened to cross the Atlantic. But the spirit and firmness of our
government, under the smiles of a benevolent Deity, have averted these
calamities.

BUT I will not dwell on so unpleasant a subject, as we hope all will be buried
in oblivion, by friendly and honorable negotiation: And may that Providence,
that has hitherto delivered us, ever direct, that no weapon formed against our
peace and good government shall prosper!

BUT while, on this memorable day, our hearts are filled with joy and
rejoicing, for the long prosperity we have enjoyed, and the blessings of
Providence displayed toward our favored land; we have this grief to mingle
with our joy; that since our last anniversary, the best of men, the delight of
his country, our political savior, has been taken from us! Yes, our beloved
WASHINGTON, after having led us through a long and glorious war, to peace and
independence; after having presided in our councils, and conducted our
government with distinguished honor and reputation; after having become an
example of all that is amible, virtuous, and magnanimous in man, rests from his
labors! It would be in vain to attempt, to and new applause to his memory; for
there is not a breath of air in America that is not perfumed with his praise,
that has not vibrated his worth! Let us then, silently acquiesce in the will of
Providence, and leave him to his rest. Peace be to thy name, O! WASHINGTON!
"May the green sod lay light upon thy breast, and sweet thy slumbers be in the
house appointed for all the living!"

BUT duly to notice past events, is not the only business of man. The present
state of things, and the future prospect, demand still higher attention. And a
wise and virtuous people, while they reflect, with gratitude, upon the
blessings they have enjoyed, and the evils, from which they have been
delivered, will consider also their present privileges; strive to remedy
existing evils; prevent future; merit further good; and attend to their
advantages in comparison with other nations.

LET us then, for a moment, consider our own situation and privileges, and see,
if we have not reason to love our country, and be attached to our government:
For if we trace the histories of all nations, in all ages of the world; where
shall we find a single nation, possessing the advantages for happiness and
prosperity, which we have in our country.

THE greater part of mankind, who are, in any degree civilized, are under
governments, which they had no voice in forming; and their laws are
administered by men, whom they never chose for that purpose. But we have
established a government of our own choice; our laws are, in fact, made by
ourselves; and administered by men of our own appointment. We are free from the
horrors and devastations of European wars -- We are separated, by an extensive
ocean, from every powerful, contentious nation. Civil and religious science,
and useful information, are more generally diffused among the people, than in
any other country: Our commerce is in a flourishing state, although it has
been, unjustly, and ignominiously insulted by foreign nations. Our land is in a
state of high cultivation, producing in great abundance, all the necessaries,
and enough of the luxuries of life. Even the poor and unfortunate, have ample
provision made for their necessary support. And Providence seems to have
withheld no good thing from us.

YET notwithstanding all these advantages, we have enemies to encounter, and
evils to endure. The ungoverned passions, and unreasonable prejudices of the
people, will always disturb their peace and happiness, and destroy their
Government unless the friends of virtue and order, exert every nerve for their
support. The prevalence of irreligion, immorality, and dissoluteness of
manners, poison the public mind, and give the enemies of our country, at least,
some hopes of exciting disaffection in the people to their righteous
government. And all the engines, which disappointed ambition can invent, are
brought into operation, to prejudice the people against their Constitution,
their Laws and their Rulers. The most gross falsehoods and slanders are
propagated against our legislators, and most virtuous men in office. And all
the arts of sophistry are exerted, by designing men, to make the people
believe, that laws, made to restrain such destructive conduct, are
unreasonable, unjust, and unconstitutional: That our legislators, men of our
own choice, are endeavoring to sacrifice our liberties, and enslave our
country! -- That duly restraining the press from the most abominable
licentiousness and abuse, is destroying its just freedom: -- And that the
people are deprived of their darling rights and privileges, if they are not
legally authorized, to vilify their government, and defame its administrators.
It would be an insult upon the good sense of my audience, were I to waste a
moment, in proving the inconsistance, and absurdity of such conduct. It is
clear as the sun that now blazes upon us: and yet it is evident that evils of
this nature actually exist; and that too much mischief and discontent have
thereby been effected. But is there no remedy? Yes, wisdom, time, and discreet
conduct may provide one.

Let the citizens of the United States, but heartily consider, the superior
advantages and privileges, with which they are blessed; let them observe strict
neutrality toward all nations; stand firm for their own rights, and exclude
all foreign intrigue from the land; let them regulate and attend to their
militia, so as to prevent the necessity of a Standing Army; let them become
more warmly attached to their excellent government; let them uniformly place in
office men of abilities and integrity, friends of virtue, patriotism, and
religion, and who make the Constitution their pole star, and whose decisions
are always marked with candor and firmness.

LET the people of each individual state, duly regulate their own concerns;
discountenance all intrigue and undue conduct in elections; put away all ill
grounded prejudices, party spirit and contention; establish and encourage
systems of religion and morality; nourish and foster seminaries of science and
virtue; guard them from impiety, immorality, dissoluteness of manners, and
prejudices against our government; plant in them the tree of liberty, which
nourished by virtue and science, will produce well ordered lives: Inspire the
rising generation with a love of virtue, patriotism, attachment to the Federal
Constitution, and abhorrence of all foreign influence.

LET our towns and societies be well regulated; let them promote good
education, order and morality in society; discountenance and discourage all
falsehood, slander, ill-grounded jealousy, and every species of immorality: Let
them treat with disapprobation, those who oppose our government, and who
imagine it a vain and wicked thing, to follow the laudable example of the most
pious men, by duly and joyfully celebrating the anniversary of great events and
remarkable providence; and who bury their rational powers in the dark abyss of
bigotry and superstition: but let them encourage and promote every thing, that
is rational, noble and disinterested; procure political information free from
prejudice; attend to the reason of measures, rather than the clamor against
them.

LET every individual in society regulate, and govern himself; throw aside his
unreasonable prejudices; correct his disorderly passions; inform himself truly,
before he judges. Let not the mad zealot, or flaming hot federalist, condemn a
great and good man, for possible mistakes, or supposed improprieties: let him
first possess half as much wisdom and discernment as the man, whom he would
sacrifice: Let him not imagine, that he is actuated by a laudable zeal in a
good cause, while he is impelled only by the mania of party spirit. Let no man
affix the character of villain or rascal to his neighbor, who only honestly
differs from him in opinion; but convince him if he is in an error, by candor
and fairness of argument. And let no one from private interest, prejudice,
disappointment, or unreasonable disgust, oppose the public good: Then will the
evils, the mischiefs, that are lurking in our land, for prey, gradually
disappear. -- Then the enemies of our country will not dare to show their
faces. Then haggard envy and disappointed ambition may, in vain, calumniate our
greatest and best citizens: And anarchy, and all the concomitants of
antifederalism, in disguised patriotism, may bellow unnoticed to the people,
that our liberties are in danger; for liberty will then be safe, for Americans
will then love their country; will glory in their Constitution, and show
respect to the Administrators of their laws: And then may we have some rational
hopes, that "our land will be a land of liberty, the seat of virtue, the asylum
of the oppressed, a name and a praise in the whole earth, until the last shock
of time shall bury the empires of the world in undistinguished ruin."

FINIS.

