AN ORATION, PRONOUNCED AT SITUATE, JULY 4, 1800, AT THE REQUEST OF THE
INHABITANTS, IN COMMEMORATION OF American Independence.

BY CUSHING OTIS.

BOSTON: PRINTED BY MANNING and LORING, Near the Old South Meeting House.

AN ORATION.
PERMIT me, my fellow citizens, to congratulate you on the return of our
national festival. We are now met to commemorate an era, that will ever live
in our recollection; to celebrate the four and twentieth anniversary of that
auspicious day, that witnessed the sanction of the solemn and sublime act,
which severed us forever from the British empire; and which, in its eventual
success, exalted us from a state of colonial degradation, to that of a great,
free, and independent people. May its annual return ever inspire our hearts
with hilarity and joy. May we delight to cherish a remembrance of our fathers'
deeds, through whose instrumentality we inherit our present national blessings;
to record their achievements, and perpetuate their virtues.

TO resist the encroachments of arbitrary power, however concealed in its
advances, or masked under specious pretexts, was worthy the descendants of
those venerable heroes, who had endured every toil, and encountered every
danger, that they might protect from violation the sacred rights of conscience,
and transmit to posterity an unsullied freedom. Long had an intercourse of
friendship subsisted between these Colonies and their parent State. Americans,
viewing Great Britain as the land of their fathers, felt for it all that
partial affection, which filial reverence could inspire. They saw their
commerce loaded with restrictions, and saw it without complaint. They beheld
with a degree of satisfaction their riches poured into the lap of their parent.
They exulted in the fame of her wide spreading glory. They had often fought by
the side of Englishmen, as brothers in the same cause, and had mingled their
best blood with theirs. But when they, boasting of liberty, which to preserve
to themselves they had often encountered the horrors of civil war, could be so
far unmindful of what they owed us as fellow citizens, as to become the willing
tools of an infatuated ministry, to wrest from us our dearest privileges, the
ties, which bound us to them, became as flax that is burnt. America, friendless
and alone, destitute of resources, but collected within herself, bid defiance
to the English nation in the zenith of her power, and elated with a recent
triumph over the arms of France. In the ardor of her zeal, her own weakness and
the strength of her antagonist were alike forgotten. In contemplating the
respect she owed herself, she was elevated above a sense of danger. Her sons,
having had free access to the tree of liberty, having ate its invigorating
fruit, drank its exhilarating juice, and been sheltered beneath the foliage of
its branches, were determined to preserve it for their children in all its
freshness and vigor. Considering freedom as their rightful inheritance, as a
sacred deposit they had received in trust for posterity, they were resolutely
bent on transmitting it pure and unadulterated; on living free, or perishing in
the attempt.

TO relieve the mother country, groaning under a massive weight of debt, a
revenue from the Colonies had long been a favorite ministerial measure. It had
been several times attempted, and as often repelled with that indignation which
became an injured people. The paltry sum to be assessed was not the object of
contention, nor resistance; but an acknowledgment or rejection of the theoretic
principle, which enlightened Americans saw, if once acquiesced in, would lay an
ax at the root of their liberties, and reduce them eventually to a state of
abject vassalage. The right of taxing they held to be inseparable from that of
representation. And for Great Britain to assume the one, while she refused the
other, they contended was a departure from her own principles, a treacherous
inversion of her own maxims. To part with the smallest portion of property,
without their own consent, they saw annihilated the tenure by which they held
the whole; was transferring a right to their own acquisitions, from themselves
to a foreign legislature, to be taken at such times, and in such sums, as
should best suit their convenience. They rejected with unanimity and spirit the
degrading idea; and nobly preferred encrimsoning those fields with their blood,
which their fathers had toiled to subdue.

THE feelings and pride of the mother country had been severely wounded, by
what she termed the refractory spirit of her Colonies. She had, from time to
time, abandoned the darling object of her wishes, but still insisted on her
right. For our laudable resistance to unprovoked usurpation, she stigmatized
us, as rebellious subjects and ungrateful children. To repel her taunts, she
was reminded, that having forgotten the protection she owed, she had justly
forfeited the allegiance, otherwise due; that having our rights and privileges
under her safe keeping, as their most proper guardian, she had acted the part
of a cruel and unnatural parent, and, like the intriguing and insidious
patriarch, had endeavored to deprive us of our birthright.

THUS did altercation for a long time agitate both countries. It drew forth the
most copious streams of eloquence on either side. It stimulated the enlightened
patriots of America to severe investigation of the wicked policy of the British
cabinet. The energetic language of freemen rose superior to reasoning enfeebled
by a bad cause. Lofty crested Britain was reduced to the humiliating situation
of appearing, in the face of Europe, fairly foiled in the field of argument.
She did not, however, relinquish the object of her prey, as would have best
comported with her interest and her reputation. Intoxicated with her own
imaginary greatness, and the fancied omnipotence of her power, she endeavored
to compel that submission, she had in vain looked for from the tameness of the
American spirit; and to obtain by the force of arms, what her refuted logic had
failed to accomplish.

THE history of those times presents our country in a dignified and interesting
attitude. In one hand extending the olive branch, as ready to accommodate on
honorable terms, with the other putting on her buckler, determined to repel
every aggression. In the inequality of the contest, she resembles the stripling
in the Jewish annals, challenging the haughty giant to the combat. For, in the
means and resources of the combatants, there was the same disparity, as between
the shepherd's sling and his antagonist's spear. But, like the young hero,
relying on the justice of our cause and the smiles of approving Heaven, we
resisted, we fought, we conquered. The American leader, more favored than the
Jewish lawgiver, entered with his people, whom he conducted in triumph into the
promised land of liberty and independence. May the energy, which effected our
revolution, be still an existing trait in the character of Columbia. May the
high toned spirit of our fathers animate their children; and the flame of
liberty, which burst forth in '75, burn, like the sacred fire of the vestals,
forever in their bosoms. To those heroes, who sealed their patriotism with
their blood, and whose deeds are enrolled in the archives of their admiring
country, may we be ever ready to pay the tribute of heartfelt gratitude. Peace
to their spirits, and let their fame be immortal. May it brighten in its
progress through time, and the sun of glory shine forever on their tombs.

GREAT had been our anticipations from the attainment of peace. We looked
forward with eager expectation to that happy moment, when our country should be
no longer frightened with the din of arms, and the alarm of war should cease.
The treaty, which secured us the object, exceeded the hopes of the most
sanguine calculators. And we verily expected a second edition of the golden age
of the poets. This delusion lasted not long. Relieved from the pressure of a
common danger, we found ourselves without a bond of union. The old system of
Confederation became of as little consequence, as the parchment on which it was
inscribed, and soon crumbled to pieces like Nebuchadnezzar's image. The moral
sense of the people had become relaxed, by those licentious practices
inseparable from a state of revolution. A fluctuating paper medium had given
birth to fraud and imposition. The States, no longer linked by the menace of an
external foe, commenced commercial rivals of each other; set up and advocated
opposite and clashing interests. The memorable tender laws, passed at that
time, are a sufficient evidence of the wretched state of things. Confidence,
public and private, was nearly at an end, and credit just breathing her last.
At this alarming crisis, the wise policy of our country dictated the only
alternative, that could have snatched us from destruction. A number of our
wisest sages and civilians met, and formed our present Federal Constitution:
that happy combination of liberty and law, so admirably adjusted in its various
parts, and with such internal checks and balances, as to forbid every rational
fear of its powers being abused. It was the result of mature deliberation,
candid inquiry, mutual concession, and patient investigation. Its formation is
a glorious epoch in the annals of our history. Its adoption was our political
salvation.

IT has been asserted by a celebrated philosopher, Rousseau.
"that the dignity of man was degraded by the restraints and shackles of
society;" "that he enjoyed more true liberty, and appeared at his highest point
of elevation, in a state of nature." But how imperfect and precarious must that
liberty be, which, in a state of nature, is liable to perpetual invasion; and
which a stronger may at any time take away. To live under a system of well
adapted laws, originating from himself, is, undoubtedly, the highest state of
civil privilege, alloted to man in this sublunary sphere.

THE organization of our General Government had an immediate renovating effect
on the aspect of public affairs. To give form, substance, and consistency, to
the new order of things, imposed immense labors on those, who were first
elected to its administration. They succeeded by toil and perseverance. Order
and harmony arose out of chaos. Public confidence was restored, and credit
revived. Commerce, which was before nearly annihilated, soon covered the ocean
with its ships, and afforded a revenue sufficient to meet every public
expenditure. Under the auspices of a fostering government, the commercial
enterprise of Americans has affected the first maritime powers with jealousy
and astonishment. Not a port of traffic, however remote, but displays the stars
and stripes floating in the wind. And it has continued to increase to the
present time in defiance of every depredation. Behold it, on its canvass wings,
returning to our ports, laden with the riches of every clime. And see, in the
elegant language of Columbia's favorite bard,

"Thy neutral flag protect its wealthy sail*
Freight every tide, and charter every gale." Paine's Ruling Passion.

NATURE has prescribed certain limits to all her works. Empires have their
rise, their progress, and their decay. Those of Asia, which successively sat as
mistresses of the world, have been swept away, and left not a trace behind.
Those of Europe have reached their acme, and are evidently on the decline. To
this Western Hemisphere, which is rapidly advancing, we may look, hereafter,
for a superiority among the nations, and rationally predict the future
exaltation of our country. Situated at a distance from those blood stained
scenes, which are desolating the Old World, and which are the fruits of mad
ambition and a lust of power, we enjoy comparative quiet in a happy land, and "
our lines have fallen to us in pleasant places." With a territory extending
nineteen degrees of latitude, fertility of soil, variety of climate; with
treasures of wealth yet unexplored, rich in resources, and governed by mild and
wholesome laws; to what heights of grandeur and magnificence, if our country is
wise, may she not aspire?

BUT do Americans rightly appreciate the peculiar advantages they enjoy? Do
they sufficiently venerate a government, the work of their own hands? Do they
guard with enthusiasm that independence, which we this day celebrate, and which
is the price and pledge of all their other blessings? To these questions the
infant history of our country presents a mortifying negative. Its annals are
already stained with two insurrections of the people against constituted
authorities; against a government of their own choice, and administered by
patriots whose characters transcend all praise -- a government, which has
hitherto, under Heaven, secured the peace, happiness, and prosperity of these
United States, and scattered blessings with a liberal hand -- a government,
whose bitterest enemies cannot with truth accuse of one intentional error, or a
single act of injustice or oppression. Those acts, which have been the most
loudly condemned by the thoughtless and designing, as usurpating and
tyrannical, breathe the ardent spirit of genuine liberty -- are barriers
erected to defend the rights of the citizens, against the destructive
machinations of domestic cabal and foreign renegadoes.

OUR continent, more particularly the southern part, is infested with hordes of
profligate foreigners; who, having fled from justice in their own country, and
found an asylum in ours, ungratefully repay her the shelter afforded them, by
plotting against her peace and welfare. With unwearied effort they are
disseminating the seeds of civil discord; endeavoring to sever the people from
their government, and industriously inculcating the doctrine of "holy
insurrection." Misrepresentation and the most vilifying abuse are the base arts
they make use of. The fairest characters are the marks, at which these vile
archers aim the shafts of their calumny. In a late periodical publication,
issued in Virginia by one of these exotic, malignant slanderers, our
illustrious President, whose character is like "pure gold, when tried in the
furnace," has been represented to the people the worst of parricides; as guilty
of almost every enormity; capable of assassinating the honor of his country; of
subverting her best interests, and exulting over her ruin. And, strange to
tell! there is found on the part of the people a listening ear, and a
disposition to believe defamation, however virulent and outrageous.

IS it not strangely inconsistent, that those virtues and talents, which
recommend their possessors to office, should fail to secure to them the
confidence and affection of their constituents, in the exercise of their
delegated power? Is it not truly surprising, that the worn out arts of
hypocritical pretenders to a more exalted love of freedom and their country
should prevail? That the stale cry of "liberty is in danger," which has been
made use of by every canting, whining seeker of popular favor, ever since the
existence of democratic government, should be practiced on enlightened
Americans with success? That the people should be so easily detached and
estranged from a good government, by the base arts of designing demagogues,
who, under the specious garb of patriotism, conceal a gigantic ambition; and
who wish, by their loud and wheedling pretensions to a veneration of the people
and their cause, to gull them into a subserviency to their own schemes of self
aggrandizement?

IT is too greatly to be feared, that intriguing foreigners, confederated with
the misled, the factious, and malevolent among ourselves, will gradually sap
the foundation of our republic. For a government like ours, which depends alone
for support on the good opinion and affections of the people, when these are
withdrawn, must inevitably fall. And will high spirited Americans, the sons of
renowned sires, suffer themselves to be thus ignobly plundered of their
government and their dearest rights, by insolent foreigners, leagued with
degenerate citizens? Men, whose inordinate appetites and intemperate passions
will not brook the restraints of laws and order; and who, therefore, wish to
subvert every institution, civil and religious: Will they tamely suffer
themselves to be deprived, by such vagrants, of those privileges for which they
have fought and bled? for which they have encountered the disasters of a seven
years war, and the hazards of an unequal contest, and a "tented field?" Shall
we keep this day, which has hitherto been our pride and boast, as an unmeaning
and useless festivity, without its bringing to our recollection those
principles, renovating that temper, and awakening those energies, which gave
our independence birth? May Heaven avert from the American mind such a state of
callous insensibility. May the present generation, like the former, swear to
part with life sooner than liberty; and think no sacrifice too great, to
preserve honor unstained, and freedom unsullied.

UNHEARD of commotions have for ten years past convulsed Europe. The groans of
oppression have been wafted to our ears on every eastern gale. France, in whom
this overwhelming calamity began, was our national friend. May the phantom,
national friendship, which deluded the youthful fancy of our country, and which
she thought possible to exist, be, henceforward, forever expunged from her
catalogue of virtues. It is a principle too pure and exalted to influence the
gross interests of bodies politic. It can exist only in the sympathy of refined
individuals. Were I to pursue a developement of the causes of contention and
animosity between the two countries; to enumerate the aggressions of the
"terrible republic," and display her insults; even if I were equal to the task,
it would last till your ears were dull with hearing, and the narration be
scarcely begun. This magnanimous friend has accused us of ingratitude! Whether
gratitude were her due, I shall not now inquire; nor whether, if it were, her
haughty and imperious demands upon us, to fulfill its duties, did not cancel
them. For the nature of gratitude excludes the idea of being claimed. It is the
proper fruit only of services rendered without the hope and expectation of
reward, springing up spontaneously in the minds of the benefited. Claiming
counter services on the score of gratitude is among the modern inventions of
that sagacious republic. Demanding compensation changes the ground entirely;
converts it into a compact of interest and barter, where both parties are at
liberty to make the best of their bargain. Yet there are some among us, who
would despoil us of the honors of this day; who, notwithstanding France
assisted us from motives of self gratification, and to curtail the power of her
rival, would have us cast our independence, and the fruits of all our fathers'
labors at her feet, to be trampled upon by that domineering government. Could
we be thus degenerate and base, might not our fathers' shades reproach us with
pusillanimity; and the ghosts of those heroes, who fell in our cause, point
indignantly at their wounds? But I shall admit at this time, without
discussion, her pretensions to our gratitude; and repel her opprobrious charge,
by appealing to the years of ninety-one and two. Let the proceedings of those
times witness for us the general enthusiasm enkindled in her favor; and the
nauseating draughts, that were drained to her success. If we have since ceased
to wish it, the change is not in us, it is in herself. It is owing to her
departure from those sacred principles, which ought to have guided her in her
emancipation; to the horrid carnage and devastation of her conduct. All we wish
her is, to repent of her follies, and be healed of her madness. We are now
making another attempt to negotiate; and it will exist as a lasting monument of
the enlightened policy and pacific views of our illustrious President. May
France no longer abuse the liberal spirit of our government. May the present
Envoys not find themselves, like the former, under the disagreeable necessity
of unfolding scenes of corruption, which have fixed an indelible stigma on the
French counsels. May Buonaparte prove less rapacious than his predecessors. And
ex-bishop Talleyrand, laying aside his duplicity and finesse, meet them on the
ground of fair and honorable discussion. May the sanguinary deeds, which have
marked the progress of their unparalleled revolution, perpetrated in the sacred
name of liberty, and associating horror with the word, be no more repeated to
disgust her sincere votaries, and pierce with anguish even the most obdurate
heart.

SINCE the last celebration of this festive day, we have to deplore a great
national calamity. The Sun, which illumined with his beams our political
horizon, has set. The best cement of our union is dissolved. The noblest pillar
in the fair fabric of freedom has crumbled into dust. WASHINGTON is no more.
The friend, the father of his country, the benefactor of mankind, and the
ornament of human nature, now swells the triumphs of the destroying angel. Well
may I exclaim in the language of the poet, "O, what a loss was there, my
countrymen!" His name alone was a rampart and a defense. Our foreign enemies
stood appalled at his greatness; and the stormy sea of domestic faction broke
its billows harmless at his feet. May we wear his counsels deep engraven on our
hearts, embalm his memory with our tears, and in our lives copy his bright
example. May his mantle, and a double portion of his spirit, rest on his
successor. And although we may conclude that he is nearly ripe for glory, O may
he yet be spared to his country. May he still go forward in the path of
inflexible virtue. No untimely frost nip the "blushing honors," which cluster
on his brow. May his fame continue spotless as it is pure, till he shall join
his elder brother and kindred spirit in those mansions above, there to receive
the approving sentence, " Well done, good and faithful servant."

IF we would preserve and maintain our liberty, and transmit it immaculate to
posterity, we must cherish the institutions of our fathers in all their
pristine vigor. Diffuse wide the means of information. An enlightened people
will never be slaves. May no son of Columbia ever fear a demand for tribute
from any power on earth, without feeling electrified with the spirit of
opposition, and determined to live free; if times or exigencies should ever
require it, may every arm be raised to protect our government and defend our
country.

LET us felicitate ourselves on the wise and forbearing policy of our
Executive, which has hitherto preserved us from being entangled in the mad
career of European politics; that we are now sitting under our own vines and
fig trees, partaking the bounties of peace. While in France the altars of
religion are thrown down, and her sacred rights are profaned, our temples are
standing, and invite us to enter. Among other inestimable favors, we enjoy the
instructions of an enlightened and patriotic clergy, whose labors have been
uniformly devoted to their GOD and their country. May the reigning public quiet
be perpetuated, nor prove to be the awful stillness of the elements, which
precedes the tornado.

IF we would secure Heaven on our side, we must make religion our peculiar
care. Imitate the bright pattern of the Christian faith, and transplant his
virtues, one by one, into our lives. May our churches be filled with votaries,
and our altars protected from the violation of sacrilegious hands. May justice
be the pole star to guide and direct us in all our transactions, public and
private. Its principles are eternal, and will prevail. May the pestilential
doctrines of modern philosophy come not nigh our dwellings; nor the baleful
contagion of infidelity poison the sweets of our domestic felicity. "To your
ownselves be true; and it shall follow as the night the day, you cannot then be
false to any man." Shakespeare.
If in this way we pursue our happiness, and study in the day thereof the
things which make for our peace, we shall certainly arrive at the mark of true
glory, and thou, my country, favorite of Heaven, be prosperous, happy, and free.

For underneath a sly informer's laid,
Who studied naught in all his life, it is said,
But mischief, 'till he his own destruction wrought,
His neighbor's ill was what he chiefly sought.
Now, if Heaven be pleased when mortals cease to sin,
Or Hell be pleased when Villains enter in,
Or Earth he pleased for entombing such a Knave,
Sure all are pleased the Rouge is in his grave.

