A SERMON, DELIVERED AT CHELSEA, ON THE DEATH or GEORGE WASHINGTON.

BY The REV. PHILLIPS PAYSON.

JANUARY. M,DCCC.

A SERMON, DELIVERED AT CHELSEA, JANUARY 14, 1800.

A DAY DEVOTED BY THE INHABITANTS OF SAID TOWN, TO PAY THEIR TRIBUTE OF GRIEF
ON THE SORROWFUL EVENT OF THE Death OF GENERAL WASHINGTON.

By The REV. PHILLIPS PAYSON, A. M. Pastor of the Church in said Town.

Charlestown: PRINTED BY SAMUEL ETHERIDGE.

1800.

A SERMON.
2d. SAMUEL, XV. 23. AND ALL THE COUNTRY WEPT WITH A LOUD VOICE.
AMIDST the vicissitudes of time there are frequent occurrences, which impress
the tender feelings of affection, and open the springs of sorrow in the human
heart. At such seasons, decent tokens and expressions of mourning become a
matter of duty, dictated both from principles of humanity and piety: and to
mingle our tears in social sympathy and condolence, gives a kind of ease to the
painful sensations of grief.

SUCH events, also, in the course of divine providence, sometimes arise, as
deeply impress the public mind, and spread a scene of mourning over a whole
nation, to which, the words of the text will strictly apply, and it may be
truly said, that all the country weeps with a loud voice. I think, I am not
mistaken in saying, that such a scene of mourning is now spread over the land,
to which we are adding our small tribute of grief, mingling our tears with
those of the public. The solemnities of the day, with the gloomy tokens of
death in our view, keep fresh in all our minds, a painful sense of that
sorrowful event, that excites the public grief; and mentioning of it, will but
increase the sorrow. It is the death of General WASHINGTON, that has raised the
loud voice of weeping through the American States. And the death of such an
illustrious personage, the first and most accomplished general and statesman of
his country, and the age; such a disinterested patriot, such a defender,
deliverer and father of his country, must needs be deeply lamented in every
heart, that is not totally void of all sensibility, gratitude and piety.

THEREFORE, to direct and assist us in the present solemnities and duties, that
we may mourn as christians, and as the free and federal citizens of America
ought to mourn; I would observe, that our mourning should be accompanied with
sentiments of piety; of ingenuous gratitude; of profound respect and reverence,
to the memory of the deceased; and also with devout and servent prayer to GOD.

THIS arrangement of the subject, will naturally direct to a devout
acknowledgment of the hand of divine providence, in forming the instruments,
and directing the measures that effected the sovereignty, the independency, the
liberty and the increasing prosperity of our country; and at the same time
excite a grateful recollection of the patriotic services, the unrivalled
virtues and merits, and heroic achievements of our great leader in war and in
peace, and inspire a profound respect and reverence to his memory; and also
mind us of our duty, to pray without ceasing to GOD, that the example, the
patriotism, the parental advice and counsels, of so illustrious a person, may
have a happy influence, upon all orders and ranks of men in the land, from
generation to generation, till time shall be no more.

THE period having arrived in the course of providence, when we should be freed
from a foreign yoke, and our great revolution commence; as the foundation of
nations, through human depravity, is generally laid in blood, and the scepter
obtained by the sword, that GOD who formed Moses to be the deliverer of his
people, from their bondage in Egypt, that GOD who taught the hands of David to
war, and his fingers to fight, who girded Cyrus with his might, that GOD,
formed, endowed and assisted GEORGE WASHINGTON, a native of Virginia, to be the
deliverer of his country, and perform wonders, which astonish the world. As he
was the gift of heaven to his country, the same unerring wisdom and goodness of
GOD that gave, has now taken away, therefore, sentiments of profound silent
submission to the divine will, highly become us as Christians. We are not to
murmur or complain, but are allowed to mourn, in the exercise of pious
resignation.

FURTHER to direct and assist our mourning, we must by no means, omit a sincere
thankful recollection of the many, the very many great and unparalleled
services this illustrious benefactor performed for his country, the memory of
which, it is hoped, that time will never obliterate.

HAVING in early life exhibited striking marks of superior military address and
talents in some memorable instances, he was appointed by the united voice of
his country, to the supreme command of the American army, at a time, when the
defense of our lives, rights and liberties, and every thing dear and sacred to
us, made it absolutely necessary for our country to appeal to arms. In this
elevated character, as general of the armies of his country, he shone brighter
and brighter, like the rising sun, until he had conquered his powerful enemies,
and completely freed his country. And the many evidences of his profound
knowledge in the science of arms; the repeated displays of most superior
martial endowments; his intrepid firmness and magnanimity of mind; the many
trophies of his victories; the powerful European armies, and the many
dignified, boasting British generals he conquered and subdued, one after
another, have fixed in his character, the indelible marks of one of the
greatest warriors and generals of the world.

AND further, to increase our sense of the obligation of gratitude we are all
under to this great man, let us, for a moment, think what had been our fate,
and that of our country, supposing the scene had been reversed, and victory had
declared for our enemy. In this case, there is no doubt at all, from what
experience had taught us, and from what some of us had seen and heard; and from
the well known habits and customs of the cruel tyrants of Europe, that as
shocking a scene of hanging and gibbeting had been opened through the land, as
ever was known in the world. And those that escaped with their lives, with
their posterity after them, would have been abject slaves to a foreign power.
Considering this, and adverting to our present enjoyments and prospects, and
the name of WASHINGTON must excite the warmest sense of gratitude in the heart
of every citizen of America.

THERE is another well known fact, which I cannot omit mentioning on this
occasion, as a most convincing evidence of the superior address, patriotism and
integrity of this great man; I mean the manner of his retiring from the scene
of war, and disbanding his army, when he had delivered his country. With a
powerful, well disciplined army, most warmly attached to his person, and the
military force of his country at his command, under every advantage to assume
the government, under any of those dignified names of king, emperor, protector,
etc. which have been so infatuating to the human mind in all ages of the world;
(to which it was then said he was warmly solicited by many) he disbanded his
army in the greatest tranquillity; giving them the most wise and paternal
counsel and advice; and affectionately recommending of them to the government
of their several states, for a just compensation of their great and eminent
services; resigned his command, and retired to his home in the character (...).
This, by all that knew (...), will be considered as the most (...) evidence of
the great integrity of his heart. Perhaps there is not another man in the
world, in that situation, that could, or would, have done the same.

LET us now, under the impressions both of grief and gratitude, follow our
great leader, from the scene of war, the field of victory, to the chair of
state as the first supreme magistrate and President of the Union, to which he
was called by the united voice of his country. His services in this station of
eminence, have a lasting claim upon the gratitude of this and future
generations; and the evidences of superior political knowledge, and talents,
for government, founded on a series of public facts, will transmit his memory
to posterity as the first and greatest of magistrates. For though we heartily
wish and pray his successors may imitate his many excellences and virtues, we
do not expect they will equal the great original. The general tranquillity, the
marks of increasing wealth and prosperity conspicuous in every city and village
throughout the United States; the entire confidence and unfeigned affection of
his country, must forever evince the superiority of his talents and wisdom as
first magistrate: and, when to these considerations, we recollect, that his
generous patriotic soul led him to decline receiving any salary or compensation
for his services, both as General of the Armies, and as President of the Union,
it seems that a grateful remembrance of him could never be lost, and ought to
be cherished in our breasts, under the deepest sensations of grief.

THESE imperfect hints (for I possess neither materials nor abilities to do
justice to the subject) I say, what has been but very imperfectly mentioned,
must impress our minds with profound respect and reverence to the memory of the
deceased. He has certainly merited it of his country; and sentiments of this
kind ought to accompany our mourning. It is scarcely supposable that the
citizens of America, will ever lose a veneration for the name and memory of
WASHINGTON. I do not recollect ever hearing of a single instance of mistake,
error, or blame, that was ever justly charged upon him; nor did I ever read of
a person in any age of the world, to whom, such real greatness and purity of
character, would more justly apply; or that ever merited more highly of this
country.

AFTER a series of the most eminent services for his country, for the space of
five and forty years, enough to bear down the firmest constitution, he declined
being considered as a candidate for the office of President, and thought proper
to retire to the private walks of life. But still retaining his disinterested
affection for his country, left it a legacy fraught with the most tender,
parental advice, counsels, warnings and cautions, that human wisdom could
devise, which, ought to be engraven on the heart of every American citizen. As
a further evidence of the singular greatness of his mind, upon retiring from
such elevated stations. But still considered his life as devoted to his
country's good, and upon the appearance of danger, once more accepted of the
command of its army; but by a kind Providence never had an occasion to be
called to the field of battle.

LET us now collect our thoughts, and prepare to follow this great man to his
sick and deathbed, bearing in our minds those words of inspiration, which bid
us to "mark the perfect man, and behold the upright, for the end of that man is
peace." It appears from the public accounts, that his last sickness was sudden
and short; and that he soon expected it would terminate as it did. But in the
free and full use of his reason, he preserved the same firmness and magnanimity
of mind in facing his last enemy, death, which always attended him in meeting
his enemies in the field; accompanied with his singular serenity of
countenance, and supported, undoubtedly, by sentiments of real piety. As a
singular and affecting evidence of this, when he actually found the cold hand
of death was laid upon him, and the breath of life was departing, with his own
hand he supported his falling chin, and closed his own eyes.

CAN we now wonder, my hearers, even from this very imperfect recollection of
the life, the services, the virtues, the merits and death, of this great and
good Columbian Hero, Patriot and Father. Can we, I say, wonder that all the
country is now weeping with a loud voice? Could the ancient Jews, that stubborn
and hard-hearted race, mourn for their Moses, their Samuel and Josiah? They
certainly would rise up in the judgment against us and condemn us, if we did
not manifest the deepest sensibility, at so great a loss, so lamentable an
event, as the death of such a Friend, Benefactor, Defender, Deliverer, and
Father of his Country. Wherefore,

THAT we may not only mourn, but mourn as christians ought to mourn, let our
tears be accompanied with fervent and unceasing prayer to GOD, the great
disposer of events, and repairer of breaches, that a wise improvement may be
made, by all orders of men, of an occurrence in his holy providence, so
alarming, instructive and sorrowful. For this great man, though now dead, is
yet speaking to his country, and speaking aloud in the example he set, the
eminent services he performed, and especially in the advice, counsels and
cautions he sends us, as it were, from his tomb; and in his death, he is still
more solemnly calling to us all, to be also ready.

MAY his successors in office, and all our magistrates, imitate his example and
virtues; and may a remembrance of his heroism inspire the militia of our
country through all generations, with the spirit and virtues that form the
soldier. And will GOD, of his mercy, sanctify these allotments of his
Providence to the public good. Finally,

THAT the citizens of the American Republic of this generation, may never be
reproached, for the want of a proper discernment of the characters and conduct
of their magistrates and public servants; nor for the want of gratitude to
their benefactors, and a decent respect and reverence to the persons and memory
of their patriots; I say, that we may never have reproaches of this kind, let
the faithful historian of these times remember to record it, for the
information of the world, and of all future generations: THAT AT THE DEATH OF
GENERAL GEORGE WASHINGTON, "ALL THE COUNTRY WEPT WITH A LOUD VOICE."

FINIS



