Mr. PATTEN's Two Discourses, DECEMBER 29, 1799.

A DISCOURSE, DELIVERED IN THE 2d CONGREGATIONAL CHURCH, NEWPORT, THE SABBATH
SUCCEEDING THE INTERMENT OF Doctor ISAAC SENTER, WHO DIED, DECEMBER 20th, M,
DCC, XCIX, AETAT. 45.

By WILLIAM PATTEN, A. M. MINISTER OF SAID CHURCH.

Published at the Request of the Society.

NEWPORT: Printed by HENRY BARBER, 1800.

A Funeral Discourse.
JOB xxx.23. FOR I KNOW THAT THOU WILL BRING ME TO DEATH, AND TO THE HOUSE
APPOINTED FOR ALL LIVING.


WITH the time, or circumstances of our removal from life, we are not
acquainted; but of the ultimate certainty of the event, there is no ground to
doubt.

PERSONS may conjecture that they shall not outlive a particular season; or
that they shall die by a particular disorder, or calamity: and yet be supported
through that season, and saved from the evil they apprehended. -- On the other
hand to presume on a course of years, imagining that we are exempt from
disease, or casualties, would not only be a sin, but might prove an
experimental mistake. By causes not foreseen, or which were not considered
dangerous, we might be aroused from security, and brought to the grave.

THE hour of death, like the coming of the Son of man to judgment, is known to
no one; but of the certainty of death there is the fullest evidence from the
experience of man in all ages, and the general state of nature: from the
indications of frailty in our own constitution, and the testimony of the word
of GOD.

THE grave is represented as the (...) appointed for ALL living. The characters
and conditions of mankind are exceedingly diversified in a number of respects;
but whatever distinctions may subsist between them, they are all alike in this,
that they must die, and make their bed in the dust. Here the rich and poor meet
together, and the servant is free from his master. In this place all
distinctions are obliterated, all relations dissolved, all acquisitions
relinquished: Naked came we from the earth, and naked do we return thither, Job
i.21. All go to one place: All are of the dust, and all return to dust again,
Eccles. iii.20.

IT is said, " I know, that thou will bring me to death, and to the house
APPOINTED for all living; implying that it is the certain, unchanging purpose
of GOD, that all shall die. Death is not an occasional event; but is
pre-determined in the plan of divine providence, is the fixed ordination of
Heaven. In conformity with this, no provision is made in nature, by which any
one can possibly avoid the change. Frequently when a person lies in death, we
behold an example of the inefficacy of all created expedients to preserve life.
None of the productions of the fields could afford nourishment: and the powers
of medicine, aided by the most discerning skill, and sympathetic kindness,
could not relieve and heal; but the appointment of GOD was carried, without
interruption, into full effect.

THIS passage of scripture leads us to consider, not only the certainty and
universality of death, but that it is a dispensation of the divine hand, I know
that THOU will bring me to death. --

GOD, though infinitely exalted and blessed, regards the state of the children
of men. He appointed the general frailty of their nature, and determines the
order, and manner in which it shall be executed, exercising over each one a
providential care. It is not in man, who walks, to direct his steps; but in
the hand of GOD are all his ways, Jer. x, 22. He observes our going out, and
coming in: he is acquainted with our state in prosperity and adversity; in
sickness and health: in the various relations we sustain -- and it is not
without a due consideration of all connected circumstances, that any change is
produced, and that death is experienced.

IF persons be brought to death, by the appointment and will of GOD, there is
infinite wisdom in the dispensation. To consider any event as under his
government; and yet opposed to infinite wisdom, is inconsistent. Though death
in itself is evil and afflictive, and a reversion of the original order of
nature; yet that it is subordinated to wise and holy purposes, is evident from
the infinite perfection of Deity, and from the declared and known reasons of
the appointment.

THE entrance of sin into the world rendered the sentence of death just. --
Wisely to adapt the condition of mankind to a season of trial, finally to be
terminated, it was ordained that the system of creation should be frail, and
with all other objects that human life should be transitory. If we be convinced
of the wisdom of GOD in determining that the heavens should wax old as a
garment, and the foundations of the earth be removed, and that all the human
race should die; then we may reconcile with wisdom his removing particular
persons from life; for in these instances he gives an example of the general
sentence, and carries it, as it respects the human race, into effect.

SHOULD it be objected, that the time and circumstances of a person's death
appear, in some instances, to militate against divine wisdom in the production
of it? To this it may be replied, that what is considered the weakness and
frailty of man in old age, is nothing more than the appointment that he shall
die, exhibited in example. There is no necessity, in the constitution of his
nature, that he should become feeble at threescore years and ten, or that he
should be at all impaired by age, more than that the Sun, by continuing to
shine, should finally lose his luster. Indeed, but for experience, it would be
thought more strange that the sun, a vast body of fire, should be kept burning
for many thousand years, without the least apparent diminution, than that the
human body should be sustained in vigor, forever.

IF it be owing solely to the decree of death, that man becomes feeble and
helpless at a certain age, then it may consist with divine wisdom, that he
should experience sickness and death in an earlier season. If the decree find
man in vigor, though a thousand years old -- interested in a variety of
relations, engaged in important labors, with scenes of enjoyment and hope
around him, GOD alone can determine when that vigor shall abate, when those
relations shall be dissolved, and those prospects closed. To plead the
importance of relations and pursuits against the time of removal designated in
Divine Providence, may ever delay the stroke of death, and is an implied claim
to immortality on earth. If wisdom be expressed in the general sentence of
death, it is doubtless expressed in the particular time and circumstances in
which it is executed.

IT may further be observed, that if death be the appointment of GOD, it is
subservient to infinite goodness.

THE goodness of GOD is as unquestionable as his wisdom, or power. In the
permission of sin, and in all the evils which result from it, he was influenced
by benevolence as truly as in the creation of the world. Unless he were, there
is a contrariety in his character; or he is less glorious and excellent in the
government of creatures than in giving them existence.

IT is asserted in scripture, Better is the end of a thing than the beginning
thereof, Eccles. vii.8. -- Existence is good, or evil, chiefly in reference to
its objects. If GOD do not exercise goodness in governing, he exercised none in
creating. Unless it were his object that creatures should be subservient to
wise and holy purposes, no advantages would result from their existence: for
however curiously they might be formed, or liberally endowed, their end would
be vain, and thus their organization and endowments would be useless.

THE object of GOD in governing is the highest general good. In pursuing this
he indulges no respect of persons; but is impartial, just and uncontrolable.
The condition of no one on earth, nor of any creature in the universe is the
same, as if his interest were alone consulted: as if it were the sole object of
GOD to exalt him, and promote his advantage.

CREATURES are viewed by GOD not as separate individuals, but in a collective
capacity, and are all subordinated to the greatest good. By this the experience
of each one is determined, whether prosperous, or adverse: whether life, or
death.

TO choose the accomplishment of this object, and voluntarily to conform to it,
is a universal duty, and in this consist the highest dignity, and the highest
happiness of which a creature is capable. In the temper here defined a person
will be willing to live, or die, as GOD shall determine: he will be happy in
the blessings with which he is favored, and content to resign them when
required in Divine Providence: he will acquiesce in the removal of his friends,
in the calamities which befall the world, and in all the evils of which
creatures are the subjects.

AS the general is superior to individual good, and is ever pursued by GOD,
death in being inflicted by him in subservience to this, is subservient to
good, even the highest of which we can conceive.

HAVING attempted to illustrate the text, by considering the certainty and
universality of death, and that it is a dispensation of infinite wisdom and
benevolence, productive in every instance, of the greatest good, I would
conclude my discourse with an

IMPROVEMENT of the subject.
1. WE may infer, that we cannot place dependence on life.

IT is not only certain that we shall be brought to DEATH, and to the house
appointed for ALL living; but of the time, or manner of our removal, we are
ignorant. These will be determined, not by our connections in this state; but
by our relation to GOD and his government. We may be spared for years, or may
soon be taken. It is our duty to consider our frailty, and not depend on life;
but be devoted to the divine will.

2. WE may infer, that it is improper to place confidence in any of our
acquaintance and friends.

INNUMERABLE are the testimonies given in Divine Providence, that the most
intimate relations must be dissolved: that persons of skill and generosity, of
eminence and great usefulness, must be removed. Of this we have witnessed a
number of instances: but few have been so impressive as the one which lately
took place among us; by which not only a family is overwhelmed in sorrow, but
the town is sensible of a loss.

HE is justly to be regretted, as a man sustaining many important relations, He
left an affectionate wife and five children -- was honorary Member of the
Philadelphia and London Medical Societies, and President of the Cincinnati, of
this State.
and of a great, generous, humane spirit. He will be lamented as a husband,
father, and benefactor: He will be regretted as at the head of a class of
citizens, distinguished for their exertions in the late revolutionary war, and
on whom dependence is placed in the future emergencies of the country, among
whom he presided with affectionate solicitude and dignity. He will be deeply
regretted, as eminent in the very useful and important profession in which he
was extensively employed; and for which he was qualified, not only by the
acuteness of his discernment and accuracy of his opinions -- by his decision
and judgment; but by a choice of the most instructive books, an extensive
correspondence, and great experience.

THE Ministers in general of the Town received his prompt, his vigilant, his
patient attention, in the hour of affliction and disease, to themselves and
families, without any claim of compensation: -- and this tribute is doubtless
small, compared with the one due to his kindness and liberality in other
instances.

SUCH was the general confidence in his skill, that some might think, under his
care, they were in a peculiar degree secure from death. But this confidence was
vain -- his own life he could not prolong: and in his removal in so early a
part of existence we are taught his dependence, our dependence, and the
dependence of all things on (...).

3. FROM the subject we learn the nature of resignation, and the reasonableness
of the principle.

TRUE resignation is founded on a belief, not that man, from a necessity of
nature, must die; but that this and every change is appointed, and carried into
effect by GOD: in a belief, not that our particular wishes and interests are
consulted; but that the highest good is promoted. -- It implies sensibilities
corresponding to the nature of events; but, both in what is pleasing and in
what is afflictive, that we submit with cheerfulness to the divine will.

ON this principle we may safely rest all the interests of existence, for it is
the sum of all its duties, and the temper is a foundation for the highest joy,
and for peace in every trial and adversity. In this temper we shall be
supported in the experience of death ourselves -- supported in the loss of
those much dearer than life. It will be the language of our hearts* It is the
Lord, the infinitely wise and just and compassionate GOD, let him do what
seems him good. -- The Lord gave, and the Lord has taken away: blessed be
the name of the Lord.

A PRAYER, suited to the preceding SERMON. [PUBLISHED FROM RECOLLECTION.]
O LORD, who art self-existent, and of whose years there shall be no end! -- We
adore thee as the Creator of all things, and as exercising dominion over the
work of thine hands. -- We bless thee as regarding every creature, and event;
and as making thy glory, and the highest felicity of thy works, the object of
thine administration.

ENABLE us, (...) reverence, to submit to thy will -- to those dispensations in
which our expectations are disappointed, as well as to those in which they are
accomplished. Impress us with a sense of our ignorance of events, necessary in
a government infinitely wise and good: and of the guilt of censuring thy
measures, and opposing THEE.

MAY we suitably consider, that we are Strangers and pilgrims on earth: that
thou will bring us to death, and to the house appointed for all living: that
man, at his best estate, is altogether vanity: that his days are an hand's
breadth -- his life, as a tale that is told.

MAY we consider thy condescension, in regarding our state: -- thy care and
infinite compassion: -- and trust thee in all seasons and circumstances: --
and, though we walk through the valley of the shadow of death, may we fear no
evil.

FOR life, and all worldly blessings, we offer thee a tribute of gratitude. We
praise thee for the richer blessings of the gospel: for the pardon of sin, for
spiritual life, and support: -- that submitting to thy will, and trusting in
thy Son, we shall be subjects of thy love, shall be led from strength to
strength, and admitted to never ending glory and happiness.

WE acknowledge, and bemoan that principle of depravity, which is productive of
disorder and misery, and is displeasing in thy sight. May we be delivered from
its influence; overcome the world and the powers of darkness, and be devoted
sincerely and entirely to thy service -- respecting all thy commands, and
taking thy promises as our heritage.

SANCTIFY to us the dispensations of thy Providence: particularly the
afflictive event we have been called lately to experience, and at this time to
consider. May it be rendered conducive to an impression of the most important
truths, and the exercise of the most essential virtues.

LOOK down in compassion on thine handmaiden, the bereaved Consort. Greatly
have thou afflicted her: her heart is broken with sorrow. Thou alone art able
to bind it up, and give her peace. Teach her to observe thine hand in this
chastisement: may she realize, though clouds and darkness are round about Thee,
that justice and judgment are the habitation of thy throne. May she trust in
thee, and enjoy the light of thy countenance, and be blessed forever.

REGARD in mercy the bereaved children -- provide for their wants. Reward into
their bosoms the liberality of thy servant to others. -- May they be trained to
usefulness and honor, to virtue and piety. May they look to thee as their GOD
and heavenly Father, and in the shadow of thy wings find a refuge from every
evil.

SANCTIFY the bereavement to all the connections and acquaintance of thy
servant. May not their estimate of earthly good, contradict the measures of thy
Providence: May they, from a sense of the frailty of man, and the transitory
nature of his connections here, be led to place their affections on things
above, and consider the importance of thy friendship, which alone is without
change.

MAY this loss be sanctified to the inhabitants of the town: and will thou, in
mercy, raise up one, whose heart thou will endue with equal discretion and
fortitude, and whose hand thou will guide with equal skill, in relieving the
distresses of thy people.

LOOK in compassion on all who mourn. May they consider that thou do not
willingly afflict: -- may they trust in thee, as the only source of consolation
and hope: and though no chastisement is, for the present joyous, but grievous;
may it yield the peaceable fruits of righteousness.

SMILE upon thy Churches. -- May not the gates of the grave, nor of hell
prevail against them. -- May all things be overruled for their advantage. --
May they exhibit a bright example of every Christian grace, and be extended
from the rising to the setting sun.

BLESS the nations of the earth. -- May the dispensations of thy Providence be
connected with the instructions of thy word to all people, and be attended with
thy gracious influence. -- May the calamities which are experienced, and the
punishments which are to be feared, be a means of awakening the children of men
to a sense of the evil of sin, and the necessity of obeying thy commands -- and
may thy name be hallowed: may thy kingdom come, and will be done, on earth, as
it is in Heaven, -- through Jesus Christ. -- To the Father, the Son, and Holy
Spirit, be ascribed all honor and praise,

AMEN.
Mr. PATTEN's DISCOURSE, ON THE DEATH OF Genesis WASHINGTON.

A DISCOURSE, DELIVERED IN THE 2d CONGREGATIONAL CHURCH, NEWPORT, DECEMBER
29th, 1799: OCCASIONED BY THE DEATH OF General GEORGE WASHINGTON, COMMANDER IN
CHIEF OF THE ARMIES OF THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, WHO DECEASED DECEMBER 14,
1799. AETAT. 68.

By WILLIAM PATTEN, A. M. MINISTER OF SAID CHURCH.

Published at the Request of the Society.

NEWPORT: Printed by HENRY BARBER, M,DCCC.

A Funeral Discourse.
II SAMUEL, iii.33. KNOW YE NOT THAT THERE IS A PRINCE, AND A GREAT MAN, FALLEN
THIS DAY IN ISRAEL.


THE Nation of Israel was favored with a succession of characters, eminent in
wisdom, and in all those talents and virtues by which human nature is exalted
and adorned.

MOSES was the first of Prophets and Legislators: Aaron the most venerable of
Priests: Joshua the most intrepid, regular and successful of Generals: Samuel
the most equitable of Judges: David the most paternal and pious of Kings, and
Solomon the wisest of men.

THE characters which arose in that nation, will not only appear with luster to
the end of time; but are a model to which succeeding generations may be
referred, for greatness in civil rule, in war, and in piety.

IN the reign of Saul, and part of the reign of David, there was a person of
distinction, Abner, the son of Ner, Readiness Uncle. After Saul was invested with
regal authority, he appointed Abner, Captain of his host. His talents were
tried in a variety of enterprises, against Moab, against Ammon, against Edom,
against Zohath, against the Philistines and against the Amalakites; and his
spirit and good conduct justified the appointment; he was a valiant man, and
there was none like him in all Israel.

ON the death of Saul, though the right of government belonged to David, but
one tribe acknowledged him, that of Judah. Abner, from his reputation and great
influence, was the most proper person to attempt the reconciliation of the
other tribes: and having made a solemn league with David, he received a
commission and entered on the business. -- But before he had proceeded far on
the journey, Joab, Captain of the host of David, sent for him in the name of
the King, and as he returned met him, and taking him aside, treacherously slew
him.

DAVID greatly lamented his death. He appointed an honorable burial, and
followed the bier: and in the language of our text, addressed his Officers and
the People, Know ye not that there is a Prince and a Great Man fallen this day
in Israel?

THIS country, like the ancient Jewish Nation, has been blessed with
characters, eminent in civil and religious offices: distinguished as Statesmen
and Divines; as Legislators, Philosophers, Judges, and Generals. It would be
presumptuous as it were vain, to attempt to point them out, or exhibit the
proofs of their talents, their virtues and usefulness.

OUR attention is, at this time, called to one, not only on account of his
distinguished greatness and excellence; but the afflictive event of his death.
-- So publicly known, so illustrious, so beloved was Washington, that the
pathetic exclamation must express the sentiments and feelings of every heart,
Know ye not, that there is a Prince, and a Great Man, fallen this day in our
Israel!

JUSTLY to delineate his virtues and endowments, would be a difficult task in
the calmest hours of reflection; but is much too critical to be executed under
the confused and tumultuous pressure of grief. -- The rationality of our
sorrows, and the duty of religiously improving them, require that we pay a
general attention to his character.

HE may truly be styled great, if abilities to discharge the duties of the most
important stations in society constitute greatness.

NOT to take a more distant retrospect -- in the commencement of the
revolutionary war he was appointed to the chief command of the armies of the
country. Not long after, Congress, "maturely considering the crisis, and having
perfect reliance in his wisdom, vigor and uprightness," invested him with
extraordinary powers; which were renewed from time to time, so long as the
exigency of affairs rendered it necessary. See Journals of Congress, Dec. 27,
1776; Nov. 14, Dec. 10, 1777, and April 23, 1778.


THE justice of this reliance, and the ability with which he executed the
trust, are evident from the support and discipline of the army, and its various
and important operations in the course of eight campaigns: and from the issue
of its successes, in the acknowledgment of our Sovereignty and Independence,
and the return of peace.

HIS greatness, as General, comprised courage and skill, moderation and
enterprise, and resources of mind suited to seasons and circumstances. His
courage was not less to be doubted, than his prudence was conspicuous. He
hazarded no interests by rashness: he lost no advantages by delay. He was
patient in trials, fortunate in decisions, had great self command -- was great
in his authority over others, and distinguished for disinterestedness and
humanity.

BY his public communications and example, he relieved the country from many
discouragements, and in seasons of embarrassment and danger was the greatest
support of its hopes; and animated his fellow-citizens in arms, sharing their
burdens, reconciling their differences, directing their ardor to objects most
useful to the Country and conducive to their honor, teaching them effectually
to preserve the character of citizens in the armor of soldiers.

IT was not the majesty of his appearance, the lightning of his eye, nor the
high authority of his commission, that influenced the troops to endure
hardships and meet the enemy with fortitude -- it was a sense of the union of
the most endearing virtues in his heart, with the most enlightened skill: a
conviction that in their General they had a Father, who was solicitous to
mitigate their distresses, and in toils and dangers would appear at their head;
and that in the love of him they loved their Country -- it was these sentiments
and feelings, which rendered them patient in sufferings, and in the day of
battle inspired them with such courage, that though their bodies might be cut
down, their spirit could not be subdued.

HE was great, not only in the character of General; but, when the necessity of
military labors was over, in retiring to the rank of a private citizen.

WITH the highest objects of personal grandeur and authority that ever
stimulated ambition, and with peculiar advantages to secure those objects, that
like an affectionate, faithful son, he should bow to the authority of his
Country, rejoicing only in her protection and esteem, laying at her feet those
honors which kings could not confer, nor take from him -- was an act of
greatness which sanctified his former exertions and achievements, and gave the
fairest luster to his character.

CONSIDERED in his political capacity and as a civil Ruler, he was likewise
great.

HE must early have been distinguished in this respect, to be chosen to the
first Congress which convened on the grievances and interests of the Country.
Chosen a Delegate by the then Colony of Virginia, Aug. 5, 1774. -- Took his
seat in Congress, Sept. 5, 1774.
His character is more fully illustrated in his numerous letters, and other
writings: it is still more highly attested in his being a member and President
of the Convention by which our present Constitution of Government was formed;
-- but it is most clearly displayed in his administration as President of the
United States.

THAT he supported this high Office with dignity, and faithfully executed its
very important and complicated duties, not only the voice of the constituted
authorities, and of the country at large; but the prosperity of the country is
a testimony.

HE was the first President on the present system of Government. Under him, the
public regulations in general, in our internal and external relations, were
adjusted: those officers who have conducted, and continue to conduct, the
public business, with so much discretion, vigilance and integrity, were
appointed: that decree of neutrality, which has prevented our being involved in
the perils and expenses of a fruitless war, was promulged -- and our relations
to foreign nations settled, in a manner as conducive as possible to our
prosperity and peace.

A FURTHER instance of his greatness appears, after he had retired from public
service, in his accepting the command of the forces, to be raised for the
support of our rights and privileges as Citizens, and the defense of the
country.

WHEN he had labored, with little intermission, for a long time in the most
arduous fields of public action; when he had long borne the weight of public
cares and interests, even till he had become old and gray headed: and when,
from confidence in the ability and experience of others, he had resigned his
public Office, and withdrawn to the shade of his patrimonial dwelling -- that,
at the appearance of danger, and his country's call, he should again come
forth* that he should arise from his seat and gird on his armor, willing to
sacrifice the repose of his last days to the public good -- was an instance of
greatness, not exceeded in any of his former actions, and which only such
peculiar circumstances admit of being exhibited to view.

IT may further be observed, that he was great in reputation, and in influence.

HIS fame went into all lands, and the fear of him was upon all nations, 1 Chronicles. xiv.17. -- No other person on earth was so universally loved and
respected. His influence was particularly great in this country. Many, who
appear to mistake the public interests, were convinced of his merit; and though
not apprehending the force of his example in obeying the laws, listened to his
advice and approved of his conduct and opinions. As Abner, from his character
and reputation, might manage the tribes of Israel as he pleased; and as it was
said of David, on a certain occasion, II Sam. iii, 36, that all the people took
notice of his behavior, and it pleased them; as whatever the king did pleased
all the people: so it may be said, the people were disposed to observe the
words and actions of Washington; and all that he said, or did, gave general
satisfaction. His opinion, with few exceptions, was the public sentiment, and
regulated the public will.

THIS confidence resulted, not only from his distinguished endowments and
reputation: but from the integrity of his heart. No one could accuse him of a
wrong intention; or mistrusted, that he would be biassed by self-interest, or
party zeal, or any other perverse and injurious principle.

INDEED, my afflicted, respected Auditors, if any thing great in its nature, or
consequences, have taken place in the political experience of this country,
since Washington came on the stage of action, then he was great: for he was the
chief instrument, in the hand of Heaven, of accomplishing the events, and
effecting the changes, for which that epoch is distinguished.

IF it were great, for an infant people to assert their own rights, and those
of mankind; and to oppose one of the most formidable, and to us, before, the
most venerated of earthly powers: then was Washington great; for he assisted in
the counsel, and took command of our armies.

IF it were great, for a people to form and amicably agree in a Constitution of
general Government, comprehending a great diversity of dispositions, manners
and habits, and harmonizing an infinite variety of interests: a constitution
the boast of our country and reason, and beneficial to mankind as an example of
regard, in freemen, to order and civil rule, then was Washington great: for in
that august Convention, where this Constitution was formed, he Presided.

IF it were great, to introduce the operation of this new system of government;
to execute the highest Office, with approbation and applause, and leave an
example, which it is one of the first wishes, both for the good of the country
and their honor, that his successors may imitate, then was Washington great:
for with his administration, the operation of the Constitution commenced; and
on his final resignation, the public regret was more expressive, than their
profuse applauses, of the ability with which he had discharged its duties.

IF it were great, for a person advanced in years, and worn with labor, and
blessed with the privileges of domestic peace, to return to public service; to
take the command of a patriotic army, to guard the liberties and government of
the country* to resist, if necessary, a perverted, licentious, threatening
world in arms -- then was Washington great; for, from the calm retreat, where
he hoped to close his days, he came at the call of his country. Her dangers,
and the thought of meeting her sons, with here and there a veteran, in the
field, strengthened his knees, and invigorated his arm, renewing his youth like
the eagle's: and he was still considered the safest of guides, and our greatest
earthly defense.

HIS character, in the various stations and lights in which it has been viewed,
was great. Had he appeared in only one of them, he would have been thought
distinguished. How is his greatness enhanced when his character is collectively
considered!

HIS talents must have been pre-eminent. He must have been formed by Heaven, to
give an example of greatness and goodness -- expressive of divine benevolence*
useful to us and instructive to the human race. Of true greatness, goodness is
the support and luster. The greatness of this person was connected with
goodness, and the result of it. He appears to have acted with a view to the
approbation of conscience, enlighted by a belief of the being and
superintending providence and government of God, and the principles and
representations of the Gospel: and his character, in its disinterestedness and
generosity, its utility, its self-diffidence, its decision, its piety, its
faithfulness and glory, is a striking example of what is the object of the
Gospel to produce.

THIS character is removed from among us. Know ye not, that there is a prince
and a great man fallen this day in our Israel! Washington is dead! Let us pause
a moment -- Our feelings are chilled at the reflection -- utterance fails me.

-- BUT we have assembled in the house of God to consider and improve this
afflictive dispensation of providence^ and it must be the

FIRST of our reflections, that it is a just subject of deep* and general grief.

IF we have any sensibility to the frowns of providence, any respect for the
characters of the great and good, any love for our country, we must be, deeply
affected with this bereavement.

IF the divine favor were expressed, in raising up such a person, and
continuing him for such important purposes, that he should be taken away is a
chastisement; and ought to be deplored, as we should feel the afflictive hand
of Heaven.

AS we venerated and admired his talents and virtues, we must lament his
removal: for though in its consequences an infinite acquisition, as we trust
and and believe to him, the evil to us is great: we shall behold his face, be
instructed by his counsels, benefitted by his exertions no more.

THE love of our Country justifies our sorrow at his death. Great to her were
the advantages of his character in what he had done, and might do. He was not
only a chief instrument of the political blessings we enjoy, and the head of
our military forces; but more than any other individual character a center of
union to all classes of citizens; and might be an important means of prolonging
our peace, and (...) our prosperity. If David lamented the (...) General, who
might have united the tribes of Israel, and brought them to obedience; (...)
propriety may (...) a character (...) father of our country, the (...) is
witness, that we sincerely (...). -- Were it poison that took (...) could have
drank it for thee -- were (...) of an assassin, we could have received it into
our own bosom -- But it was the hand of God. That hand, which closed thine
eyes, may yet support our hearts: may teach them to submit: may grant them
consolation and peace: may avert the evils which we apprehend, and continue the
blessings we enjoyed in thee!

THIS event likewise exhibits in an impressive light, that we should not place
our confidence in man.

IN all ages, the great and good have, with other characters, been brought to
death. Our fathers, where are they? And the prophets, do they live forever? The
grave is without any order: the great and small are there. Abner, the important
character and chief General mentioned in our subject, was prematurely slain.
David, who lamented him, and was far his superior in virtues and station,
became old and finally gave up the ghost. Washington, who has long been a
subject of public confidence, an object of public admiration and esteem, is
gone. Man is not to be accounted of, whose breath is in his nostrils. The days
of his years are threescore years and ten: and if by reason of strength they be
fourscore years; yet is their strength, labor and sorrow; for it is soon cut
off, and we flee away. From the frailty of human life, we ought not to rely on
man. If we cannot depend on his existence, it is evident we cannot depend on
his exertions for our good.

THE subject further teaches, the reason for gratitude, that the character we
have considered was brought into existence, and so long continued.

SUCH a character was of great importance -- was necessary to our welfare, as a
people. It was an act of great goodness in GOD, that he should form his servant
with such endowments, and lead the public mind to observe them: that he should
continue his servant through a series of trials; support him in his labors,
till he had arrived at old age, and in his usefulness till death.

IN some instances persons of talents, and capable of promoting the public
welfare, are not discriminated. They are like those flowers which, in the
language of the Poet, are " -- born to blush, unseen;
"And waste their sweetness on the desert air."


IN some instances, when called into action, and public expectations are
excited, and the public confidence engaged, they are prematurely cut down,
either by treachery, or disease, and thus are like children carried from the
cradle to the grave. But the talents of this person did not escape public
observation: and he was continued in public office till his principles and
modes of conduct could be ascertained, and marked; forming an example, in fair
and full proportion, calculated to instruct and engage imitation.

WE have likewise reason for gratitude, that he was left to no action by which
his reputation would be fullied, and his example rendered pernicious. -- Many
persons outlive their characters; but his was uniform till death put the seal
upon it, and precluded the possibility of its being tarnished. The public eye
will ever behold it with admiration and pleasure, and the imitation of it will
conduce to individual greatness and excellence, and the general good.

FINALLY, the subject, in its various parts, enforces the duty of trusting
alone in GOD.

WHEN a created being is removed, the divine arm is not shortened: to think it
is, implies that we viewed the creature in the place of the Creator. When a
created being is removed, he, indeed, is deprived of ability to assist us; but
the ability of God is not impaired. He is infinite and unchangeable: the source
of all power and goodness. As distinguished public characters are a testimony
of his merciful agency, so their removal should lead us to make him the sole
object of confidence. -- In this temper, we may be certain of his support and
protection.

THAT he is able to relieve and bless, appears, not only from his infinite
perfection, and from his forming characters, once useful and important; but
from his raising up others to supply the place of these, when removed. In many
instances, when great and influential characters were taken from the people of
Israel, and they appeared in danger of anarchy and ruin, the Lord interposed,
and preserved them in order and peace. When Moses died, Joshua was called to
the command: when Elijah was taken, his spirit rested on Elisha: when David
slept with his fathers, Solomon was established on his throne: and reigned with
wisdom and glory, and in peace. The same divine power and goodness which formed
Washington, may bless us with continued advantages in other characters, and
increase our prosperity and happiness.

THE welfare of our Country is an object too dear and important to be resigned,
but from necessity: -- and added to the present loss, would render it truly
overwhelming. If it were a maxim with heathens, that "no one ought to despair
respecting the Republic;" it is still more improper that we should despair as
Christians -- as subjects of the highest civil and religious privileges.

UNGRATEFUL would it be, not to perceive and acknowledge, the various
testimonies, which GOD is yet giving, in favor of our support.

IT was a blessing, in this sense, that the person we this day lament, was not
taken while at the head of government; but from a station, where his example of
obedience to the laws is calculated to strengthen, rather than interupt the
public harmony.

WE have reason to be thankful, in this sense, for the Constitution of general
government; which is now established, and is armed with power to silence
faction, as well as repel foreign invasion.

WE have likewise a testimony of divine goodness in the character of the
present Chief Magistrate, the President of the United States; to whose hands
Washington, with satisfaction, saw the reigns of government committed; and in
whose high talents, and tried integrity, and regard to religion, we may not
only be assured of a faithful and honorable discharge of the duties of that
office, but the beneficial influence of an example, far more extensive than his
authority.

WE have likewise encouragement from the public spirit, the talents and
experience of our Officers in general, civil and military; and the patriotism
of a large majority of the people.

THE grief which overspreads the country; which pervades all orders of
characters, and appears in mourning in every place, is an evidence, we trust,
that the example of Washington will be imitated. -- Then, under the divine
blessing, our councils will be wise, our arms invincible; government will be
respected, and our interests will prosper.

MAY the Lord sanctify his example, and his death, to these important purposes.
May he bless the virtuous Relict of his deceased servant: and be her God and
never failing portion -- and support with his favor, the particular
connections, under this bereavement. May he bless the President of the United
States, granting him the light of his countenance and his direction. May he
bless all our Rulers and Officers, with the people of the country, and build us
up as a nation. -- May he subdue the spirit of sin and violence, and mitigate
the evils which result from it; and cause the earth to be the suburbs of that
glorious state, where love has universal influence, and peace eternal reigns --
where all tears are wiped forever from the eye, and the righteous rest in the
bosom of God.


