A TOUR THROUGH UPPER AND LOWER CANADA.

By John C. Ogden, OF THE EPISCOPAL CHURCH.

CONTAINING, A VIEW OF THE PRESENT STATE OF RELIGION, LEARNING, COMMERCE,
AGRICULTURE, COLONIZATION, CUSTOMS AND MANNERS, AMONG THE ENGLISH, FRENCH, AND
INDIAN SETTLEMENTS.

THE SECOND EDITION.

WILMINGTON: PRINTED BY BONSAL AND NILES, FOR THE AVTHOR. -- 1800.

ENTERED ACCORDING TO ACT OF CONGRESS.

INTRODUCTION.
THE Discovery of America, has opened a new Field for Improvement, in the
commercial and busy World. To become intimately acquainted with the States and
Provinces of North America* is an Employment worthy the Attention of the
greatest Statesman and humblest Peasant. While Travelers constantly present to
our View, their accurate, entertaining, and edifying Observations in Europe,
Asia, and Africa, we are not fully possessed of those, which give us a View of
our own Country, and the contiguous Provinces.

The Re-capitulation of many of the following Observations upon the Provinces
of Canada, to Individuals, has led them to suggest to the Author the
Gratification it would afford, to have these presented in a Volume.

In Obedience to their Wishes, I have undertaken to present such Remarks and
Information, during my Travels through these Countries, as may perhaps amuse,
if not edify.

While Wars convulse foreign Countries, and fluctuating Politics agitate the
public Mind; while we are extending our commercial Connections, forming
Alliances, and drawing Intelligence from every Quarter, it is hoped that this
small Work may contribute a Mite to increase our Acquaintance with those, who
are now connected with us by Treaties, as well as a Similarity of Laws and
Customs.

Our former Intercourse has been chiefly by War; but Peace, Commerce, and
Emigrations are extending our Connections, and awake a Solicitude for more
particular Accounts, than any one has yet detailed.

A TOUR, etc.
OUR principal communication from Lower Canada to the States, is by the way of
Lake Champlain and St. John's, by a water conveyance from Skeensborough, or the
roads through Vermont.

Admission into the province of Lower Canada, was secured by the visitants
reporting themselves at the Isle of Noix. Their ames are also taken at the
custom-house in St. John's, and a passport obtained into that province, in order
to a proper introduction, either on business or amusement. A fort, garrison,
and magazine, are at St. John's. The trade is inconsiderable. Time and
enterprise may convert it into a place of distinction, as it is at the
extremity of the northern part of Lake Champlain, where the waters of the river
Sorel, formed by the lake, pass into the river St. Laurence.

The rapids not far from St. John's are not so great, as to impede all
communication with the lake and rivers. Rafts constantly pass at the seasons,
when the waters are high; -- but boats are so far impeded, that merchandise is
conveyed by land from St. John's to Chamblee, about nine miles.

A regular stage passes from St. John's to Montreal, by the way of Lapararie. In
the spring of the year the roads are wet and heavy; but the excellent Canadian
horses, and dexterous drivers, conveyed us in good season to the above village,
which is opposite to Montreal.

The decline of day, and the expediency of waiting for the boats, which set out
in the morning for the city, tempted us to amuse ourselves with a walk through
the settlement, along the pleasant banks of the river.

The most distinguished object is the parish church, situated in a small open
square, near the center. The curate resides near it: His mansion is the public
property of the church, and is sufficiently large and commodious. -- The church
is spacious and venerable, and constructed upon a species of artichecture which
is not modern, but so far reduced to rule, as for a long time to please the
eye, and entertain the curious. It is strong and lofty. Heavy arches within,
support the roof; and the serious mind, cannot fail of being impressed with
devout sensations, while passing through it. The chancel is well finished, and
decorated with carvings, and the furniture upon the altar: A number of historic
scripture paintings adorn the walls.

Contiguous to the chapel, is also a female academy, or country nunnery; where
the village girls are instructed by their own sex, and others are received as
boarders. Besides these, there are about an hundred houses built of stone, or
hewn timber, and chiefly made white and plastered with lime.

The whole country is flat; and except the mountain of Montreal, at nine miles
distance, the horizon only bounds the view. The island, city, and mountain of
Montreal, with a number of other islands, variegate the extensive scene, west
and north, from Lapararie.

The conveyance from hence to Montreal, is in flat-bottomed boats, which are
managed by the inhabitants with great dexterity. -- They pass the rapids
safely; and the distance is forgotten, amidst the hilarity and music of these
watermen, and the villages on the shore we had ^oft, and that to which we
approached.

This city is defended on the river side by an high wall, and entered by gates.
The whole presents an handsome view of well built houses and churches. The
streets are regular and commodious. The walls which surround this place, are
out of repair: They enclose the public buildings and squares, and the most
valuable part of the stores and business. Extensive suburbs contain the
laboring people; and when united with the above described part of the city,
make it large and respectable.

At the head of the deeper and more navigable waters of the river St. Laurence,
and at the confluence of the immense lakes, and large rivers, north, west and
south-west; -- connected with a flourishing country, Montreal will ever hold a
conspicuous station among the busy towns of North America.

The merchants who traffic with the Indians, in the north-western country,
reside and have their factory here. This valuable business employs many
artists: It may be said to be the main-spring to the mercantile affairs of
these regions. Many European merchants have settled here, and compose part of
the agreeable society we meet with.

The rapid and extensive western settlements, since the last war, call for a
large supply of merchandise; which is paid for in wheat, lumber, and many other
articles of produce, with some furs also.

Great attention is paid to religion by the Catholics. The parish church, in
the center of the city, is a magnificent fabric, and is built of stone, in the
form of a cross. Its elegant steeple is covered with tin, and furnished with
three well-toned bells. A carving of the crucifixion, as large as life, is
placed over the chancel, at the east end of the church. The furniture and
decorations of the chancel are rich, and the historic scripture paintings
numerous, and well executed. In the gallery, at the west end, is a good organ.

The sacristee, or vestry room, is large and richly supplied with every thing
that is used in the solemnities of their religion. The vestments of the priests
and ornaments of the altar, are superb. This edifice affords an extensive
field, for the curiosities and enquiries of a catholic or protestant.

A large painting, which is intended to afford an idea of Purgatory, is hung at
the right side of the entrance into this building: It exhibits an angelic
being, or the divine Savior descended from an opening cloud, and with a most
benign countenance, extending his delivering arm to the distressed, condemned,
and desponding spirits, represented in the lower part of the picture. This
group are drawn with a variety of countenances; some in all the distortion of
agony and despair. -- Others, with the cheering lines of hope. -- Others, who
have passed the season of confinement, are reaching forth their hands, to
accept a rescue, by the heavenly messenger.

The design and execution, are ingenious. The lesson taught from this
representation, is obedience to virtue's laws, that we may escape the place of
torture, in a future world. In this extensive fabric, all the solemnities of
religion are celebrated, with great pomp and decorum.

Contiguous to it, and connected by a long covered walk, is the seminary or
constant residence of the clergy. They eat at one common table, and have their
separate apartments for study and retirement, with a common library.

In the rear is a garden, arranged in regular order, stored with much good
fruit, and affording a pleasing spot for air and exercise.

A college of considerable size in another part of the city, is under care of
the clergy. In it, young men are taught the learned languages, and many
branches of literature. -- Here is a library and good accommodations for the
students.

The college, of the order of the Recollett Friars, is out of repair; -- the
fraternity is almost dissolved, by the death of its members; as none could be
added to it, according to stipulations at the conquest. Mass is constantly
celebrated in their chapel.

The college of the dissolved order of Jesuits, is converted into barracks for
soldiers, and a prison. The chapel is repaired and (...), for an English church.

Large gardens are connected with these institutions, and take up a very
important and useful part of the city: They however subserve the purposes of
health, while the suburbs furnish room for the abodes of the industrious and
poor, and gardens for the citizens.

Three nunneries are within the city. One, is devoted to the education of
females. Two, are hospitals for the sick, and asylums for the poor. Both are
well regulated and valuable institutions. They are supported from the early
benefactions of their founders, who were females, and other property owned by
their respective communities, joined to their earnings, from various specimens
of ingenuity, and industry, which they constantly vend.

The nunnery in the city, which is an hospital, lost part of its funds in the
late seizure of the property of the monastries in France. These women, wishing
to preserve their sisterhood, and to perform the accustomed acts of charity to
the sick and poor, supply the deficiency in their present incomes, by making up
the articles of Indian dress, sent by the merchants among the western tribes.
This is the chief asylum for the distressed. The nuns have provided an
apothecary's room, which is well stored with all necessary medicine, and the
king's chief physician, directs the administering of it, and constantly visits
the patients gratis.

The buildings for courts and public business, are not distinguished for
convenience or taste, while the edifices dedicated to religion and piety, do
honor to their proprietors.

The market is well furnished with the produce of the season, cheap, good, and
in great variety.

The camp-de-mars, or field of military parade, is on the ramparts, near the
north gate. It is a pleasant walk, and at the hours of bringing on, and
relieving the guards, affords a lively scene.

From this city, we have a view of the mountain, which is at a small distance.
It is ascended by a good road, which rises gradually, and presents a variety of
interesting objects, such as gardens, orchards, and country seats. -- From the
summit, the eye beholds many lively landscapes.

The city and the islands in the river, or rather lake which surrounds the
island and mountain of Montreal, and Isle Jesu, unite in entertaining the sight
in endless variety. This is the magazine for fruit, in particular for apples
for the province. These are raised in abundance, are excellent in their
quality, preserved with ease, and sold at a moderate price.

Several parishes and parish churches are on this island. At La'chine is the
landing place from the upper countries; the rapids making any further progress
toward the city, by water very difficult: Boats are built at this place, and
loaded for the Indian and western traffic. A canal is meditated, but not begun,
in order to remove the difficulties, which prevent the loading at Montreal: --
A convenient valley presents for this purpose. The expense would be amply
compensated by the facility, with which business would then be executed.

The private villas, country houses, gardens, and highly cultivated mountain
and island, entice the visitor to spend some time among the delightsome scenes.
The roads are good in summer and winter. The soil is rich, and air exceedingly
salubrious.

A part of the army is stationed at Montreal, in barracks erected for the
soldiery, under the French administration, and those formed lately in the
college of the Jesuits.

An happy harmony prevails among all orders of the inhabitants, which are
composed of English, French, Scotch and Irish. An urbanity, hospitality, and
interesting gentility of manners pervade most classes of people.

Since settlements have been made in the northern parts of Vermont, and its
neighborhood, on the Canada side of the line, an extensive traffic has been
introduced into this city from thence. This will increase with the population,
and for a long time be unrivalled. In case of war, Montreal is exposed to
invasions by land, should the States take a share in the contest.

Religion, appears to have its proper influence upon the inhabitants. Churches
are thronged: Peace takes place among professors of every name. The clergy are
well supplied. The English priests have their rewards from England, joined to
an annual salary paid by their parishoners. The catholic ministers have certain
rents, which are competent to their necessities. From their wealth and good
offices, the poor and distressed find great relief from want and woe. The
clergy of all ranks are pious, polite men, -- of good learning and abilities.

Some schools are erected under European instructors. Their progress has not
yet been such, as to become distinguished seminaries, in the city or its
neighborhood. Females are generally taught in the nunneries, and by an
ordinance of the catholic church, boys and girls are not educated in the same
school.

After an agreeable abode of a fortnight at Montreal, we set out for Quebec, by
the way of William Henry, a town which received its name from a prince of
England, who visited the provinces not many years since. It is situated at the
easterly point of land, where the rivers Sorel and St. Laurence unite their
waters. The ground is advantageous for forming a town. It is laid out for the
purpose, and a number of houses are erected. Part of the army are quartered at
William Henry to guard the pass to and from the country, by the way of the
river. As settlements increase in Vermont, and on the south side of Canada,
near the States, the town of William Henry will increase also. The easy water
conveyance down the river, impeded only by the rapids above Chamblee, and the
small streams and mill seats upon them, will tend to encourage every kind of
industry.

The English church is the second that has been built in the province. -- A
small one had been previously erected on the opposite side of the St. Laurence,
rather as a monument or mausoleum for the dead, than a chapel for a numerous
congregation.

A minister of the English church, a man of fortune, resides and officiates at
William Henry, and among the troops at St. John's.

The Catholics have a large stone church, which is not far from the mansion of
their minister. In no parts of this province, do the Catholics appear negligent
in providing for the institutions and support of religion.

This town is about forty miles below Montreal. As we came hither by water, we
were constantly amused with a pleasant country: Villages are in view on both
sides of the river: Many of them are decorated with spires made brilliant by a
covering of tin.

For their better accommodation with water, the inhabitants build their houses
near the banks of the river, and their farms are consequently narrow in front,
and their houses not far from each other. These are formed of stone or square
timber; -- being made white with lime, the contrast between them, and the
verdure of the trees and fields, causes a picture-like scene. We in reality
passed one continued village.

A decent, respectful affability of manners, prevails among the French
peasantry; the roads and houses being near the margin of the water, we
frequently conversed with the inhabitants on the shore.

Our waterman were civil and attentive. -- We were often indulged by them, with
a French song, and with gratification saw their attention to their religion, as
they passed the churches. These they visited at the hours of devotion.

Having spent some days at William Henry, we proceeded down the river; but
having reached the center of the Lake of St. Peter, a south wind caused a
dangerous swell, and we landed at the river De Loup, from whence we took
carriages, and were conveyed to Three Rivers.

The islands formed at the mouth of the river Sorel, extend from William Henry
to the Lake. They are flat, variegated by trees, cultivated fields, and small
farm houses. Our passage in different directions, among these islands, and the
width of the Lakes, deprived us of our former views of the country; but these
were exchanged for objects equally amusing, as the islands afford a great
variety.

The town called Three Rivers, is built upon a rising ground: The front toward
the river, is generally a high steep bank of sand and gravel. It is the only
place of consequence, as to trade, on the north side of the river St. Laurence,
between Montreal and Quebec. While the province was under the administration of
the French, some superior civil and military officers resided at Three Rivers.
A large parish church, a nunnery which is an hospital, and place for female
education, are possessed by the Catholics. -- The college erected by the
Jesuits, is now a prison, and place for public offices. Its chapel is improved,
partly for civil courts and a congregation of Protestants of the English
church. This union of religion and law* under one roof, is uncommon. The
chancel is circular, and converted into very commodious seats, for judges,
jurors, and other attendants upon judicial proceedings. On the south side of
the same chapel is erected a decent pulpit, reading desk and pews.

This town enjoys some trade with the Indians, who often visit it with their
furs, belts, and other manufactures. The soil of the neighboring country is
barren and sandy. -- About nine miles in its rear is a large settlement formed
by a furnace, which is the chief factory for cast iron. From hence, the whole
northern country is furnished with that immense supply of stoves, so
universally used in those provinces. European artists, distinguished for their
ingenuity, are employed as superintendants and conductors of this extensive
business. In every part, ability, and enterprise are discovered, and a better
regulated factory need not be sought for in North America.

The mechanism of the extensive works, -- the mode in which water is conveyed
to the various parts where it is wanted, cause great dispatch in business.

The town of Three Rivers, obtained its name from its neighborhood to the
river, which has two islands at its mouth, as it enters the river St. Laurence,
and this forms the appearance of three streams.

The central situation of this town, between the cities of Montreal and Quebec,
has led many to project the erection of a college in it, for the instruction of
young men.

An English clergyman, and two Catholic ministers, reside here upon handsome
stipends raised by their respective communities.

Locations are made in the lands south of Three Rivers, on the opposite shore,
and a communication between Canada and the States, will shortly be opened from
thence by the way of the river Connecticut.

The road from the river De Loup to this place is good, and like the country
already described, well settled and well cultivated. We passed the late
cantonments of those called the loyal corpse, during the late war, and the
guards on the point of the Lake of St. Peter, where the waters assume a
narrower course, and become part of the river St. Laurence.

A new scene opened upon our arrival at Quebec, the key into the province by
water, and the theater of many military operations, where the members of two
European nations have ruled, and the inhabitants of the States have
distinguished themselves by their valor.

Unfavorable winds, and the impediments of a tide, frequently detained us on
our way to this city, as the waters flow up the river as far as Three Rivers.
-- This left us to attend to its progress, and to regulate our voyage
accordingly.

From Montreal to Quebec, we have again found an almost continued village. Good
accommodations by night and day, and easy conveyances by land and water, all at
a moderate price.

Religion appears truly venerable not only in its temples and other edifices,
but in the hospitality, politeness and genteel de deportment of most of its
professors. To the clergy and other gentlemen of rank and information, we have
been indebted for many civilities. -- At Cape Santa and Point-au-Tremble, we
were politely entertained, while the winds and tide delayed our voyage. The
first of these villages, is made conspicuous at a considerable distance, by a
large church adorned with five steeples -- all covered with tin.

This temple stands on a rising ground, and was founded by three ladies of
great estate -- It is called the Church of the Three Sisters, in commemoration
of this their piety. It ranks in size with the Cathedral of Quebec, and the
parish church of Montreal.

Point au-Tremble is eighteen miles from Quebec. The late suffragan or
assistant bishop, called the coadjutor, resided in this parish. -- He was
greatly esteemed by Lord Dorchester and the court at Quebec. Through the
influence of this nobleman, that worthy prelate was advanced to the Episcopal
chair. He attended Lord Dorchester on a voyage to England, and was formerly a
Catholic missionary among the Indians at Penobscot, in the State of
Massachusetts and received a stipend from to the general court there for those
services. A specimen of policy or liberality at that time, which is to be
applauded, but not easily accounted for. This dignitary joined to a zealous
attachment to his religious profession, the christian, gentleman, the friend of
learning, and patron of useful arts, and men of merit. He died in Quebec, and
the curate of Longuile near Montreal, was elected to the same dignity.

The bishops of the Catholic church preserve the succession of episcopal power
with great care, and no one is consecrated without the approbation of the
bishop of Rome, and the governor of Canada.

Thus preserving the distinction of ecclesiastical powers, the rights of
patronage, and the duties of allegiance, and removing jealousies and
discontents on all sides.

One bishop only is necessary, to deliver the sacerdotal power to another, and
a suffragan is always elected upon the decease of either of the two, that the
diocese may not be destitute of a superior. The other bishop resides with the
clergy in the seminary of Quebec. His former palace is converted into land and
other offices, and its chapel into a court or parliament house. The clergy
teach a number of young men in the seminary, and are the principal instructors
through the province.

It is a common place remark that the clergy of the church of Rome, wish to
keep the people in ignorance. This charge has given offense in Canada. At the
first settlement of this province, large reservations of lands were made, for
the promotion of learning, and commodious and excellent colleges were erected.
These were under the superintendance of the society of Jesuits. Instructors
were placed and every needful endowment and arrangement made for disseminating
knowledge. But, upon surrendering of the province to the British, after the
conquest, these colleges were converted into barracks and prisons, both in
Montreal and Quebec. The funds are appropriated to other uses after the decease
of the longest liver of the fraternity.

All attempts to erect substitutes for these, have been abortive. The nation of
England has not made amends for the loss, and the Catholics have been defeated
and chagrined. -- The Anglo-Americans who abode by the British standard, and
wished to provide for the education of their children in Canada, have
endeavored to form academies and schools after the example of the States. The
Catholic bishop has been consulted, and he gave his opinion without reserve,
that the colleges and property of the Jesuits ought to be restored to their
original uses in promoting knowledge; -- that they were amply adequate to every
purpose. He was asked to give a statement of the present revenues of the
clergy, with a hope, that a fund might be raised from thence for the purpose.
His answer was, that the incomes of the clergy, were barely sufficient for
their necessities, -- that these depended upon certain parts of the products of
the country, which were frequently diminished by blast, drought, and unfruitful
seasons, -- that the clergy were constantly obliged to resign their dues to
relieve the poor, and thus neglecting exacting justice for themselves.

After deliberating on the subject, the governor and the English party
relinquished the design. Colleges are not erected. Young men are sent into
England and the States for education. The clergy of the Romish church proceed
to educate all who are placed under their care, and some Protestant schools are
taught in the towns of Montreal, William Henry, Three Rivers, and Quebec.

This last city is composed of two parts, called the Upper and Lower town. The
latter is erected under a precipice, and upon the beach on the banks of the
river. It is connected with the upper town, by a winding street, and a foot way
up winding stairs. In it are the public and private stores and wharves. The
depth of the water, the height to which it rises, and the commodious beach
formed during the ebb of the tide, afford many conveniences to facilitate
business. One street of houses, with the above stores and wharves, compose the
principal part of the lower town.

The upper town is built upon an eminence which commands the country and river.
The fortifications are strong, the city is entered by gates, and must be
reduced only by great military force, regular siege, and persevering
operations. Every apparatus and and provision for its defense, are prepared and
in readiness, in great quantities. Surprise, stratagem, and starvation, are
scarcely practicable, especially when the rigors of winter, are to be
surmounted by assailants and besiegers.

Within the walls, are the chatteau or governor's house, all public offices,
the churches, seminary, Jesuits and Recolletts colleges, and two nunneries.

The chatteau is a large stone building, with a commodious spot as a court
yard, or place of parade in front toward the town. Joined to this, is a large
dining or banqueting hall: On the summit of an inaccessible precipice in front
from this house and its gardens, we view the country east, and south across the
river, and the whole of the lower town.

The most remarkable building in Quebec, is the Cathadral church, which is
large, and attended by a numerous congregation. It is well adorned at the east
end near the altar, but does not make the same splendid appearance, with the
parish church of Montreal.

The seminary and former college of the Jesuits are large. Elegant chapels are
joined to each of them. The Recolletts college and chapel have been demolished
by fire, and are in ruins. The nunneries are also large: One is a place of
female education, the other is an hospital: A third is without the city, and an
hospital. These institutions, the property of females, -- the receptacle for
the sick and wounded, are conducted with great order and economy. Human woes
are alleviated by them in a manner, that does honor to human nature and
religion. They contain large apartments for sick men, and sick women. They are
the only alms houses in the province, and are supported from the property of
the nuns. These women are the nurses and attendants. Apothecaries' rooms,
supplied with medicine are in each, superintended by a nun. This is her
principal employment. The hospital rooms are connected with the chapels, and by
the opening of folding doors the sick may attend the devotions. They are
screened from public view by a curtain and lattice work. Great gracity and
decorum are observed through the whole. On the side opposite to the apartments
of the sick, is the chapel of the nuns, opened and secured in the same manner.
The main chapel is accessible to all visitors, as are the churches through the
province. Such sacred respect for religion, and such integrity prevail, that
the churches are open night and day. The hand of sacrilege, has seldom deprived
the temples of the smallest article. Contiguous to each of the colleges and
nunneries, are gardens which occupy a considerable part of Quebec. Many private
gardens are also within the city. Perhaps no more ground is taken up in these,
than is necessary to preserve the health.

Fires have frequently ravaged the upper and lower town, and the suburbs.

The most memorable spot contiguous to Quebec, is Abraham's plain. This is an
extensive flat ground about a mile in width, extending in a line with the river
toward the south-west. Near the river the bank rises suddenly, and forms a
precipice not easily to be ascended. On the north side, this hill gradually
descends to the river St. Charles. The neighboring region then rises in a
gentle slope, and we are entertained with a view of the pleasant country, farm
houses, and villages, until the prospect is lost in the distant hills and the
horizon. On this plain Wolf fell. The spot is shown, but is not marked by any
monument to distinguish it. He landed at a place now called Wolf's cove, made
by the river, covered by the circular form of the neighboring height or
precipice. He ascended by an hollow way, which nature had formed by a small
rivulet caused by rains from the water collected on the plain.

Nature had thus prepared a landing place and a pass from the beach, which was
covered from the view of the besieged, and gave an opportunity to surprise the
enemy within the walls.

The public road runs along this plain, and is decorated with gentlemen's
country seats and fertile fields.

Beyond this cove is Powel place, the residence of the Protestant bishop. It is
an elegant house, and the farm and gardens are in English style.

A large area in front, with irregular clusters of trees, a walk on the banks
of the river, and the descent by steps, lead the visitor around a seat of the
greatest distinction in the neighborhood.

In surveying Abraham's plain, we were pointed to the places where Montgomery,
Wooster, and others quartered and carried on their military operations.

The country around Quebec exhibits many enchanting prospects. The villages and
settlements across the St. Laurence, toward point Levi and the States -- the
isle of Orleans -- the country toward the falls of Montmorency -- Dorchester
bridge -- and the nunnery without the city, give beauty to extensive prospects.
The falls of Montmorency, at the distance of seven miles, tempted us to a ride
through the French villages and farms east of the city.

This admired prospect is made on a small river, which descends at least two
hundred feet in one sheet of water. A basin below receives it, and it is
conveyed from thence a small distance into the river St. Laurence. We beheld
the beauties of this place from a summer house, which General Haldimand erected
over the river, to which we descended by several flights of steps, made of
wood, by some ingenious artist. This summer house is really hung over the
river, and the fall must be from the above height, whenever it gives way to the
decay of time. The varied tinges of the rainbow, formed amidst the water and
vapors in a clear day; the diminished stature of the fishermen below, and the
ingenuity of the artist, afforded us much amusement.

This house is elegant, but not large. -- It is accommodated with all the
offices needful for a place of retreat for an hour or a night: It is too costly
for a peasant and man of business, and is not sufficiently commodious for the
permanent residence of a gentleman of leisure, rank, or fortune. Much taste is
displayed, and some considerable expense has been bestowed in decoration.

The Indian village of Lorette is visited by strangers, where intercourse with
civilized nations, and the superintendance of the Catholic clergy, exhibited
the descendents of the aboriginals of America in a well regulated settlement;
pious, industrious, and moral. -- A chapel, parson's house, and the usual
institutions of this country, for the benefit of its inhabitants, are found in
this place also.

Referring particular remarks upon the customs, manners, and peculiarities of
this country to the close of this work, we proceed to other parts of the
provinces.

Upon leaving Quebec, we revisited some of the country through which we passed
on our way thither. We found the river Sorel to be much narrower than the St.
Laurence, and the margin equally well filled and decorated with handsome
villages, through a fertile country* An uniformity of fashion prevails in their
churches and houses -- but the variety of views is great. The narrowness of the
river presented objects on each side, as we progressed slowly against the
stream.

Bellevieu and the neighboring mountain, exhibit an alluring, noble prospect.
This mountain rises in a conical form, and is conspicuous at a great distance.
Apple and other fruit trees flourish upon it, and it is not inhabited except in
a few places.

Chamblee Basin at the head of navigation, is about one mile across. Its form
is circular, and its banks inhabited. A church and village on one side, and an
old stone fortification on the other, and the entering of the waters from Lake
Champlain, down the rapids, give variety to the objects which engrossed our
attention. The fort is square, enclosing a barrack, and guarding the water
conveyance and entrance by land.

The rapids are seldom passed except in the spring, and some have projected a
mode of clearing out the rocks. Time will, by some work of art, open an easy
water communication between the river and lake.

Very costly and excellent mills are erected on the side of these rapids. The
carrying place from hence to St. John's is about eight miles. The road is good,
boats are often taken across, and but little interruption to travelers takes
place between Lake Champlain and Quebec.

Lower Canada appears upon examination, to enjoy as many of the blessings of
life, as are needful to make man happy. The government is mild and energetic.
The ancient French code, and the present system of English laws, are conducted
in such a mode as to secure the citizens at large, in every valuable right. A
representation, by the election of the people in a provincial legislature, and
the privilege of trial by jury, are established by the constitution.

The civil and military list are maintained by the British nation, and the
people pay few or no taxes to defray the expenses of government. Salaries are
paid to the English clergy, and to some of the Catholic and Presbyterian
ministers, by the crown.

The militia are officered by men elected from among themselves, and their
respective companies have alarm posts assigned, and the officers residence is
marked by a pole with an evergreen top. In this mode, in all cases of distress
and danger, a resort is immediately pointed out, for the inhabitant and
stranger.

To the south-east of this place near the States, settlements are rapidly
forming within the province. The settlers are chiefly from the loyalists of the
late army, and emigrants from New England. Already has considerable land been
improved and brought into cultivation, and as these extend along the lines, and
advance toward the river St. Laurence, they will greatly increase the
prosperity of this province.

The hardy manners and industry, the successful mode of clearing lands, in
which the northern colonists excel, give them many advantages. They cultivate
the older farms, through the ancient settlements, among the French inhabitants
better, and landholders in general prefer such upon their estates.

This province, affords as many of the real enjoyments of life, and the people
are as happy, peaceable, and prosperous as in any part of North America. Few
conquered countries have been better protected or governed. Religion, while it
restrains the people within the bounds of morality, has a large share in
teaching them to obey government. The principles of liberty and religion, which
have placed all power in the hands of the people, and destroyed many of the
laws and customs of countries governed by absolute monarchs, and nobles and
clergy with superior powers, are gradually extending: This in consequence of
the use and administration of the English laws and their opinions, customs,
manners and religion.

The monastic orders decrease gradually, and few offer themselves for admission
into the nunneries. The order of Friars and Jesuits were permitted to enjoy
their estates at the conquest, but to enrol no more in their fraternities.
These orders are therefore almost extinct.

An order called the gray nuns, are school mistresses, who instruct the girls
only in the French and Indian villages. They are not confined to the cloister,
and are very attentive to their pupils whom they early initiate into an
acquaintance with the catachisms, smaller rituals, and the principles of
religion. They have maidservants who attend their domestic concerns, and the
institutions may be considered as well regulated boarding schools. -- Females
who perform the more laborious part of the economy of the nunneries, are called
Lay Sisters, and have not taken the vow of single life.

Protestanism has made but little progress. The universal toleration which is
established by law, -- the peaceable temper of the governors of the Catholic
church, -- and the civil and military characters at the head of the province,
have preserved general harmony.

The English bishop in Quebec is a gentleman of great learning, eminently
qualified for his office. His moderation and discretion are very acceptable to
all parties. So little zeal for proselyting from the Catholics has prevailed,
that more have joined these from the Protestants than have been converts to the
English church or the Presbyterians.

Although a bishop, priest, and deacon officiate in Quebec, yet an English
church has not been erected for the use of the English congregation, and divine
service is celebrated in a Catholic chapel. The politeness and hospitality of
the clergy were displayed in a manner which demands our highest acknowledgments
of gratitude.

Our very genteel reception by the assistant bishop of the Catholic church,
opened a source for much information. We found him easy of access, affable, and
dignified in his manners. He also performed the duties of a parish priest and
received a reward not superior to most of that order. He frequently
administered medicine to the sick, having been called in his missions to study
the healing art.

By his letter we became acquainted with the bishop of Quebec, a much esteemed
ecclesiastic. In Quebec we met these dignitaries together at the seminary, and
dined with the former at the chief justice's, in company with three of the
clergy of France, gentlemen of distinguished rank, learning, and abilities.

The intercourse among all descriptions of the heads of departments and
communities is such, as displays great order and confidence among each other,
with a happy effect upon the people and subordinate nations.

The common habit of a bishop is a purple stuff, with a velvet collar and
cuffs. A gold cross about three inches long is worn around his neck, and a
broad silk sash with gold tassels at the ends around his waist. This dress is
fitted to the body but spreads in the skirt, reaching to the feet. It is closed
from the neck to the bottom with a large number of buttons. The habit of the
inferior clergy is black, but is similar in its fashion.

On our return from Quebec, we found the bishop at Point-au-Tremble,
celebrating the anniversary of his consecration, attended by the head of the
Recolletts, three of the clergy from France, and some of the parish clergy from
the city and neighborhood. -- Perfect ease prevailed among all. Toward the
evening the bishop accompanied us to the banks of the river, attended by the
head of the Recolletts, a gentleman far advanced in life, but retaining a fund
of vivacity, and a sprightly fancy and humor, which make his company
acceptable in all circles.

When the sun was near setting the parish bell rung, and the company taking off
their hats, conversation was suspended and devotion engrossed a few minutes.
This appeared to be a signal for presenting devout thanksgivings to the Father
of mercies, and is observed accordingly by the whole parish and country.

In the chapel a body of Indian men, women, and children were upon their knees,
totally absorbed in presenting their evening adorations. We passed them,
apparently without being noticed, and as far as external deportment authorized
us to judge of the employment of the heart, no supplicants could be more
sincerely devout. They were part of a tribe who were upon a visit to the bishop
their former priest, and were treated with great tenderness and kindness by
himself and his family.

The weather was pleasant and we had seen them in their encampment near the
margin of the river. They had made their voyage in a birch canoe, which was now
their shelter from the sun. The women were busy in manufacturing articles for
sale in birch bark, which they decorate with the porcupine's quill -- Diligence
and innocence marked their demeanor. These temporary defenses by their canoes
are made more convenient, by the birch bark which they carry with them; which
answers as a floor to sleep upon, or as tents to ward off the wind and rain.
The birch canoes are made of the bark of that tree and are of different
dimensions. Those used in the North-western trade are large: They are
constructed for expeditious sailing, -- are light, and easily conveyed over
portages or carrying places. Great attention must be paid to the motion at
entering or while within them, as the smallest accident will overturn them if
this is not observed. When they are properly loaded and ballasted, they are
safe and pass dangerous rapids without difficulty or damage.

While the Canadian men have not generally the benefits of schools, and want
colleges and instructors, the women are well educated in the city and country
nunneries. The ursuline nuns teach in the cities and towns, and the gray nuns
in the country.

The country nunneries are large well built houses, with gardens and needful
court yards for safety, exercise and ornament. One of these is to be found in
every village. Girls from a distance are received as boarders, and the village
girls as day scholars. -- They retire at regular hours and are removed at the
pleasure of parents. Being contiguous to the chapel of the neighborhood, all
attend devotions, morning and evening. The effect is pleasing, as the women
obtain good educations in reading, writing, and many of the useful and
ornamental branches of industry which are peculiar to the sex.

Religion is venerated in every quarter -- Its temple, its humane, and
benevolent institutions -- Its monuments and memorandums in cities and
countries are numerous. Historic paintings and pictures cover the walls, and
the crosses by the way constantly lead the mind to devout reflections. It would
be foreign from the design of this work to enter upon a detail of the
peculiarities in the opinion and rights of the Catholic church, which we call
superstitious. Many ingenious arguments are given for their faith and
institutions. Protestants when they striped the churches of historic scripture
paintings, deprived themselves not only of the rich productions of eminent
artists, but of valuable means for instruction. The animated canvas in Catholic
countries, gives us more just and lively ideas of the nativity, resurrection,
and ascension of our Lord, than can be afforded by the tongue or pen of the
learned, nay, than by the language of scripture itself. That the painter has
given us the scene in reality is not pretended, but as exact a representation
of it as human ingenuity can devise. To this custom of decorating churches it
is to be attributed, that Italy produced so many eminent painters, and became a
school for men of that profession. The charge of idolatry, has been carried in
the opinion of sober Protestants, beyond all bounds of decency. The
representation of the person or event is preserved to instruct and solemnize.
The most powerful arguments are used to deter the people from praying to images
or pictures.

While candor and charity lead us not to censure or condemn what we are not
thoroughly acquainted with, we should guard against those violences and
convulsions, which would make a prey of professors of religion of any kind to
gratify spleen, bigotry, avarice, or any hateful passion. Reformation is to be
effected by wisdom, gentleness, patience, and more exemplary piety.

Traveling in this province is easy and expeditious. A public mail-stage runs
from St. John's to Quebec: A calesche, a species of chaise or chair drawn by one
horse, is used by all classes of citizens. These are to be had at most of the
peasants' houses, and obtained at pleasure in the cities. For a moderate price
travelers are conveyed in them sixty miles a day -- As the driver passes the
churches and crosses, he checks the speed of the horse and stops for a minute,
and taking off his hat repeats a small prayer, and replaces it upon his head
and drives on. Some have profanely resisted and ridiculed this practice; but to
be conducted as a stranger by attendants, who constantly pay their homage to
the Creator and Preserver of men, must console every considerate mind* It is
more commendable to encourage such devotions, than to interrupt them and give
needless offense

Water conveyances in small and large vessels are also constant between the
cities of Montreal and Quebec. Whenever wind or tide detained us contrary to
our inclination, we found ready transportation by the peasants on the land.

Water voyages are peculiarly entertaining. The expedition and convenience by
which they are conducted, lead many to prefer this mode. The canoes and flat
bottomed boats pass safely and are managed with dexterity. To the orderly and
respectful deportment of the boatmen in general, they joined a scrupulous
demeanor as they passed the churches and monuments of religion. The watermen
constantly amused us with their singing in a measure which is harmonious, and
animates them to greater dexterity and expedition.

The foregoing describes a summer's visit and tour. A winter is scarcely less
pleasant: The country is then covered with snow -- the waters congealed, and
pleasure and business create an active season. The roads are good: Fat horses
and good sleighs, called carioles, are plenty. Dressed in fur and prepared for
the climate, the cold and storm makes but little impression -- They cause but
little complaint by either night or day, and the houses being heated by stoves
a temperature is formed to that degree, which causes flowers to appear in full
bloom, and citron trees are to be found which have not been injured by frost
for many years.

With a warm dress, a buffaloe skin over our feet and lap, a fur cap, muff,
mittens and buskin lined with fur, we visited the village of the Algonguin and
Irrioquois Indians, about 40 miles from Montreal -- This is the residence of
the descendants and remnant of two tribes, who dwell in two streets or small
cantonments in houses formed of hewn timber closed with lime. The distance
between these cantonments is but a few rods. In each is a small chapel of a
regular form, about fifteen feet square. These edifices are frequent in these
provinces, and they are improved in the Catholic processions, in villages, as a
substitute for large churches in the cities. Certain solemnities are attended
in them on public festivals.

The Indians appear to be totally converted to christianity, and reduced to
order under the government. No attendants upon religious worship can be more
punctual or reverential, and the singing of their women is soft and enchanting.
The large chapel is decorated with a number of excellent historic
representations taken from sacred scripture. The altar, vestry room, vestments
of the priests, and the furniture at large used in this temple, are exceeded by
few of the French churches.

The Indians do not confine their devotions to the public assembling in the
church, but are punctual in their morning and evening ejaculations before and
after their meals, and in all cases of difficulty and danger.

After the season of hunting expires, these two tribes return to their village:
-- One of them permits the women and children to attend them into the forest:
-- In the other, the women abide at home. In summer the land is cultivated, and
bread and many other necessaries raised for their consumption during the year.
They have horses and other cattle, and vehicles for winter traveling. The
women are diligent in their domestic concerns, and manufacture belts,
mockasons, and various parts of the clothing of their families. Furs and skins
are dressed by these people, and their whole time appears to be industriously
employed in the manufactures peculiar to themselves. A large surplus is sold to
the merchants in this village and Montreal. Traders are established in all
these settlements, who enjoy a lucrative traffic and possess the confidence of
the Indians.

The felicity and prosperity which prevail, afford strong arguments in support
of the policy of both the French and English governments, and the good effect
of the Catholic religion. These tribes are useful auxiliaries in all confusions
with the western tribes, and are employed as ambassadors and runners.

About forty miles above this settlement, plantations are forming on the
Ottawais river into a region but little known until late years. A large country
is now opening by water upon this river, which will be the principal channel of
communication with the north-western country. The neighborhood of this
territory to Montreal, and the easy communication by water to every part of the
provinces, make it very valuable.

At the mouth of this river is the Lake of the two mountains, known by its
vicinity to two high hills, which are to be seen at a considerable distance.
Many fertile islands and small streams are connected with this Lake and the
river.

Opposite to this Indian village is a French settlement, to which we passed
through an avenue of evergreens of about twelve feet in height, placed in the
ice, in regular order, equi-distant from each other. This is a common practice,
and very necessary where roads are exposed to be destroyed by new snows, or the
traveller may lose his way in a storm.

A stone fortification formerly defended the entrance into the lake and river
at this place, and some of its remains are to be seen, contiguous to the chapel
and parish house. These are erected on a point of land, where commanding views
present in every direction. -- Time may make this a place of importance, and a
large city may be formed where the natives have resided unmolested for many
years. A road is opened from Montreal in the rear, and a winter journey is made
across the islands and frozen waters in front.

The customs and manners of the Indians, have been very generally and
accurately described by those who first visited them, in what we call, their
rude and savage state -- An intercourse with those who have emigrated from
Europe, has changed the scene in some degree among the tribes in Canada. They
have assumed the short furtout which is generally used by the peasantry. The
children are nursed upon a board, and the blanket is retained by men, women and
children, as the outer garment in rain or cold. The Indian stocking and
mockasins, are well adapted to the climate. The French peasants wear a shoe of
tanned leather, constructed in the same form.

The French government, early countenance matrimonial alliances with the
natives, and a great similarity of features and complexion appear in all parts
of the country, through which we have passed. This affinity is evident in both
the French and Indian settlements, and men and women of these respective tribes
and nations, live happily together in domestic and matrimonial state. Their
progeny marry together as children of one common family. Was this virtuous and
rational matrimonial alliance encouraged, by the European emigrants into the
American regions north and south, many confusions and outrages would be
prevented.

From this village we passed through French settlements into the upper
province, and the townships possessed by the late loyal corpse and the
adventurers from Europe and the States. People of every language and nation,
have came hither and formed prospering colonies. Heaven has blessed their
labors, industry, and enterprise. Few have experienced greater success. The
nation of England has fostered them with great care, and bestowed rations of
provisions, clothing, materials for house building, husbandry tools, and
continued the pay of the late officers and soldiers for three years. Each of
the emigrants also had a quantity of land bestowed upon them.

In return for this bounty, the nation vends her manufactures, and must enjoy a
lucrative commerce with countries that are increasing in wealth and numbers,
whose consumption of foreign commodities will increase in proportion also. The
advantages to the nation from this justice, policy, and this mode of colonizing
will be immense. The country is fertile, well timbered and watered. Commodious
locks are formed near the rapids, which facilitate transportation. The winter
is peculiarly favorable for conveying the produce of the country and
commodities of the merchant to market, as the roads are good, the country flat,
and waters frozen.

At St. Regis on the south side of the river, a number of Indians reside in a
small town, built of hewn timber, who are occupied in hunting, fishing,
farming, and the manufactures of their tribes. The most distinguished object in
this place is a very large Catholic church, inferior to few in size, which has
been lately built by the Indians themselves, with a small assistance from the
clergy and some gentlemen of rank and fortune. Men, women, and children in this
village assisted the masons and carpenters in procuring timber, stone, and
lime, and in every possible part of the labor.

It is a work which does honor to their zeal, and is an ornament to a very
pleasant country, contiguous to fertile islands, and the waters of the river
St. Laurence. Mountains toward to the southwest are seen, which are in the
State of New York, and neighborhood of Lake Champlain -- Roads from hence, and
from an American plantation, making on the side of the States opposite
Johnstown, or Oswegatche, will expedite the communication with Albany and
New York, and shorten the present route more than one hundred miles. The
country is well calculated for this purpose.

The British nation pay a salary to the Catholic minister of St. Regis, and a
Presbyterian minister on the opposite shore. At Cornwall and Johnstown, they
are about to erect and maintain churches and academies. and a sum is assigned
for the purpose.

Kingston is a considerable town in the Upper province. It is erected near the
old fort, called Frontinac, part of which remains with the barracks, and are
improved by the garrison which is stationed there. Many large houses, stores,
and some convenient wharves are built near the river or lake. Being at the
extremity of that inland sea, called the Lake Ontario, and near the outlet from
thence which forms the river St. Laurence, this must be a town of considerable
importance. A number of large vessels are constantly passing from hence in
every direction across the Lake, and boats are arriving to, and passing from
hence and Montreal. The country is clearing and cultivating. Numerous bays and
rivers are connected with the Lake, and wealth must reward the industry of a
busy, enterprising people. Wheat, lumber, cattle, horses, and potashes, will
compose the principal exports. The constant influx of inhabitants will for a
long time, consume the produce of the farmer, and spare the trouble of
exportation, With the numbers that have entered these regions, government has
been established. similar in its form to the constitution of England, and the
other royal governments* the civil, military, and ecclesiastical officers are
chiefly supported by the crown, and the Legislature meet^ on the other side of
the Lake.

An English church is erected, and a missionary, who is the bishop's
commissary, is inducted into the cure -- He visits the Mohawk Indians, and has
translated the gospels and liturgy into that language.

The object of the British nation, is to people and cultivate this country, and
to make it as perfect a part of the empire as possible. Dreading revolutions
they are cautious in receiving republicans from the States, and wish to
encourage husbandmen and laborers only. -- Clergymen, lawyers, physicians, and
schoolmasters from the States, are not the first characters who would be
fostered. Many congregations would have been formed, and schools opened, if the
policy in this particular had been different.

An extensive field is opened for men of letters is every profession. Destitute
of colleges, academies and schools, and confiding in the qualifications of the
clergy ordained by the bishops in the States, governor Simcoe wished to have
introduced such, but an act of the British parliament disconcerted his design.

When the bishops of England were permitted to consecrate bishops for the
States, a clause was inserted, in the act passed by parliament for the purpose,
that nothing therein contained should enable such "bishops or clergymen
ordained by them, to exercise their functions, within the limits of the
nation." This act was drawn by the archbishop of Canterbury, and has been
obstinately adhered to.

While the States are open to the clergy from England, and some since the peace
and the above law, have been received into our parishes; the clergy born and
ordained in the States are excluded from the parishes in the provinces.

Some of the latter, by reason of our popular elections, have given way to
these emigrants from Europe, to the distress of these American clergymen, and
not for the greater good of our flocks. By means of this law, these new
countries have been destitute of ministers, and lament their exposure to the
inroads of infidelity and enthusiasm.

Wise dignitaries and able statesmen on both sides of the Atlantic; christian
ministers and professors agree, that the law is illeberal, unchristian and
unequal. Much complaint and clamor have arisen, but no remedy has been
provided. -- In the provinces, they say that clergymen from Europe are not
acquainted sufficiently with the customs, manners, and habits of Americans, to
serve with them successfully. In the States, it is agreed that this law, and
our unrestrained (...) of receiving clergymen from the British nation, is not
consonant with the opinions of our country as to aliens, and the practice of
the Europeans, in their respective countries, who retain all places of
influence, honor, and profit in the hands of their own sons and citizens. --
The unity of the christian church in heart, faith and devotion, is too far
sacrificed to State policy and Ecclesiastical establishments. This law has
certainly defeated the extending of religion and learning in the provinces.

All the attorneys in this province have not been regularly bred to the
profession. Many are admitted to the bar, because they have been adherents to
the government, and reside in particular neighbourhoods, where a practioner is
wanted. The order of attorneys is not numerous in Canada. Men of distinguished
talents and acquirements are in the profession, and justice is well
administered. -- Controversies among the Catholics, are generally adjusted by
the clergy, and litigations are not frequent. Pension, place, and favor are
reserved for the English and Scotch adventurers, and the sons of Oxford and
Cambridge.

A taste for literature, and desire after mental and other improvements is
prevalent, and science will extend its happy effects among these new
settlements.

Mechanics of every kind are established -- Ship builders and mill-wrights have
produced excellent specimens of their abilities. Most of the mills which are
erected upon the larger streams and mill seats, are the labors of ingenuity,
and bring profit to the proprietors.

A water voyage through these provinces from Kingston to Montreal is enchanting
and entertaining, -- cheap and expeditious -- while much delay and many
impediments, put the patience to the proof, in attempts to pass into the
country against the stream.

New objects present every moment to draw the attention: The river, -- the
broader waters of the Lake of St. Francis, -- the rapids and islands, are full
of novelty.

Among the first which attract notice, is a cluster called the Thousand
Islands, where at least that number are collected together, not far from Lake
Ontario, of various forms and sizes. Sometimes they are exhibited in a regular
line, and then surround us, where to a stranger, no certain outlet appears.
These islands are not inhabited except by birds and wild animals. Fish are
taken in abundance in most of the northern waters.

The rapids at the outlet of the Lake of St. Francis, -- below the cedars, --
and at the cascade, are entertaining to the eye, but cause the heart to
tremble. These the Indians encounter without damage or much anxiety: No
adventure appears to be more hazardous; but the skilful Indian navigator
conducted us safely through all. To the Catholic priests we were indebted, for
recommending such for boatmen, as were temperate and faithful. Upon our parting
with our attendants, they generally asked whether we were satisfied, and they
had fulfilled their engagements? -- This is a practice among both French and
Indians, and renders traveling more pleasant, where such persons may be called
to respond for insolence or dishonesty, and by habit are taught to be decent
and respectful to employers. -- In no instance did one of those who escorted
us, offend by their neglect, indolence, impertinent language, or intoxication:
And on our return, we were frequently asked, whether our attendants had done
their duty. All travelers would wish that a similar care was universal.

The mutual attachment of the clergy, and their Indian parishioners to each
other, appears to be the result of those reciprocal good offices, which bind
generous souls together, and of that particular attention which is pa^d to the
natives. Instances of this kind are (...). -- A priest, who had (...) a (...)
among the Indians, was about to be removed to another cure -- (...) of this
reached the Indians, who sent a^ aged chief to him as a messenger. Having
^^livered his errand, and used many arguments to dissuade him from removing; he
a^ked for an ancient, valuable belt, which had been deposited with the priest
for safe custody, and was the testimonial of an alliance between the natives
and the administration of that time: When the belt was delivered, the chief
examining and recognizing it, spread it around the feet of the priest, and
asked him whether he could walk away from the affection and bonds of union
which that belt reminded him of? The belt was restored to its cabinet, the
priest remained and the Indians were satisfied.

In the church at Kingston we saw an Indian woman, who sat in an honorable
place among the English. She appeared very devout during divine service, and
very attentive to the sermon. She was the relict of the late Sir William
Johnston, superintendant of Indian affairs, in the then province of New York,
and mother of several children by him, who are married to Englishmen, and
provided for by the crown. She is the sister to the celebrated Col. Brant, and
has always been a faithful and useful friend in Indian affairs, while she
resided in Johnston hall, and since her removal to Upper Canada.

When Indian embassies arrived, she was sent for, dined at governor Simcoe's
and was treated with respect by himself, his lady, and family. When treaties or
purchases were about to be made at Johns^^^ hall, she has often persuaded the
obstinate chiefs into a compliance with the proposals for peace, or sale of
lands. She retains the habit of her country women, and is a Protestant. During
the life of Sir William, she was attended with splendour and respect, and since
the war, receives a pension and compensation for losses, for herself and her
children.

Soon after the arrival of the Protestant bishop, he visited the diocese, and
on his way accidentally passed a party of Indians, who recognized their former
missionary, the present minister of Kingston, in company with the bishop, and
followed them to the inn where they halted. The bishop's attention was drawn to
the affectionate meeting of the Indians, and their old friend. This led the
Indians to ask, who the bishop was? Being informed, that he was the spiritual
guide, who was sent by the Great Father across the water to preach the gospel,
and regulate the concerns of religion, they solicited the privilege of making a
speech to him, which was done accordingly through the interpreter, in which
they expressed their joy and gratitude to God, and their earthly guides who led
him to this undertaking The bishop in return, addressed them, and agreeable
impressions were made on all sides, by so sudden and unexpected an interview.

The clergy of Montreal are proprietors of an estate, near the Algonquin and
Iroquois towns, and maintain the incumbent, whom we found to be a sensible,
polite, affable, and hospitable man. His assistant was an accomplished young
Ecclesiastic, who had escaped from France since the present wars, and was one
of the priests in Lions. He retreated by the way of Geneva into England, and
since his arrival in Canada, has devoted himself as a missionary to the service
of the Indians. He has learned their language and constantly attends the duties
of his function with great punctuality. Gratitude to his Almighty deliverer
appears to have dictated this measure: He was a youth of good talents and
education, adorned with many elegant endowments, acquired amongst the literati
of a polished city, in a once civilized country. His parents were cast into
prison, and probably fell a sacrifice to Jacobinism and Roberspiere.

The clergy of the church of Rome, are early inspired with an ardent desire to
be sent on distant missions, and to propagate the gospel in every part of the
world. They sacrifice ease and affluence for those employments, with great zeal
and alacrity. From hence it is, that they have planted christianity, in the
most distant parts of the globe. From their consequent successful labors, and
greater experience, they are in due time, advanced to the station of bishops
and superiors.

They are appointed to their various errands by the bishop of the diocese, and
removed at his discretion, and upon the decease of a parish priest, another is
immediately placed in the cure. If his administration is not acceptable, he is
made the minister of some other place.

Discords seldom break out with virulence between the clergy and their
parishoners, and great reverence is paid to the priesthood as an office of
divine appointment. Aaron when consecrated to the priesthood in the church of
Israel, was not more revered than the Catholic priests are in all public
performances.

Their robes are made in imitation of those used by the Jewish priests, and in
commemoration of the garments worn by the Savior of men. Different prayers are
connected with these vestments, and used at the time of putting them on or
taking them off.

So minutely are these devotions, and the instruction or moral connected with
them attended to, that the glove or slipper, used at a bishop's consecration,
are not put on without praying, that the person about to be elevated, may be
blessed, as Jacob was blessed by his father, when he put on the hairy gloves,
and that his feet may be shod with the preparation of the gospel of peace.

Politeness, prudence, liberality, and discretion lead the Clergy of Canada,
not to introduce the subject of religion precipitately, before men of other
persuasions. They enter upon such themes with caution and gravity. Carefully
abstaining from them in public places, which are not devoted to religion.

Instances are often repeated of their respect to the British government. When
Prince William Henry, was publicly received in Montreal, many of the clergy of
the church of Rome were present, and paid him the respect of kneeling according
to the ancient customs of Europe. The prince, however, politely requested them
to dispense with that ceremony, and was obeyed.

The Protestant bishop, Doctor Mountain, arrived with the title given him in
England of bishop of Quebec. This was the title also of the superior in the
Catholic church, who immediately directed his clergy to address him in future,
by his surname. Such cordiality is observed, that when the late superintending
bishop of the provinces (bishop Inglis) visited Canada, he called upon the
Catholic clergy, and was received by them with great respect. Upon leaving the
province, he lamented the desolate state of the English church, and in a
farewell sermon preached in Quebec, caused the governor-general to wipe the tear
from his eye.

The feasts, fasts, and different ceremonies and processions of the Catholic
church are yet observed; except, that by a late ordinance, the people are not
compelled to attend to all those which are appointed in the callender. This
dispensation was obtained, through the influence of the English and Protestant
party; but it has not prevented the accustomed observance of those seasons on
the part of the people.

The festival of Corpus Christi, in commemoration of the institution of the
sacrament of the Lord's Supper, is observed as an high day in mid-summer, and a
sermon is preached on transubstantiation. The great dignity of the holy
Eucharist, which is daily celebrated, led the Catholic church to set apart, one
day in the year, in which the prayers, selected scriptures, and sermons direct
the attention more particularly to that ordinance. -- They are not silent on
the theme at other times. On that day, the streets are adorned with branches
from the trees, and procession^ pass from the churches. The priests appear also
in their most splendid robes.

A gentleman in Quebec, being in company with the late worthy Chief Justice
Smith, who was born and educated in New York, and lived and died a
Presbyterian, called these processions "fooleries." The Chief Justice with his
accustomed mildness and good sense, requested the gentleman to recollect what
he had said, and to consider when these things called 'fooleries (...) adopted,
and what was their design. That they originated at a time when christians lived
among heathens, whose false worship was full of ostentation and splendour; that
the christian processions were exhited in superior magnificence, and that some
duty of piety and morality, or some important fact in the gospel history and
the life of our Lord, was commemorated in every part, that our candor and
moderation, were therefore to be exhibited, when we commented on the usages of
the Catholic church. -- The Chief Justice at the same time, used the most
respectful language concerning the wisdom and piety of the English church, and
extolled the moderation and candor of the present bench of bishops in England.
Whatever specimens of bigotry, his history of New York, and other writings
might formerly be supposed to exhibit, his demeanor in Canada, appears to have
been that of a friend to universal toleration, liberty, and forbearance, among
professors of every kind. Had he lived to have inspected his history of
New York, it would not have appeared in its present form. Certain things there
recorded have been investigated, and ought to be corrected, because they are
contrary to known facts.

The houses of Canada, are well calculated for the purposes of all seasons.
Those of the rich have generally an half story beneath the surface of the
earth, a second story is of a good height, and a third is formed in the roof,
which is steep that the snow may not remain long upon it. This middle story is
divided into three large rooms in front, and three smaller, with a kitchen in
the rear.

Two stoves and the kitchen fire warm these apartments in such a manner, that
the inner doors are open night and day, during the coldest weather. A large
stove is usually placed in the center of one of these rooms, which is at the
entrance and end. This stove guards the other parts of the house from the
intrusions of frost. The walls of the houses are thick, as stone and lime are
plenty.

The windows are closed by folding sashes, hung upon hinges, which open the
whole in case of necessity, in summer.

The art of improving the benefits of the heat, communicated by the stoves,
consists chiefly, in making the pipes very large, of a diameter of seven and
eight inches. In the courthouse of Quebec, a stove is fixed with three
perpendicular pipes, which communicate with each other: -- After the smoke has
passed through these, it is conveyed across the hall. Fires have so frequently
taken place, that a law now prevents the pipes from being conveyed out of the
houses, except through a chimney.

Stoves are never used in the Catholic churches, and a portable wood or tin
stove is seldom seen. The English congregations in Quebec, Montreal, William
Henry, Three Rivers, and Kingston, have stoves in their chapels.

Protestant zeal, is perhaps not more cold, than Catholic; but, after the
celebration of Mass, Catholics may retire and not wait for the sermon.
Protestants who are such advocates for preaching, as to give up praying in
public, rather than part with the sermon, cannot endure the cold until the
whole is ended, and therefore, provide for the warming of their churches. But
another reason is, that stoves would deface the paintings and ornaments of the
church, and expose these costly edifices to be destroyed by fire.

The mild and affable administration of Lord Dorchester made him very dear to
the people of Canada, and they take pleasure in repeating anecdotes of his
agreeable intercourse with all orders. The head of the Recolletts, was a
gentleman far advanced in years. He retained great vivacity and a sprightly
humor and fancy, which rendered his company very acceptable in all circles.
The severe weather increasing at the beginning of winter, Lord Dorchester
informed this father who had the direction of the church in which the English
congregation assembled, that it was time to place the stove in the chapel, as
Lady Dorchester had complained, that the cold was disagreeable on the preceding
Sunday. I hoped, my Lord, replied the father, that her ladyship's devotions,
would have kept her warm this winter.

The common vehicle for conveying passengers in winter, is called a cariole,
and is constructed in a commodious form -- It imitates a chair or chaise
without a top, and is not unlike a calasche or summer vehicle. The sled or
runners which support the cariole, are made of plank, and elevate the machine
about eight inches. In front is a seat for the driver* and the whole is
defended by a work which rises as a guard against the snow, which is collected
by the machine, and impedes the progress of the horse Another use of this
invention is, to enable the driver more readily to raise the cariole over such
obstructions. This form adapts it for making new roads in snow over which it
slides, leaving a smooth track, while the snow is made more compact. An
inconvenience soon takes place in roads, which are constantly used. The snow
collecting in front, and the machine being lifted over it, by the driver or the
strength of the horse, it soon imitates waves, and the motion becomes very
uneasy.

Attempts have been made to lead the peasantry, to adopt some improvement in
their carioles, in order to remedy this, but without success.

Carioles used by gentlemen of fortune, are constructed and decorated at
considerable expense. They are light, airy, and elegant. The fur blankets used
in them, and the fur which is worn by the proprietors, exhibit great taste and
wealth.

The horses are not harnessed by the side of each other, but draw in a line.
This creates an impediment to those, who pass to and from the States, and
Canada in the winter. The roads of neither are adapted to the vehicles used and
the mode, in which horses draw them, in the other.

A luxury is enjoyed very generally in ice, during the summer, which is easily
preserved in houses of a very simple construction. These are small cellars,
about twelve feet square, formed in gardens, or on the north side of their
houses. They are secured by hewn timber instead of stone, and covered with
plank or slabs, which are supported by a pole which rests on two standards.
Upon these planks, earth is cast, and the whole covered with green sods. Small
bushes, such as the rose and goose-berry, are set in this layer of earth, and
trees are planted around the whole to increase the shade. The ice is taken in
winter from the lakes and rivers, and cast into these houses, where it is
broken into as small pieces as possible, and water poured in, which is
congealed by the frost, and forms a solid mass.

To Protestants the peculiarities of the Catholic religion affords much
amusement. -- Burials are attended in the churches with great pomp. During the
celebration of the religious offices, the corpse is placed upon a stage, which
is ascended by steps and surrounded by candles. These stages are painted black,
and adorned with representations of sculls and bones. Aromatic gums are burned
in censers in honor of the dead, and to prevent infection or offense from
putridity.

Crosses stand in the burial places as well as in the roads. Indeed they are
seen in every direction through the country in places of sepulture: Where
casualties, disasters, or deliverances have taken place, these are fixed as
monuments. They generally call the mind to devout ejaculations. In the grave
yard, in Montreal, are several marble monuments, made with urns standing upon
pedestals, and surrounded by iron rails.

The monuments of religion reared for the dead are decent, but those for the
benefit of the living, must engross the unavoidable attention of travelers.
Such have been already mentioned, in the description of the churches, colleges,
and monasteries. The uncommon privilege we were indulged with, in visiting
three nunneries, will afford an opportunity to gratify the curiosity of such,
as have not traveled into Catholic countries.

Admittance into these is gained with great difficulty, only by the permit of
the superior of the church, or his vicar in the neighborhood. Great neatness,
order, convenience, and industry are exhibited in all of them. -- The
apartments are well finished and furnished, and the walls are decorated with
paintings and pictures, drawn from historic events recorded in sacred
scripture. Portraits of the foundresses of the nunneries, and of the most pious
nuns, who have died in these institutions, are seen in their parlours; --
carvings of the crucifixion, as large as life, are also frequent.

The cells of the nuns are small chambers, about twelve feet square, containing
a bed for a single person, a bureau for clothing, a desk where devotions are
attended, and two chairs. A number of these chambers, with a window in each,
and furnished in the same manner, occupy the center of the buildings.

The habit of the Ursalines is black, and that of the order of St. Joseph is
white. Th^^ are uniform in fashion and quality, and are not expensive, while no
emulation in dress can take place. The veil is black gauze, and is placed (...)
the face in their devotions, in imitation of the angels. The nuns eat at one
common table, and during their meals, a total silence is observed, while they
attend to one who reads aloud from a small pulpit, built for the purpose. The
Lady Abbess instructs them in their religious duties every morning, and this
employment, with their devotions, takes up an hour. She has an assistant, who
presides in her absence, and a separate desk or pew is built for them, which is
decorated with many ingenious carvings and representations of angels. Hospital
rooms are also devoted to the sole uses of the sick nuns, that they may be
attended more conveniently, and their mansion be preserved from infectious
disorders. Persons of considerable distinction are taken to the nunneries, when
sick, and the late bishop died in one in Quebec. In that within the city, we
saw a citizen of Vermont, who was wounded, as he was conveying a raft down the
river St. Laurence. No patient need be better attended by the physicians or
nuns; and this was done gratis.

A gravity or sedateness, marks the countenances of the nuns, which some have
construed into the gloom of discontent. It appears to be no more, than the
effect of a constant reserve, which is observable among many other sects of
christians, increased by the singular dress of the head, which covers the
forehead, and conceals part of the face. They appeared sufficiently cheerful,
and expressed the most perfect attachment to their mode of living and
retirement. One of them observed, that twenty years was, but as one day, so
pleasantly did time pass with them. -- She was born and educated in Boston, in
Massachusetts.

After so circumstantial a detail of the state of these countries, and its
religions and policy, it may not be amiss to remark, that it cannot be
surprising, that the natives who receive the benefit of these regulations, who
are constantly amongst them, and are early taught their nature and design,
should be converts to christianity, and live in peace and friendship, with the
descendants from the Europeans.

The Indians are numerous in the trading towns, after the season of hunting --
and in every place are scrupulously observant of all the rites of the church.
Several circumstances conspire to produce their effect, -- such as

1st. Their marriages, which were encouraged, and took place between the
natives and original French settlers. These contracts are solemnized in the
churches.

2d. The restraint caused by confession, experience has proved, that this
custom detects crimes committed against each other. The missionaries lead the
offending party to make restitution to the injured. In this way, they are
protected in their property and persons, from the superior power and art of
Europeans.

3d. The benevolent services of the priests and nuns, who have taught the young
savages the principles and rituals of religion, very early in life. These
chaunt and respond the service, and observe the ceremonies of bowing, kneeling,
and crossing themselves, with great punctuality.

4th. The frequent and splendid processions, decorated temples and
representations to the eye, by paintings and carvings. These savages,
habituated to the use of hieroglyphics, are thus in a degree, compensated for
the want of a knowledge of letters, and the art of printing. The historic
scripture paintings in the Indian chapels, are excellent performances, and make
serious impressions, upon a people averse to study.

Religion appears to have been an object of the chief care of the first and
succeeding inhabitants. Early reservations and purchases of lands were devoted
to the purposes of piety forever, and to secure so desirable an object, the
clergy and missionaries endured many hardships, and submitted to the pains of
poverty, while the lands were uncultivated. They devoted their labors and
incomes to the erecting of churches and colleges very early. Vestiges of their
economy and good management are constant. -- The self denials, pious
benefactions, and successful exertions of the Catholic clergy to provide for
the service of God, and the support of christianity, exceed every Protestant
country in any other northern state, colony, or province, in North America.

The present government has also in all their locations of lands, reserved a
due proportion for pious uses. As few oppressions and clamours exist in
supporting religion, as possible, consistent with the present state of human
affairs in both the provinces.

The surface of these provinces is flat, and the soil good, being well wooded,
and furnished with many streams, rivers, and lakes.

The river St, Laurence, cannot be exceeded in the endless variety of objects,
which are connected with it, It begins at the outlet of the Lake Ontario, seven
hundred miles from the sea, and is navigable for large vessels as far as
Montreal, which is five hundred miles from the mouth, where it is ninety miles
wide. The tide flows as far as Three Rivers, eighty miles from Quebec. In its
course, it forms an endless variety of bays, islands, and harbors.

A general fertility prevails on its shores, as we advance into the country. It
is evident that many of the islands have been formed in the revolutions of the
seasons, by the altered courses of the river, by the lodging of floating trees
and sediment, which have collected together during the floods. The bed of the
river is left dry, in many places below Quebec. Its bottom is chiefly composed
of flat rocks in such places, and pilots are obliged very carefully to keep the
channel. The constant current has worn away the bottom and shores so far, that
the water has subsided below its ancient high water mark, and the lower town of
Quebec, is said to be built upon a bank, which was regularly overflown, when
the country was first discovered by the Europeans.

The pencil only, can give a stranger any just idea, of the entertaining water
scenes at the rapids. The principal, are those of Richlieu, Montreal, La Chine,
the Cascade, Cedars, Coto-du-Lac, and those above Cornwall, in Upper Canada.

The Richlieu rapids, are passed without much difficulty. Those at Montreal,
prevent all further progress in large vessels. The shore is so bold and
perpendicular at this city, that vessels are loaded and unloaded along their
sides, and wharves and piers are not wanted. The current, however, and contrary
winds, make it necessary to warp vessels with the help of men, to these
stations.

At the Cascade, is a rapid which is dangerous, and a great natural curiosity.
We passed it with two Indians, in a birch canoe, upon the ridge of the wave
made by the current, when the smallest error on the part of our boat-men would
have plunged us into a whirlpool some feet below us. Advancing near this place,
the Indian in the stern with a smile, pointing to the shore, expressed that he
wished we were on it. -- The smile was returned to animate him: He gave the
sign, that no motion of the body must take place. Laying aside his hat, and
crossing himself, he spoke to his companion in the bow; both redoubled their
exertions, and in a moment we passed all danger, and found ourselves gliding
down with the current. -- Curiosity led us to land and view the dangerous
place, where we had passed unhurt.

Part of the British army perished at this place, by following the pilot's boat
in front, which from his skill went safe, where wind, compass, and deep water,
are not all the requisites for successful navigation. A lock and canal convey
boats now, without risquing the dangers of the rapids.

The Isles of Montreal and Orleans, are the most noted. The first has been
described, and is made remarkable, by its mountain, which in English, is the
Royal Mountain. The second is near Quebec: -- It contains several villages, and
is under high cultivation. The meadows and low lands, near the river and lakes,
yield good crops of grass.

The rivers which unite with the St. Laurence, are the Oswagatchie, Ottawas,
Sorel, L^ Assumption, St. Francois, and Three Rivers. The first settlements
were formed upon the banks of the river and lakes, for the convenience of
water. Few farms in the lower province are cleared at any considerable distance
from these waters. Many mill seats are upon these streams, and wind-mills are
frequent near the shores where the waters are smooth.

The vegetation is rapid, and the summer season short. The ice melts gradually
by the influence of the warmer waters from the southwest. In winter it is
sometimes suddenly broken in some places for a few days, and floating and
crouding together by the force of the current, and the confinement of a narrow
part of the river below, it is congealed together: One of these collections of
ice, is formed opposite Montreal, and a road is cut t^^ough it with axes,
before a passage can be obtained to the south shore.

Business is conducted with facility, as regular* posts pass into Canada, from
the States, and through the provinces, as far as Halifax.

Newspapers are printed at Quebec, Montreal, and Newark, in Upper Canada. They
are carefully guarded against every thing that may excite discontents among the
inhabitants, or encourage assaults upon religion and government. -- Books are
seldom printed, as the communication with England is constant, and all literary
productions are obtained early, at a moderate price. No paper-mill has been
erected, and that article is imported from abroad.

The climate is more congenial to commerce and agriculture, than is generally
imagined. Accessible to the ocean, and vessels of heavy burden coming up the
St. Laurence, as far as Montreal, great amends are made those, who do not
reside on the borders of the sea. It is evident to every honest man, that it
must be the wish of the people of the provinces, to be at peace with the people
of the States. No substantial good could be gained, but much might be lost by
the contest. No advantages could be derived to the States, as a government, by
a war with Canada. Individuals actuated by a thirst for spoil, and by a love of
disorder, have sought to embroil both, but hitherto without success. It is a
well known fact, and openly confessed, that the British nation does not derive
a revenue from those provinces, which is equal to the sum, expended by the
crown in protecting, governing, and providing for its adherents.

When the Governor General's speech to the Indians appeared, by which they were
in danger of being instigated to war, the wise and good were pained. When the
proclamation of neutrality was seen, under the signature of President
Washington, an universal joy was circulated -- Similar sensations were
exhibited, when the treaty of peace was ratified. While these events took
place, agents from the French republic, were actively exciting the people to
insurrections, and the laws of the province were violated by smugglers. A late
trial has elucidated facts, which were well known before. Men from the States,
who had been received into the provinces as subjects* permitted to establish
themselves in business, to repair their fortunes, and obtain credit, were too
active in attempts to destroy the government, to plunder public stores, and
make spoil of the treasures of the Catholic church.

Publications had been issued through the newspapers in Philadelphia, to sound
the public opinion, as to a war with Canada. -- Every misrepresentation, as to
the state of the popular opinion was sought for, and great encouragement was
given by many in the States, to such as were solicitous for convulsions. At
this time, the people of Canada, were not projecting trouble for the States,
but as far as possible, encouraging a friendly intercourse, and reciprocal good
offices.

The Catholic religion had been assaulted, and treasures devoted to pious uses
were seized upon in France: -- Armies, and the leaders in the new government,
were dividing the property of temples, religious houses, and asylums for
^^verty and disease, and for the young and defenseless.

Reformation was the pretext: This flame was begun in a great degree in the
States, and a few were ready to give it free course in the provinces. The
clergy from France at this time took great pains with the Canadians, to lead
them to subordination to government, and to preserve themselves from massacres
and destruction. They saw that the Catholics were proscribed, and that the
property devoted to religious uses was doomed to spoliation. History can
scarcely afford a more diabolical design. -- Religion is protected by
government, in the same manner, as in the States. The people are satisfied with
their religion: -- It preserves order, and no substitute was offered; we had no
right to impose another upon them. The revenues of the clergy were not
excessive, and they were benefactors to their flocks, -- had patiently endured
poverty and hardships, until the lands were brought to their present state of
cultivation. They protect their aged parents and other relations, maintain
great hospitality, and are the patrons of the people. Such is their duty and
interest. So important have the parish priests been, (and few others are now in
Canada) in the esteem of the British government, that great tenderness and
respect have always been paid to them. It is an incontrovertible fact, that
those persons in the States, who wished to pillage the clergy of Canada, have
to the utmost of their power, injured the order of clergy in their own
neighbourhoods. They do not support christianity, but are among its inveterate
foes.

The rancour against the Catholics is most severe in those States, where they
have few or no Protestant ministers. -- The people of the States are divided
into parties about religion and are not at unity among themselves* -- Union,
order, harmony, and prosperity, universally extend among the Catholics, in
Canada.

It is well known, that the principles of liberty and law, which give dignity
and happiness to the States, are derived from the maxims adopted in the
government of England. These principles must extend through the provinces.
Legislatures, elected by the people, and trials by jury, put new powers into
the hands of the Canadians. -- Civil courts are regularly and frequently
holden, no taxes are levied, and no extortions made.

Madness, avarice, bigotry, and intolerance alone, could wish to carry war into
Canada. Commerce and colonization, under the banners of peace, will give
happiness, wealth, and prosperity, to every part of North America.

A LETTER FROM A GENTLEMAN TO HIS FRIEND, Descriptive of the Different
Settlements in the Province of UPPER CANADA.

INTRODUCTION.
The valuable information contained in the following Letter, and the very
respectable character of the Author, lead the writer of the Tour, to subjoin
this also, that the Voume may be more useful to the public.

A LETTER.
NEW YORK, 20 th, Nov. 1794. MY DEAR FRIEND,
SINCE I had the pleasure of writing to you from this city, in which I gave you
a particular description of the lands in this State, and in the State of
Pennsylvania, together with the mode of settlement, and the manner in which
they are to be purchased, I have made a tour through the province of Upper
Canada, and shall endeavor to give you a particular and impartial account of
that country, so far as I have traveled through it, with its laws, government,
and commercial advantages. In my letter from Albany, I mentioned that I went to
that city by water, from thence I proceeded to Schenectady, fifteen miles by
stage. Schenectady is a handsomely situated little town, on the banks of the
Mohawk river, inhabited mostly by Low Dutch; but from the appearance of the
place, one would imagine it a deserted village, the houses being generally old,
small, and mostly shut up, but surrounded by the finest flats of intervale land
you can possibly imagine, which continue to the source of that river. The
desolate appearance of this town was accounted for to me, by the current of
Indian trade turning down the river St. Laurence, since the revolution. It has,
however, the prospect of becoming a flourishing place, ere long, by the vast
increase of the settlements to the west of it, the produce of which must center
there. At this place I took an open boat, navigated by three men, in which I
passed to Lake Ontario, without any other interruption than two short portages,
one at the little falls of half a mile, round which they are now cutting a
canal; the other of one mile, at Fort Stanwix, about one hundred miles west of
Schenectady; at which place, we leave the Mohawk river, and descend the current
to Oswego, one hundred miles more to the west, where the British hold a post at
the entrance of Lake Ontario, commanded by a captain, from whom I received
every mark of civility and attention. A custom house officer is also stationed
there, to prevent an illicit trade being carried on between the United States
and the British colonies. No merchandise in, nor furs out, are permitted to
pass this post, without a passport from the governor of Upper Canada: but
settlers moving into that province to reside, are permitted indiscriminately to
pass with all utensils of husbandry, household furniture, and stores for their
own consumption. The high prices which hatters fur at present command in the
United States, is the only inducement I conceive for smuggling past that post;
for except a few articles imported from the East Indies, I found the retail
shops at Kingston and Niagara, selling as low, and many articles, particularly
woolens, lower than in the city of Philadelphia. This was written previous to
the late Treaty.


From Oswego, vessels sail to Niagara, Kingston, and any other port on the
Lake; but settlers more frequently continue along the south shore of the Lake
to Niagara, about one hundred miles, in the same open boats which bring them
hither, as they are generally manned by themselves. But finding a vessel here
ready to sail for Kingston, I dismissed my boatmen, and embarked in her for
that place, about twelve hours sail.

Kingston is a new but growing town, situate on the north-east corner of Lake
Ontario, where that Lake empties itself, and forms the river St. Laurence, the
banks of which are thick settled down to Lake St. Francois, where the provinces
of Upper and Lower Canada are divided. This river is navigable for vessels of
one hundred tons, and upwards, to Oswegatche, seventy miles below Kingston; but
vessels seldom go down the river, as the fort which is at Kingston, serves as a
deposit for all the public stores, provision, and merchandise for the upper
posts.

The land immediately about Kingston, is covered by valuable quarries of
limestone, and through all the settlements round it are plenty of thin
valuable stones, which are considered by the inhabitants rather as an
acquisition than detriment to their plantations. The most flourishing part of
this settlement is round the Bay of Kenty, the soil of which is rich, easy
worked, and produces from one to three crops, without any other cultivation
than what is done by the iron tooth harrow, and yields from twenty to thirty
bushels of wheat to the acre; -- those lands are somewhat heavy timbered having
vast quantities of the sugar-maple, hickory and bass wood, and in some places,
white pines of a surprising height; but where the latter grows, the land is
more sandy, and although it is warm, sweet land, it is not so stony as the
maple or oak land. This Bay is 70 miles in length, beginning about twenty miles
southwest from Kingston, leaving a neck of land from two to twelve miles wide,
between it and the Lake, all of which is settled, and round the whole Bay so
thick settled, that their improvements already meet, and form the appearance of
a beautiful old settled country. This Bay and the creeks emptying into it,
abound in great quantities of wild fowl, and fish of various kinds.

From Kingston I proceeded to Niagara, in a schooner of upwards of one hundred
tons burden, across this little sea of fresh water; a sea it may justly be
called, for we were a great part of the time for three days out of sight of the
land; though passages have been made in twenty hours; we enter the Niagara
river between the fort and the town called Newark, with a beautiful prospect of
both.

The fort stands in a commanding situation, on a point formed by the junction
of the river and lake, upon the east side of the river, and is a regular
fortification, in good repair, and well garrisoned.

The mouth of this river affords a safe and copious harbor, sufficiently large
for half the British navy.

The town of Newark is situate in lat. 43 north, on the west banks of the
river, extending along the Lake about a mile, enjoying in the summer, the fresh
breezes from this little sea, in almost every direction, plentifully supplied
with fish at all seasons of the year. In the winter here are caught by seines,
quantities of white fish, which seem to be peculiar to that river; they are
generally from two to six pound weight, and are considered the best fish in the
lakes; besides, there are sturgeon, bass, and many other excellent fish, in
great plenty; salmon are taken in all the creeks round the Lake; these
varieties of fish are not only esteemed a luxury, but a great assistance to new
beginners in supporting their families, many laying in half a dozen barrels or
more for their winters' use.

The land about the town of Newark for many miles, though not so good as the
land further back, is well inhabited each way upwards of fifty miles around. --
What gave me a more particular knowledge of this settlement was* being intimate
with the Surveyor-General, a gentleman of liberal education, good information,
and indefatigable in the duties of his office, by which means, he has collected
notes from the different field-books of his deputies, of the soil, timber, and
streams, of all that country; and in such parts as I went over, I found his
notes very correct, and by no means exaggerated. In many places there is little
more for the farmer to do, than cut a sufficiency of timber to fence his
fields, girdle or ring the remainder, and put in the harrow, for in few places
only is it necessary to make use of the plough, till the second or third crop,
there being little or no under-brush; yet in many places there is beautiful
white pine, oak, and black-walnut timber; sugar-wood which is also found here
in great plenty, mixed with beach, hickory, and bass wood.

At Newark resides the Governor, whose character is well known in England, and
is deservedly held here in high estimation. -- Here are also most of the
principal officers of government, besides many other gentlemen of
respectability, who form a very intelligent and agreeable society.

Besides Newark there are several important situations in this part of the
province, which bid fair to become places of consequence, the most
distinguished of which are, the landing places at each end of the portage, Fort
Erie, the head of Lake Ontario, and York, called by the natives, Torento.

The lower landing or Queenston, is about seventy miles up the river from
Newark, where the vessels discharge their cargoes, and take in furs collected
from three to one thousand five hundred miles back; there have I seen four
vessels of sixty and one hundred tons burden unloading at the same time, and
sometimes not less than sixty wagons loaded in a day, which loads they carry
ten miles to the upper landing place or Chipawa creek, three miles past the
great falls. This portage is an increasing source of wealth to the farmers for
many miles round, who carry from twenty to thirty hundred weight, for which
they get one shilling and eight pence, New York currency, per hundred weight,
and load back with furs, etc. -- From Chipawa the merchandise is transported in
batteaux to Fort Erie, a distance of eighteen miles, and are shipped there on
board of vessels for Detroit and Michilimakinac. -- Detroit, I was told, was a
pleasant country, though a low and marshy soil, more noted for its fur trade
than its agriculture.

At the head of Lake Ontario, about fifty miles west from Newark a small town
is laid out and stores are building, being a central place between Newark, York
and Detroit, from thence a road of twenty-two miles to the grand river is cut
out, and crosses that river about fifty miles above its entrance into Lake
Erie, and continues in a southern direction to the river La Trenche, now called
the Thames, which empties itself into Lake St. Clair, about twenty miles above
Detroit. Settlements are making on this road, and along the river Thames
partial ones are made for an extent of eighty or ninety miles in length. On
these two rivers are extensive open flats of land, equal to those of the Mohawk
river, on which may be cut a sufficiency of hay for many thousand head of
cattle yearly; the lands on this road are of an excellent quality, and in many
places light timbered, in others covered with thrifty oak, black walnut, sugar
maple, beach and lindar.

York formerly Torento, is situate on the best harbor round the Lake, opposite
Niagara, and about forty miles distance across the Lake, but round by land near
one hundred miles, along the shore of which great quantities of fish are
caught; a town is here* in great forwardness, and should the seat of government
be removed from Newark thence, as is contemplated, it will soon become a
flourishing place. From this a road is cut out across to Lake Simcoe, or the
Rice lakes thirty-three miles, the outlet of which empties itself into Lake
Huron, a distance of forty-five miles from Lake Simcoe, thirty-six miles in
length; this route affords an easy communication with Michilimackinac. -- From
York to that Lake, a tier of lots of two hundred acres each, is laid out on
each side of this road, called Dundas-street, granted on the express condition
of building and improving on them, within one year from the time they are taken
up, many of these are built upon and occupied.

On the east side and joining the rear of these lots is a settlement of near
one hundred German families, on an excellent tract of land, much of which is
open, white oak woods; these Germans came on this summer, furnished with every
thing to make their situation comfortable and enable them to improve their land
to advantage, and no doubt in a short time will make a fine settlement; they
are supported by a company who have liberally supplied them with teams, farming
utensils and provisions, sent them a clergyman of their own country, and are
about to build them mills, a church, and a school-house.

If this generous example was with equal spirit followed by a few more
companies, it would add to the population of the country, more than any other
mode yet pursued. -- There is still plenty of vacant lands of the best kind,
and such as show a disposition to settle and improve them, meet from the
Governor every encouragement they merit, who makes liberal grants to all such
as do actually bring on settlers, and prove themselves desirous of promoting
the interest of the country, the whole of which is well adapted for raising
wheat, Indian corn, and other summer grain; flax (where the land is borne a few
other crops) succeeds remarkably well, and the face of the country yields grass
in abundance; hops of a good quality grow here spontaneously, also a variety of
wild fruits such as plumbs, mulberry, blackberry, strawberry, raspberry, and
grapes. Orchards are in great forwardness, for the age of the settlement, some
of which already bear fruit. -- Peaches, cherries, and currants are plenty
among all the first settlers. The farmers raise a great quantity of pork,
without any other expense than a little Indian corn, for a few weeks previous
to killing, and often kill their hogs out of the woods, well fatted on nuts. In
many places salt springs have been discovered, and some of them already worked
to such advantage that in all probability that article, which generally comes
heavy in the interior part of a country, may in a short time be afforded here
as low as in many of the old settled places in the United States. -- Many
valuable streams for water works, run in every direction through this country;
and upon some of them are mills built, which prove very lucrative to the
owners, particularly saw-mills, from the quantity of good timber and great
demand of boards, as more buildings are going on than carpenters and masons can
be found to finish: Stones being scarce, bricks are generally used in mason
work.

This settlement was begun by a few disbanded troops after the peace of 1783,
and being but little known by the people of the United States, who had imbibed
an opinion that it was entirely under control of the military, few emigrants
bent their course this way, till they were convinced of the civil government,
being well established, and upon a constitution happily adapted to the minds of
the people, since which numbers of respectable inhabitants have come in from
the different States. Some of whom have come in their wagons quite from North
Carolina, but as there is a space of country, for about 70 miles, between
Niagara and the Genesee country, where the roads are not sufficiently open for
wagons, they transport them from the mouth of the river to Niagara in boats.
However, this obstruction will probably be soon removed, when it will be a
pleasant jaunt to get into a carriage at Niagara, and drive to this city, which
may be effected without difficulty, in about two weeks, particularly by sleighs
in winter. The mode of settlement generally pursued here, and which seems best
calculated to save expense, is by two, three or more men coming on in the
summer, who throw up a log-house each, put in a field of wheat, and return for
their families, which they bring on the following spring, by the route before
described past Oswego, if by water; but such as come by land, bring their
families as far as the mouth of Genesee-river, there take boat, and send their
cattle by land. This country from the reduction till the year 1790, was
included in the province of Quebec, and from the year 1774, the civil
administration was vested in a Governor and Legislative Council, at that time
best adapted to the ideas of the people, who were most entirely French, and
from prejudice, preferred that form of government, being most analogous to what
they had been accustomed to prior to the conquest of Canada, but at the
conclusion of the late dissentions between Great Britain and America, Upper
Canada, then called the back posts, was held out as an assylum to those who had
adhered to the unity of the British empire, and who generally came under the
denomination of loyalists. From the peace to the year 1790, government
delegated to laud boards the power of granting lands to any applicants, if men
of morality and sobriety.

In the year 1790, the wisdom of the British government, was eminently evinced
in dividing that large country, into two separate governments, and granting to
each a constitution, on the most liberal and disinterested principles, a
constitution for freedom and the rights of man, perhaps unequalled in the
historic page, with all the advantages, enjoyed by the British colonies in
America previous to the revolution, and with many additions, the British
parliament having renounced forever the right of taxation. -- Here no man's
property for any cause whatever is taxed, directly or indirectly; the British
government most generously paying for even the surveying of lands, and the
whole support of the civil establishment.

You will naturally wonder, how with all these advantages this country has
hitherto escaped the notice and keen observations of Land Speculators, and the
eulogiums of Pamphleteers, too frequently the hired and useful assistants of
the former class of men, but this I have found is accounted for on the best of
principles. The Indians being undoubtedly the original proprietors of the soil,
and it even has and continues to be policy of the British government to
extinguish their right, by fair and equitable purchases. Large purchases of
this kind has been made from time to time by government, as the population of
the country required, and as yet there is not a single instance of
dissatisfaction on the part of the Indians; having thus liberally paid them for
their lands, very advantageous terms are held out to actual settlers, (the only
class which at first can enrich any country) who get a grant of two hundred
acres each. However for the encouragement of men, commanding the means of
improving on a larger scale, by proper application they get a handsome
additional quantity. By this means the substantial farmer becomes the
inhabitant* and large tracts to the detriment of any country, never lie waste.

Had I not resolved on examining minutely, and judging for myself, I should
never have become acquainted with a country, which for richness of soil,
agriculture and trade, in fact every thing that will conduce to make an
industrious man happy, yielding to none I have as yet seen.

Niagara is at present the temporary seat of government, consisting of a
governor, a legislative council, and house of assembly chosen by the people;
here annually in the month of May, they meet for the purpose of legislation. --
Members of the assembly are chosen for four years, and have already sat three
sessions. -- In this time they have made many wholesome and necessary laws.
Weekly courts, called courts of request, are held throughout the province, by
two justices of the peace, who have cognizance of all debts under half a Joe;
there are also district courts every three months, in which a judge presides,
and gives trial by a jury of twelve men, in sums not exceeding twenty four
pounds N. Y. currency, whose judgment is unappealable, and all sums above
that, are tried by a jury before the chief justice and two associate judges,
who make an annual circuit through the province; from them is an appeal to the
governor and council. -- The people have it fully in their power to regulate
all local matters which respect their several towns, such as constables,
path-masters, and other town officers, in the same manner as formerly in the
other colonies, now United States of America. -- The militia in the several
districts have an annual meeting, and all males from the age of sixteen to
forty-five are mustered, except the Friends, Tunkers, and Menonists, and those
of that religious description, who are exempted from bearing arms. In short,
Sir, it would swell a letter to too great a bulk, to give a more minute account
of the local laws that have been already made for the public good, suffice it
to say, that with respect to that government and its laws, its administration
is conducted with every wish and attention to render the situation of those who
may settle under it comfortable and happy, being neither land tax, quitrent, or
any other tax whatever, excepting the country rates, to be paid by the
freeholders, for the regulation of their internal police.

The noble river St. Laurence supplies this country for an extent of two
thousand miles, with commercial advantages inferior to none on this side of the
Atlantic. -- Conceive to yourself vessels of six hundred tons burden,
unloading all kinds of British goods at the port of Montreal, five hundred
miles from the sea, and again receiving in return, furs from the interior parts
of the country, as far as the Missisippi is known to the westward, and the
waters emptying into Lake Superior from the northward. -- This town, when the
banks of the different lakes and rivers are settled by husbandmen, which is at
no distant period, must have a vast increase of trade, for without doubt all
British manufactures, through these vast water communications, will come much
cheaper, through the whole course of its windings, than can be afforded from
any other quarter. Goods on importation being liable to no duty, which will
undoubtedly give this country a vast advantage over the new settlements that I
described in my former letters; indeed nature points out this place as the
emporium of trade for the people inhabiting both sides of these lakes and
rivers emptying into them as far as they extend to the west. From Montreal,
boats called by the Canadians, batteaux, containing twenty five barrels bulk,
are worked by four men to Kingston, a distance of nigh two hundred miles up the
river in the course of six or eight days, and again return in three, loaded
with furs, pot-ash, and other produce of the country. -- Vessels, generally
schooners, receive the goods at Kingston, and convey them in a short time, to
the landing or Queenston, below the great falls of Niagara. Here the portage
gives employment to a number of teams in transporting them to Chipawa, as
before described; -- they are again received at Fort Erie in vessels of the
same burden as formerly which navigate all Lake Erie, Huron, and Michigan. The
expenses incurred during all this rout are comparatively trifling, as you will
observe there is but one portage, and that only ten miles in the course of this
communication. And when one reflects on the temperate climate, rich soil, and
other natural advantages of this interior country, you anticipate a great
population in a short time. -- The streights of Niagara, from its peculiar
situation, being the channel through which all the produce of the vast country
above must pass, is looked forward to as a place of the first consequence, and
where a farmer will at all times find a market for his produce, the transport
being easy from thence to the Atlantic. -- Here have I seen with amazement that
famed cataract, which exceeds every description I have ever heard of it, but it
would be idle in me to pretend to give you an idea of it -- It strikes the eye
with more grandeur and sublimity than the pen can convey. -- Amongst many other
natural curiosities, a spring about two miles above these falls, attracts the
attention of the curious, -- emitting a gas, or inflammable air, which, when
confined in a pipe, and a flame applied to it, will boil the water of a
tea-kettle in 15 minutes: -- Whether this may hereafter be applied by machinery
to useful purposes, time will determine.

It was lately discovered in clearing away and burning the brush under the bank
of the river, to erect a mill, and was observed after the brush was consumed to
burn for days togather, to the great astonishment of the inhabitants.

About 300 miles west of this is fort Detroit, situate on the east side of the
streights, between Lake Erie and Huron, around which a French settlement was
established before the reduction of the province, but attending more to the
Indian trade than agriculture, made but little progress as farmers. The English
settlements lately begun on the opposite shore are already in a higher state of
cultivation; however, the French have fine orchards, from which Niagara is at
present supplied with cider and apples. About one hundred miles west from
Detroit lies a valuable country on the waters emptying into the Missisippi, now
unhappily contested by the United States and the natives of the soil.

To the northward of Detroit, about three hundred and fifty miles, lies Fort
Michilimackinac, on an island between Lake Huron and Michigan, is about five
miles round, and an entire bed of gravel incapable of cultivation, but most
remarkable for being the general depot and grand rendezvous of all the Indian
traders, who meet in the month of June from every quarter, deliver their furs
and receive their outfits for the ensuing year. -- Spanish settlements many
miles down the Missisippi are supplied with British goods through this channel,
to much greater advantage than from New-Orleans, where the rapids of the
Missisippi oppose almost unsurmountable difficulties in ascending it.

This fort, the forts of Detroit, Niagara, and Oswego, fell within the United
States, when the lines of separation were drawn, at the treaty of peace, in the
year 1783: Fort Miami, which was built by the British lately, is also within
those lines. Previous to that peace, stores of deposit had been occupied at the
foot of the Miami rapids, where the Fort now stands, and the annual presents to
the Indians, which they have long been in the habits of receiving from the
British government, were there issued. This place was prudently chosen for that
purpose, in order to prevent the Indians from coming through the settlement,
crouding about and mixing with the troops at Detroit, where the too frequent
use of spiritous liquors would have occasioned numerous quarrels and accidents,
which might have terminated fatal to that friendly intercourse and good
understanding which has ever prevailed between the English and the natives of
America.

Hitherto have I said little respecting the aborigines of this country: --
Various are the opinions entertained by different people, and different
historians have risked conjectures how this continent was originally peopled;
their own ideas of it are not less curious than extraordinary. They do not
believe, nor have they the smallest vestige of traditional memorial to induce
them to believe, but that they are a distinct race of men from the whites, some
of the most intelligent amongst them will at this day relate in detail the
natural and original history of themselves and the continent they live upon.
They fully believe in a good and evil spirit, and in a future state of rewards
and punishments, and have certain times in the year for their particular modes
of worship, when they more generally endeavor to appease and avert the wrath
of the bad, than invoke the Good Spirit, to which, however, after favorable
crops, a good hunt, or success in war, they in a fervent manner, return thanks.
-- They say that the face of the globe was first covered with one great water,
in which the turtle was the principal inhabitant. That the Great Spirit caused
this turtle to grow to such a size that the waters could no longer float it,
and in consequence, it became stationary, continuing to grow until the moss and
rubbish collecting on his back, became a soil, and shot forth herbs, bushes,
and at length trees, and now forms this great island (as they term it) upon
which they were created a distinct race of men, and that the Great Spirit made,
after them, every kind of beasts and birds of the forest, for their food and
use, (from the first twelve of which they took the names of their twelve
tribes) and that these are as different in their kind, from those given by the
Great Spirit to the white people, for their use, as they are themselves from
us. That they increased in strength and numbers, till the white people came
amongst them, and introduced their habits, with the use of strong drink, to
which they justly impute their degeneracy.

When the feeling mind reflects on the former situation of these credulous
people; the various deception practiced on them under the mask of friendship,
the artless, and faithful attachment they bear to the white people where they
are treated with, upon seeming principles of justice and candor, it must truly
sympathize with them in their present gloomy prospects.

This people who were two centuries ago possessed of the whole of this vast
continent, affording them spontaneously every comfort of life, without rivals
in the enjoyment of it, now driven back step by step, to the last spot of their
fertile soil, and that contested. Contested by the very people whom they have
been led to consider, as their brothers, fathers, and protectors. -- Prejudice
from education, habit, and particular situations in life may warp the minds of
the best of men, but a virtuous and penetrating mind, will always estimate in a
proper degree, the relation and ties they have a claim to on us, if it is only
from our superior cultivation of mind and manners. Would it not therefore argue
a greater degree of virtue, and redound more to the honor of humanity, for
Christians, bordering on the remains of their country, to turn their attention
to the civilization of these people, than to endeavor by art and arms to
extirpate them from the face of the country, which they conceive to have been
given by the Great Spirit to them alone. -- It is idle to say that people of
their quick ideas, and lively imagination, are incapable of civilization, for
where education, and a proper attention to their morals has been bestowed,
there are proofs to the contrary. Instance Jos. Brant a full blooded Indian,
who having received an early education, though residing still with the Indians,
is much the gentleman, easy in his manners, mild and friendly in his
disposition, regular and methodical in his whole deportment, and has by his
good examples, brought many of his nation into a regular system of husbandry,
and a decent way of living in their families,

Thus have I now as generally made you acquainted with this great country, as
correctly as my short stay in it would admit of; but I cannot conclude this
without giving you a piece of information equally new to every body here as to
me.

For many years past, adventurers have attempted without success to cross to
the Pacific Ocean. The honor of this arduous task was left to a Mr. Alexander
Mac Kenzie, a partner in the north-west fur company, who lately returned by the
way of the lakes, having fully accomplished the object of his undertaking in
the course of two years, by traversing the continent of America to the
northward of west, over vast mountains covered with ice, which obliged him to
make new canoes, wherever he had the water in his favor. On his arrival on
this coast, seven weeks sail from Canton in China, and two degrees to the north
of Nootka Sound, he found the Indians without firearms, but furnished with
some clothing and ornaments, principally Spanish manufacture. The Indians
accompanying him were not understood by those on that coast, and appeared to be
perfect strangers to one another. It was with difficulty he could reconcile
them to him as a white man, on account, as he understood, of some injury given
them by people of his color a few days before that time. These are supposed to
have been the Americans from the port of New York, who had touched there in
their trade with China.

After remaining a few days and making the necessary observations, he returned
and brought along with him some valuable skins of the sea otter, and other
natural curiosities, peculiar to (...) but as the gentleman himself has it in
idea to go soon to London, I have little doubt but he will meet with the reward
due to his exertions, and give to the world an account of the wild and
uninhabited tract he traversed.

FINIS.

