Mr. Porter's Eulogy on WASHINGTON.


AN Eulogy ON GEORGE WASHINGTON, LATE COMMANDER OF THE ARMIES, AND THE FIRST
PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, Who died on the 14th of December,
1799, AETATIS 68.

DELIVERED, JAN. 14th, 1800, BEFORE THE INHABITANTS OF THE TOWN OF ROXBURY, AT
THE REQUEST OF THEIR COMMITTEE; AND Published in compliance with their wishes;

By ELIPHALET PORTER, One of the Ministers of said Town.

BOSTON: FROM THE PRINTING-OFFICE OF MANNING and LORING, Near the Old South
Meeting House.

G. W. Born Feb. 22, 1732. Died, at MOUNT VERNON, Dec. 14, 1799. Aged 68.


Eulogy.
FRIENDS AND BRETHREN,
WHILE we were yet in affliction, occasioned by the death of our late EXCELLENT
GOVERNOR, taken from the head of this Commonwealth, at the meridian of his
life, usefulness and honor; we have been called to a fresh occasion of public
grief and mourning. It has pleased Heaven to commission the destroying angel
to take the life of that ILLUSTRIOUS MAN, whom we have so long delighted to
honor, as the most distinguished friend and benefactor of our nation; and one
of the brightest ornaments of the human race.

WHEN the mournful tidings first reached our unwilling ear, what heart did not
endeavor to find consolation in the hope, that the painful intelligence might
prove premature? But this consolation was transient as the hope that inspired
it: and we are left to the full impression of the melancholy truth, that the
Father of our country is no more. -- Yes; a nation involved in undissembled
grief; the mourners, who, in slow and sad procession, go about the streets;
this solemn assembly; these sable signs of sorrow and of death; the gloomy
rites and service to which we devote this day, proclaim, that WASHINGTON has
departed, never to return.

HE has, at length, retired beyond the reach of his country's call, at which he
so often came to her aid. And the knowledge that he lives is no longer a source
of pleasing reflection to our minds, and of security to our nation. The public
has, indeed, sustained a loss, which true patriotism will deeply deplore; and
every heart experiences a wound, on its individual peace, which will not be
soon healed. But it would be unworthy of the present occasion, to indulge that
extravagant and selfish sorrow, which, precluding reflection, gratitude and
piety, refuses to be comforted.

IT is true, our WASHINGTON is taken away; but this implies, that he was first
given: And we have less reason to grieve at his recall, than to rejoice, that he
was so long lent to our country, and to the world. It is consoling also to
reflect, that he departed in a manner worthy of himself. He died as he had
lived -- like a Hero and a Christian. Thus he consummated his character, and
acquired fresh glory in death.

THE painful void in our minds, occasioned by his removal from earth, is in
some measure supplied by the bright image of what he was; and the contemplation
of the benefits which have flowed, and may still flow, to his country, and to
mankind, from his glorious life and example. Such is the just pride we take in
his character; and such the gratitude we feel for his services, that we love to
dwell on his great actions; and feel interested in every circumstance of his
existence.

TO select with judgment, and relate with impartial truth and dignified
simplicity, the principal incidents, transactions and services of his life,
would be pronouncing the best eulogy on his talents and virtues; and thus would
be fulfilled, to your entire satisfaction, one of the duties of this great
occasion. But the speaker foresees, with regret, the very imperfect manner, in
which, at a short notice and unexpected call, he will perform a service, to
which, had he ample time for reflection; for the choice and arrangement of
materials; and for seeking out acceptable words, he could not flatter himself,
that he would be able to do justice. Nor can he hope to discharge the duty
assigned him, in that impressive manner, in which it would have been performed,
by another, could entreaty have prevailed with him to have made the attempt.

IN the country, which WASHINGTON was destined gloriously to defend, and
essentially serve, he "viewed the native soil of himself and his progenitors
for several generations." He was born in the year 1732, at the parish of
Washington, on the banks of the Rappahannock, in Virginia. The 22d of February,
according to the present style, has been too long distinguished in our
calendars; and its annual return too often celebrated with festivity and joy,
not to be known as the day of his birth. Never may it be blotted from the days
of the year; nor cease to be numbered in the months. Let the light shine upon
it; let no cloud obscure its luster: And as for the night thereof, let the
stars appear, in all their number, magnificence, and beauty.

"HIS education having been principally conducted by a private tutor, at
fifteen years of age he was entered a midshipman on board a vessel of war." He
appears to have possessed a native fortitude of mind, which did not shrink at
the prospect of toil and danger. But Providence had destined him to other, if
not less toilsome and hazardous, scenes, than those he contemplated. Of his
father he had been deprived by death, at the age of ten years. The affection of
his surviving parent rendered her reluctant at his engaging in the naval
profession; in consequence of which, he relinquished his purpose. His regard to
filial duty, the obligation of which the wise and good have, in all ages, felt
and acknowledged, was rewarded by days not only long, but glorious.

IN the nineteenth year of his age, he received an appointment in the militia,
with the rank of major. When he had completed but twenty-one years, such was
the opinion entertained of his intelligence, and address, that he was employed
on an important public mission; the objects of which were, to inquire into the
state of facts, relative to the encroachments, by the French, on the western
frontier; to remonstrate against their hostile procedure; and to treat with the
natives of the wilderness. The surprise occasioned by employing a youth on a
mission of such difficulty and magnitude, was exceeded only by that, which was
excited, by his discharging its duties, with a fortitude, judgment, and
precision, that would have reflected honor on the maturest age and experience.

THE following year, we find him the Colonel of a regiment; raised by Virginia,
for the purpose of resisting the French aggressions. With the troops, entrusted
to his command, he hastened to the scene of contest. In an attack, which he
made on a considerable party of the enemy, he proved victorious. But assailed,
in his turn, by a greatly superior force, he was obliged, after a brave
defense, in which were killed and wounded more than one third of his men, to
accept an honorable capitulation.

IN the fatal expedition of Braddock, in the year 1755, COLONEL WASHINGTON
attended that unfortunate general, in the capacity of an extra aid-de-camp. The
wisdom of his advice, and the valor of his conduct, on this occasion, have
been universally acknowledged. The first was unhappily rejected; but the last
was of signal service, in securing the retreat, and saving the remnant of a
surprised and defeated army.

"NOT long after this time, the supreme authority of Virginia, impressed with a
due sense of his merits, gave him, in a new commission, the command of all the
troops raised, and to be raised, in that Colony. In the year 1758, he commanded
the van brigade of General Forbes's army, in the capture of Fort Duquesne."

THE many dangers through which he had passed, and the uniform wisdom and
valor of his conduct, excited attention and admiration, on the other side of
the Atlantic, as well as in America. As though under the impulse of a prophetic
spirit, a respectable writer, of that day, expresses himself in the following
manner: "I may point out to the public that heroic youth, Col. WASHINGTON, whom
I cannot but hope Providence has hitherto preserved, in so signal a manner, for
some important service to his country."

IN the year 1759, hostilities on the frontiers having, in a good measure,
subsided, and his health being greatly impaired, by a pulmonary complaint; he
was led to a measure, which excited the extreme regret of his troops, the
resignation of his military command. Happily for his country, his health was
gradually restored. Fond of agriculture, which was congenial with the purity of
his mind, and the simplicity of his manners, he settled as a planter and
farmer, on the banks of the Potowmac, at his seat, which, from respect to the
gallant Admiral of the name, was called Mount VERNON. About the same time, he
formed that tender connection of human life, that served to alleviate the cares
and burdens of his elevated stations, and which was dissolved but by that
event, which breaks asunder the dearest ties, and which we this day lament.

HE continued, without any considerable interruption, at his favorite
residence; attending to agricultural pursuits; and discharging the duties of a
member of the Assembly, a Magistrate of the county, and Judge of the Court;
till he appeared in the memorable Congress of 1774, as a Delegate from
Virginia. He was also a member of the Congress, in the following year, when the
revolutionary war commenced.

A MOST interesting and important crisis, in our public affairs, was now
arrived. A scene was opening, which called for great talents and virtues; and
was adapted to put them to the severest trial. In particular, a Commander in
Chief, to conduct our military operations, was required; one who had the
fortitude and patriotism, the skill and address, to qualify him for the arduous
and adventurous undertaking of organizing, reducing to order, and successfully
directing against a powerful foe, an army, composed of troops, in a great
measure, without discipline, without habits of subordination, without military
stores; and at a time when our country had formed no alliances, provided no
funds, and established no form of national government.

WHERE was such a character to be found? Heaven, that had decreed the success
of our bold, but righteous, appeal to arms, foreseeing the great occasion, had
provided THE MAN. He was in the midst of the assembled patriots and sages of
the land. His noble person, his nobler mind, his military achievements, his
fair fame, his wonderful combination of great and requisite qualities, pointed
him out to the venerable guardians of the public safety, as with a sun beam.
With one voice, they called him to the arduous employment, and bid him go and
SAVE HIS COUNTRY.

"THE HERO comes;" but with that amiable distrust of his own abilities, and
that reliance on the aid of Divine Providence, which are characteristic of
great minds; and which he manifested, on all occasions. The satisfaction and
joy, with which he was welcomed to this vicinity, then the scene of war, cannot
be easily conceived, by those, whose age and power of recollection do not
enable them to recall to their minds that interesting period. When the eye saw
him, then it blessed him; and they were thought the happiest, who could first
gain a sight of his person. It would not be indulging to fancy, but reciting a
fact, should it be said, that such were the dispositions with which he was
regarded, as that it was deemed an opportunity, too precious to be lost, "to
touch the hem of his garment."

THE effects of his personal influence, and of his wise counsels and orders, in
the introduction of system; in the adjustment, and prevention of disputes
relating to rank; in promoting order, discipline, and economy, through the
military department, were soon felt; and, during the war, proved of unspeakable
advantage.

IT was not long before our enemies, in consequence of the judicious and
spirited measures, which were adopted under his direction, were obliged to
evacuate the adjacent capital. This important event delivered you from the
immediate evils and desolating effects of war. The present increased and
prosperous condition of this town, compared with the decayed and ruinous
appearance it then exhibited; while it excites your gratitude to Heaven, may
well serve to increase your affectionate regard to the memory of him, who was
employed as a principal instrument in producing the agreeable change.

NEARLY as the various events and circumstances of the war are connected with
WASHINGTON's glory, it will not be expected that I shall attempt to recite
them. You have, indeed, seen with your eyes, and heard with your ears, the
glorious and successful manner, in which he conducted our military operations.
Innumerable were the difficulties and discouragements, that he had to
encounter, and astonishing the wisdom, fortitude and perseverance, with which
he met and surmounted them. The toils and anxieties he endured; the personal
dangers he braved; the important victories he won; and the glorious conclusion
of his military career, are already recorded in the annals of his country; and
will be handed down by the faithful historian, for the instruction and
admiration of future ages.

HAVING set the seal to his patriotism, and evinced the moderation and
greatness of his soul, by cheerfully resigning his military commission into the
hand of the Civil Power that gave it; and withdrawing to the humble scenes and
occupations of private life, we were ready to imagine, that the measure of his
glory was full. Not adequately conceiving of the amplitude of his mind, and
wonderful diversity of his talents; nor foreseeing the future exigencies of the
public, we thought nothing remained for him to perform, by which he could
increase the obligations of his country; and acquire an accession of fame. But
how were we deceived in our views! Obedient to the voice of patriotism, he
again appeared on the great theater of action; rendering exalted services to
our nation, and reaping a fresh harvest of glory.

HE assisted and presided in the deliberations of the Convention that formed,
and recommended to the adoption of the people, that Constitution of national
Government, which has proved so rich a blessing to our land. When this
Constitution was introduced, in the year 1789, he was called by the unanimous
suffrages of his country, to the high station of PRESIDENT of the UNITED
STATES: and at the expiration of the first presidential term, the same signal
proof of the public affection and confidence, was repeated.

IN the exertions he contributed toward organizing and bringing into operation
our new Government; in watching over the public peace, order, and happiness; in
defending our rights, as a free and independent nation, against the dangers,
which threatened them, from abroad, and at home; and in the manner of his
discharging, for eight years, the multiplied and arduous duties of the Supreme
Executive Power, without the aid of precedents, or footsteps, to guide him in
the doubtful course, he discovered a vigilance and foresight, integrity and
firmness, patriotism and ability, which excited admiration, in foreign
countries; and greatly increased that debt of gratitude, which was before due
to him, from his own. But judging it compatible with duty, and the existing
state of public affairs, he declined the future suffrages of his country, and
indulged his inclination, in relinquishing the power and elevation of office,
for the shade of retirement.

HIS country was again in danger; and required his aid. Still animated by the
patriotism which had so long been the ruling principle of his conduct, he
consented to resume the military character; and accepted the command of our
armies. He appears, however, not to have relinquished, on the present occasion,
the generous resolution to which, during his former high employments, he had
uniformly adhered, of not accepting any pecuniary consideration, exceeding the
amount of expenses actually incurred, in the public service. His appearance in
the field, not becoming necessary, he continued his dignified retirement at
Mount Vernon; where, with a fortitude and composure that agreed with the tenor
of his life, he has at last fallen in that "war in which there is no discharge."

HE displayed a wonderful consistency of character. In all situations and
circumstances, whether prosperous or adverse, he was like himself; collected
and serene, wise and temperate, firm and dignified. He appeared, in the various
scenes of his life, to be under the commanding influence of a principle
superior to every other, in forming a consistent, useful, and truly great
character; a principle of moral rectitude, or duty. "He put on righteousness,
and it clothed him: his judgment was as a robe, and a diadem."

PRUDENCE, if not the most splendid, is one of the most useful, virtues; and it
belonged to WASHINGTON, in an eminent degree. His prudent and cautious temper,
originating, not in sinister views, but in a solicitude to conduct with
propriety and usefulness, was always combined, in proportion as the path of
rectitude was obvious, with decision and firmness.

HE viewed subjects accurately and comprehensively, or in their various
connexions, tendencies, and remote, as well as immediate, effects: and knew how
to wait for the beneficial, though distant, result of wise measures and upright
conduct. Such was his excellent judgment of men and things, that it not only
indicated a natural strength of mind, and a habit of attentive observation; but
implied the possession of those amiable moral qualities, which, by precluding
prejudice, passion, and all unworthy motives, serve to clear the mental sight,
prevent illusions, and cause every object to appear in its true form.

HIS private life, as well as his public, was a model of propriety and
greatness. It was distinguished by temperance, self-government, simplicity and
purity of manners; by integrity and honor; by industry, perseverance, and the
love of order; by the mild virtues of humanity, and pervading influence of
rational piety.

THE more we examine and contemplate his character, in the various parts, and
in the sublime whole; the more it excites our admiration. It is not every
country, nor every age, that produces a WASHINGTON. Might I not, with more
propriety, ask, what country, or what age, has this honor, but our own? If we
compare this great Man with the most distinguished characters of ancient, or
modern, times, will he not appear still greater by the comparison? ALEXANDER
has been called the Great; but how contemptible did he appear, in his scenes of
intemperance and riot! How deserving of the deepest abhorrence, when he slew
his friend, because he would not flatter! But what act of injustice and
cruelty; what unmanly vice, or scene of deliberate guilt, injured the private
reputation; diminished confidence in the public character; and tarnished the
bright fame of WASHINGTON?

MUCH has CAESAR been celebrated, in the annals of the world. But he was not
great enough to overcome his own ambition and lust of power. Refusing to
surrender his military command, he passed the Rubicon, that bounded his
province; destroyed the liberties of his country; and seized the government of
the Roman empire. But when was WASHINGTON known to pass the line, which bounded
his rightful authority? Did he ever invade the liberties of the people? or
attempt to establish himself in the possession of despotic power? No. He knew
how to use power, when entrusted with it for the public good; and that end
being accomplished, how to resign it. Possessing the government of himself, he
was greater than the master of Rome, and of the world.

THE retirement of CHARLES the Fifth has been often mentioned. But did the
gratitude and blessings of a nation follow him in his retreat? It is true he
retired; and well he might, for penitence and tears. Considering his persidy
and crimes, and the devastations and miseries that were the effects of his
ambition, it would not have been strange, if, through shame and remorse, he had
sought a refuge in the grave.

THE late FREDERICK, of Prussia, was a great warrior, and renowned monarch. But
who, without surprise and indignation, can contemplate him scoffing at
religion, and endeavoring to undermine those everlasting truths, which are the
great supports of society, order and happiness, in this life; and open to the
virtuous, bright prospects of felicity and glory, beyond the grave? So did not
WASHINGTON. He venerated religion, observed its precepts, and respected its
institutions.

BUT, alas! the uniformly great and good Man, whose character we so justly
admire and celebrate, now lives, only in the hearts of his grateful countrymen;
in the admiration of the world; and in our national independence, peace, and
prosperity, to which he so essentially contributed, by his military
achievements; and the consummate wisdom of his civil administration. When he
had done more than any other man for his country; when time had scattered
silver locks over his venerable brow; when he was ripe in virtue; when he was
full of glory; he was taken to the skies: and shall one, who has long watched
and toiled in the service of others, never enter into rest? Shall the wise and
faithful never receive their reward?

WHEN a virtuous and beloved parent dies, how natural and becoming is it for
the children of the family, not only to mingle their sorrows, and tokens of
respect to his memory, on the sad occasion; but to regard his faithful counsels
and example; and, banishing forever their animosities, feel themselves more
endeared to each other, by their common relation to the deceased! How natural
is it for them to honor those whom he regarded, and who were the partners of
his cares and toils! And how reasonable, that they should make a wise use of
the means and advantages, which they may inherit from him, of promoting their
mutual welfare, honor and happiness!

WE, my Friends and Brethren, with the citizens of the United States, have,
indeed, lost a Father; one, who, in the infancy of our nation, has been
pre-eminently useful, in protecting us by his arm, and guiding us by his
counsel. In the sincerity of our hearts, we this day offer to his memory the
tribute of our tears, gratitude and veneration. Let us never forget his wise
maxims and faithful advice, as expressed on various occasions, and especially
as communicated, in his last solemn and affectionate address, "The Legacy of
the Father of his Country."

ANIMATED by his resplendent example, may we lead a virtuous, patriotic, pious,
life, which is true glory. Let contention, prejudice, party views and spirit,
yield to the love of truth, to kind affections, and a pure zeal to perpetuate
the free government, honor, peace and prosperity of our common country.

LET us manifest our veneration for the deceased, by regarding, with due
affection and respect, his patriotic companions in arms, and wise associates in
council and government. ADAMS, his worthy successor, as President of the United
States; a man whose abilities, integrity and patriotism have been long tried
and approved, has peculiar claims to the esteem and confidence of his country,
not only on account of his own great talents, virtues and services; but in
consequence of the cordial friendship, approbation, and support, which he
received from his great Predecessor.

WASHINGTON, like the great Jewish leader and lawgiver, "put a portion of his
honor on" his successor, perceiving in him "the spirit of wisdom." In one of
his last official communications, he explicitly declared, as his opinion, That
the measures of the present administration were "wise and prudent," and "ought
to inspire universal confidence."

THERE is a sorrow for the dead, which is injustice to the living; and which
will by no means correspond with the character of the great and good Man, whose
death we deplore; and who so well knew how to appreciate, and acknowledge, the
abilities and virtues of others. By an excess of grief, or the affectation of
it, on the present occasion, we implicitly reproach surviving patriotism and
talents; and departed worth may be emblazoned, with the view of placing living
merit in the shade.

AMERICANS! prize the rich inheritance handed down to you from WASHINGTON and
your Fathers. Unimpaired, let it be transmitted to future generations. Pour the
fervent prayer to HEAVEN, that licentious principles and manners; "the
infidious wiles of foreign influence;" domestic divisions, contempt of
government, and destructive anarchy; established despotism and tyrannic power,
may never prevail, and spread their debasing influence and desolating effects,
in this favored land.

AS an incentive to every thing wise, virtuous, patriotic and great, cherish
the memory of the departed HERO, PATRIOT and SAGE. Love and defend the country
that gave him birth; was the object of his pure affection; the scene of his
glorious life; and contains his hallowed dust.

FINIS
The Legacy OF THE Father of his Country. ADDRESS OF GEORGE WASHINGTON, ON
DECLINING BEING CONSIDERED A CANDIDATE FOR THE PRESIDENCY OF THE UNITED STATES.
To the PEOPLE of the UNITED STATES.
FRIENDS AND FELLOW-CITIZENS,
THE period for a new election of a citizen, to administer the executive
government of the United States, being not far distant, and the time actually
arrived, when your thoughts must be employed in designating the person, who is
to be clothed with that important trust, it appears to me proper, especially as
it may conduce to a more distinct expression of the public voice, that I should
now apprise you of the resolution I have formed, to decline being considered
among the number of those, out of whom a choice is to be made.

I beg you, at the same time, to do me the justice to be assured, that this
resolution has not been taken without a strict regard to all the considerations
appertaining to the relation, which binds a dutiful citizen to his country; and
that, in withdrawing the tender of service, which silence in my situation might
imply, I am influenced by no diminution of zeal for your future interest; no
deficiency of grateful respect for your past kindness: but am supported by a
full conviction that the step is compatible with both.

The acceptance of, and continuance hitherto in the office to which your
suffrages have twice called me, have been a uniform sacrifice of inclination to
the opinion of duty, and to a deference for what appeared to be your desire. I
constantly hoped, that it would have been much earlier in my power,
consistently with motives, which I was not at liberty to disregard, to return
to that retirement, from which I had been reluctantly drawn. The strength of my
inclination to do this, previous to the last election, had even led to the
preparation of an address to declare it to you; but mature reflection on the
then perplexed and critical posture of our affairs with foreign nations, and
the unanimous advice of persons entitled to my confidence, impelled me to
abandon the idea.

I rejoice, that the state of your concerns, external as well as internal, no
longer renders the pursuit of inclination incompatible with the sentiment of
duty, or propriety; and am persuaded, whatever partiality may be retained for
my services, that, in the present circumstances of our country, you will not
disapprove my determination to retire.

The impressions, with which I first undertook the arduous trust, were
explained on the proper occasion. In the discharge of this trust, I will only
say, that I have, with good intentions, contributed toward the organization
and administration of the government, the best exertions of which a very
fallible judgment was capable. Not unconscious, in the outset, of the
inferiority of my qualifications, experience, in my own eyes, perhaps still
more in the eyes of others, has strengthened the motives to diffidence of
myself; and every day the increasing weight of years admonishes me more and
more, that the shade of retirement is as necessary to me as it will be welcome.
Satisfied that if any circumstances have given peculiar value to my services,
they were temporary, I have the consolation to believe, that, while choice and
prudence invite me to quit the political scene, patriotism does not forbid it.

In looking forward to the moment, which is intended to terminate the career of
my public life, my feelings do not permit me to suspend the deep acknowledgment
of that debt of gratitude, which I owe to my beloved country, for the many
honors it has conferred upon me; still more for the steadfast confidence with
which it has supported me; and for the opportunities I have thence enjoyed of
manifesting my inviolable attachment, by services faithful and persevering,
though in usefulness unequal to my zeal. If benefits have resulted to our
country from these services, let it always be remembered to your praise, and as
an instructive example in our annals, that under circumstances in which the
passions, agitated in every direction, were liable to mislead -- amidst
appearances sometimes dubious -- vicissitudes of fortune often discouraging --
in situations in which, not unfrequently, want of success has countenanced the
spirit of criticism -- the constancy of your support was the essential prop of
the efforts, and a guarantee of the plans, by which they were effected.
Profoundly penetrated with this idea, I shall carry it with me to my grave, as
a strong incitement to unceasing vows, that Heaven may continue to you the
choicest tokens of its beneficence -- that your union and brotherly affection
may be perpetual -- that the free constitution, which is the work of your
hands, may be sacredly maintained -- that its administration, in every
department, may be stamped with wisdom and virtue -- that, in fine, the
happiness of the people of these States, under the auspices of liberty, may be
made complete, by so careful a preservation and so prudent a use of this
blessing, as will acquire to them the glory of recommending it to the applause,
the affection, and adoption, of every nation which is yet a stranger to it.

HERE, perhaps, I ought to stop. But a solicitude for your welfare, which
cannot end but with my life, and the apprehension of danger, natural to that
solicitude, urge me, on an occasion like the present, to offer to your solemn
contemplation, and to recommend to your frequent review, some sentiments, which
are the result of much reflection, of no inconsiderable observation, and which
appear to me all-important to the permanency of your felicity as a people.
These will be offered to you with the more freedom, as you can only see in them
the disinterested warnings of a parting friend, who can possibly have no
personal motive to bias his counsel. Nor can I forget, as an encouragement to
it, your indulgent reception of my sentiments on a former and not dissimilar
occasion.

Interwoven as is the love of liberty with every ligament of your hearts, no
recommendation of mine is necessary to fortify or confirm the attachment.

The unity of government, which constitutes you one people, is also now dear to
you. It is justly so; for it is a main pillar in the edifice of your real
independence; the support of your tranquillity at home, your peace abroad; of
your safety; of your prosperity; of that very liberty which you so highly
prize. But, as it is easy to foresee, that from different causes and from
different quarters, much pains will be taken, many artifices employed, to
weaken in your minds the conviction of this truth; as this is the point, in
your political fortress, against which the batteries of internal and external
enemies will be most constantly and actively (though often covertly and
insidiously) directed, it is of infinite moment that you should properly
estimate the immense value of your National Union, to your collective and
individual happiness; that you should cherish a cordial, habitual and
immovable attachment to it; accustoming yourselves to think and speak of it as
of the palladium of your political safety and prosperity; watching for its
preservation with jealous anxiety; discountenancing whatever may suggest even a
suspicion that it can in any event be abandoned; and indignantly frowning upon
the first dawning of every attempt to alienate any portion of our country from
the rest, or to enfeeble the sacred ties which now link together the various
parts.

For this, you have every inducement of sympathy and interest. Citizens, by
birth or choice, of a common country, that country has a right to concentrate
your affections. The name of AMERICAN, which belongs to you, in your national
capacity, must always exalt the just pride of patriotism, more than any
appellation derived from local discriminations. With slight shades of
difference, you have the same religion, manners, habits and political
principles. You have, in a common cause, fought and triumphed together; the
independence and liberty you possess are the work of joint councils, and joint
efforts, of common dangers, sufferings and successes.

But these considerations, however powerfully they address themselves to your
sensibility, are greatly out-weighed by those which apply more immediately to
your interest. -- Here every portion of our country finds the most commanding
motives for carefully guarding and preserving the union of the whole.

The North, in an unrestrained intercourse with the South, protected by the
equal laws of a common government, finds in the productions of the latter,
great additional resources of maritime and commercial enterprise, and precious
materials of manufacturing industry. The South, in the same intercourse,
benefiting by the agency of the North, sees its agriculture grow and its
commerce expand. Turning partly into its own channels the seamen of the North,
it finds its particular navigation invigorated; and while it contributes, in
different ways, to nourish and increase the general mass of the national
navigation, it looks forward to the protection of a maritime strength, to which
itself is unequally adapted. The East, in a like intercourse with the West,
already finds, and, in the progressive improvement of interior communications,
by land and water, will more and more find, a valuable vent for the commodities
which it brings from abroad, or manufactures at home. The West derives from the
East supplies requisite to its growth and comfort; and, what is perhaps of
still greater consequence, it must of necessity owe the secure enjoyment of
indispensable outlets for its own productions to the weighty influence, and the
future maritime strength of the Atlantic side of the Union, directed by an
indissoluble community of interest as one nation. Any other tenure, by which
the West can hold this essential advantage, whether derived from its own
separate strength, or from an apostate and unnatural connection with any foreign
power, must be intrinsically precarious.

While, then, every part of our country thus feels an immediate and particular
interest in Union, all the parts combined cannot fail to find, in the united
mass of means and efforts, greater strength, greater resource, proportionably
greater security from external danger, a less frequent interruption of their
peace by foreign nations; and, what is of most inestimable value! they must
derive from Union an exemption from those broils and wars between themselves,
which so frequently afflict neighboring countries, not tied together by the
same government; which their own rivalships alone would be sufficient to
produce, but which opposite foreign alliances, attachments and intrigues would
stimulate and embitter. Hence, likewise, they will avoid the necessity of those
overgrown military establishments, which, under any form of government, are
inauspicious to liberty, and which are to be regarded as particularly hostile
to Republican Liberty. In this sense it is, that your Union ought to be
considered as a main prop of your Liberty, and that the love of the one ought
to endear to you the preservation of the other.

These considerations speak a persuasive language to every reflecting and
virtuous mind, and exhibit the continuance of the UNION as a primary object of
patriotic desire. Is there a doubt, whether a common government can embrace so
large a sphere? Let experience solve it. To listen to mere speculation, in such
a case, were criminal. We are authorized to hope, that a proper organization of
the whole, with the auxiliary agency of governments for the respective
subdivisions, will afford a happy issue to the experiment. It is well worth a
fair and full experiment. With such powerful and obvious motives to Union,
affecting all parts of our country, while experiment shall not have
demonstrated its impracticability, there will always be reason to distrust the
patriotism of those, who in any quarter may endeavor to weaken its bands.

In contemplating the causes which may disturb our Union, it occurs as matter
of serious concern, that any ground should have been furnished for
characterizing parties, by geographical discriminations -- Northern and
Southern -- Atlantic and Western; whence designing men may endeavor to excite
a belief, that there is a real difference of local interests and views. One of
the expedients of party to acquire influence, within particular districts, is
to misrepresent the opinions and aims of other districts. You cannot shield
yourselves too much against the jealousies and heart-burnings which spring from
these misrepresentations; they tend to render alien to each other those who
ought to be bound together by fraternal affection. The inhabitants of our
Western Country have lately had a useful lesson on this head: They have seen,
in the negotiation by the Executive, and in the unanimous ratification by the
Senate, of the treaty with Spain, and in the universal satisfaction at that
event, throughout the United States, a decisive proof how unfounded were the
suspicions, propagated among them, of a policy in the General Government and in
the Atlantic States, unfriendly to their interests in regard to the Missisippi:
They have been witnesses to the formation of two treaties, that with
Great Britain and that with Spain, which secure to them every thing they could
desire, in respect to our foreign relations, toward confirming their
prosperity. Will it not be their wisdom to rely, for the preservation of these
advantages, on the UNION by which they were procured? Will they not henceforth
be deaf to those advisers, if such there are, who would sever them from their
brethren, and connect them with aliens?

To the efficacy and permanency of your Union, a government for the whole is
indispensable. No alliances, however strict, between the parts, can be an
adequate substitute; they must inevitably experience the infractions and
interruptions which all alliances, in all times, have experienced. Sensible of
this momentous truth, you have improved upon your first essay, by the adoption
of a Constitution of Government, better calculated than your former, for an
intimate Union, and for the efficacious management of your common concerns.
This Government, the offspring of your own choice, uninfluenced and unawed;
adopted upon full investigation and mature deliberation; completely free in its
principles; in the distribution of its powers, uniting security with energy;
and containing within itself a provision for its own amendment, has a just
claim to your confidence and your support. Respect for its authority,
compliance with its laws, acquiescence in its measures, are duties enjoined by
the fundamental maxims of true liberty. The basis of our political systems is
the right of the people to make and to alter their constitutions of government
-- But, the constitution which at any time exists, until changed by an explicit
and authentic act of the whole people, is sacredly obligatory upon all. The
very idea of the power and the right of the people to establish government,
presupposes the duty of every individual to obey the established government.

All obstructions to the execution of the laws, all combinations and
associations, under whatever plausible character, with the real design to
direct, control, counteract or awe the regular deliberation and action of the
constituted authorities, are destructive of this fundamental principle, and of
fatal tendency. They serve to organize faction; to give it an artificial and
extraordinary force; to put in the place of the delegated will of the nation,
the will of a party, often a small, but artful and enterprising minority of the
community; and, according to the alternate triumph of different parties, to
make the public administration the mirror of the ill-concerted and incongruous
projects of faction, rather than the organ of consistent and wholesome plans,
digested by common councils, and modified by mutual interests.

However combinations, or associations, of the above description, may now and
then answer popular ends, they are likely, in the course of time and things, to
become potent engines, by which cunning, ambitious, and unprincipled men, will
be enabled to subvert the power of the people, and to usurp for themselves the
reins of government; destroying, afterward, the very engines which have lifted
them to unjust dominion.

Toward the preservation of your government, and the permanency of your
present happy state, it is requisite, not only that you steadily discountenance
irregular oppositions to its acknowledged authority, but also that you resist,
with care, the spirit of innovation upon its principles, however specious the
pretexts. One method of assault may be to effect, in the forms of the
Constitution, alterations which will impair the energy of the system, and thus
to undermine what cannot be directly overthrown. In all the changes to which
you may be invited, remember that time and habit are at least as necessary to
fix the true character of governments, as of other human institutions; that
experience is the surest standard, by which to test the real tendency of the
existing constitution of a country; that facility in changes, upon the credit
of mere hypothesis and opinion, exposes to perpetual change, from the endless
variety of hypothesis and opinion; and remember, especially, that for the
efficient management of your common interests, in a country so extensive as
ours, a government of as much vigor as is consistent with the perfect security
of liberty, is indispensable. Liberty itself will find in such a government,
with powers properly distributed and adjusted, its surest guardian. It is,
indeed, little else than a name, where the government is too feeble to
withstand the enterprises of faction, to confine each member of the society
within the limits prescribed by the laws, and to maintain all in the secure and
tranquil enjoyment of the rights of person and property.

I have already intimated to you, the danger of parties in a state, with
particular reference to the founding of them on geographical discriminations.
Let me now take a more comprehensive view, and warn you, in the most solemn
manner, against the baneful effects of the spirit of party, generally.

This spirit, unfortunately, is inseparable from our nature, having its root in
the strongest passions of the human mind. It exists, under different shapes, in
all governments, more or less stifled, controlled, or repressed; but in those
of the popular form, it is seen in its greatest rankness, and is truly their
worst enemy.

The alternate domination of one faction over another, sharpened by the spirit
of revenge, natural to party dissension, which, in different ages and
countries, has perpetrated the most horrid enormities, is itself a frightful
despotism: But this leads at length to a more formal and permanent despotism.
The disorders and miseries, which result, gradually incline the minds of men to
seek security and repose in the absolute power of an individual; and, sooner or
later, the chief of some prevailing faction, more able or more fortunate than
his competitors, turns this disposition to the purposes of his own elevation,
on the ruins of public liberty.

Without looking forward to an extremity of this kind (which nevertheless ought
not to be entirely out of sight) the common and continual mischiefs of the
spirit of party are sufficient to make it the interest and duty of a wise
people to discourage and restrain it.

It serves always to distract the public councils, and enfeeble the public
administration. It agitates the community with ill-founded jealousies and false
alarms; kindles the animosity of one part against another; and foments,
occasionally, riot and insurrection. It opens the door to foreign influence and
corruption, which find a facilitated access to the government itself, through
the channels of party passions. Thus the policy and will of one country are
subjected to the policy and will of another.

There is an opinion, that parties in free countries are useful checks upon the
administration of the government, and serve to keep alive the spirit of
liberty. This, within certain limits, is probably true; and in governments of a
monarchical cast, patriotism may look with indulgence, if not with favor, upon
the spirit of party. But in those of the popular character, in governments
purely elective, it is a spirit not to be encouraged. From their natural
tendency, it is certain, there will always be enough of that spirit for every
salutary purpose: and there being constant danger of excess, the effort ought
to be, by force of public opinion, to mitigate and assuage it. A fire not to be
quenched, it demands a uniform vigilance to prevent its bursting into a flame,
lest, instead of warming, it should consume.

It is important, likewise, that the habits of thinking, in a free country,
should inspire caution in those entrusted with its administration, to confine
themselves within their respective constitutional spheres, avoiding, in the
exercise of the powers of one department, to encroach upon another. The spirit
of encroachment tends to consolidate the powers of all the departments in one,
and thus to create, whatever be the form of government, a real despotism. A
just estimate of that love of power, and proneness to abuse it, which
predominates in the human heart, is sufficient to satisfy us of the truth of
this position. The necessity of reciprocal checks in the exercise of political
power, by dividing and distributing it into different depositories, and
constituting each the guardian of the public weal against invasions by the
others, has been evinced by experiments, ancient and modern; some of them in
our country, and under our own eyes. To preserve them, must be as necessary as
to institute them. If, in the opinion of the people, the distribution or
modification of the constitutional powers be in any particular wrong, let it be
corrected by an amendment in the way which the Constitution designates. But let
there be no change by usurpation; for though this, in one instance, may be the
instrument of good, it is the customary weapon by which free governments are
destroyed. The precedent must always greatly overbalance, in permanent evil,
any partial or transient benefit which the use can at any time yield.

Of all the dispositions and habits, which lead to political prosperity,
religion and morality are indispensable supports. In vain would that man claim
the tribute of patriotism, who should labor to subvert these great pillars of
human happiness, these firmest props of the duties of men and citizens. The
mere politician, equally with the pious man, ought to respect and to cherish
them. A volume could not trace all their connexions with public and private
felicity. Let it be simply asked, Where is the security for property, for
reputation, for life, if a sense of religious obligation desert the oaths which
are the instruments of investigation in courts of justice? And let us with
caution indulge the supposition, that morality can be maintained without
religion. Whatever may be conceded to the influence of refined education, on
minds of peculiar structure; reason and experience both forbid us to expect,
that national morality can prevail, in exclusion of religious principle.

It is substantially true, that virtue or morality is a necessary spring of
popular government. The rule, indeed, extends, with more or less force, to
every species of free government. Who, that is a sincere friend to it, can look
with indifference upon attempts to shake the foundation of the fabric?

Promote, then, as an object of primary importance, institutions for the
general diffusion of knowledge. In proportion as the structure of a government
gives force to public opinion, it is essential that public opinion should be
enlightened.

As a very important source of strength and security, cherish public credit.
One method of preserving it is, to use it as sparingly as possible; avoiding
occasions of expense by cultivating peace; but remembering also, that timely
disbursements, to prepare for danger, frequently prevent much greater
disbursements to repel it; avoiding, likewise, the accumulation of debt, not
only by shunning occasions of expense, but by vigorous exertions, in time of
peace, to discharge the debts which unavoidable wars may have occasioned, not
ungenerously throwing upon posterity the burden which we ourselves ought to
bear. The execution of these maxims belongs to your representatives, but it is
necessary that public opinion should cooperate.

To facilitate to them the performance of their duty, it is essential that you
should practically bear in mind, that toward the payment of debts there must
be revenue; that to have revenue there must be taxes; that no taxes can be
devised, which are not, more or less, inconvenient and unpleasant; that the
intrinsic embarrassment inseparable from the selection of the proper objects
(which is always a choice of difficulties) ought to be a decisive motive for a
candid construction of the conduct of the government in making it, and for a
spirit of acquiescence in the measures for obtaining revenue, which the public
exigencies may at any time dictate.

Observe good faith and justice toward all nations; cultivate peace and
harmony with all: religion and morality enjoin this conduct; and can it be,
that good policy does not equally enjoin it? It will be worthy of a free,
enlightened, and (at no distant period) a great nation, to give to mankind the
magnanimous and too novel example of a people always guided by an exalted
justice and benevolence. Who can doubt, that in the course of time and things,
the fruits of such a plan would richly repay any temporary advantages, which
might be lost by a steady adherence to it? Can it be, that Providence has not
connected the permanent felicity of a nation with its virtue? The experiment,
at least, is recommended by every sentiment which ennobles human nature. Alas!
is it rendered impossible by its vices?

In the execution of such a plan, nothing is more essential, than that
permanent, inveterate antipathies against particular nations, and passionate
attachments for others, should be excluded; and that, in the place of them,
just and amicable feelings toward all should be cultivated. The nation, which
indulges toward another an habitual hatred, or an habitual fondness, is in
some degree a slave. It is a slave to its animosity or to its affection, either
of which is sufficient to lead it astray from its duty and its interest.
Antipathy in one nation against another, disposes each more readily to offer
insult and injury, to lay hold of slight causes of umbrage, and to be haughty
and intractable, when accidental or trifling occasions of dispute occur. Hence
frequent collisions, obstinate, envenomed and bloody contests. The nation,
prompted by ill will and resentment, sometimes impels to war the government,
contrary to the best calculations of policy. The government sometimes
participates in the national propensity, and adopts, through passion, what
reason would reject; at other times, it makes the animosity of the nation
subservient to the projects of hostility, instigated by pride, ambition, and
other sinister and pernicious motives. The peace often, sometimes perhaps the
liberty, of nations has been the victim.

So, likewise, a passionate attachment of one nation for another, produces a
variety of evils. Sympathy for the favorite nation, facilitating the illusion
of an imaginary common interest, in cases where no real common interest exists,
and infusing into one the enmities of the other, betrays the former into a
participation in the quarrels and wars of the latter, without adequate
inducement or justification. It leads also to concessions to the favorite
nation, of privileges denied to others, which is apt doubly to injure the
nation making the concessions; by unnecessarily parting with what ought to have
been retained; and by exciting jealousy, ill will, and a disposition to
retaliate, in the parties from whom equal privileges are withheld: and it gives
to ambitious, corrupted, or deluded citizens (who devote themselves to the
favorite nation) facility to betray, or sacrifice the interests of their own
country, without odium, sometimes even with popularity; gilding, with the
appearances of a virtuous sense of obligation, a commendable deference for
public opinion, or a laudable zeal for public good, the base or foolish
compliance, of ambition, corruption, or infatuation.

As avenues to foreign influence in innumerable ways, such attachments are
particularly alarming to the truly enlightened and independent patriot. How
many opportunities do they afford to tamper with domestic factions, to practice
the arts of seduction, to mislead public opinion, to influence or awe the
public councils! Such an attachment of a small or weak, toward a great and
powerful nation, dooms the former to be the satellite of the latter.

Against the insidious wiles of foreign influence (I conjure you to believe me,
fellow-citizens) the jealousy of a free people ought to be constantly awake;
since history and experience prove, that foreign influence is one of the most
baneful foes of Republican Government. But that jealousy, to be useful, must be
impartial; else it becomes the instrument of the very influence to be avoided,
instead of a defense against it. Excessive partiality for one foreign nation,
and excessive dislike of another, cause those whom they actuate to see danger
only on one side, and serve to veil and even second the arts of influence on
the other. Real patriots, who may resist the intrigues of the favorite, are
liable to become suspected and odious; while its tools and dupes usurp the
applause and confidence of the people, to surrender their interest.

The great rule of conduct for us, in regard to foreign nations, is, in
extending our commercial relations, to have with them as little political
connection as possible. So far as we have already formed engagements, let them
be fulfilled with perfect good faith. -- Here let us stop.

Europe has a set of primary interests, which to us have none, or a very remote
relation. Hence she must be engaged in frequent controversies, the causes of
which are essentially foreign to our concerns. Hence, therefore, it must be
unwise in us to implicate ourselves, by artificial ties, in the ordinary
vicissitudes of her politics, or the ordinary combinations and collisions of
her friendships or enmities.

Our detached and distant situation invites and enables us to pursue a
different course. If we remain one people, under an efficient government, the
period is not far off, when we may defy material injury from external
annoyance; when we may take such an attitude, as will cause the neutrality, we
may at any time resolve upon, to be scrupulously respected; when belligerent
nations, under the impossibility of making acquisitions upon us, will not
lightly hazard the giving us provocation; when we may choose peace or war, as
our interest, guided by justice, shall counsel.

Why forego the advantages of so peculiar a situation? Why quit our own, to
stand upon foreign ground? Why, by interweaving our destiny with that of any
part of Europe, entangle our peace and prosperity in the toils of European
ambition, rivalship, interest, humor or caprice?

It is our true policy to steer clear of permanent alliances, with any portion
of the foreign world; so far, I mean, as we are now at liberty to do it: for
let me not be understood as capable of patronizing infidelity to existing
engagements. I hold the maxim no less applicable to public than to private
affairs, that honesty is always the best policy. I repeat it, therefore, let
those engagements be observed in their genuine sense. But, in my opinion, it is
unnecessary, and would be unwise, to extend them.

Taking care always to keep ourselves, by suitable establishments, on a
respectable defensive posture, we may safely trust to temporary alliances for
extraordinary emergencies.

Harmony, liberal intercourse with all nations, are recommended by policy,
humanity and interest. But even our commercial policy, should hold an equal and
impartial hand; neither seeking nor granting exclusive favors or preferences;
consulting the natural course of things; diffusing and diversifying, by gentle
means, the streams of commerce, but forcing nothing; establishing, with the
powers so disposed, in order to give trade a stable course, to define the
rights of our merchants, and to enable the government to support them,
conventional rules of intercourse, the best that present circumstances and
mutual opinion will permit, but temporary, and liable to be from time to time
abandoned or varied, as experience and circumstances shall dictate; constantly
keeping in view, that it is folly in one nation to look for disinterested
favors from another; that it must pay, with a portion of its independence, for
whatever it may accept under that character; that, by such acceptance, it may
place itself in the condition of having given equivalents for nominal favors,
and yet of being reproached with ingratitude for not giving more. There can be
no greater error than to expect or calculate upon real favors from nation to
nation. It is an illusion which experience must cure, which a just pride ought
to discard.

In offering to you, my countrymen, these counsels of an old and affectionate
friend, I dare not hope they will make the strong and lasting impression I
could wish; that they will control the usual current of the passions, or
prevent our nation from running the course which has hitherto marked the
destiny of nations: But if I may even flatter myself, that they may be
productive of some partial benefit, some occasional good; that they may now and
then recur to moderate the fury of party spirit, to warn against the mischiefs
of foreign intrigue, to guard against the impostures of pretended patriotism;
this hope will be a full recompense for the solicitude for your welfare, by
which they have been dictated.

How far, in the discharge of my official duties, I have been guided by the
principles which have been delineated, the public records, and other evidences
of my conduct, must witness to you and to the world. To myself, the assurance
of my own conscience is, that I have at least believed myself to be guided by
them.

In relation to the still subsisting war in Europe, my proclamation of the 22d
of April, 1795, is the index to my plan. Sanctioned by your approving voice,
and by that of your Representatives in both Houses of Congress, the spirit of
that measure has continually governed me; uninfluenced by any attempts to deter
or divert me from it.

After deliberate examination, with the aid of the best lights I could obtain,
I was well satisfied that our country, under all the circumstances of the case,
had a right to take, and was bound in duty and interest to take, a neutral
position. Having taken it, I determined, as far as should depend upon me, to
maintain it with moderation, perseverance and firmness.

The considerations which respect the right to hold this conduct, it is not
necessary on this occasion to detail. I will only observe, that, according to
my understanding of the matter, that right, so far from being denied by any of
the belligerent powers, has been virtually admitted by all.

The duty of holding a neutral conduct may be inferred, without any thing more,
from the obligation which justice and humanity impose on every nation, in
cases, in which it is free to act, to maintain inviolate the relations of peace
and amity toward other nations.

The inducements of interest for observing that conduct will be best referred
to your own reflections and experience. With me, a predominant motive has been
to endeavor to gain time to our country to settle and mature its yet recent
institutions, and to progress, without interruption, to that degree of strength
and consistency, which is necessary to give it, humanly speaking, the command
of its own fortunes.

Though in reviewing the incidents of my administration, I am unconscious of
intentional error, I am nevertheless too sensible of my defects, not to think
it probable that I may have committed many errors. Whatever they may be, I
fervently beseech the Almighty to avert or mitigate the evils to which they may
tend. I shall also carry with me the hope, that my country will never cease to
view them with indulgence; and that after forty-five years of my life dedicated
to its service, with an upright zeal, the faults of incompetent abilities will
be consigned to oblivion, as myself must soon be to the mansions of rest.

Relying on its kindness in this as in other things, and actuated by that
fervent love toward it, which is so natural to a man who views in it the
native soil of himself and his progenitors for several generations; I
anticipate, with pleasing expectation, that retreat, in which I promise myself
to realize, without alloy, the sweet enjoyment of partaking, in the midst of my
fellow-citizens, the benign influence of good laws under a free government --
the ever favorite object of my heart, and the happy reward, as I trust, of our
mutual cares, labors and dangers.

G. Washington.
United States, 17th Sept. 1796.
FINIS

