AN ORATION ON THE ADVANTAGES OF AMERICAN INDEPENDENCE DELIVERED Before a
Public Assembly of the Inhabitants of CHARLESTOWN, SOUTH CAROLINA, ON THE
FOURTH OF JULY, 1778, THE SECOND ANNIVERSARY OF THAT GLORIOUS ERA.

By DAVID RAMSAY, M. B.

Magnus ab integro seclorum nascitur ordo.
Jam redit and Virgo, redeunt Saturnia regna:
Jam nova progenies, coelo dimittitur alto.
Huic ego nec metas rerum, nec tempora pono: Imperium sine fine dedi.

VIRG. CHARLESTON: PRINTED BY T. C. COX, NO. 137, TRADD STREET, ONE DOOR FROM
THE BAY. 1800.

TO The Honorable CHRISTOPHER GADSDEN, Esquire, Lieutenant Governor OF THE
STATE OF SOUTH CAROLINA; WHO, Fearless of Danger, Undaunted by Opposition,
Uninfluenced by the Hope of Reward, IN THE WORST OF TIMES, Has stood among the
FOREMOST, An early, active, zealous, disinterested Champion, IN THE CAUSE OF
AMERICAN LIBERTY AND INDEPENDENCE; The following ORATION, Originally drawn up
at his Request, IS RESPECTFULLY INSCRIBED BY His humble Servant, THE AUTHOR.

ORATION.
Friends and Fellow-Citizens,
IMPRESSED with the deepest sense of my insufficiency, I rise to address you
with peculiar diffidence. When I consider the knowledge and eloquence necessary
to display the glorious prospects, which Independence opens to this continent,
I am stung with a degree of self-reproach for undertaking the important task.
But your known attachment to the cause of America encourages me to hope, that
you will receive with indulgence, a well-intended exertion to promote her
welfare; and emboldens me to cast myself on that candor, which looks with
kindness on the feeblest efforts of an honest mind.

We are now celebrating the anniversary of our emancipation from British
tyranny; an event that will constitute an illustrious era in the history of
the world, and which promises an extension of all those blessings to our
country, for which we would choose to live, or dare to die.

Our present form of government is every way preferable to the royal one we
have lately renounced. It is much more favorable to purity of morals, and
better calculated to promote all our important interests. Honesty, plain
dealing, and simple manners, were never made the patterns of courtly behavior.
Artificial manners always prevail in kingly governments; and royal courts are
reservoirs, from whence insincerity, hypocrisy, dissimulation, pride, luxury,
and extravagance, deluge and overwhelm the body of the people. On the other
hand, republics are favorable to truth, sincerity, frugality, industry, and
simplicity of manners. Equality, the life and soul of commonwealth, cuts off
all pretensions to preferment, but those which arise from extraordinary merit:
Whereas in royal governments, he that can best please his superiors, by the low
arts of fawning and adulation, is most likely to obtain favor.

It was the interest of Great Britain to encourage our dissipation and
extravagance, for the twofold purpose of increasing the sale of her
manufactures, and of perpetuating our subordination. In vain we sought to check
the growth of luxury, by sumptuary laws; every wholesome restraint of this kind
was sure to meet with the royal negative: While the whole force of example was
employed to induce us to copy the dissipated manners of the country from which
we sprung. If, therefore, we had continued dependent, our frugality, industry,
and simplicity of manners would have been lost in an imitation of British
extravagance, idleness, and false refinements.

How much more happy is our present situation, when necessity, cooperating
with the love of our country, compels us to adopt both public and private
economy? Many are now industriously clothing themselves and their families in
sober homespun, who, had we remained dependent, would have been spending their
time in idleness, and strutting in the costly robes of British gaiety.

The arts and sciences, which languished under the low prospects of subjection,
will now raise their drooping heads, and spread far and wide, till they have
reached the remotest parts of this untutored continent. It is the happiness of
our present constitution, that all offices lie open to men of merit, of
whatever rank or condition; and that even the reins of state may be held by the
son of the poorest man, if possessed of abilities equal to the important
station. We are no more to look up for the blessings of government to hungry
courtiers, or the needy dependents of British nobility; but must educate our
own children for these exalted purposes. When subjects, we had scarce any other
share in government, but to obey the arbitrary mandates of a British
parliament: But honor with her dazzling pomp, interest with her golden lure,
and patriotism with her heartfelt satisfaction, jointly call upon us now to
qualify ourselves and posterity for the bench, the army, the navy, the learned
professions, and all the departments of civil government. The independence of
our country holds forth such generous encouragement to youth, as cannot fail of
making many of them despise the siren calls of luxury and mirth, and pursue
heaven-born wisdom with unwearied application. A few years will now produce a
much greater number of men of learning and abilities, than we could have
expected for ages in our boyish state of minority, guided by the leading
strings of a parent country.

How trifling the objects of deliberation that came before our former
legislative assemblies, compared with the great and important matters on which
they must now decide? They might then, with the leave of the king, his
governors and councils, make laws about yoking hogs, branding cattle, or
marking rice; but they are now called upon to determine on peace and war,
treaties and negociations with foreign states, and other subjects interesting
to the peace, liberty, sovereignty, and independence of a wide extended empire.
No wonder, that so little attention has been paid to learning; for ignorance
was better than knowledge, while our abject and humiliating condition so
effectually tended to crush the exertions of the human mind, and to extinguish
a generous ardor for literary pre-eminence.

The times in which we live, and the governments we have lately adopted, all
conspire to fan the sparks of genius in every breast, and kindle them into
flame. When, like children, we were under the guardianship of a foreign power,
our limited attention was naturally engrossed by agriculture, or directed to
the low pursuit of wealth. In this state, the powers of the soul, benumbed with
ease and indolence, sunk us into sloth and effeminacy. Hardships, dangers, and
proper opportunities, give scope to active virtues, and rouse the mind to such
vigorous exertions, as command the admiration of an applauding world. Rome,
when she filled the earth with the terror of her arms, sometimes called her
generals from the plough: In like manner, the great want of proper persons to
fill high stations, has drawn from obscurity many illustrious characters, which
will dazzle the world with the splendor of their names. The necessities of our
country require the utmost exertions of all our powers; from which vigorous
united efforts, much more improvement of the human mind is to be expected, than
if we had remained in a torpid state of dependence.

Eloquence is the child of a free state. In this form of government, as public
measures are determined by a majority of votes, arguments enforced by the arts
of persuasion, must evermore be crowned with success: The rising patriot,
therefore, who wishes the happiness of his country, will cultivate the art of
public speaking. In royal governments, where the will of one or a few has the
direction of public measures, the orator may harangue, but most probably will
reap prosecution and imprisonment, as the fruit of his labor: Whereas, in our
present happy system, the poorest schoolboy may prosecute his studies with
increasing ardour, from the prospect, that in a few years he may, by his
improved abilities, direct the determinations of public bodies, on subjects of
the most stupendous consequence.

Thus might I go through the whole circle of the arts and sciences, and show,
that while we remained British subjects, cramped and restrained by the limited
views of dependence, each one of them would dwindle and decay, compared with
the perfection and glory in which they will bloom and flourish, under the
enlivening sunshine of freedom and independence.

I appeal to the experience of all, whether they do not feel an elevation of
soul growing out of the emancipation of their country, while they recollect
that they are no longer subject to lawless will, but possess the powers of
self-government, and are called upon to bear an active part in supporting and
perpetuating the sovereignty of the United States; and in organizing them in
such a manner, as will produce the greatest portion of political happiness to
the present and future generations. In this elevation of soul consists true
genius; which is cramped by kingly government, and can only flourish in free
states.

The attention of thousands is now called forth from their ordinary employments
to subjects connected with the sovereignty and happiness of a great continent.
As no one can tell to what extent the human mind may be cultivated; so no one
can foresee what great events may be brought into existence, by the exertions
of so many minds, expanded by close attention to subjects of such vast
importance.

The Royal Society was founded immediately after the termination of the civil
wars in England. In like manner, may we not hope, as soon as this contest is
ended, that the exalted spirits of our politicians and warriors will engage in
the enlargement of public happiness, by cultivating the arts of peace, and
promoting useful knowledge, with an ardor equal to that which first roused them
to bleed in the cause of liberty and their country? Their genius sharpened by
their present glorious exertions, will naturally seek for a continuance of
suitable employment. Having, with well tried swords, and prudent counsels,
secured liberty and independence for themselves and posterity, their great
souls will stoop to nothing less than concerting wise schemes of civil policy
and happiness -- instructing the world in useful arts -- and extending the
empire of science. I foresee societies formed of our heroes and statesmen,
released from their present cares; some of which will teach mankind to plough,
sow, plant, build, and improve the rough face of nature; while others
critically examine the various productions of the animal, vegetable, and
mineral kingdoms, and teach their countrymen to "look through Nature up to
Nature's God." Little has been hitherto done toward completing the natural
history of America, or for the improvement of agriculture, and the peaceful
arts of civil life; but who will be surprised at this, who considers, that
during the long past night of 150 years, our minds were depressed, and our
activity benumbed by the low prospects of subjection? Future diligence will
convince the candid world, that past inattention was the effect of our
dependent form of government.

Every circumstance concurs to make it probable, that the arts and sciences
will be cultivated, extended, and improved, in independent America. They
require a fresh soil, and always flourish most in new countries. A large volume
of the book of nature, yet unread, is open before us, and invites our attentive
perusal. Many useful plants, unknown to the most industrious botanist, waste
their virtues in our desert air. Various parts of our country, hitherto untrod
by the foot of any chemist, abound with different minerals. We stand on the
shoulders of our predecessors, with respect to the arts that depend on
experiment and observation. The face of our country, intersected by rivers, or
covered by woods and swamps, gives ample scope for the improvement of
mechanics, mathematics, and natural philosophy. Our free governments are the
proper nurseries of rhetoric, criticism, and the arts which are founded on the
philosophy of the human mind. In monarchies, an extreme degree of politeness
disguises the simplicity of nature, and "sets the looks at variance with the
thoughts;" in republics, mankind appear as they really are, without any false
coloring: In these governments, therefore, attentive observers have an
opportunity of knowing all the avenues to the heart, and of thoroughly
understanding human nature. The great inferiority of the moderns to the
ancients in fine writing, is to be referred to this veil cast over mankind, by
the artificial refinements of modern monarchies. From the operation of similar
causes it is hoped, that the free governments of America will produce poets,
orators, critics, and historians, equal to the most celebrated of the ancient
commonwealths of Greece and Italy.

Large empires are less favorable to true philosophy, than small, independent
states. The authority of a great author is apt, in the former case, to
extinguish a free enquiry, and to give currency to falsehood unexamined. The
doctrines of Confucius were believed all over China, and the philosophy of
Descartes, in France: But neighboring nations, examining them without
partiality or prepossession, exploded them both. For the same reason, our
separate states, jealous of the literary reputation of each other, and
uninfluenced by any partial bias, will critically pry into the merit of every
new opinion and system; and naught but truth will stand the test, and finally
prevail.

In monarchies, favor is the source of preferment; but, in our new forms of
government, no one can command the suffrages of the people, unless by his
superior merit and capacity.

The weight of each state in the continental scale, will ever be proportioned
to the abilities of its representatives in Congress: Hence, an emulation will
take place, each contending with the other, which shall produce the most
accomplished statesmen. From the joint influence of all these combined causes,
it may strongly be presumed, that literature will flourish in America; and that
our Independence will be an illustrious epoch, remarkable for the spreading
and improvement of science.

A zeal for promoting learning, unknown in the days of our subjection, has
already begun to overspread these United States. In the last session of our
Assembly, three societies were incorporated for the laudable purpose of
erecting seminaries of education. Nor is the noble spirit confined to us alone:
Even now, amidst the tumults of war, literary institutions are forming all over
the continent, which must light up such a blaze of knowledge, as cannot fail to
burn, and catch, and spread, until it has finally illuminated, with the rays of
science, the most distant retreats of ignorance and barbarity.

Our change of government smiles upon our commerce with an aspect peculiarly
benign and favorable. In a few years, we may expect to see the colors of
France, Spain, Holland, Prussia, Portugal, and those of every other maritime
power, waving on our coasts; whilst Americans unfurl the Thirteen Stripes in
the remotest harbors of the world. Our different climates and soils produce a
great variety of useful commodities. The sea washes our coast along an
extensive tract of two thousand miles; and no country abounds in a greater
plenty of materials for ship-building, or has a better prospect of a
respectable navy. Our stately oaks, the greater part of which would probably
have withered in their native spots, had we remained subjects, will now be
converted into ships of war, to ride triumphant on the ocean, and to carry
American thunder around the world. Whole forests will be transformed into
vessels of commerce, enriching this independent continent with the produce of
every clime and every soil. The wealth of Europe, Asia, and Africa, will flow
in upon America: Our trade will no longer be confined by the selfish
regulations of an avaricious step-dame, but follow wherever interest leads the
way. Our great object, as a trading people, should be to procure the best
prices for our commodities, and foreign articles at the most reasonable rates:
But all this was cruelly reversed by acts of the British Parliament, regulating
our trade in a subserviency to their own emolument; our interest being entirely
out of the question. It requires but a moment's recollection to convince us,
that as we now have a free trade with all the world, we shall obtain a more
generous price for our produce, and foreign goods on easier terms, than we ever
could, while we were subject to British monopoly. That British merchants gave
us a low price for our commodities, appears from this single consideration --
they made money by exporting them from England. If they found it profitable to
export tobacco, rice, indigo, etc. from Britain, it must be in consequence of
their allowing the American colonists less for those articles, than they would
have brought in European markets. In this manner, much of our produce was sold
to the consumers, loaded with double freight, insurance, and commissions, over
and above the additional expense of unloading and reloading in Great Britain.
The industrious American planter received no more for his produce than the
pittance the British merchant, after reserving his own profit, was pleased to
allow on the sale thereof, brought to market charged with this unnecessary
expense. The distance from America to those places of Europe, which consumed
our staples, is generally less than to the British ports. From all which
premises, it appears undeniably evident, that American commodities, carried
directly to the countries where they are consumed, will produce much more clear
profit to the planter, than when they arived there by the circuitous way of
Great Britain.

The same reasoning holds good with respect to many articles imported from
England, which were not of its own growth or manufacture; for they would come
much cheaper from the countries where they were made, than they ever could,
while we were obliged to receive them through the hands of British merchants,
loaded with double freight, insurance, commissions, and sometimes with duties.
If interest had not silenced the voice of justice, Great Britain, while she
obliged us to buy at her market, would have considered herself as bound to
supply our wants as cheap, as they could be supplied elsewhere: But instead of
this, she not only fixed exorbitant prices on articles of her own production,
but refused us the liberty of buying from foreigners those articles which her
own markets did not afford, and had also begun the fatal policy of superadding
additional duties. What a scene of oppression does this open to us? A great
part of the price, for which our commodities sold in Europe, was lodged in
British coffers; and we were obliged to buy manufactures of her production, at
prices of her own fixing, and were restrained from buying even those articles
which she could not raise, where they could be got cheapest: Besides, as we
durst not buy from any others, they had it in their power to fix any advance on
the first cost, that their avarice prescribed, and our necessities would permit.


The boasted act of navigation was not intended for our advantage, nor for the
advantage of the whole empire; but was a glaring monument of the all-grasping
nature of unlimited power. To enumerate all the ungenerous restrictions imposed
by the British government on American commerce, would be an outrage on
patience. Time only will unfold the whole of this mystery of iniquity. A few
years experience will show such an amazing difference between the fettered
trade of the British Colonies, and the extensive commerce of the Free,
Independent States of America, as will cause us to stand amazed, that we so
long and so patiently submitted to so many and such cruel restrictions. In one
word, so long as we remained dependent, the commerce of this great continent
would have been sacrificed to the interest of a selfish European island.

Carolina had particular reason to wish for the free trade of Independence. The
Tobacco Colonies were also great losers by the British monopoly of trade. The
duties on their staple amounted to more than half the first cost. Tobacco
exported from Britain, sold in European markets for more than double the sum
the American planter received for it. -- If it should become a custom in the
United States, to celebrate the anniversay of Independence with an annual
oration, it is hoped that some citizen of Virginia or Maryland, will place the
selfish restrictions on the exportation of this valuable commodity, in a proper
light.
The whole island of Great Britain did not annually consume more than five
thousand barrels of her staple commodity, rice; and yet, it was an enumerated
article. The charge on unloading, reloading, and shifting every cask, owing to
this enumeration, was immense; though it served no other purpose but to procure
jobs for British coopers and wharfingers. So little regard was had to our
interest, while dependent, that this enumeration was obtained by the
instigation of a Captain Cole: Several vessels coming from England before him,
and purchasing rice for Portugal, prevented the aforesaid captain of a loading;
he returned, and in resentment said, carrying rice to Portugal was a prejudice
to the trade of England: And on this single instance, so ill founded and
supported, rice became an enumerated article Gee on Trade, page 21.
How could our trade flourish, or our produce bring its full value, while
restricted by a legislature so regardless of our interest, that a petty
captain, to secure himself a cargo, could prevent our staple from being sent
directly to a foreign market.

Union with Great Britain confined us to the consumption of her manufactures,
and restrained us from supplying our wants by the improvement of those
articles, which the bounty of Heaven had bestowed on our country. So numerous
were the inhabitants of some provinces, that they could not all find employment
in cultivating the earth; and yet a single hat, manufactured in one colony, and
exported for sale to another, forfeited both vessel and cargo. The same
penalties were inflicted for transporting wool from one to another. Acts of
parliament have been made to prohibit the erection of slitting mills in
America. Thus did British tyranny exert her power, to make us a needy and
dependent people, obliged to go to her market, and to buy at her prices; and
all this at a time when, by her exclusive trade, she fixed her own prices on
our commodities.

How widely different is our present situation? The glorious fourth of July,
1776, repealed all these cruel restrictions, and holds forth generous prices,
and public premiums, for our encouragement in the erection of all kinds of
manufactures.

We are the first people in the world, who have had it in their power to choose
their own form of government. Constitutions were forced on all other nations,
by the will of their conquerors; or, they were formed by accident, caprice, or
the over-bearing influence of prevailing parties or particular persons: But,
happily for us, the bands of British government were dissolved at a time when
no rank above that of freemen existed among us, and when we were in a capacity
to choose for ourselves among the various forms of government, and to adopt
that which best suited our country and people. Our deliberations on this
occasion, were not directed by there overgrown authority of a conquering
general, or the ambition of an aspiring nobility, but by the pole star of
public good, inducing us to prefer those forms that would most effectually
secure the greatest portion of political happiness to the greatest number of
people. We had the example of all ages for our instruction, and many among us
were well acquainted with the causes of prosperity and misery in other
governments.

In times of public tranquillity, the mighty have been too apt to encroach on
the rights of the many: But it is the great happiness of America, that her
independent constitutions were agreed upon by common consent, at a time when
her leading men needed the utmost support of the multitude, and therefore could
have no other object in view, but the formation of such constitutions as would
best suit the people at large, and unite them most heartily in repelling common
dangers.

As the strength of a people consists in their numbers, our separate states,
sensible of their weakness, were actually excited by self interest to form such
free governments, as would encourage the greatest influx of inhabitants. In
this manner, an emulation has virtually taken place in all the thirteen states,
each contending with the others, who should form the freest constitution. Thus
independence has been the fruitful parent of governments formed on equal
principles, more favorable to the liberty and happiness of the governed, than
any that have yet been recorded in the annals of history.

While we were dependent on Britain, our freedom was out of the question; for
what is a free state, but one that is governed by its own will? What shadow of
liberty then could we possess, when the single NO of a king, 3000 miles
distant, was sufficient to repeal any of our laws, however useful and salutary;
and when we were to be bound in all cases whatsoever by men, in whose election
we had no vote, who had an interest opposed to ours, and over whom we had no
control? The wit of men could not possibly devise any mode, that would unite
the freedom of America with Britain's claim of unlimited supremacy. We were
therefore reduced to the alternative of liberty and independence, or slavery
and union. We wisely chose to cut the gordian knot, which tied old Britain to
the new, and to assume our independent station among the empires of the world.
Britain, had she honestly intended it, was incapable of governing us for the
great purposes of government. Our distance, and other local circumstances, made
it impossible for her to be sufficiently acquainted with our situation and
wants: But, admitting it was in her power, we had no reason to expect that she
would hold the reins of government for any other end but her own advantage.
Human nature is too selfish, too ambitious, for us to expect, that one country
will govern another, for any but interested purposes. To obtain the salutary
ends of government, we must blend the interest of the people and their rulers;
or else, the former will infallibly be sacrificed to the latter. Hence, the
absurdity of our expecting security, liberty, and safety, while we were
subjects of a state a thousand leagues distant.

Connection with Britain involved us in all her quarrels; and such is the
fluctuating state of her politics, that we could not long expect a political
calm. In vain did the Atlantic ocean interpose; for, by our unnatural union, we
were necessarily dragged into every war, which her pride or ambition might
occasion. Besides, as she considered the colonies as her property, what was to
hinder her from ceding any or all of them to the different European states?
Thus, while we had no independent government of our own, we might have been the
sport of various contending powers, and tossed about, like a football, from
one to the other.

Our independence will naturally tend to fill our country with inhabitants.
Where life, liberty, and property are well secured, and where land is easily
and cheaply obtained, the natural increase of people will much exceed all
European calculations. Add to this, the inhabitants of the old world becoming
acquainted with our excellent forms of government, will emigrate by thousands.
In their native lands, the hard-earned fruits of uninterrupted labor, are
scarcely equal to a scanty supply of their natural wants; and this pittance is
held on a very precarious tenure; while our soil may be cheaply purchased, and
will abundantly repay the toil of the husbandman, whose property no rapacious
landlord dare invade. Happy America! whose extent of territory westward, is
sufficient to accommodate with land, thousands and millions of the virtuous
peasants, who now groan beneath tyranny and oppression in three quarters of the
globe. Who would remain in Europe, a dependent on the will of an imperious
landlord, when a few years industry can make him an independent American
freeholder?

Such will be the fruits of our glorious revolution, that in a little time, gay
fields adorned with the yellow robes of ripening harvest, will smile in the
remotest depths of our western frontiers, where impassable forests now frown
over the uncultivated earth. The face of our interior country will be changed
from a barren wilderness, into the hospitable abodes of peace and plenty.
Cities too, will rise majestic to the view, on those very spots which are now
howled over by savage beasts and more savage men.

The population of this country has been heretofore very rapid; but it is
worthy of observation, that this has varied more or less, in proportion to the
degrees of liberty that were granted to the different provinces, by their
respective charters. Pennsylvania and New England, though inferior in soil, being
blessed originally with the most free forms of government, have outstripped
others in the relative increase of their inhabitants. Hence I infer, that as we
are all now completely free and independent, we shall populate much faster than
we ever have done, or ever would, while we were controuled by the jealous
policy of an insignificant island.

We possess thousands and millions of acres, which we may sell out to new
settlers, on terms very easy to them, and yet sufficient to defray the whole
expense of the present war. When the quit rents formerly paid to the king,
shall be appropriated to the benefit of the independent states, they will fill
our treasuries to so great a degree, that foreign nations, knowing that we
abound in the sinews of war, will be afraid to provoke us. In a few years, when
our finances are properly arranged, the stoppage of those sums which were
formerly drained from us, to support the pride and extravagance of the British
king, will be an ample provision, without taxes, for defraying the expense of
our independent governments.

It is difficult to compute the number of advantages arising from our present
glorious struggle; harder still, perhaps impossible, precisely to ascertain
their extent. It has attracted the attention of all Europe to the nature of
civil liberty, and the rights of the people. Our constitutions, pregnant with
the seeds of liberty and happiness, have been translated into a variety of
languages, and spread far and wide. Who can tell what great events, now
concealed in the womb of time, may be brought into existence by the nations of
the old world emulating our successful efforts in the cause of liberty? The
thrones of tyranny and despotism will totter, when their subjects shall learn
and know, by our example, that the happiness of the people is the end and
object of all lawful government. The wondering world has beheld the smiles of
Heaven on the numerous sons of America resolving to die or be free: Perhaps
this noble example, like a wide-spreading conflagration, may catch from breast
to breast, and extend from nation to nation, till tyranny and oppression are
utterly extirpated from the face of the earth. Britain will eventually lose
less by our independence, than is commonly supposed. The king and ministry may
be cured of their lust of domination, and will be deprived of influence and the
means of corruption. While she had a monopoly of our trade, it encouraged
idleness and extravagance in her manufactures; because they were sure of a
market for their goods, though dear and ill made: But, as independence will
bestow our commerce on those who most deserve it, this will be the means of
introducing frugality and industry among her laboring poor. Our population
will be so much the more rapid for our free governments, that, in my humble
opinion, that part of our trade which will fall to the share of Great Britain,
if she has the wisdom to conclude a speedy peace, will be more to her advantage
than a monopoly of the whole of it, if we had remained subjects.


The tyrants and landlords of the old world, who hold a great part of their
fellow men in bondage because of their dependence for land, will be obliged to
relax of their arbitrary treatment, when they find that America is an asylum
for freemen from all quarters of the globe. They will be cautious of adding to
the oppressions of their poor subjects and tenants, lest they should force them
to abandon their country for the enjoyment of the sweets of American liberty.
In this view of the matter, I am confident that the cause of America is the
cause of human nature, and that it will extend its influence to thousands who
will never see it, and procure them a mitigation of the cruelties and
oppressions imposed by their arbitrary taskmasters.

If such be the glorious consequences of Independence, who can be so lost to
every generous sentiment, as to wish to return under royal domination? Who
would not rather count it an honor to stand among the foremost, in doing and
suffering in a cause so intimately connected with the happiness of human
nature? Away with all the peevish complaints of the hardness of the times, and
the weight of the taxes. The prize for which we contend, would be cheaply
purchased with double the expense of blood, treasure, and difficulty, it will
ever cost us.

Our independent constitutions, formed on the justest principles, promise fair
to give the most perfect protection to life, liberty, and property, equally to
the poor and the rich. As at the conflagration of Corinth, the various melted
metals running together, formed a new one, called Corinthian brass, which was
superior to any of its component parts; in like manner, perhaps it is the will
of Heaven, that a new empire should be here formed, of the different nations of
the old world, which will rise superior to all that have gone before it, and
extend human happiness to its utmost possible limits. None can tell to what
perfection the arts of government may be brought. May we not therefore expect
great things from the patriots of this generation, jointly cooperating to make
the newborn republics of America as complete as possible? Is it not to be
hoped, that human nature will here receive her most finished touches? That the
arts and sciences will be extended and improved? That religion, learning, and
liberty will be diffused over this continent? And, in short, that the American
editions of the human mind will be more perfect than any that have yet
appeared? Great things have been achieved in the infancy of states; and the
ardor of a new people rising to empire and renown, with prospects that tend to
elevate the human soul, encourages these flattering expectations.

Should any puny politician object, that all these prospects are visionary,
till we are certain of independence; I reply, that we have been in possession
of it for two years, and are daily more able to support it, and our enemies
less able to overset it. When we first dared to contend with Britain, we were a
loose, disjointed people, under no other government but that of a well
regulated mob. If in these circumstances we were able to defend ourselves, what
may we not now expect, when we can draw forth our whole strength in a regular
constitutional manner? If the maiden* courage of our new raised levies, has
successfully withstood the well trained bands of our enemies, can we distrust,
when three campaigns have made them equal in discipline, to those with whom
they are to contend? Such is the situation of Britain, that were we only able
to keep up the appearance of an army, she could not afford to protract the war:
But instead of this, our troops are more numerous, better disciplined, clothed,
and armed, than they ever were. The most timid may dismiss all their doubts,
since Louis XVI, of France, that illustrious protector of the rights of human
nature, with a magnanimity worthy of himself, has guaranteed to us our
independency. If Britain could not subdue America when she stood single and
alone, how abortive must all her attempts prove, when we are aided by the power
of the greatest European monarch?

The special interposition of Providence in our behalf, makes it impious to
disbelieve the final establishment of our heaven-protected independence. Can
any one seriously review the beginning, progress, and present state of the war,
and not see indisputable evidence of an overruling influence on the minds of
men, preparing the way for the accomplishment of this great event?

As all the tops of corn in a waving field are inclined in one direction by a
gust of wind; in like manner, the Governor of the world has given one, and the
same universal bent of inclination to the whole body of our people. Is it a
work of man, that thirteen states, frequently quarreling about boundaries,
clashing in interests, differing in policy, manners, customs, forms of
government, and religion, scattered over an extensive continent, under the
influence of a variety of local prejudices, jealousies, and aversions, should
all harmoniously agree, as if one mighty mind inspired the whole?

Our enemies seemed confident of the impossibility of our union; our friends
doubted it; and all indifferent persons, who judged of things present, by what
has heretofore happened, considered the expectation thereof as romantic: But He
who sits at the helm of the universe, and who boweth the hearts of a whole
nation as the heart of one man, for the accomplishment of his own purposes, has
effected that, which to human wisdom and foresight, seemed impossible. A review
of the history of America, from its first discovery to the present day, forces
upon us a belief that greater blessings are reserved for this continent, than
she ever could have possessed whilst lying low at the foot of an European
island.

It has never yet been fairly tried how far the equal principles of republican
government would secure the happiness of the governed. The ancients,
unacquainted with the present mode of taking the sense of the people by
representatives, were too apt, in their public meetings, to run into disorder
and confusion. The distinction of Patricians and Plebians, laid the foundation
of perpetual discord, in the Roman commonwealth. If the free states of Greece
had been under the control of a common superintending power, similar to our
Continental Congress, Their Council of Amphyctions, in some things resembled
our Congress; but their powers were too limited. This suggests a hint, that a
confederation of the United States, on principles that vest the Congress with
ample powers, is most likely to perpetuate our republican governments and
internal tranquillity. The union of independent commonwealths, under one common
head, is an application of the social compact to states, and requires powers
proportionably enlarged. Treason in our governments, puts on a new aspect, and
may be committed by a state as well as an individual; and therefore ought to be
clearly defined, and carefully guarded against.

To give permanency to our confederation on republican principles, among other
regulations, it will be expedient to erect a great Continental University,
where gentlemen from all the states may form acquaintance, receive the
finishing touches of education, and be inspired with a continental liberality
of mind, superior to local prejudices, and favorable to a confederated union.


they could have peaceably decided their disputes, and probably would have
preserved their freedom and importance to the present day. Happily for us,
warned by experience, we have guarded against all these evils. No artificial
distinction of ranks has been suffered to take place among us. We can peaceably
convene a state in one small assembly of deputies, representing the whole in an
equal proportion. All disputes between the different states, and all
continental concerns, are to be managed by a congress of representatives from
each. What a security for liberty, for union, for every species of political
happiness! Small states are weak and incapable of defense; large ones are
unwieldy, greatly abridge natural liberty, and their general laws, from a
variety of clashing interests, must frequently bear hard on many individuals:
But our confederation will give us the strength and protection of a power equal
to that of the greatest; at the same time that, in all our internal concerns,
we have the freedom of small independent commonwealths. We are in possession of
constitutions that contain in them the excellencies of all forms of government,
free from the inconveniences of each; and, in one word, we bid fair to be the
happiest and freest people in the world for ages yet to come.

When I anticipate in imagination the future glory of my country, and the
illustrious figure it will soon make on the theater of the world, my heart
distends with generous pride for being an American. What a substratum for
empire! compared with which, the foundation of the Macedonian, the Roman, and
the British, sink into insignificance. Some of our large states have territory
superior to the island of Great Britain, whilst the whole together, are little
inferior to Europe itself. Our independence will people this extent of country
with freemen, and will stimulate the innumerable inhabitants thereof, by every
motive, to perfect the acts of government, and to extend human happiness.

I congratulate you on our glorious prospects. Having for three long years
weathered the storms of adversity, we are at length arrived in view of the calm
haven of peace and security. We have laid the foundation of a new empire, which
promises to enlarge itself to vast dimensions, and to give happiness to a great
continent. It is now our turn to figure on the face of the earth, and in the
annals of the world. The arts and sciences are planted among us, and, fostered
by the auspicious influence of equal governments, are growing up to maturity;
while truth and freedom flourish by their sides. Liberty, both civil and
religious, in her noontide blaze, shines forth with unclouded luster on all
ranks and denominations of men.

Ever since the flood, true religion, literature, arts, empire, and riches,
have taken a slow and gradual course from east to west, and are now about
fixing their long and favorite abode in this new western world. Our sun of
political happiness is already risen, and has listed his head over the
mountains, illuminating our hemisphere with liberty, light, and polished life.
Our independence will redeem one quarter of the globe from tyranny and
oppression, and consecrate it the chosen seat of truth, justice, freedom,
learning, and religion. We are laying the foundation of happiness for countless
millions. Generations yet unborn will bless us for the blood-bought
inheritance, we are about to bequeath them. Oh happy times! Oh glorious days!
Oh kind, indulgent, bountiful Providence, that we live in this highly favored
period, and have the honor of helping forward these great events, and of
suffering in a cause of such infinite importance!

FINIS.

