PART OF A DISCOURSE DELIVERED ON THE 29th OF DECEMBER, UPON THE CLOSE OF THE
YEAR 1799, RECOMMENDING THE IMPROVEMENT OF TIME.

BY JOHN PRINCE, LL. D. Minister of the First Congregational Society in Salem.

PUBLISHED BY DESIRE OF THE TOWN.

SALEM: Printed by THOMAS C. CUSHING, at the Bible and Heart.

To the Committee of Arrangements, etc.
GENTLEMEN,
THE Inhabitants of this respectable town having, through you, requested for
publication a copy of the Discourse I delivered on the 29th of December, being
the Sabbath after the melancholy news of the death of General WASHINGTON
reached us, I submit to their candor the enclosed pages, which contain the
principal part of it.

As the Discourse was written without the least expectation of its appearing in
print, and was not solely appropriated to the event, I have, in copying,
omitted some parts, which are wholly irrelevant to the design of the town in
bringing into public view the occasional discourses delivered in it on that day.

I am, with great esteem and respect, Gentlemen, Your friend and humble
servant, JOHN PRINCE.
Salem, Jan. 20, 1800.
ON THE Improvement of Time.
REVELATIONS X.5, 6. And the angel, which I saw stand upon the sea and upon the
earth, lifted up his hand to heaven, and swear by him that lives forever and
ever, who created heaven and the things that therein are, and the earth and the
things that therein are, and the sea and the things which are therein, THAT
THERE SHOULD BE TIME NO LONGER.


****CONSIDERING the end for which man is made and placed in this world, the
condition of his present life, and his connection with a future state, it is of
the utmost importance to him to make a right estimate, and good improvement, of
his time. It is in this life he must take a right direction, if he would make a
happy progress through eternity. It is here he must begin to live well, if he
would live hereafter in the enjoyment of immortality. As he must necessarily
look forward to that period when "time shall be no longer," when the
revolutions of the earth, which now measure off his existence in stated and
regular portions, shall cease, and days and nights, months and years, shall be
done away, it becomes him, while they last, diligently to use them to the great
end for which they are given -- to prepare for eternity.

If man were to live here forever, his life passing on continually, without the
interruption of death, it would be wise in him to make a right and diligent use
of his time; because wisdom, which is the true glory of man, consists in using
every thing to the best end; and this, as it respects the life of man, is in
doing that which gives him the greatest dignity and happiness. The reverse of
this is folly. For he who misuses his time, spending it in the pursuits of
vice, only accumulates to himself a load of misery, which makes life unpleasant
and burdensome, if not undesirable. And he who spends his time in idleness,
without much employment in actions either good or bad, suffers a disease to
grow upon him, which will finally make him in capable of enjoyment, fill him
with uneasiness, and render his existence miserable.

Man was made for action; and he cannot transgress this law of his nature
without injuring himself. He was ordained to seek and find happiness in a
course of good actions. He ought not therefore to expect to find it in
idleness, or the pursuits of vice. He must be active, but he must also be
virtuous; otherwise he perverts the end of his being, which leads to misery.

If it be true, that, in the present state, virtue generally tends to
happiness, and vice to misery, it is also true* that our good or bad conduct
will produce much more enjoyment and suffering in the future; for this is a
state of probation and trial to mankind; the other is to be a state of rewards
and punishments, in which men are to receive according to the deeds done in the
body.

Though, in general, happiness results from good actions, and misery from bad,
in this life, yet it is not uniformly the case. Good men are sometimes
permitted to suffer, even for the exercise of virtue; and the wicked are
allowed to triumph, and to enjoy for a while the harvest they reap in the field
of iniquity. It is by prosperity and adversity God tries men here; but we are
cautioned against being overcome by these trials, and exhorted to look to the
end. We are neither to be frighted from the path of duty by the sufferings of
the virtuous, nor decoyed from it by the temporary prosperity of the wicked.
Mankind, in all their actions, should look forward to the future state, where
virtue will be highly rewarded, and vice severely punished; and consider what
effect their actions will have upon their future, rather than on their present
life. If the practice of godliness be not always profitable to the righteous in
giving them the good things of this life, it will give them, in adversity, that
consolation and hope which are better than the gains of ungodliness; and it
will finally give them the inestimable treasures of heaven. For the Apostle
assures us, that in "the day of the righteous judgment of God, he will render
to every man according to his deeds: to them who, by patient continuance in
well doing, seek for glory, honor, and immortality, he will give eternal life;
but unto them that are contentious, and do not obey the truth, but obey
unrighteousness, he will render indignation and wrath, tribulation and anguish,
upon every soul of man that does evil." Seeing, then, that as the conduct of
men has been here, so will their condition be hereafter, it is necessary we
should be diligent in using our time well; spending it in the faithful
discharge of our duty; making the most we can of the short term of life now
allotted us, by employing it in good and virtuous actions.

I do not mean to assert, that every moment of our time, not necessarily
employed in taking the refreshment of animal nature, must be devoted to bodily
action. There are mental as well as corporeal employments belonging to the duty
of man. The mind must be refreshed, as well as the body: it must have its food
and its exercise; and our wisdom is to be shown in the proper distribution of
time between study and labor, thinking and acting. As animal beings, we must
provide for the support and comfort of the body: but as rational beings, our
principal care must be to promote the improvement and happiness of the mind.
Our cares for the former should be subservient to those for the latter. The
body is the vehicle in which the soul acts, and through which it receives many
pleasures; but mere sensual enjoyments are of the lower kind, and our animal is
the least valuable part of our nature. We ought duly to prize every enjoyment
God has given us; but we should prefer those of the noblest kind, and on which
he has stamped the greatest value. What shall a man profit if he gain the whole
world of sensual pleasures, and lose all the exquisite delights which belong to
the soul -- all that pure and refined happiness an intelligent being is capable
of enjoying? A part of our time, therefore, ought to be appropriated to
thinking and reflecting; for without this we cannot improve the mind, lead a
rational life, nor answer the principal end of our being.

He who reflects properly on his nature and condition, must soon perceive, that
the intention of his Creator in placing him here, was not merely that he might
enjoy the sensual or social pleasures of the present life. His views and
expectations are necessarily carried forward to another state: his hopes and
fears connect him with it, and he feels himself bound to act with reference to
it. Revelation teaches him to contemplate the future state of immortality as a
spiritual state of purity and holiness; full of wisdom and love, as well as of
unspeakable happiness. He will therefore see the necessity of a diligent
improvement of his time, to become qualified to enjoy it. In many things it is
the contrast of our present condition: and if we would obtain the
qualifications for it, we must oppose every thing in ourselves we perceive
contrary to it. We shall find we have much to do in time to prepare for
eternity. We have the evil propensities of our nature to restrain and subdue,
the passions to control and regulate, sin to mortify and conquer. We have
knowledge to acquire, of our duty, of the best manner of resisting and
overcoming temptations, and of performing good and virtuous actions. We must
watch with vigilance, and pray with fervency, that we be not overcome by our
spiritual enemies. We have many and various talents to improve; and time, which
is not the least important talent, embraces all the others. How many duties
have we to discharge which respect ourselves! how many social duties which
regard others! We have much to learn and practice, if we would "abound in the
work of the Lord." And, though we have the grace of God to assist us in this
christian course and warfare, we need to use great diligence to make
progressive improvement in it. Our passions will sometimes get the advantage
over our reason and judgment, and a sense of our duty -- impede our progress
toward heaven, and throw us back upon the world. It requires every aid of
exertion, circumspection, diligence and firmness, "to persevere in the ways of
well doing" -- to lead that life of piety and virtue which will fit us for the
enjoyment of immortality.

I mean not to suggest, that we can merit eternal life by our own works. This
is the free gift of God to men through Jesus Christ. But he has not promised it
to any who continue in disobedience, who spend their time in idleness, or
employ it in the works of iniquity. He requires the qualification of holiness
to fit us for it. "Ye shall be holy," says he, "for I am holy;" and, "without
holiness no man shall see the Lord." By the use of the means of grace, God has
appointed, we may become holy; but we must be diligent in the use of them, to
make progress in a holy life.****

Enough has been said to show the importance of time to us, and the necessity
of making a right use of it, that we may be prepared for that final, though
uncertain, period when time shall cease, and eternity, as it respects us,
begin; and when all, who shall be counted worthy to obtain the gift, shall
enter upon the enjoyment, of eternal life.

I have been led to this subject, my hearers, by that transition of time which
has brought us near the close of the present year. At the end of two days it
will be no more. Another year of our lives will have rolled away, and brought
us nearer to that important period "when time will be no longer;" when the
apparent revolutions of the sun, and other heavenly bodies, shall no longer
divide the portions of our existence. For then the present constitution of this
world will end. "The heavens shall pass away with a great noise, and the
elements shall melt with fervent heat; the earth also, and the works that are
therein, shall be burnt up." The measurers of time will no longer perform this
office: the revolutions by which our years have been determined will then
cease: the present beautiful scene of nature, and all the works and monuments
of human labor, art, and ingenuity, will be gone. But the soul of the good,
the righteous man, shall remain unhurt, amidst this dissolution of nature, this
"wreck of matter, and this crush of worlds." He is taught to look for, and
expect from the Lord, "new heavens and a new earth, wherein dwells
righteousness. Wherefore, beloved," says the Apostle, "seeing that ye look for
such things, be diligent, that ye may be found of him in peace:" be diligent in
the improvement of the present time, that ye may be prepared for that great
event. And let us, my hearers, reflect seriously on this truth, that we know
not the time when this decree of the Almighty, pronounced by his angel, shall
be fulfilled. As it respects ourselves it cannot be farther distant than the
remainder of our lives: for, when death closes the present scene of our
existence, to us "time will be no longer." And who can count with certainty
upon a future hour? Let us then improve the present time in the important
duties of life, to secure the blessings of eternity. As one mean of
improvement, as a stimulus to diligence and activity, let us reflect on the
year that is past; and, while the scenes of it are fresh in our minds, select
from them that useful instruction they afford.

In this, as in every other year, we may trace the progress of good and evil in
the world. We may see the unhappy effects of a state of imperfection, in the
sufferings produced by sin. And we, my hearers, have seen, and realized, many
of the blessings of a bountiful Parent, in our own preservation, and the
enjoyments he has furnished to us. We have heard of wars, and the rumors of
wars, in distant parts of the world; while we have enjoyed the blessings of
peace. We have read of the slaughter of the field, and of the sword drunk with
the blood of its enemies; while our fields have only teemed with the blessings
of life, and our swords have rested in their scabbards. We have heard of the
devastations of war, and of the destruction of thousands of our fellow-men;
while our lives have been protected from the weapons of violence, the rage of
ungoverned passions, and the mad career of ambition and disorganization. Our
habitations now shelter us from the inclemency of winter; a blessing, at this
moment, denied to many, who have been deprived of it by the ravages of war. We
also are enjoying the fruits of a plentiful harvest, while many, on the theater
of the war in Europe, are suffering with hunger. While some parts of our own
country have been visited with pestilence, we, in this part of it, have been
blessed with a remarkable degree of health. No epidemic disease has come nigh our
dwellings, or touched the lives of our citizens. Some indeed have been called
to quit this scene of existence in the past year; but the number has been
small, compared with many other years. It is the common lot of humanity, and
what must be expected in its present state.

But though we have been thus remarkably favored, and have many reasons to be
grateful to God for his goodness to us in the year past, yet we have also to
acknowledge his judgments, and to mourn under the afflicting hand of his
providence. As individuals, some of us The Author's Mother died in July.
have been called to part with near relatives and friends, which has agitated
our bosoms, and called the tear of sorrow from our eyes. For these losses we
could mourn in silence and solitude, and confine, within our own domestic
walls, the expressions of our grief. But God in his wise providence has, in the
course of the past year, afflicted us with bereavements as a people, and called
us to public mourning, by taking from us good and valuable men in public life
-- men high in station -- eminently useful -- conspicuous for public and
private virtues -- ornaments of religion and society -- and greatly beloved by
their country and particular acquaintance. It is not six months since a SUMNER
died, and the gloom of public grief overspread our countenances for the loss of
a most excellent Chief Magistrate of this Commonwealth -- a man who was beloved
and respected wherever he was known; and who, as far as the duties of his
office extended, evinced what advantages a people enjoy when blessed with a wise
and good governor. Short was the time this blessing was lent to us in him; but
long will his virtues and usefulness remain in our remembrance.

As the year has drawn nearer to the close, God has seen fit to afflict us with
a more extensive loss, in taking from us our beloved WASHINGTON; He died on the
14th of December, 1799.
our country's pride, our nation's greatest prop; the man whom he had raised up
to be the instrument of his providence in working out our political salvation.
This is a distressing national event; it demands, and has, a nation's tears.
For we cannot part with one who has been so eminently useful to us, and is so
justly universally beloved, without deep-felt affliction. That he was the
Father of his Country, we all have experienced, in the protection he afforded
us in the time of danger; in the wisdom, courage and prudence with which he led
our armies, and presided in our national councils. That he had a sincere
affection for his country, is evident from his numerous actions to serve it.
This affection, guided by a mind endued with wisdom and integrity, always led
him to seek his country's good. That he was not ambitious of power, is seen by
his resigning that power which had been delegated to him in the field, into the
hands of the people again, when he had accomplished the purposes, and secured
the object, for which it was given to him. That his country was dearer to him
than riches, is evident from the pecuniary sacrifices he made to serve it.

Few, if any, good and virtuous patriots have been so fortunate in doing so
much for theirs, as WASHINGTON has done for his country. Few have, like him,
begun and conducted a revolution through to independence. He was the only
commander in chief of our armies, through a long and hazardous war, which he
terminated with success and glory to himself and country. He then resigned his
sword to a grateful people, and soon after received from them the helm of the
national government, to conduct in peace our political bark, which he had so
ably guided amidst the tempests of war. He continued at the head of our
councils till our government was established in safety and prosperity. He then
retired from the burden of office, so long and so well sustained, to enjoy
domestic ease and tranquillity. Those who were acquainted with his private
life, and shared his intimacy, speak of him as exemplary in the walks of
religion; in the practice of piety and virtue; and declare that he was great,
good and amiable in his domestic circle, as he was in the public sphere of life.

I do not mean to attempt to give you his full and complete character. It is
far above the powers of my pen to describe it, which is too inadequate to
express the feelings of my own heart. You are acquainted with all his virtues
and worth; you know how valuable he has been to his country; and your grateful
hearts, I doubt not, will appreciate all his merits. What I have said, or may
say, of him is not with any expectation of exalting his merit with you; but
because it would be improper that a person so great, good, and valuable, should
be taken from us, whose death so justly excites universal mourning, without
noticing some of the virtues which endeared him to us. In our hearts he has
erected a monument of love and respect, which will be as durable as our lives.
His contemporaries, who were the witnesses of his actions, need no higher
eulogy than to recollect them. To posterity many men of genius, observation,
and judgment, will transmit his name and virtues, which will live as long as
this American nation exists, at whose birth he presided, whose infancy he
nourished, over whose childhood he watched with a parent's care and solicitude,
and which he never left till it had attained the strength of manhood.

Perhaps the world never saw an instance like this, of a young nation advancing
with such rapid and sturdy growth. Let us look back to the time when this
country was a wilderness, an uncultivated scene, and compare it with the
present. How soon do we behold it filled with inhabitants, with populous
cities, and numerous towns, flourishing under an increasing commerce, and
improving agriculture, beyond example! This national prosperity, under the
fostering hand of Providence, is to be attributed to him whose death we now
lament, more than to any other man.

God, to answer the great, wise and good designs of his government of the
world, always provides adequate means to accomplish his ends. To incorporate
the people of this part of America into a nation, and establish them in
prosperity, he gave them a WASHINGTON for their leader, who was equal to the
mighty work. And, having fulfilled his purpose by him, he has, in his own time,
taken him again. In this afflictive dispensation to us, his goodness to our
departed Father and Friend is seen, and ought to be acknowledged. For it is
worthy of remark, that, as this good man died when at the summit of earthly
greatness, so he died without imbecility of body or mind. He neither outlived
himself, by withering in age, and sinking into second childhood, or doing any
one action, through the infirmity of years, that might cast a shade over his
former glory. He died as he lived, with all the honors he ever acquired by his
great and good actions bright upon him; and in possession of all that affection
and veneration he had impressed, by those actions, upon the hearts of a
grateful people. The Sovereign of the world, having exhibited him here in so
eminent and useful a character, has, by a timely death, exempted him from the
common frailties of age, which might have diminished his greatness in our view:
perhaps that his example, as a true patriot, might not, in any part of it, be
less perfect than it now is; and that the recollection of it may, through
future times, be a useful lesson to others. In his death, then, as in his life,
he may be useful to his country. He has fallen "like a shock of corn fully
ripe," in the best time for himself. And in this event we may consider him as a
favorite of Heaven. This we often noticed in the course of his public life. We
then saw conspicuously the hand of Providence shielding him in danger, and
crowning his military actions with success* and the spirit of wisdom directing
him, in our national councils, to those measures which have secured our
national glory.

And in him we have an example also of what has been offered in this discourse,
on the advantage of a wise and diligent improvement of time. Without this he
never would have been so great, good and useful as he was. For we are not to
understand, by what has been said above, he was immediately inspired by God. By
deep reflection and study, and by a social and active walk in life, he acquired
that wisdom to judge rightly, and that prudence to act cautiously, for which he
was eminent; and that knowledge of the world, which enabled him to manage our
affairs with so much address and advantage. His death has secured his earthly
fame -- his political immortality; and we trust he is gone to reap the reward
of his illustrious labors in the kingdom of his Redeemer, whom he loved and
served.

Though he might have been longer highly serviceable to us, and it would have
delighted our hearts to have had him dwelt among us while he could have been
useful, and enjoyed life, that we might have given him the tokens of our
gratitude, as we grew in greatness and prosperity; and felt the benefits of his
patriotism; and have received his sage advice and fatherly blessing: yet, as
the great Parent of all, the wise Governor of the world, has denied us this
gratification and favor, let us humbly submit to the dispensation; let us
gratefully thank him for having continued his valuable life so long, and made
him so useful to his country.

And let us remember, that though our beloved friend be dead, and his tongue
silent in the grave, he yet speaks to us in that valuable legacy he has left
behind him for our perusal and direction. In his Farewell Address, on quitting
the office of President, he is still our counselor. And while our hearts are
oppressed with grief for this separation from him, let us seriously resolve
that we will attend to his instructions, and follow his counsels, which have so
often saved us in the time of danger, and have led us to unexampled prosperity.

And though I would say nothing to lessen the praise which is due to the great
and good friend we have lost, yet let us always remember, that he was but the
instrument in the hands of God to effect what has been done for us. It is to
Him, "who rules in the kingdoms of men," we are primarily indebted for all we
have and enjoy, in a national, as well as private, view -- To him let us give
the tribute of thanksgiving and praise -- To him we must look for future
blessings. Though our hopes are in some measure cast down by this event, they
are not destroyed. Our chief trust and confidence is in God, who will still be
"the light of our countenance," and preserve our national independence and
prosperity, if we do not forsake him. We have good reason to presume, that he,
who gave us a WASHINGTON to make us a free and prosperous nation, will not
suffer this work of his hands to be destroyed by the arts of wicked men; unless
we forfeit the invaluable blessing of freedom, by becoming the slaves of vice,
and prostituting, to the service of sin, the bounties of his providence.

Let us remember, that though God has taken our WASHINGTON from us, he has left
us many great and good men, wise and virtuous patriots, to conduct our national
affairs. And let us resolve to unite in harmony with them to promote our
country's good. Let us solemnly declare, we will always revere, love, and
support, the constitution God has given us, and be obedient to the laws of the
government founded upon it. Let us diligently improve our time through the
years which may be to come, in the faithful discharge of all duties, religious
and civil, patriotic and social -- in the exercise of all public and private
virtues. And by our prayers to the great Ruler of the world, the Father of all
blessings, by mutual good counsels and actions, let us endeavor to give a
stability and prosperity to our nation and government, which shall last,
through succeeding ages, till the angel of God shall again "stand upon the sea
and upon the earth" to perform the oath he has sworn, "THAT TIME SHALL BE NO
LONGER."

AMEN.

