TWO DISCOURSES: THE FIRST OCCASIONED BY THE DEATH OF GENERAL WASHINGTON,
DELIVERED AT SPENCERTOWN, JANUARY 19, 1800.

THE SECOND, DELIVERED ON A THANKSGIVING OCCASION, AT THE SAME PLACE, DECEMBER
13, 1799.

BY DAVID PORTER.

Published at the request of a number who heard them.

PRINTED IN HUDSON, BY ASHBEL STODDARD, M,DCCC.

THESE Discourses are handed to the public with very little variation from the
first draft. In compiling them there was no intention of making them more
public, than to a friendly and confidential auditory. The writer subjoins this
apology, that they were written amidst numerous avocations, and under a very
infirm state of health. If the reader be (...) indifferently entertained in the
perusal; it is hoped, nevertheless, he will make every generous allowan^^ and
^^nsure (...) candor.

DISCOURSE I.
THE Providence of God this day to be improved is solemn and v^ry affecting. It
is no other than the death of the illustrious GEORGE WASHINGTON, who departed
this life on the 14th day of the month last past.

Frequently we have convened on mournful occasions; but never have we
experienced a period of such general lamentation as the present. Our eyes have
seen the bursting tear. Our ears have heard the painful shriek of the
disconsolate. We have beheld husbands taking the last full gaze of their
dearest companions; parents weeping for their children and refusing to be
comforted, because they were not; and feeble, helpless orphans bereft of their
only guides. But this day's services, these badges of mourning indicate the
keenest sensations, at the loss of a man, great beyond an equal, the father of
his country, and the friend of the human race.

Propriety and the intent of this discourse, suggest it as suitable, that we
feel no less solemn, than though the remains of this wonderful personage were
now before us, to be entombed in our full view, and by our own hands.

You will therefore let me have your serious and religious attention, while I
attempt to state something from God's word suited to the very important and
mournful occasion.

The words to be the theme of the discourse, you will find written in the 2d
Book of Samuel, the 1st Chapter, and the 27th verse: "How are the mighty
fallen!"

The text is part of the Eulogium spoken by king David on the death of Saul and
Jonathan. Being inspired, his example sanctions the propriety of taking special
notice of the death of those who have been illustrious in their lives. David
was a feeling (...)* and taught of God, he touched the subject with the
sublimest strokes of delicacy and sensibility.

He begins; " The beauty of Israel is stain upon the high places; how are the
mighty fallen!" He goes on; " tell it not in Gath, publish it not in the (...)
of Askelon. Ye (...) of Gilbon let there be no (...)." In the cou^^ of his
lamentation, he repeats the text no less than three times; " How are the mighty
fallen!"

The words pertinently apply to the character of General Washington; he was "
mighty." They are applicable to his end; he has " fallen" a prey to death the
king of terrors.

The words mighty and great have nearly the same import, I shall, therefore,
use them promiscuously in the ensuing discourse, as shall be most convenient.

In the first place, I shall observe some traits in the character of General
Washington in which his greatness was very apparent. Secondly, I shall notice
the goodness of God in raising up such a character, and continuing his active
services for so great a length of time. Thirdly, I shall consider the important
instruction to be derived to the people of this country from his character, and
the improvement, if wise, they will make of the Providence of God in taking him
out of the world.

In illustrating the character, the following may serve as a summary. The
greatness of General Washington appeared from his singular diffidence in
accepting the first honors conferred on him; from his refusing pecuniary
compensation for his many services both in the field and cabinet; from his
familiar condescension to inferiors; from his remarkable intrepidity and
knowledge in warlike enterprises; from his profound skill in in perceiving the
result of present measures, through a complication of the most difficult and
perplexing circumstances; from his unequaled patience and composare of mind on
the most trying occasions; from his never having been elated by those many and
distinguished honors conferred on him; from his retiring from the first o^^^ce
in the nation to the place of a common citizen; and from universal consent.

This summary, I shall endeavor to unfold, with as much brevity and clearness,
as I am capable.

The greatness of General Washington appeared from his singular diffidence in
accepting the first honors conferred on him. The greatness of this man was
perceived in the early part of his life. In Braddock's defeat he signalized
himself so as not to be forgotten, tho at this time he was no more than about
nineteen years of age. On the commencement of hostillities between the United
States and Great Britain, the continental Congress were unanimous in appointing
him to the command of the army. The manner of his accepting the appointment,
was a strong proof of his greatness. Not made vain, nor at all moved by the
honor conferred on him, his mind was occupied with the arduousness of the
undertaking, and the importance and precariousness of the result. He expressed
his own insufficiency, and dependence on the Disposer of events. Conscious
there was a higher power who overruled, he did not depend on an arm of flesh;
but with every mark of modesty and diffidence he accepted his appointment, from
a sense of duty and not from motives of self-exaltation. Almost any other man
would have betrayed, either directly or indirectly, undue gratification at
being raised at once to the highest post of trust and honor in the nation. But
General Washington, with cheerful reluctance, bids farewell to Vernon's
beauteous height, with a diffidence unequaled; and yet with such intrepidity
and valor as could not fail rousing the timid, and inspiring every bosom with
fresh resolution. Steady and unmoved, like a mighty rock, a crown of laurels at
the conclusion of an eight years victorious war, altered not the man. With the
same steady smile, he leaves the field and retires to the sweets of private
life. Called again, by the free and unanimous suffrages of the people, to the
Presidency of the United States; he expressed his reluctance. With modesty he
viewed himself unequal to the betrustment. But swayed by the voice of his
country, he comes diffidently to the sacred book and is qualified to office.
Through the annals of time, the modesty and diffidence of Washington on these
occasions will set him up as one of the greatest of the human race.

His greatness appeared from his refusing pecuniary compensation for his many
services both in the (...) and cabinet. Without any regard to present
possessions, whether they be great or small, there is a native thirst in the
mind to amass more. This is a maxim which meets universal credence and is
corroborated by fact. But in this respect General Washington must be viewed as
singular and almost entirely alone. His mind was so elevated and his passion
for wealth so subordinate, that the annual compensation of eight thousand
pounds weighed not a feather in his consideration. In this feeling of mind, he
was steady and persevering. He was great in wealth; but it was not his idol.
This part of his conduct is at least an indication of his greatness.

The greatness of General Washington appeared from his generous condescension
to his inferiors. His station was the first. He was honored more than any other
man in the world; but all this did not make him proud and haughty. He did not
view it beneath him to mingle in social intercourse with the lowest peasant.
Look to the despots of the eastern continent. At what cringing distance do they
hold their subjects. If they speak, they die. With Washington how different!
Tho elevated to the highest pinnacle of honor, he did not forget that he was a
man, and that others were so too. He wanted not flattery nor the parade of
adulation. He was never more in his element, than in friendly intercourse with
those of ordinary station. This his greatness will never be forgotten.

The greatness of Washington appeared from his remarkable intrepidity and
knowledge in warlike enterprises. All the talents of generalship united in him.
His integrity was so far past suspicion, that the nation could repose entire
confidence in him, without the least imaginary hazard of fallacy. Beside, he
held the esteem and affections of those under his command to a man. His
counsels were cool and deliberate; and yet seasonable and adequate. The lives
of those under him, he viewed precious, and he would not expose them contrary
to the soundest policy, and the dictates of the purest reason. If he retreated
from his enemy, after re^^ection would sanction the measure. If he entered the
combat, his valor and intrepidity were exceeded by none. Never was a man
farther from cruelty. Prisoners of war felt safe at his disposal Compared with
him, Alexander and the Caesar's loose all their glory, as the stars their light
by the rising sun. In short, language can hardly express his talents. He was
uniform, and yet amazingly various. When we look on other generals we find one
to excel in this thing and another in that. But Washington excelled in all. He
was great in planning; and yet he was no better in planning than carrying into
execution. But that in which he seemed as it were to rise above himself, was
this, same did not reach him. He stood aloof from the eclat of an admiring
world, like a statue unmoved. In ^ine, as a warrior and general in the field,
ancient history produces no rival. All that envy and malice could ever do to
lessen him, could only set him the higher and sound the farther the glory of
his athcievements.

The greatness of this man appeared from his profound skill in the systems of
national policy After this great man retired from the field, the public opinion
of him was in part as it is of other men. His military glory resounded to the
remotest clime. But it was conceived this was his greatest excellency, and that
in the cabinet it would be impossible he should arrive to equal greatness and
fame. No sooner was he promoted to the Presidency, than the public mind was
turned upon him, and prepared, at least, to discover some weakness, some
deficiency common to great characters. This idea which occupied the mind was
the fruit of observation and analogical reasoning. That talents so numerous, so
various and so extraordinary should meet in one man was past credibility.
Without proof equal to vision it could not be admitted. This was the
prepossession of the public mind. But so soon as General Washington had
opportunity to display his political wisdom, he rose as a statesman to as
elevated a pinnacle, as by his military exploits. The truth was, his mind was
great and his conceptions adequate to every undertaking. He was a lover of
mankind, and therefore he could not be a tyrant; and for the same reason, he
could not settle into the opposite extreme. To exalt human felicity was his
object, and he had genius to discern the measures and principles which would
accomplish the end. The best constitution of civil government seemed to be the
natural growth of his mind, and to administer to the greatest advantage, was
none beyond his abilities. When he took the Presidency, he discovered the
difficulties. The jarring and clashing interest and passions of the various
states of the confederacy, would have been an infurmountable embarrassment to
any other mind. But in the first outset, each state of the union felt his
impartiality, and was linked by his skill, and make willing to renounce party
considerations, and to look to Washington as the patron and friend of the
whole. When he came to the chair of state, it was a season of peculiar
difficulty. Far were we from organization. Our finances were miserable, and our
national credit beneath mediocrity. Foreign kingdoms looked to see us crumble;
but they were disappointed in the result. This great chieftain and sage of the
nation, drew order from confusion, and soon made America an asylum for the
oppressed, and the pride and astonishment of the whole world. As a statesman,
his character stands alone. The kings and politicians of ancient and modern
Europe, are sullied by Washington, as the moon by the ushering in of the
brightness of the morning. This his greatness will live to the latest ages.

The greatness of General Washington appeared from his wonderful foresight in
perceiving the result of present measures, through a complication of the most
difficult and perplexing circumstances. Not to diminish from the wisdom of
others, nor to detract honor from any man, Washington, in this respect, was
without a parallel. And herein his greatness will ever stand acknowledged. His
acquaintance with men and things was amazing. He knew their passions: he was
appriz^^ of their views and objects. He let all circumstances have their just
weight and no more. And hence little changes did not affect him. He could see
through a mist of darkness which would wholly eclipse the sight of others. His
mind was original, exact and clear in its conceptions. He was not hasty in
accomplishing his designs; and yet he was familiar with the result through a
complication of the most intricate circumstances. Closely did he cleave to the
maxim of the wise man, that " in the multitude of counselors there is safety;"
yet his mind was independent and his actions without the least tincture of
party consideration. This trait in General Washington's character can have no
just description, because so rare. It is too delicate and elevated to be
touched with the pen. We may glance at it and wonder and that is about all we
can do. A better definition cannot be given of it than to say, it was (...)
itself.

The greatness of General Washington appeared from (...) patience and composure
of mind on the (...). He was bred in affluence, and, in his private capacity,
knew no other than the most easy fortune; and hence we might suppose him less
likely to submit with resigned feelings to trying scenes. But, tho exalted by
fortune, he was not voluptuous and effeminate. He had the hardihood of
antiquity connected with the best modern improvement. To meet extreme
difficulties his patience and composure of mind were the most extraordinary.
This example he exhibited both in the field and in the chair of state. Without
permanent resources; with a small diminishing body of troops, and the country
very much disheartened, he endured a whole year's embarrassment in Jersey and
Pennsylvania. He could not fight for want of men. All he could do was to worry
the enemy in the chase of him; except by mere generalship, which instances were
not a few. But, with almost every thing to discourage and backen, he discovered
not a symptom of impatience. Restless discontent was unknown to him. If ever a
person could be justified for want of composure, Washington would, un^oudtedly,
be the man; and yet he was at the farthest distance from any thing of the kind.
This part of his character did not appear to be a studied business; it was a
native feature in it. His patience was not apathy and insensibility, for no man
had more tender and sublime sentiments than he. In his Presidency many things
occurred which would have discomposed him, had he not been like a strong
fortress, perfectly above the reach of receiving the least impression in this
part of his character. As a vast rock in the midst of the sea, against which
the beating billows roll without effect, stood the mighty Washington. He could
bear insults without complaining. He could receive the vilest aspersions for
the best deeds, and be as composed and patient as if nothing had been done.

The greatness of General Washington appeared from his never having been elated
by those many and distinguished honors conferred on him. This feature in the
character before us has been partly anticipated, and yet something more, I
conceive, may be pertinently considered. In the esteem of the people at large
throughout the United States, this patriot stood vastly higher than any other
man. He had his enemies, but even they were under the necessity of respecting
him. The praises of Washington were resounded from one end of the Union to the
other. People differently educated, of opposite views and principles, varied
not any in setting him up as the greatest General and Statesman in the world.
This was not only done by the people at large; the great and the learned
considered it as indubitable. It was not a mere silent opinion; but it was a
matter expressed in the strongest terms, and by actions of the most unequivocal
import. General Washington was perfectly apprized of the light in which he was
holden. It was none of it concealed from him. Let it be considered that these
honors were heaped upon him, at a period of life in which they would be very
likely to flatter and elate. But his mind was so steady, so weighty and exalted
in its apprehensions, that all these were without the least apparent effect in
giving him a more exalted opinion of himself. We know that to feel lifted up at
same, is incident to human nature. Few have wisdom and greatness sufficient
wholely to conceal i^, even tho the degree of honor conferred be very moderate.
Washington was an exception of ever discovering a symptom. Sometimes he even
wept at the amazing parade in crowning him with laurels; and when he could
decently, he withdrew from the reach of those who were prepared to express
their sentiments of respect in forms the most honorary. Than this nothing could
be a more striking mark of General Washington's greatness.

His greatness was farther manifest in his voluntarily retiring from the first
office in the nation to the place of a common citizen. When he drew near the
close of the time, for which he had been elected to the Presidency, he could
not but have known, beyond hesitancy, that the people, with unanimous
suffrages, were ready to raise him again to the same dignified station. But
this great man had a preference for the peaceful retreats of private life. In
the bosom of man there is a thirst for honor; but Washington had gained the
mastery over this passion. And what seemed greatly to corroborate it, was his
accepting the appointment of Lieutenant General, an inferior office to that he
had before bolden. If we trace ancient and modern history, where shall we find
a parallel instance. Cincinnatus may be mentioned; but this in every respect
does not equal it. Do we find the kings of Europe, Asia and Africa pulling off
their crowns, and giving them to others, and humbling themselves to the
condition of common subjects? Not an instance of this kind can be produced.
They hold power as long as they can, and this without consulting the choice of
those over whom they reign. How different was Washington! He was willing to
take the lowest seat, and this was exaltation and greatness of the purest kind.

Finally, the greatness of this man appeared from universal consent. It is
almost universally the case, that characters which rise the highest, do
something toward the conclusion, to fully their glory; but this great General
and Patriot did nothing. His character was a finished one. The last part was
equal to the first. It grew brighter and brighter till the sun went down. It
was all greatness. And thus it was considered, not only by Americans; but by
all the nations of the world. They gathered the sentiment in part from his
writings, in part from his military achievements, and in part from his
political knowledge and wisdom displayed in the first office of the government.
Attention to all these sources entitled him to an acknowledged superiority to
any other man upon the globe. His legacy, how replete with wisdom and depth of
conception! His deeds, how unexceptionable, and fraught with every thing that
was noble and conducting to national felicity and glory! So much in one man
could not be hidden. It was beholden by an astonished world, and Washington
stands acknowledged the first, the greatest of the human race. Thus I have
observed some traits in General Washington's character, in which his greatness
was very apparent.

I proceed in the second place to notice the goodness of God, in raising up
such a character and continuing his active services, for so great length of
time.

We shall greatly fail in this part of the subject, if we omit considering, and
letting it sink into our minds, that the Lord God was the great potter and
former of the character we have been unsolding. The greatness of it, in every
respect, in all the instances in which we have viewed it, was an effect of
Almighty efficiency. It was the will of God to have such a character, a vessel
of such vast dimensions; and, therefore, he said, let it be, and Washington was
raised up. God's ultimate end in thus doing, as in every thing, was to display
himself. And his goodness herein is very visible to all of spiritual
discernment.

Let us then search into the goodness of God in the matter above specified; and
to help our memories and guide our judgments, let us take the following
out-lines as a summary. The goodness of God in raising up General Washington
and continuing his active services for so great length of time, is strikingly
apparent, from the blessings conferred on the people of this country through
his instrumentality; from his example to future generations; from the influence
his conduct may probably have with those, who hereafter shall be raised to the
same elevated stations; from the very weighty instruction and reproof herein
given to all tyrants and despots; and that God has hereby established, by a
visible and acknowledged providence, one of the most essential points in the
system of revealed religion, viz. his absolute sovereignty.

The goodness of God in raising up General Washington, and continuing his
active services for so great length of time, is strikingly apparent, from the
blessings conferred on the people of this country through his instrumentality.
In establishing our national independence, General Washington was an instrument
greater than any other. By this no one will imagine there is the least design
to detract from other characters and fully their same. We have had many heroes
and great statesmen whose names will never be forgotten by a grateful people,
and through whom God's goodness has been strikingly exhibited. It is pleaded,
however, that General Washington was undoubtedly the first and greatest. To
sever this country from foreign dominion, was the will of heaven, and it was
the decree, to do it by instruments and not by miracle. The man whose less we
now mourn, was the principal instrument, and how great the goodness of God in
raising him up! This may be set in the most obvious point of view, by
considering our national and individual blessings. As a nation, we are the
proprietors of a free and happy country. We have not to cross the wide Atlantic
to consult the pleasure of our sovereign. Our property is our own by
indefeasible tenure. We are built on the broad base of freedom, and our
national government is in every view such as good citizens will prize as one of
the greatest of temporal blessings. Nothing is wanting but good and pious
hearts to make us the happiest people on the globe Taking into view our civil
privileges, the goodness of God is most visible in raising up the instruments
by which they are secured to us. Among these, Washington was the principal. He,
under God, has guided us through indeseribable hazards to independence and
national felicity. God was the efficient cause of the whole; and yet he gave
existence to the talents of this great man, and used them to accomplish his
benevolent design. And how good is the Lord, that he should endow one in this
country, with such unequaled portions of integrity, wisdom and fortitude, as to
take us by the hand and lead us safely to a field of such invaluable privileges
as those we possess? We can never adore this goodness enough. And what
heightens the goodness of God, in raising up this great and distinguished
character, is, that we were favored with his active services for so great
length of time. We had the use of his abilities in situations the most
hazardous for twenty-five years in succession. When a nation begins to exist,
then is most wanted the wisdom of the wise. God saw our necessities, and did
not withhold the bounty of his goodness. He gave us Washington to go before us,
and to be with us, and to nourish us up to our present state of national
importance. It would be infidelity itself not to notice the goodness of God in
this matter. The eminent usefulness of this great man we do not deny; that his
being and talents were from God is beyond hesitancy; and that the whole was the
fruit of unmerited goodness, will be felt by all, but the vile and abominable.

Our privileges in small societies and individual capacity are handed to us by
God through the same channel of conveyance. The least observation must lead us
to notice it If foreign power could tax away our property at option and demand
our young men to sight their bloody battles, could any of us do otherwise than
go mourning, and acknowledge ourselves to be slaves and pensioners? But blessed
be God it is not so with us; and why is it the reverse? The Lord has wrought
through the instrumentality of him, whose wisdom and prowess have given us
freedom and independence and secured to us our property beyond the fear of
having it divided without our consent.

The goodness of God is manifest in his raising up General Washington and
promoting him to the high offices he sustained, from the consideration, that
his example still exists and will never be obliterated from the memory of man.
The force of example, experience teaches, is very great. Nothing can have a
more baneful effect on a community than bad example, especially in those of
elevated stations. Virtuous example has the contrary tendency. The reign of
David over Israel was very unexceptionable, and the happy influence of his
example descended to future generations. We have the character of General
Washington portrayed before our eyes, and our children's children will be the
objects of its influence. And what special lesson does it enforce? To answer in
a word, it bears testimony against immoral practices of every description, and
paints virtue in charms which cannot easily be resisted. Washington is no more;
but his example is a living monitor. This is a sharper reproof to vice, than
the threats of majesty, or the terrors of the halter or the gibbet. The value
of the example is greatly heightened, from the consideration that it is
well-known to all classes of citizens from the highest to the lowest. The
goodness of God is very visible in this particular.

From the influence his conduct may probably have with those, who hereafter
shall be raised to the same important stations, we may also see the goodness of
God. If Generals in the field and Presidents of Congress, should be at a loss
how to steer amidst perplexities which sometimes occur, they have a character
before them from which wisdom flows as a stream from its fountain. Having
caught the mantle of this great statesman, those who fill the highest seats in
the government, it is sanguinely hoped, will transfuse its blessing to ages yet
unborn. Washington, standing at the head of the series, will give complexion
and features to what shall follow in the administration of this great and
flourishing empire. At least the sentiment is not chimerical nor wholely
improbable. This is a fruit of divine goodness.

The goodness of God is manifest in raising up and continuing this great man at
the helm of the nation so long, from the very weighty instruction and reproof
hereby given to all tyrants and despots.

The greater part of the eastern continent is subjected to despotism. The life
and property of the subject are at the sole pleasure of the prince. Thirst for
power and aggrandizement is the governing passion. The obedience they receive
is of the slavish kind; it proceeds not from love, but from fear of their
vengeance. Well might they look to Washington and be instructed, that the
highest excellency of a ruler, is to be just and benevolent, and that to have
obedient and faithful subjects, is to prove himself their patron and friend.
How reproved must stand those despots and hard hearted tyrants who have embrued
their hands in innocent blood, by the bright example of this mighty hero and
statesman? Through the goodness of God, we have reason to conclude, they have
felt the reproof, at least in some small degree. The high estimation in which
General Washington has been holden by all the kings and princes on the globe
seems to imply it. If so, the condition of millions in servitude is hopefully
meliorated and rendered more tolerable in consequence of the existence of such
a character. If in this way the Governor of all events, be softening the rigor
of despotism, then his great goodness in raising up and continuing General
Washington in the important stations he held so long, cannot but be clearly
seen.

The goodness of God is very srikingly exhibited in raising up the character we
have been contemplating, since, through this providence, he has established one
of the most essential points in the system of revealed religion, viz. his
absolute sovereignty. By the sovereignty of God is meant nothing which clashes
with infinite goodness. It is not an arbitrary procedure contrary to the reason
and fitness of things. It is his creating and governing the world and all
beings according to his own righteous pleasure. The point is established by
natural religion. It is confirmed with additional clearness in the two
testaments. Such passages as these evidence it to demonstration. " He works
all things after the counsel of his own will." " All things were made by him
and for him." " He has mercy on whom he will have mercy and compassion on whom
be will have compassion." " We are the clay and thou our potter." The self same
sentiment is forced upon the mind, by the character we have been considering.
The fact is this; God Almighty formed Washington a greater vessel than almost
any other, and in this way has proved his sovereign right to make men to
differ. In making some great and others small he is justifiable, because the
clay is his. Complainingly to object, why have thou made me thus? is contending
with a most material point in the system of revealed religion, corroborated by
the goodness of God, in the acknowledged fact under consideration. Let us then
not dispute the absolute sovereignty of God, till we sacrifice our judgments on
the altar of obstinacy, and put out our eyes for fear of the light.

Having noted instances of the goodness of God in forming and continuing this
illustrious character for so great length of time; I shall thirdly, consider
the important instruction to be derived to the people of this country from his
character, and the improvement, if wise, they will make of the providence of
God in taking him out of the world.

From the character of General Washington, the inhabitants of this country may
derive many very special lessons of instruction. With the help of this
character they can have no hesitancy on whom to turn their thoughts to fill the
most important offices in the government. It may be admitted as a ruling maxim,
that those who possess the nearest likeness to this great warrior and
statesman, will have the first claim on our suffrages and influence. Washington
possessed all the virtues and abilities requisite to fit him to preside over a
nation, and, of course, those who approach the nearest to him in these respects
will in future administer best; till the blessed period shall arrive, when the
Prince of Peace shall solve all nations into a happy kingdom and rule by his
heavenly scepter.

The people in this country may be farther instructed by this character, that
vice and immorality utterly disqualify a man for an important, public station.
The confidence of a people is not attainable by base characters. A man of
disorderly life will always be suspected of a radical defect. Those who fill
the first offices should be men in whom entire confidence may be reposed
without suspicion. Washington was such a man. And how happy and exalted have we
been under his administration! And hence the people in this country, if
suitably impressed, will cautiously avoid all characters of the opposite
complexion in filling the chair of state. " When the wicked rule, the people
mourn."

But it is time to descend to the last clause of that part of the subject under
consideration, and to search after the improvement those who are wise will make
of the providence of God in removing General Washington by death. He who has
loved us, fought for us and worn out his life in the services of his country,
is now entombed in the silent grave. Never will he be seen more by mortal eye.
Never will another speech fall from his lips. He is gone where all must go, and
this has been ordered by the wise disposal of God. And what improvement shall
we make of this affecting providence? Perhaps we may be almost ready to say,
wherefore is it thus! Why should the executioner be suffered so speedily to do
his work! Could not his hasty steps have been a little retarded! Such thoughts
must not be indulged. God's " thoughts are not as our thoughts, nor his ways as
our ways. Though clouds and darkness are round about him; yet justice and
judgment are the habitation of his throne." It becomes us to submit and kiss
the rod which is laid so heavily on us, and open our mouths in the language of
inspiration, " The Lord gave, and the Lord has taken away, and blessed be the
name of the Lord."

In improving this death, we of this nation cannot but behold a thick and
dismal cloud suspended over us. Our head, our greatest counselor, the man the
most beloved and trusted to, is taken away. We have, therefore just occasion
for mourning. Our loss is greater, than we yet imagine. It may well be sensibly
felt, by every state in the Union, by every smaller community, and by every
individual. O Washington, thou are gone, but we will not forget thee! Thy great
deeds, thy glorious achievments shall be engraven in letters of gold. When we
look on our dear-bought freedom we will think of thee. When we count our
treasures, when we see our children growing up in a garden of delights, distant
from the thunder of despotism, we will teach them to lisp thy name. We do weep
for thee, and in broken accents, bid thee a long, last farewell.

In improving this death, it becomes all the inhabitants of united America to
lift up their servent prayer to God through his son, that the wisdom and
virtues of this great man descend and rest on those who hold the first offices
in the nation. Ye civil fathers, we cannot but mingle the tears of condolence
with you. You are deprived of a brother and a father. In perplexing situations,
you looked to him for wisdom and counsel; but he is taken from your head, our
prayer is, that you, with submissive hearts, catch hismantle, and stay
yourselves on the Lord.

We are taught by this solemn and affecting provi^^nce " To put not our trust
in princes nor in the son of man, in whom there is no help. His breath goes
forth, he returns to his earth; in that very day his thoughts perish." No
endowments of wisdom and greatness can secure from the bold demands of death.
The great and the mighty fall, and we must have our turn. These limbs, these
bodies must soon mingle with their kindred dust. This being inevitable, how
vastly important, that we do the work God has given us to do, before the night
comes wherein no man can work. We must all stand before the tri^^nal of Christ
to be judged according to our deeds. Let then the death of this great and
wonderful personage serve to bring our dissolution fresh to mind. Let us
converse with death and eternity, and be seriously inquisitive, whether we are
prepared for our final exit out of time. To leap down the awful precipice with
fear and trembling, who can endure the thought! Short of the sanctifying
influence of the Holy Spirit, through the blood of Christ, death will convey us
to endless despair. Look, therefore to the Lord Jesus by faith, receive his
gospel in the power and spirit of it, and be charmed with his glorious
character. Be assured there is enough in the divine Savior to crown you with
infinite delight. How truly great, how illustrious the character we have been
unfolding, how signalized, how finished and admirable! But this, with all its
excellency, proceeded from the forming hand of Christ. He is the " wonderful
Counselor, the mighty God, the everlasting Father, and the Prince of Peace."
He invites you to come to him, to be heirs with him, and set with him forever
in heavenly places. He will crown all his sons and daughters with delights
which eye has not seen, nor ear heard, neither have entered into the heart of
man to conceive. Let our souls awake in pious praise and magnify the Lord most
high.

DISCOURSE II.
REVELATIONS xi, 17, " We give thee thanks, O Lord God almighty, which art and
wast, and art to come, because thou have taken to thee thy great power and have
reigned."
THESE words are an inference drawn by the twenty-four elders from something
which preceded. They sat before God on their seats and were furnished with the
text I have read to you by the seventh angel. The declaration of the angel, or
rather the found which proceeded from him, was followed with great voices in
heaven, saying, " The kingdoms of the world are become the kingdoms of our
Lord, and of his Christ, and he shall reign forever and ever." On the hearing
of this, the twenty-four elders, who sat before God, fell upon their faces and
worshipped God, saying, " We give thee thanks, O Lord God almighty, which art
and wast, and art to come; because thou have taken to thee thy great power and
have reigned." What particularly dilated their hearts with praise and
thanksgiving to God, was the wonderful effect produced by his almighty
efficiency in causing the kingdoms of this world to become the kingdoms of our
Lord and of his Christ. The twenty-four elders traced the effect to its true
source and origin, and ascribed it to the governing power of almighty God; "
because thou have taken to thee thy great power and have reigned."

When they saw Christ's kingdom rising out of the ruins of the apostasy, and
the wicked nations of this world submitting to his divine and heavenly scepter,
they could account for it on no other principle, than that God had the control
of the dispositions of men, to turn them according to his sovereign pleasure.
In view of this, they prostrated themselves before him with the profoundest
reverence, and shouted his praise in grateful thanksgiving.

It would be an undue construing of the text to suppose its ultimate reference
to any other period, than to Christ's spiritual reign in the seventh millinary;
and yet it has a pertinent application to other times, and may be contemplated
to very great advantage in the age in which we live. If all the blessings to be
experienced, when all shall know the Lord, shall owe their origin to God, and
derive their existence from the consideration, that God has taken to himself
his great power and has reigned; then it will follow, as a necessary
consequence, that all other blessings of whatever kind and whenever received,
are of the same heavenly extract. This reasoning, I conceive, will not be
viewed by any, sophistical and inconclusive. If not, it is hoped the minds of
the auditory are prepared with all readiness to embrace the sentiment, that all
the blessings they receive, whether private, social, national, or spiritual,
spring directly from this source, that God almighty has taken to himself his
great power and has reigned. You will, therefore, let your minds go along with
me in the discussion of the subject, with hearts uplifted to God, and not the
less that this thanksgiving was not by public, but private notification. It is
a usual custom in the place in which this discourse was delivered, to have an
annual thanksgiving lecture, tho no proclamation be issued from authority.


In prosecuting the subject, I shall, in the first place, take into
consideration some of the peculiar blessings and benefits we enjoy. Secondly,
Shall show that these benefits and blessings are to be accounted for solely
from this plain truth stated in the text, that the Lord God does take to
himself his great power and does reign. Thirdly, I shall point out the
obligations under which we are to give thanks to God, that we, and all
creatures and things, are under his administration and absolute control.

Firstly, We are to consider some of the peculiar blessings and benefits we
enjoy. It is a great blessing to have such an existence as that of man.

This will appear from a variety of considerations, some of which I shall
enumerate. When we compare ourselves with the various species of creatures that
fall under our observation, how decided is our preference to be men, rather
than animals of any other order. All creatures upon earth, except man, move by
instinct and blind passion. They are capable of no improvement in subjects of a
moral nature, and to discover the least degree of difference between virtue and
vice, they have no ability. But man is endowed with noble faculties and is a
capable subject of rising higher and higher in knowledge and virtue to all
eternity. A foundation being laid in us for such vast improvement, must endear
existence to every one, who contemplates the matter in a just light: To say the
least, to have such an existence, is a great benefit and blessing. But when we
take into consideration the amazing value conferred on our existence by the
Christian religion. the favor is augmented beyond conception. The existence of
any creature is ever to be estimated according to the felicity it is capable of
receiving. Man is to exist forever, and, if a Christian, as he may be, if he
will give Christ his heart, nothing short of happiness " which eye has not
seen, nor ear heard," will be his certain and unfailing portion. Thus
contemplating the matter, we cannot but see the immense value of our existence,
and that to be endowed with such improving faculties is a blessing of
indescribable importance.

It is a great blessing to have bodies so curious and wonderfully made. The
very shape and motion of man excite awe and reverence in the inferior orders of
creatures and challenge superiority. Our bodies are organized to be a suitable
repository for a rational spirit. They are so skillfully contrived as not to
shackle the soul and prevent its moral and intellectual improvements. Well said
the Psalmist; " I will praise thee, for I am fearfully and wonderfully made,
and in thy book all my members were written. How precious are thy thoughts unto
me, O God!"

Health is a peculiar benefit and blessing. The body, tho curiously organized,
is yet delicate and exposed to almost innumerable disadjustments. If any of the
parts loose their proper tone, the effect is sensibly felt through the whole.
If one member suffer, all the members suffer with it. Great exactness must be
maintained in the human frame, or health will be impaired. Visit hospitals and
rooms of the sick, and hear the groans of those who are racked with pain, and
deny, if possible, that health is a peculiar blessing.

To have and enjoy a competency of the good things of this life, is a benefit
which it would be ungrateful to overlook. Laid in the balance with religion,
these things are lighter than vanity; and yet, during our abode upon earth,
they are indispensible. God does not support man by miracle, nor warm and
clothe him otherwise than by means. In the cold of winter, without clothing,
food and fuel, man would be immediately wretched. The piercing frost would
benumb his limbs, and gnawing hunger make him a prey to death. Looking,
therefore, upon the inevitable consequences of being deprived of every worldly
good thing, the benefit of the means of bodily support cannot but be seen in
its proper light.

The benefits and advantages resulting from social intercourse in society may
well hold a high place in our estimation. Man is formed for society, and this
is a great source of his happiness. Exclude him from holding connection with
any of his species, and he is wretched. All his trials and difficulties must
remain locked up in his own bosom. The organs of speech and hearing would be
useless to him. Here he must spin out his life without one kind look from any
creature, or the hearing of one articulate note. To roam in solitude, how
tedious, days and nights! but, on the other hand, open to man all the
advantages of society, the family circle and every thing beyond, of friendly
intercourse, and what a large field of pleasures and advantages disclose to
view. Is he under a cloud of adversity, his friends stand ready to sympathize.
Has he pleasures, they are doubled by imparting. It is to society our moral and
intellectual faculties are indebted for a great share of their improvement,
and, by often speaking one to another, Christians are excited to a more
vigorous animation in the duties they owe to God and men. Thus society is a
peculiar blessing and benefit.

Civil government is another distinguished privilege and blessing. Such are our
passions, and such the connection between men, that civil institutions are
absolutely requisite. God has overruled in this matter, that men might be
secured in their rights, and that the lawless and disobedient may be checked in
their abominations. Therefore it is written; " Whosoever resists the power,
resists the ordinance of God; and they who resist shall receive to themselves
damnation. For rulers are not a terror to good works, but to the evil. Will thou not be afraid of the power? Do that which is good and thou shall have
praise of the same. For he is a minister of God to thee for good; but if thou
do that which is evil, be afraid; for he bears not the sword in vain, for he
is the minister of God, a revenger to execute wrath upon him that does evil."
Thus we see the design of civil government. Its end is noble and a privilege
granted to man of no inferior importance. That we might realize its utility,
let us contemplate society independen of it. Let us view the wicked and lawless
without rest^^i^t, at liberty to invade life and property at option. Were
matters thus circumstanced, who would be safe and not be continually exposed to
the most base aggressions? All must be convinced, that wretchedness would be
the unavoidable result. Neighbor would rob neighbor, and our streets would be
drenched in blood. Civil government is that, which, under God, secures life and
property and stamps them with value. It is, therefore, an evident blessing, a
benefit unspeakably rich.

Having pursued the subject thus far, blessings of another kind offer
themselves to our consideration. By these are meant spiritual blessings in
Christ. The gospel, which brings life and immortality to light, is a treasure
so great, that every other dwindles to nothing holden in competition with it.
The ultimate design of it, is not to teach men the arts and economy of this
world. It discloses glad tidings of great joy, states the grounds of admission
to the favor of God, and what we must do to be saved. The gospel, therefore, is
a blessing by itself and without a parallel.

The philosophers of antiquity had their conjectures respecting a future state,
but they were the idle chimeras of (...) darkness. Aristotle, Socrates and
Plato made attempts to reclaim men from the arms of vice; but their attempts
were fruitless. If they prescribed formularies, they had no authority to
enforce them, and to show of^^nding man how he might be pardoned for crimes
already c^mmitted, they were as incapable as their most ignorant pupils. But
the Son of Righteousness has chased away every cloud of heathenish ignorance
and superstition, and explained, to the lowest capacity, the way of life. The
gospel asserts the doctrine of the atonement, and yet it has other concomitant
blessings. The atonement and salvation are two things. In perfect justice, God
might have made apropitiation for sin, without saving the sinner; and yet he
grants eternal life to whomsoever he pleases. Salvation supposes an exemption
from the penalty of God's righteous law, and admission into his heavenly
kingdom. In this is comprised conviction of sin, regeneration, sanctification,
and a crown of righteousness which fades not away. Thus I have noticed some
peculiar blessings and benefits conferred upon man.

Secondly, I shall show that these benefits and blessings are to be accounted
for solely from this plain truth stated in the text, that the Lord God does
take to himself his great power and does reign. The reasoning by which it may
be made to appear that God governs, is easy, it is not far fetched. It is a
necessary consequence resulting from the perfections of his nature. If God be
the author of all things he must govern them. His government must be as
extensive as his works. Our ideas of God's government are too limited, if we
suppose only some great things under his control, and others more minute, left
out of his plan. The falling of a sparrow to the ground and the numbering of
the very hairs of our head, are matters of which he has the particular
disposal. And hence all the blessings we have enumerated are the immediate
fruit of his almighty, governing efficiency. God governs in the matter of our
existence. For preservation we are absolutely dependent. In him we live, move
and have our being. The favor of having a rational existence above other
creatures, is because God is at the head of the universe and has so ordered.
When we contemplate our bodies so curiously formed, our improving faculties,
the means of improvement, our health and strength, our food and raiment, and
con over the whole sum of blessings generally called common, we can trace their
origin no farther than to the reigning power of God. Men speak of these things
as matters of mere chance, and often praise their own wisdom for having planned
affairs so luckily. They arrogate to themselves all the glory, and conduct as
if there were no God. Nevertheless, by arguments, a priori, the being of a God
is found to be necessary, and by fair deductions a posteriori his attributes
and universal government are conclusively maintained. And hence, it is no
infringement on the best logic to speak as in the following sentences. He
makes rich and he makes poor, he exalts and he ab^seth. Every spire of
grass, every blade of wheat, every degree of growth in an animal, is an effect
of his mighty agency. He gives strength to beasts, and causes them to exercise
it for man, as strictly as he gave birth to creation, and governs in little
things as especially as in great. It is just so in respect to civil government.
It is the Lord's. He holds the heart and volitions of every ruler from the
highest to the lowest. By him kings reign, and princes decree justice. If men
mean evil, God means it for good. If they despise and refuse to retain him in
their knowledge, he will, nevertheless, be exalted, and from that very matter
get to himself a great name.

Christianity, with all its blessed effects, is known and enjoyed, because God
has taken to himself his great power and has reigned. The covenant of
redemption ratified between the Father and the Son, before the world began, was
of the Lord. The coming, life, death, resurrection and ascension of Christ,
were under his superintendence. He reigns in the work of conviction. " Thine
arrows are sharp in the heart of the king's enemies; whereby the people fall
under thee." Aside from this, men will never know themselves. They will glide
along in the broad road to ruin and perceive it not. Finite art is inadequate
to discover to them their hazardous situation. But when display of God's power
is made, they will be pricked to the heart, and see themselves to be poor, and
wretched, and miserable, and blind, and naked. Man is naturally disinclined to
see the light. His eyes are fast shut against it. And to keep him blind, satan
is always busy. But the power of God supercedes every obstruction, and produces
the wonderful effect of convincing him of his real condition.

The renovation of the heart, is because God reigns and has the dispositions of
men at his command. The wonderful effect in the millennium, in causing the
kingdoms of this world to become the kingdoms of Christ, is traced to this
source. And there is no other way of accounting for the regeneration of any
sinner. " The new birth is not of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of
the will of man; but of God." Men are not converted as a reward for any thing
previously done by them to purchase the change. They do not put themselves into
a salvable state, by sinning less, and so invite God to renew them. He is found
of them, who sought him not. He conquers the stubborn heart in the full
strength of its opposition, and, by his invisible drawings, captivates the soul
to the obedience of faith.

Christians are kept from final apostasy by the same power by which they are
regenerated. Christ takes care of his flock. He is the great ruling shepherd,
and, therefore, none are lost from his sold. They are kept by the power of God,
through faith, unto salvation. Thus the matter of saving sinners, from
beginning to end, is through the infinite reigning power of God. This has
always been the case and will be till time shall be no more.

Thirdly, I shall point out the obligations under which we are to give thanks
to God, that we, and all creatures and things, are under his administration and
absolute control. Men, in general, will grant they are under obligations of
gratitude to God; but what this gratitude ought ultimately to respect is not so
commonly perceived and acknowledged. God is good to us, and therefore that we
ought to make grateful returns to him, will not be contested. But if we love
God on no higher principle, than that we ourselves are made gainers by his
goodness, our love is of a selfish kind, and our gratitude the fruit of a
sinful heart. " If ye love them that love you, what thank have ye:" For sinners
give to sinners, in hopes to receive as much again. There is no love acceptable
with God, short of that which esteems and adores him for what he is in himself;
nor any gratitude fit to be so denominated, except thanksgiving which is put
into exercise by the consideration, that he takes to himself his great power
and does reign. Our obligations to gratitude remain to be unfolded. One
obligation to give thanks to God for his universal reign, may be gathered from
analogy. Reasoning from analogy reflects great light on many subjects in
divinity. The point before us is not an exception. Holy beings are excited to
devout thanksgiving, in view of the pleasing truth, that all creatures and
things are under the absolute control of the Almighty. We may be assured this
was the case in regard to the twenty-four elders. " We give thee thanks, O Lord
God almighty, which art, and wast, and art to come; because thou have taken to
thee thy great power and have reigned." The saints in light and all the holy
angels, are continually shouting, " Amen: blessing, and glory, and wisdom, and
thanksgiving, and honor, and power, and might, be unto our God forever and
ever." The spring of the whole is, that God's reign extends to all events and
circumstances, and secures a final result in every view most eligible. Do then
the inhabitants of the glorious world feel themselves obligated to render
thanks to God, because he has taken to himself his great power and does reign?
Is this the business of all pure and holy beings? If so, all men, yea, every
rational creature in the universe is obligated immediately to exercise a
similar disposition toward God, and from the same consideration. Because, what
is suitable for one order of rational beings, is so for another, since there is
but one law and one lawgiver. Hence the argument from analogy is conclusive, in
establishing our indispensible obligation to give thanks to God; because he
has taken to himself his great power and does reign, and that we, and all
creatures and things, are under his administration and absolute control.

Another obligation of gratitude arises from the infinite wisdom and goodness
of the divine government. God being infinitely powerful, wise and good, the
plan of administration which he has adopted must be the best. To deny this,
would be to deny the perfections of God Perfection will act like itself, and
hence, any other government than that which embraces the highest possible good,
all things considered, is unworthy of Jehovah. Here then is an object
sufficiently excellent to awaken every soul to the liveliest thanksgiving. It
is the best possible system of governing and disposing of all beings and
worlds. As our obligation to love God results from the moral excellency of his
character, so one of the principal springs of gratitude originates from the
consideration that he takes to himself his great power and reigns in infinite
wisdom and goodness. In the view of this particular, it will be obligatory for
ever on all finite beings to exercise the highest strains of thanksgiving, and
this aside from every thing sinister. To do it, will be the glory and felicity
of the spotless hosts of heaven, and to refuse it, will be the misery and
torment of the wicked in hell. A farther consideration, which lays us under
increasing obligation to give thanks to God that we, and all creatures and
things, are under his administration and absolute control, is, that this is the
source whence all true happiness springs. Separate from a full persuasion and
belief that God reigns, the glorified spirits above and all Christians would
sink into a state of wretchedness. If it be given up that God reigns, then it
must be granted, either that some other being reigns, or that events are at the
disposal of blind chance. On either of these hypotheses, what have the friends
of God to rejoice their hearts, what have they to expect? If fatan governs,
nothing but the fruits of malevolence can be in prospect. And if the affairs of
the universe are left to the guidance of chance, our very existence is
casualty, and every expectation of good to come is vain and groundless. But,
blessed be God, the affairs of the universe are not so circumstanced. All
government is his. He has taken to himself his great power and does reign.
Here is happiness, here is comfort for the friends of Zion. " The Lord reigns,
let the earth rejoice, let the multitudes of the isles be glad." In this belief
there is no room for despondency. In the darkest hour, under the greatest
pressure of affliction, there is joy for the upright in heart. " Although the
fig tree shall not blossom, neither shall fruit be in the vine, the labor of
the olive shall ^ail; and the fields shall yield no meat, the flock shall be
cut from the fold, and their shall be no herd in the shall; Yet I will rejoice
in the Lord, and joy in the God of my salvation." The divine government,
therefore, being the principal source, whence all holy intelligences do and
will forever derive their felicity, it is suitable the grateful incense of our
hearts should ascend to God, that we, and all creatures and things, are under
his administration and absolute control.

APPLICATION.
In conformity to the preceding discourse, I shall suggest some considerations,
which, by God's blessing, may serve to awaken your gratitude a fresh. Every
favor you enjoy whether private, social, national or spiritual, is the fruit of
the reigning agency of the Almighty. Your daily supplies are his free donation.
Is your cup full? the Lord has filled it. Have you good measure, pressed down
and running over? you have received it from your divine benefactor. This has
been a year of fat things. Your houses and granaries will bear me out in the
assertion. No blighted harvest, no destructive hurricane, no deluging flood, no
dedevouring insects, has God sent this year, to cut you short of a plentiful
supply for yourselves, your children and your cattle. He has not suffered the
destroying angel to come nigh your dwellings. You have heard of the raging
pestilence in some of our capital cities; but you are alive this day with your
little ones. You set under your own vines and fig trees and have none to molest
you or make you afraid. As citizens you enjoy a government founded on
benevolent principles and happy in its administration. Not another nation on
the globe can compare with us in freedom and felicity. We have been envied our
privileges, and numerous attempts have been made to deprive us of them. Times
not a few, thick darkness has hovered over our heads, and we have been
threatened with devastation and death. Our profoundest politicians have been
often perplexed and could see no light. But the shades of night are dissipated,
and prospects the most pleasing open before us. All these favors and blessing
result from the governing agency of the Almighty. This being true, will any be
backward to come into the sentiments and feelings of the twenty-four elders and
say, " We give thee thanks, O Lord God almighty, which art, and wast, and art
to come; because thou have taken to thee thy great power and have reigned?" God
has a just right to the grateful emotions of your hearts. And do you enter his
gates, this day, with thanksgiving and his courts with praise? Do your hearts
burn within you in view of God's universal reign? Are your souls in haste to
break forth in these holy sentiments? Thou art our God, and we will praise
thee; thou art our God, and we will exalt thee. In return for thy blessings, we
have no equivalent to repay thee; but we will not cease to adore thy
government. Thou shall have our humble thanksgiving. It is thy claim, and our
reasonable service.

Before I close the subject, I cannot omit bringing up to your recollection the
mavelous work of God in the conversion of sinners within the compass of the
present year. Converts have been multiplied in places in every direction.
Ministers and missionaries have been wonderfully blessed. Saints have shouted
for joy, and Christ has been glorified. But, not to burden your memories and
swell the discourse to an undue length, the display of God's sovereign grace in
this town, to which you have been eye witnesses, calls for the grateful
emotions of your souls, and all that is within you. When we contemplate the
origin of this refreshing from the presence of the Lord, the dismal night of
stupidity and darkness which preceded it, and the insufficiency of means and
instruments to effect any thing of the kind, we are necessitated to ascribe the
whole to the reigning power of almighty God. The Lord has wrought wonderfully,
because " he has mercy on whom he will have mercy, and compassion on whom he
will have compassion. Not to acknowledge his sovereignty in this matter,
implies a heart of unbelief in departing from the living God. You will not
hesitate to say: " It is the Lord's doing, and it is mavelous in our eyes."
How precious the blood of Christ, and how infinite his grace to pave the way
for such a work! The salvation of one sinner in point of importance, is as far
beyond every thing temporal, as the heavens are high above the earth. And have
you come prepared to give God the glory which is due to his name? In looking
and pondering on the matter, let us never forget, that this work has been
wrought because, he has taken to himself his great power and has reigned.
This being true, there is every encouragement for prayer. All hearts are in his
hand and he can turn them whithersoever he will. Does God thus reign, and are
the fruits of his government such? We ought to be humble in the dust, that we
have not seen more of it, been more delighted with it, and praised him in
higher notes of thanksgiving. Is the Lord such a God? resolve this day to be
entirely his.

END.

