AN ORATION, DELIVERED IN ST. PHILIP'S CHURCH, BEFORE THE INHABITANTS OF
CHARLESTON, SOUTH CAROLINA, ON THE FOURTH OF JULY, 1800.

IN COMMEMORATION OF AMERICAN INDEPENDENCE.

BY APPOINTMENT OF THE AMERICAN REVOLUTION SOCIETY, AND PUBLISHED AT THE
REQUEST OF THAT SOCIETY, AND ALSO OF THE South Carolina State Society of
Cincinnati.

Quae enim res unquam (proh sancte Jupiter!) non modo in hac terra sed in
omnibus terris est gesta major? quae gloriosior quae commendatior hominum
memoriae sempiternae?" CICERO. Phillip. 2. BY JOHN J. PRINGLE, A MEMBER OF THE
REVOLUTION SOCIETY, AND ATTORNEY GENERAL OF SOUTH CAROLINA.

CHARLESTON: PRINTED BY W. F. YOUNG, FRANKLIN'S HEAD, NO. 43, BROAD-STREET. M.
DCCC.

ORATION.
FRIENDS AND FELLOW-CITIZENS,
IT was the remark of a celebrated Roman historian, Sallust. in Bell. Catil.
made perhaps too much in the spirit of detraction, that the exploits of the
Athenians, sufficiently grand and noble in themselves, were much exaggerated by
fame; and that inasmuch as Athens produced writers of extraordinary genius, the
achievements of her citizens were renowned throughout the world, as the most
glorious and exemplary; and the valor of. those who performed them, were
exalted proportion ately to the talents and address of those who recounted them.

Although it is very presumable, that our country, the United States, will not
be destitute of writers and orators, capable of ranking with those of Athens,
at the most brilliant periods of its literary eminence, yet we need not be
apprehensive, that any such remark as has been premised, will ever derogate
from the wise counsels and heroic actions, which contributed to the acquisition
and establishment of the independence and sovereignty of the United States, of
which we now celebrate the twenty-fourth anniversary. In the early ages, when
Athens, with the other Grecian states, inspirited by the fervid love of
liberty, and actuated by the generous impulses of patriotism, performed those
actions, which have been borne along the tide of time, down to us, with such
effulgent and unfading glory; the means of committing them to co-eval records
were slow and uncommon; they could not be made to pass as it were under the
immediate review of co-temporary nations, with whom, if but a little remote,
there was little or no communication.

Much must, therefore, have been necessarily left to uncertain tradition. Hence
fiction had greater temptation and latitude to magnify and embellish, with less
possibility of detection. At the advanced era of the American revolution, the
improvements in the arts of printing and navigation, had, in a manner,
approximated and united the most distant parts of the globe; and intelligence
of national transactions, was wafted from one to the other hemisphere on the
wings of the wind. France, Spain, and Holland, three of the most conspicuous
powers of Europe, taking an active part in the war, which terminated in the
independence of the United States, contributed to the extensive and accurate
publicity of the counsels and actions, which led to and attended that important
event. These have been committed to historic records, with unalterable
fidelity. So known, so attested, and so recorded, they must ensure the
admiration and applause of future ages, in as high a degree as of the present
age. The two very respectable societies, who concurred in celebrating, by an
annual appropriate oration, this glorious event, many of whose members
contributed materially to it, in the tented field, and in the public counsels,
did not aim, by such an oration, to blazon it by brilliant flourishes of
rhetoric, or captivating strokes of eloquence; its intrinsic merits render this
an unnecessary, a superfluous undertaking. They were induced to it by more
laudable views. They must have conceived, that such a discourse, on such a
theme, on such a day, and to such an audience, as the present, might tend to
fan the flame of patriotism, which had glowed in the breasts, and prompted the
meritorious actions of those distinguished champions of the revolution, who
were yet living, and claim of them a consistent continuance of services, as
often as occasions might require -- that it might tend to excite a grateful
zeal for the public welfare in those of our fellow citizens, whom immature age,
or subsequent adoption, had precluded from cooperating to the happy event, of
which they enjoy, and their posterity will enjoy the benefits -- that it might
tend to render the rising generation emulous of that fair same, and truly
ennobling distinction, which result from important services rendered to one's
country -- that it might tend to prevent national degeneracy, by fostering a
generous national pride.

Vid. Sall. in Bell. Jugurth.
It was a custom of one of the most magnanimous nations in the world, to place
in the vestibules of their houses, the statues of the most illustrious of their
ancestors, that in beholding, as often as they passed them, their minds might be
set on fire to excel them; and that the excited reminiscence of their great
services, might kindle in their own generous hearts, a flame that nothing could
extinguish, but the equalling them in merit and glory. If mute marble,
inanimate effigies, could produce such effects, what might not be expected from
great events, expressively delineated by the pen of the historian, or conveyed
to the heart, in the glowing language of the orator? The productions of their
native poets, historians, and orators, rehearsed and pronounced to the
Grecians, in their periodical and solemn assemblies, vivified and invigorated
that ardent patriotism, which was the energetic spring of so many disinterested
and heroic enterprises.

In taking but a cursory and rapid view of the prominent and distinguishing
features of the American revolution, it may be allowed, in every fair and just
regard, to challenge the pre-eminence over that of every other recorded in the
annals of nations. No revolution ever originated in causes and motives more
pure, just, and honorable -- ever, in the same space of time, produced a
greater number of excellent patriots; more persons distinguished for military
and political genius and talents -- ever exhibited a greater display of wise
counsels and heroic actions -- more active valor, and passive fortitude -- a
more general cooperation of people of every class for the public good -- ever
effected more benefits with fewer evils -- more extensive and improvable
national and individual felicity.

It may not be improper to observe, that the theater on which these bright
scenes have been unfolded, the territories of the United States, are favored
regions, where the fell monster, despotism, has never yet been known to inhabit
-- where the tutelar goddess of the country, the guardian genius of the place,
seems ever to have been sacred liberty -- here she seems to have fixed her
peculiar, her beloved abode. Every region of the old, every other part of the
new hemisphere, at some period or other, has groaned, or does groan, under the
scorpion scourge of tyranny. At the earliest discovery of this continent, and
it is reasonably to be presumed ever before, the various aboriginal tribes, or
nations, who were spread over it, from the St. Lawrence to the Mississippi,
lived in a state of society which abridged but few of their natural rights. In
their councils, the most wise and experienced were chosen to preside; the
warrior of the most signal valor and conduct was their leader in the field. The
sentiments of freedom were so congenial with their souls, that no
blandishments, or terrors, could ever bring them to a state of servitude.

To these happy regions, where no vestiges were ever discernable of the
tyranny, or of the slavery of man, the first colonists emigrated from a free,
although a monarchical state of Europe, and emigrated about the time, when
regal attempts at arbitary power, and the resistance of the parliament and
people to them, had educed the most rational and fervent sentiments of the
rights of man, and inveterate abhorrence of dispotism. The spirit of fredom,
which they brought with them, could not fail to be transmitted to their
progeny, in a land where it not only ever existed, but where every surrounding
object, animate and inanimate, was calculated to nurture and increase it. No
adventitious circumstances arose, to prevent it from prevailing, with the same
influence, in the hearts of those resolute adventurers from other parts of
Europe, who resorted hither from time to time, in the spirit of the Grecian
emigrant chief, Horat. Ca^m. 7. Lib. 1.
where fortune kinder than their parent state, conducted them, and where they
could enjoy that liberty and happiness which she denied to them. North America,
thus peopled, and blessed with infinite natural advantages of soil, climate and
situation, under the auspices of freedom and industry, and the protecting wings
of the mother country, in the space of less than two centuries, attained to a
pitch of affluence and population which astonished the rest of the world. Among
such a people, equally exempt from the insolence of riches, and the abjectness
of poverty, no such inequality of condition or station existed, as could
promote a dependant, or servile spirit. -- In no country, did ever more general
happiness, and general liberty prevail; when the parent state disclosed a
disposition to subvert these, and substitute a system of unmerited and
intolerable oppression. The king and parliament of Great Britain endeavored to
levy taxes in the colonies without their consent, and asserted the right of
binding them in all cases whatsoever, contrary to the rights to which they were
entitled by nature, the British constitution, by charter and usage. Fortunately
at this period, the people of the colonies were too enlightened as to their
rights, and too jealous and tenacious of them, passively to submit to the
invasion of them. The enervating luxury and vices of old and opulent societies,
had not yet infected this hardy and industrious people. They cherished the
manly spirit of defending their rights and privileges, at every hazard of life
and fortune. From New Hampshire to Georgia, they rose in opposition, to the
arbitrary attempts of Great Britain. Nobly discarding all local jealousies and
particular views of interest, they made it a common cause; and concurred in the
generous resolution, to sacrifice their present ease for honorable perils, and
to bury themselves beneath the ruins of their country, rather than to survive
the destruction of their freedom. Happy was it, that liberty attacked, could
thus readily rally under its banners the people of so many distinct provinces;
happy that it was at a time, when no causes of rivalry and difference had
prevailed sufficiently among them, to enable British despotism to obtain
footing, and to rule by dividing them. Did ever any people, simultaneously
rising in resistance, against the oppressive measures of government, discover
more moderation, union, order, and system, than the people of America? Their
resentments did not burst forth like the long pent up, struggling fires of a
volcano, which in their explosion cast on every side a blasting lava. Their
just and glorious cause was never sullied by any rabble-like, barbarous, brutal
excesses, which make revolutions too often deplorable, and to be deprecated;
And make us, rather bear the ills we have
Than fly to others that we know not of."
SHAKESPEARE.

It was reserved to the sober minded, reflecting people of America, to exhibit
to the world, the novel, extraordinary, and interesting spectacle, of an
orderly, regular, and governmental resistance of one part, to another part of a
great nation. With a noble and implicit confidence, which was never retracted,
and never abused, they committed the vindication of their inestimable rights to
the delegates, whom they elected to meet in the general Congress. Was there
ever a public body, in the best established, and the most experienced
government, who surpassed them in foresight, widom, disinterestedness, and
firmness? There was scarcely an individual among them, who as to all, or most
of these qualities, did not justify the choice of his constituents.

" Through what variety of untried matter,
" Through what new scenes and changes must they pass."
In this novel, trying, perplexing, and perilous situation, lawyers,
physicians, merchants, and planters, prove themselves to be politicians of
great reach and sound judgment, statesmen of grand conceptions and elevated
views, as well as patriots of uncorruptible integrity. Their minds deeply
affected by the important subjects of their deliberations; exalted to
enthusiasm by the magnitude of the objects committed to them, develop abilities
and talents, which in ordinary times, and without such excitements, might have
continued dormant. When the native faculties and energies of the soul are
powerfully stimulated, and impelled by great and extraordinary occasions, men
are very apt to display astonishing valor, firmness, and eloquence.

Were the rights of any people ever traced to their source in nature and
reason, and defended upon principles of positive constitution and law, with
more acute and profound reasoning, expounded with more perspicuity, and
enforced with more pathos and energy, than those of the people of America by
Congress? Under the difficult, dangerous, and embarassing circumstances, which
occupied their attention, were there ever measures planned with more wisdom,
and supported with more firmness, than all their measures? Lord Chatham in his
speech in the House of Lords, 20th January, 1775.
Let the public declaration, and impartial judgment, of one of the ablest
statesmen and greatest orators the world ever produced attest their merits.
"When, said he, your lordships have perused the papers transmitted to us from
America -- when you consider the dignity, firmness, and wisdom with which the
Americans have acted, you cannot but respect their cause. History has been my
favorite study, and in the celebrated writings of antiquity, I have often
admired the patriotism of Greece and Rome; but I must declare, and avow, that
in the master states of the world, I know not the people, or senate, who, under
such a complication of difficult circumstances, can stand in preference to the
general Congress at Philadelphia. I trust, that it is obvious, that all
attempts to impose servitude upon such men, to establish despotism over such a
mighty continental nation, must be vain, must be fatal."

The succeeding Congress composed mostly of the same members, did not fall
short of the character of the preceding; or in any manner falter in the noble
career they traced. Provoked, yet placable, they reiterate the most reasonable
petitions, and just remonstrances, to their inflexible oppressors, who, instead
of granting a redress of grievances, prepare the way for military coercion, and
military resistance, by a series of acts of parliament, as unjust in their
principle, as cruel in their operation.

It was not until after the battles of Lexington and Bunker's Hill, in both of
which the British were the aggressors, and until America was inevitably reduced
to the alternative of absolute and unconditional submission, that Congress
recurred to arms and resistance by open force. Manifesting to the world the
justice of their cause, and rectitude of their views, "we fight,' they
declared, not for glory or conquest; we exhibit to mankind, the remarkable
spectacle of a people attacked by unprovoked enemies. In our native land, in
defense of freedom, for the protection of our property, acquired by the honest
industry of our forefathers, and our own, against violence actually offered, we
have taken up arms, and shall lay them down, when hostilities have ceased on
the part of the aggressors, and the danger shall be removed, and not before."
It is under circumstances like these, that noble, generous minds, and free
spirits, expanding with a sublimating enthusiasm, rise superior to all
considerations of interest, danger, or ease; with such minds there can be no
hesitation, when the choice is between death and slavery, ruin or dishonor.
Astonished Europe beheld a new people, emerging into national consequence,
possessing a lively sense of the value of freedom, with vast energy to defend
it at every hazard, against one of the most brave, opulent, and powerful
monarchies of the world. All the virtuous and generous part of mankind approved
their cause, admired their spirit, and wished success to their struggles. When
they entered upon the contest, how dubious was the issue? Yet they entered upon
it with minds erect and undaunted.

The interest and pride of Great Britain, deeply affected, and vehemently
roused, prompt her to rack every resource, and employ her whole strength for
their subjugation. Numerous troops, including German mercenaries, and large
fleets, are sent out, commanded by the most able and experienced admirals and
generals, supplied with all the instruments and munitions requisite for war, to
carry into execution, plans fraught with blood and desolation, and every way
calculated to inspire and spread dismay and terror. Who were to be opposed to
these formidable bands, and to these redoubtable commanders, arrayed in all the
pomp of war, emboldened by confidence in military discipline, and completely
versed in tactics? They were to be opposed by men, drawn hastily from all the
peaceful occupations of life, unaccustomed to the dangers of the field, and to
the restraints of military duty; badly supplied with arms and warlike equipage,
but commanded in chief, by thee, O WASHINGTON, paragon of heroes! and animated
by thy enthusiastic spirit, O holy LIBERTY! by that same spirit, under whose
invigorating impulses, in ancient times, small bands of Grecians discomfited
the numerous hosts of the mighty Persian monarch at Salamis, Marathon, and
Plateae -- in more modern times, the Swiss peasantry defeated the Austrians at
Sampach and Lauten, and Charles the Bold of Burgundy at Morat; and the Dutch
burghers gained their independence in despite of the most powerful monarch of
Europe. To the awful and impressive lessons which these victories held out, the
independence of America has added another, to rulers, to beware how they
trample on the sacred rights of the people, and to the people, to rise up
against oppression, since "they can never want the means, if they do not want
the spirit to be free," especially in these enlightened times, when the
prevalence of sound philosophy, and the general diffusion of science, has so
considerably dispelled that ignorance and superstition, which were the most
efficacious aids of despotism.

It was nearly about the time, when General and Admiral How arrived in the
state of New York, with a powerful sleet and army, that Congress gave that most
signal proof of their enlarged views, wonderful decision, and impregnable
firmness, by solemnly ordaining and declaring, "that these colonies were, and
of right ought to be INDEPENDENT STATES, and that they were absolved from all
allegiance to the British crown, and that they had full power to do all things
which independent states ought to do." To this measure* as transcendent in
wisdom, foresight, and policy, as in boldness, decision, and dignity, the
emphatic words of the Roman orator appear justly applicable; what has there
been ever performed, O Holy Supreme, upon the whole face of the earth, greater,
what more glorious, and what more worthy to be consecrated to the eternal
remembrance of mankind? To what immortal honor art thou not entitled, O ADAMS,
who brought forward, and ably supported in Congress that noble act? And thou,
also, O JEFFERSON, in whose perspicuous and energetic language is expressed
that sublime memorial of the rights, and of the spirit of freeborn Americans?

To this declaration of independence, the Congress and people of America
adhered, with unremitting firmness, in the most gloomy periods, and adverse
vicissitudes of the contest. Immediately after the disastrous defeat at
Long Island, when dismay and despondence might naturally be supposed to assail
even resolute minds, Congress rejected with disdain the insidious proposals
made by Lord and General How. In this instance their magnanimity may be
matched with that which the senate of Rome showed, when the conquering Annibal
appeared at the gates of that city. To Lord Carlisle, and the other
commissioners, who afterward proffered every freedom and privilege, short of a
total separation of interests from Great Britain; and in case of their being
unaccepted, menaced the extremes of war and desolation, Congress declared, that
they would make no treaty, inconsistent with those which they had, as
independent states, made with other nations; and would enter upon none, which
was not accompained with an expilcit acknowledgement of their independence, and
withdrawal of the fleets and armies of Great Britain. Herein they did not fall
short of another much vaunted example of the magnanimity of the Roman senate,
when they refused to listen to any overtures of peace from the victorious
Pyrrhus, till he withdrew his arms and forces out of Italy. At length
Great Britain, after an obstinate and ineffectual contest of eight years,
during which she lavished an immense profusion of blood and treasure,
explicitly recognized the independence of the United States, yielding all
claims to any part of their territories. It will not be consistent with the
limits, and other topics of this discourse, to indulge my inclinations to make
a particular and adequate display of the great bravery, perseverance, and
attachment to the liberties and welfare of their country, manifested by the
officers and soldiers of the Continental army, upon many memorable occasions,
under all the difficulties, dangers, and discouragements that men could
encounter; and which never divested them of that clemency, which is always
associated with real courage. It may be truly said of them, that they never
shed the blood of their adversaries but in the field of battle, or when opposed
to them with arms. History, in these respects, has not failed to do them
justice. It may not, however, be amiss here to notice the unexampled moderation
and regularity, with which at the end of the war, scantily requited for their
services, they retired to the rank and occupations of citizens, uncorrupted by
the vices and disorderly habits usually contracted in camps, in a long course
of war; and have given examples of industry, regard of social order, and
submission to the laws: and many of the officers have since rendered their
country eminent services in the civil stations, to which they have been
appointed by the suffrages of their fellowcitizens.

The revolution of the United States has been frequently paralleled with the
revolutions of two celebrated nations of Europe, the Swiss and Dutch. Both of
them, by their exemplary valor and perseverance, had recovered their freedom,
and expelled their oppressors; but it may be remarked, that they had for some
time submitted to the yoke of oppression, and grievously felt its pressure
before they determined to shake it off -- they were severely galled by the
chains of despotism, before they broke from them.

The people of the United States being free, and magnanimously resolute to
continue so, and tremblingly alive to any design of arbitrary power, quickly
descried, and broke in pieces, the fetters prepared for them. As it is more
meritorious never to suffer the loss of liberty, than to regain it when lost;
in this view will the American revolution excel the other two revolutions.

At no crisis, and under no vicissitude, however difficult and gloomy, did the
people of the United States, manifest any symptoms of despair, or abjectly
court, or by humiliating concessions obtain, the aid of foreign powers. In this
further regard, it claims a marked and honorable superiority over that of the
Dutch. After the capture of an important town of Zealand, by the Spanish
invaders, it is a fact well ascertained, that such was the despair of Holland
and Zealand, that they formed the design, which was approved in the states of
Holland, to confer the sovereignty of those provinces on some protestant
prince, who should be able to protect them against the tyranny of Philip, and
the offer was made to, but declined by Queen Elizabeth of England; and the
other United Provinces did, sometime after actually acknowledge the duke of
Anjou, as their sovereign. The United States of America, when they were at the
lowest ebb, and soliciting foreign assistance, never proposed any terms, or
concessions, incompatible with the dignity of free, sovereign, and independent
states. It was after the convention of Saratoga, when the tide of success had
(...) strongly in their favor, that they made the treaty with France, which was
fair, equal, and dignified. The treaty which was made between Queen Elizabeth
and the Dutch, was such as might be expected of a people, who frequently
despaired of being able to rescue themselves, by their own resources and
exertions, from the vengeance of their provoked tyrant.

When the seven Dutch provinces met at Utrecht, and signed the articles of
alliance, known by the name of the Union of Utrecht, and which were the basis
of that commonwealth, known by the name of the United Provinces, the first coin
they struck after this union, is typical of their desponding situation. It
represented a vessel laboring amidst the waves, unassisted by sails or oars,
with the motto, "lncertum quo fata ferant."
"Uncertain where the fates may carry." The articles of confederation and
perpetual union, between the thirteen United States of America, were agreed to
by Congress within a few months after the declaration of independence, and at a
still more dangerous crisis, after the American armies had been repeatedly
defeated, and were retreating before the enemy. These expressly evince the
noble confidence they had, of maintaining their independence in spite of all
the horrors of war, and exertions of the enemy.

The American is meritoriously distinguishable from every other revolution, as
being of nobler birth, and as originating upon principle, and not in
consequence of grievances actually suffered. The people of America "augured
misgovernment at a distance, and snuffed the approach of tyranny in every
tainted breeze." The duty imposed on tea was trivial, and attended with present
profit; but it might have involved an acquiescence in the parliamentary right
of taxation, which although a question of apparently abstract discussion, was
big with important and mischievous consequences. The outrageous and sanguinary
excesses, and practices, such as arbitrary imprisonment, persecution for
religious opinions, lawless executions, which have generally been the cause of
revolutions in other countries, had not existed among the Americans. They
surprised the monster in its infancy, and strangled it in the cradle; mindful
of that important maxim, that although nations may acquire liberty, yet if this
inestimable acquisition is lost, it is rarely or never recoverable. Men who
suffer themselves to remain long in a state of servitude, if they should
retain, or recover the sense of freedom, they lose the capacity of enjoying or
retaining it. "Liberty," says the profound, as well as eloquent Rousseau, "is a
wholesome aliment, but hard of digestion, and a sound stomach can only bear it.
I laugh at those debased minds, who, suffering themselves to be linked together
in a confederacy, dare talk of liberty without having an idea of it; and who,
with hearts filled with all the vices of slavery, imagine that to be free, they
need only be mutinous." At the revolution, Americans possessed not only the
ideas, but habits of freemen. The transition effected by this revolution, was
from a state of freedom, to a state of still greater freedom, which transition
therefore, did not require those extensive and radical changes, and convulsive
reforms, which are resorted to in states, where inveterate abuses, habitual
errors, and deep rooted institutions, inimical to freedom, have long prevailed;
and which reforms and remedies, exhaust the blood, rend the nerves, and strike
at the vitals of the body politic. Little more was requisite to restore
tranquillity, order, and stability, in the United States, than to expel the
invading enemy.

As soon as the fleets and armies of Great Britain disappeared, the happy
consequences of American independence began to expand. It dawned indeed beneath
clouds, and was for sometime dimmed by mists; but it had scarce rose above the
horizon, when it unveiled itself with splendid majesty. No sooner had
grim-visaged war made way for lovely peace, than those fields which had been
irrigated with the blood of their proprietors and cultivators, and had beheld
death and desolation stalking through them, in so many hideous forms, were
crowned with golden harvests; the meadows and pastures were covered with sheep
and herds, towns and cities arose from the ruins of conflagration, with
increased elegance; the ports were thronged with vessels, and resounded with
the busy hum of men; industry, commerce, and plenty, in the train of liberty,
progressed throughout the United States.

After the cessation of the toils and perils of war, and the return of the
blessings of peace, the discreet and intelligent citizens of America, did not
run headlong into tumults and anarchy, misled and beguiled by Utopian schemes,
and untried theories; nor did they lapse into listless repose, or torpid
indifference for the public welfare. Preserving that attention and vigilance,
which all free nations ought continually to exercise toward the interests of
the community, they soon became sensible of the imbecility and incompetency of
the existing confederation, to preserve the union of the states, and its
essential objects. They concurred in forming a convention, composed of men,
many of whom had given conspicuous proofs of their patriotism, in the most
arduous and trying times of the revolution. With minds divested of all national
prejudices and national bigotry, profiting from the experience of past ages,
availing themselves of the improvements in policy, which the results of
science, and researches of philosophy had revealed to modern times; reviewing
other institutions of government, theoretic and practical, culling their
excellencies and excluding their defects, they framed one for the citizens of
the United States, perhaps, upon the whole, the most calculated to ensure and
perpetuate the happiness of a people, of any heretofore devised. No social
compact, or plan of policy, ever so explicitly recognized the majesty of the
people, as the true source of legitimate power, by whom it is expressly
declared to be ordained and established. We may truly say, that it is the work
of reason, the result of deliberation, a regular digested plan, which was cast
at once, like a beautiful statue, coming from the hands of the artificer,
finished and symmetrical. Most, if not all other governments, have been imposed
by force, or gradually formed by casual emergencies, and have been improved or
impaired by them, from time to time, incorporating in their progress and
operation, many of the barbarisms, prejudices, and errors of the times through
which they passed, and which it would be difficult to extirpate or remedy,
without endangering the whole structure. This government may boast the peculiar
excellency of containing within itself, the corrective principle or power of
making such constitutional amendments, as experiment may evince to be salutary,
and in a manner, which protects against the evils of rash and violent
innovations.

It has not proved to be merely specious in theory, but has practically
succeeded, beyond what its warmest favorers predicted, or expected. But
governments, however excellent, require to be well administered.

It is very remarkable, that the good fortune of America, as well as its wisdom
and valor, has prevailed in every critical and important juncture. One signal
instance of this was its possessing so great a patriot and hero, as WASHINGTON,
at the dawn of the revolution; and another instance of equal good fortune, was
the still possessing him, after carrying his country, by his bravery and
conduct, triumphantly through the war, to preside at the formation of the new
federal constitution, of which he was afterward called to be the president and
guardian, by the eager and unanimous suffrages of his fellow citizens. His
primary discharge of the functions and duties of that high station, was
necessary to dissipate the clouds of prejudice, which might, for sometime, have
obscured the genuine and intrinsic worth of the constitution; his weight of
character, wisdom, and firmness, were requisite to launch it fairly and
steadily into agency, and to develop its admirable principles by a suitable
administration. Important and critical events before long occurred, to put to
the test, the efficiency of the government, and his capacity to preside. An
alarming resistance to some of the laws of the United States, took place in one
of our sister states; it was quickly repressed by the energy of the government,
and able conduct of the president, without bloodshed, or capital punishment.

A war, unusually ferocious, extensive, and destructive, arose between most of
the powers of Europe, with several of whom we had treaties of amity and
commerce, and were in habits of constant intercourse; toward one of whom
antipathies and resentments had not entirely subsided; and toward another a
grateful predilection existed. In this difficult and perplexing crisis, our
illustrious President taking an unimpassioned and clear view of our real and
permanent interests, and the rights of the belligerent powers, marked out and
adopted that system, which was promulgated in his proclamation, and rules, and
regulations; and which while it manifests his correct ideas of true policy, and
his faithful adherence to treaties and the law of nations, has exalted the
national justice, and national character of the United States, and has
prevented hitherto their being implicated in the war. One of the belligerent
powers finding its efforts either to seduce, or intimidate the United States to
take a part favorable to its views, equally abortive, recurred to indications
of hostile intentions, and to lawless depredations on our commerce.

The animated and prudent measures of our present President, and of the
government, to assert our national dignity, and to protect our commerce, and to
prepare for our general defense -- the reprisals made by our rising navy are
likely to be attended with the desirable effects; and France, however aspiring
and dreadfully resentful, it may have appeared to other nations, has lately
invited that amity, which she had before haughtily and unreasonably rejected;
and we have now the pleasing prospect of securing the re-establishment of peace
and commerce with her, consistently with the honor and interests of the United
States.

The general spirit and accord, which those apprehended hostilities excited in
the citizens of the United States -- the facility with which adequate military
arrangements have been made, and the requisite resources supplied the rapid
progress of our growing navy -- the skillful and gallant conduct of the
officers and crews of different frigates, afford auspicious presages of future
spirit and ability, to assert and defend our national dignity and interests,
against all who may violate, or prepare to violate them.

The exigencies which occurred, have increased our public debt, but in how
trivial a degree comparatively with the greatness of the objects, and with our
actual and increasing resources? We cannot but be reconciled to the
requisitions of government, when we find from the general statement of
expenditures, lately submitted to the public, with what judgment and economy
they have been applied to the public wants and occasions, and how small a
portion of them are subtracted for the moderate salaries of our public
officers, some of whom, especially in the higher departments, by their
services, rather injure, than benefit their private fortunes. -- How much the
reverse is the case in other governments? In too many of them, a great part of
the immense sums of money, which are wrung from the hard hands of industry, by
enormous taxes, and heavy imposts, is prodigally lavished in maintaining the
gaudy pageantry, and supplying the corrupting luxuries of royalty, in rewarding
the venal abettors of arbitrary power, and pensioning the sycophantic minions
of a court.

Among the peculiar felicities, which attend the people of the United States,
it may be observed, that no nation, which ever existed, had so fair a prospect
of exemption from the evils of foreign war and invasion. They border on no
nations from whom they can apprehend any great danger. The immense ocean, which
nature has interposed between them and the states of Europe, serves as an
effectual rampart to discourage and to baffle any attempts of the most powerful
of those states to invade and subdue any part of the United States; it serves
also to prevent the latter from intermeddling in any of their feuds; and seems
to point out the impropriety of having any other concern with them, but in the
way of friendly and advantageous commerce.

To the most potent nation of Europe, any attempt to effect any conquest in the
United States, as long as they remain in close and firm union, would prove a
rash and desperate enterprise, a Syracusan expedition. After the total failure
of Great Britain, who, with every possible advantage, invaded America; taken at
every disadvantage, it is very improbable, that any other nation will have the
temerity to make another invasion, while the general union subsists.

Few adequate and rational causes, and grounds, can the United States ever have
to tempt them to offensive war, and aggressive measures -- not the acquisition
of territory, for they possess within their own acknowledged and indisputable
limits, more than sufficient to satiate the most extravagant desires -- not to
increase the number of their people by conquest, for under the favorable
circumstances that attend them, their natural increase, and emigrations from
other countries, will stock them with surprising rapidity. Nothing exists to
create and nourish those prejudices and antipathies against other nations,
which occasion irritability and propensity to open enmity. All sufficient
within themselves, they may become happy, great, and powerful by their own
legitimate resources, and need not aim at prosperity or aggrandizement, from
the misery or depression of any other people. They may indulge to the amiable
spirit of philanthropy, and benevolent precepts of christianity; and instead of
envying, or disturbing, they may rejoice at, and promote the welfare of the
rest of mankind.

How different is the situation of most of the countries of Europe? When we
take a retrospect of the bloody, devastating, and expensive contests which have
prevailed among them for many centuries past; when we consider their frequency
and short intermissions, we may be warranted in pronouncing, that the relative
and habitual state of the nations of Europe, is a state of warfare. Their
complication of interests, and their real or imaginary equilibrium of power,
keep them in continual negotiation, agitation and disquiet. Treaties of peace
between them are little more than truces, and are commonly impregnated with the
germs of future wars; which generally recommence, as soon as the exhausted
parties are, or think themselves sufficiently recruited, to resume hostilities
with any prospect of advantage* A few of the most powerful states, leave not to
the weaker, the choice of peace or war, but drag them sooner, or later, into
their vortex.

The strength, opulence, and prosperity of them all, is comparative with, and
dependant on the weakness, poverty, and infelicity of their neighbors and
competitors. They transmit, and esteem it politic to transmit, their enmities
from generation to generation, inhumanly and unchristianly styling each other
"natural enemies," especially Shakespeare. Henry V. Act v. Scene 2.
Those contending powers
Of France and England, whose very shores look pale,
With envy of each others happiness.


Our national happiness is as little liable to be overthrown, or endangered by
internal commotions or seditions, as by external attacks. We are exempt from
all, or most of those causes, which usually foment, inflame, and carry
political dissentions to desperate extremities. There are no privileged orders
among us -- no distinct ranks -- patricians or plebeians -- nobles or commons
-- all have equal rights and privileges, the same common interest -- those who
are elevated to office and power, are so by the free will and choice of, the
people, or their representatives, and but for a limited time, during which they
are responsible, and in case of delinquency, removable. It is not to be
expected, nor is it desirable, that we should be entirely free from warm
divisions of opinion, and animated discussions, upon points of common interest
and safety. These may be productive of less evil, than cold indifference to
public concerns -- than that dead and dangerous calm, which may be owing to the
supiness, remissness, and relaxation of national spirit, which may follow from
much ease and overflowing wealth. The river which, sometimes swelling, and
rushing on with the rapidity of a torrent, breaks its mounds, and deluges the
country round, does partial mischief; while the still exhalations of stagnant
waters, diffusively spread dangerous diseases and deadly pestilence. But it is
nevertheless the duty of every true lover of his country, to endeavor to
restrain dissentions and divisions from ripening into factions, when they
become extremely dangerous -- the public good will then be sacrificed to the
particular views and interests of each faction -- men will not be chosen for
their merits and capacity to serve the public, but from their party attachment
and party violence -- measures will be obstructed, merely that the party
proposing them may not derive credit and popularity from their success -- the
good and the moderate will be neglected, or obliged to retire from such
turbulent scenes; and foreign influence, and foreign interests will begin to
intermingle and predominate.

The different states formed into their present confederation, have combined
the interior police and liberty of small states, with the power and vigor of a
great empire, uniting all the advantages, and excluding the disadvantages of
democracy and monarchy. Their experience has already evinced, how well
calculated republican governments may be to produce the greatest happiness of
mankind. The government of each state, as well as the government of the United
States, may be truly styled "governments of all by all," and not governments
"of all by one," or "the combinations of the few against the many;" they are
governments reared, as all governments ought to be, on the basis of natural
right, and general happiness, wherein those who are elevated to eminent
stations, from the mass of the people, and revertible to it, are only so
elevated with a view to the public benefit, and become not the masters, but the
agents of the people. Offices and power, thus only attainable by the free
suffrages of the people, are accessible to, and conferrable on all, who have
the talents, virtue, and patriotism to merit them. This equality of political
and personal rights, is the true and only equality, practicable and consistent
with the peace, order, and safety of civil society. The law, which is the
expression of the will of the people, ought necessarily to meet with reverence.
All that they require of any man, is to do, or forbear toward others, what he
would wish others to do, or forbear toward him. No man is here so high, as to
be beyond their reach, or so low as to be without their protection. Can it then
be matter of surprise, that the United States should, in a few years since
their sovereignty and independence, attain to such a pitch of opulence, power,
and prosperity, as nations do not arrive at in the course of many ages, in the
ordinary rise and progression of empires. It has been usually remarked, with
respect to the products of nature, and the works of art, that nothing of speedy
growth, or hasty construction, is of long duration. The tree which shoots up
quickly, and spreads its branches widely, is not apt to strike its roots
deeply, and is liable to be easily overturned by storms. But this rule cannot
be applicable to the growth and duration of the United States. Their sudden
greatness, and prosperity, have not arisen from extrinsic, accidental, and
transient, but from intrinsic, regular, and permanent causes and means, which,
from their nature, must long operate with augmenting vigor and effect. The
commerce, which is daily pouring riches into them, is not like the precarious
commerce of Tire and Carthage of old, and of the Hanse-towns, Venice, and
Holland in latter times; which fluctuating circumstances, and the competition
of rival states, may destroy; but is supported upon the solid basis of a
varied, increasing, inexhaustible agriculture, which can only be limited by the
number and industry of their inhabitants. -- Their extent of territory, and
population, are not the fruits and effect of conquest over a diversity of
people, of different and discordant tempers, manners, and customs, held
together by the constant compression of overruling force.

The arts and sciences, and at length manufactures, in states like these,
possessing most, or all the materials, must flourish amidst such favorable
circumstances, such extensive liberty and civil toleration; every art, science,
and manufacture, will be translated to them, in their most improved and matured
state, from other countries. Happy, not only in the actual fruition of so many
comforts and blessings, the United States have still greater in the bright
perspective which opens to their view.

They have reason to expect, before the lapse of many years, to have every
thing within themselves, that can contribute to the real comforts, and to the
embellishments of life, and to their general prosperity and solid grandeur. The
American Eagle, upborne on vigorous pinions, will take as lofty and extensive a
flight, as ever did the Roman Eagle, and in that flight may survey as great and
powerful an empire; but an empire not formed for war and bloodshed, aggrandized
by conquest, and supported by rapine and oppression, held together by force,
and dissolving with the remission of that force; but an empire become
magnificent and powerful by the voluntary association of a cluster of free
states, equal in their rights and immunities, obeying no laws, and submitting
to no governments, but what emanate from their free will and choice, and
flourishing and supported by their own innate resources, and by reciprocation
of commercial benefits with other nations.

Their happiness and example may tend to the amelioration of the condition of
other nations, may inspire the spirit of rational reformation in perverted
governments, will at least hold out to their miserable and oppressed
inhabitants, a happy asylum, and may tend to make peace more sought, and wars
more shunned by other nations.

It will not be possible, while we contemplate on this glorious day, the
happiness and grandeur, actual and progressive of these our rising states, to
be unmindful of those virtuous and valorous patriots, by whose eminent prowess,
and good conduct, they became so free, so great and flourishing; many of whom
sealed their patriotism, and cemented the fabric of our freedom, with their
blood. In particular let us take this occasion of pouring forth effusions of
the most lively gratitude, to WASHINGTON, whose recent loss we have so much
deplored -- to that first and best of men and heroes, to whose fame, panegyric
cannot now add, or from it, obloquy detract -- also let us call to our
particular and grateful remembrance, the virtuous, enterprising, unassuming,
and circumspect GREEN, of whom it would be sufficient to say, that WASHINGTON,
who was so keen and accurate an observer and discriminator of the talents and
qualities of men, designated him as worthy to succeed him in command, should
destiny snatch him from the service of his country, before the work of its
freedom and independence was accomplished -- GREEN, to whose heroic and
successful exertions, all America, and this state in particular, is so greatly
indebted.

Let us cherish with the most lively gratitude, the remembrance of the great
and meritorious services of all our deceased patriots; let their bright
examples direct and animate us to those pursuits, which will be beneficial to
our common country, and honorable to ourselves -- let us suppose their immortal
spirits to be continually hovering over us, and witnessing our conduct --
applauding such of our actions as are advantageous, and reproving such as are
injurious to the commonweal. Let not our lips merely show forth their praise,
but let our hearts be indelibly impressed with earnest desires, to imitate as
far as we can, their good qualities and patriotic deeds.

Fellow-citizens, if benefits enjoyed ought to excite gratitude and love,
Americans ought to be susceptible of as ardent a love of their country, their
common, impartial, and bountiful mother, as ever inflamed Grecian and Roman
breasts, and in them produced so many disinterested and glorious actions. Above
all things, maintain with the most unshaken attachment, the intimate and
general union of the states, without which it will be impossible for their
prosperity and greatness to continue -- be assured, that this only can save the
different states from intestine discords and civil wars, or defend them from
foreign invasion and conquest. Cultivate good morals as highly essential to
free governments; and religion, without which morals can have no solid support.
Be ever mindful, that civil societies, especially those under republican
government, cannot subsist without due obedience to the laws. Never confound
licentiousness with liberty, and guard against anarchy, as much as against
tyranny. Disseminate, as much as possible, education and knowledge, which will
countervail that natural aristocracy, which will exist more or less in the
freest states. Let not ambition, or the spirit of conquest, but only self
defense, and the vindication of your rights, prompt to wars. Observe with
sacred fidelity all national engagements, and never regard any thing as founded
in good policy, which is inconsistent with justice.

It does indeed seem vain to expect that the best constituted governments, more
than any other human institutions, can last for ever. Like the human body,
their natural tendency is to dissolution.

" Proud cities vanish, states and realms decay,
" The world's unstable glories fade away. Hoole's Tasso.
"
But there have been instances of states enduring and flourishing for many
ages, by tracing, watching, guarding against, and correcting the causes of
decadence and ruin; and by attending to and renovating those principles, which
are calculated to promote and support their happiness and duration. The United
States promise a duration as unexampled, as their greatness is sudden; may the
great Arbiter of human destinies, grant that their duration and prosperity, may
be coequal with the duration of the world!

FINIS.

