CHARACTER OF THIS WORK. From the CRITICAL REVIEW, Vol. XVI. page 221.
"Among the many novels with which the press is every day swarming, we are
happy, when able, to select a few, which afford amusement without endangering
the morals, and instruction without the dullness of constant moralizing. Of
this number is Antoinette.

"The title, however, should not lead our readers to suppose that this
publication is of a political character. It has not the least reference to the
affairs of France; and for this reason we could have wished it had appeared
under another name: the present is apt to mislead readers.

"The heroine is the daughter of a nobleman of the ancient family of the
Percivals, barons of Arlington, that occupied Arlington castle, on the western
side of the lake of Killarney, in Ireland. The principal incidents of the
history pass in that picturesque and beautiful spot.

"Antoinette is the daughter of lord Arlington, by his first wife; several
circumstances, for a long time mysterious and inexplicable, relating to the
parents of the young lady, form a principal part of the plot, in the
unravelling of which, considerable ingenuity is discovered. In the character of
lord Arlington we contemplate those generous virtues that throw a luster on
exalted stations; and in lady Arlington we view a sensible female, who thinks
the principal excellence of her sex consists in the cultivation of her
understanding, and in an attention to her children. Both these characters, and
indeed most of the others, are well drawn; though we think lady Arlington bears
the absence of her husband rather too stoically, and several incidents are too
hastily run over, particularly such as must have occurred during the lady's
residence in London, a description of which would have afforded a degree of
variety in the work.

"The morality is unexceptionably pure; the principles are liberal; the reader
is led on gradually to events interesting and striking; the language is in the
main neat and correct, and the issue of the history fortunate and agreeable. On
the whole, this novel has considerable merit; and we think the writer might
display her powers of description a little more freely.

"The latter hint we drop, because we understand this is the production of a
lady, who is likely to favor the world with another novel shortly, and because
we think the public will receive Antoinette as a favorable specimen of her
abilities."

ANTOINETTE PERCIVAL.

A NOVEL.

Nor same I slight; nor for her favors call:
She comes unlooked for, if she comes at all.
POPE. PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED FOR MATTHEW CAREY, No. 118, HIGH STREET.

March 20, 1800.

ANTOINETTE.
CHAPTER I.
It was a spot,
Where Nature with a lavish hand had poured
Her various charms, -- where great sublimity
With beauty strove, which most should catch the eye,
And wake the soul to rapture.

ON the western side of the lake of Killarney, between that noble expanse of
waters and the Atlantic ocean, stood Arlington castle, the seat of the ancient
family of the Percivals, barons of Arlington. The house was situated on the
declivity of a hill, and the front being to the south west, commanded a view of
the ocean, with the Skelig Isles in the horizon. The space between the house
and the sea was a continued landscape of lawns and woods, or rather
shrubberies, for they were only of a stature to diversify and adorn the
prospect, not to interrupt it. From another part of the house were seen the
beautiful lakes of Killarney, with the mountain of Mange^on on the other side
of them, forming a scene not less grand than picturesque. On the whole,
perhaps, a more romantic or beautiful spot could not be formed by the most
luxuriant imagination.

The house was spacious, and had formerly been the abode of cheerfulness and
hospitality; but alas! the halls now no more rang with the mirth of the festive
board; the guests no more assembled round the blazing hearth; nor did a smiling
peasantry repeat with transports the name of their hospitable landlord. All was
silent in the mansion -- its owners had forsaken it -- they were allured away
by the luxuries of the English metropolis, and by the imaginary fame to be
acquired by gaining a seat in the English house of commons; forgetting that it
was not the mere act of sitting there, which could cast a luster around their
heads; and that, this was only to be obtained by filling the seat worthily; by
laboring incessantly to promote the welfare and happiness of those, who had
deputed them to that station; and not by sitting on the benches as idle
spectators and auditors.

Two very expensive contested elections, for the populous town of --, had made
dreadful depredations on the fortune of one of the proprietors of Arlington
castle; so that when it descended to his son Edward, he found himself
encumbered with an immense debt, thus foolishly incurred.

Edward, born and educated in the metropolis of Great Britain, could ill digest
the thoughts of returning to live amongst the WILD Irish, as he had always
heard them emphatically styled; and he therefore determined to try, first,
whether by prudent management in England, he might not be able to retrieve his
affairs, without banishing himself from all civilized society, which he
conceived it would be, to return to his patrimonial inheritance.

Prudence in the choice of a wife, he conceived, would be of the utmost
importance to him, in carrying his economical plans into execution. For this
purpose, he resolved not to take one from amongst the daughters of affluence,
who would probably spend three times as much money as she brought him; but to
seek out for some female, who, having been educated in habits of economy and
retirement, would have no wish to enter into the expensive course of life,
which one born in a more elevated situation, would naturally be led to expect.

It was not long before he met with a young woman, agreeable in her person,
whom he thought exactly suited to the plan of life which he had laid down for
himself, to whom therefore, he immediately made his proposals, and was, soon
after, married. Mistaken man! he soon learnt the severe lesson, that ignorance
of an irrational course of life in her early years is no security for a woman's
leading a rational one, when more knowledge of what is called the world, has
filled her head with new ideas of the pleasures to be derived from following
the giddy rounds of folly and dissipation, in which she sees thousands engaged.
No; a woman is then most likely to perform her duty properly, when initiated
into the follies of the gay world, with a mind accustomed to reason on all
things; and who, viewing those follies, therefore, with a philosophic eye,
would not prize them too highly, or seek after them too eagerly.

Start not, readers, at the ideas here suggested, of a female philosopher. I
know it is a character, which the world has been hitherto in the habit of
considering as a sort of eccentricity of nature, very fit to be shown about as
a sight, but not to be imitated. But, thanks to the improved state of knowledge
in these times, we may hope that in a short time the character will become so
common, that it will no longer be looked on as a prodigy, or shunned as a bane,
but nourished as a plant of the most balsamic influence. For let me ask,
whether it can seriously be supposed by any reflecting person, that a woman
will be the less likely to perform the domestic duties well, when her mind has
been cultivated, and she has been taught to perform them on principle, and to
use her reason in the management of her family, than when her whole system of
action is the result of habit only; so that like a piece of mere mechanism,
should one wheel be in the least deranged, she is utterly at a loss, and the
whole machine immediately becomes confusion and disorder.

Lord Arlington, at least, had soon reason to repent of the choice he had made;
for no sooner did his bride find herself elvated to a station, to which,
previously to her acquaintance with him, she had never even dared to raise her
thoughts, than she launched out into every extravagance, which the intoxication
of newly-acquired rank could suggest to her, without ever pausing a moment, to
consider whether such expenses were proper or improper.

Lord Arlington endeavored, from the first dawning of this propensity to
extravagance in his wife, to check its progress; but alas! in vain; she went on
from year to year, growing more profuse, as expense grew less proper; 'till, at
last, hurt in his fortune, almost beyond a possibility of retrieving -- and
wounded deeply in his mind with the thoughts of the needy situation, and
consequent obscurity, into which he and his family, must be thrown, by the
fresh encumbrances which the prodigality of his wife had brought on his before
over-burdened estate, he resolved to make one effort more, before all was lost;
and by removing his wife from the scenes with which, and the companions by
whom, her attention had, for so long a time, been entirely occupied, to pluck
up the evil by the roots, and endeavor to save a part of his fortune from the
general wreck.

However contrary therefore, to his own inclinations it might be, he determined
to retire with his wife and his son Theodore, then about six years of age, and
the only fruit of his ill-starred union, to Arlington castle, there to live in
retirement and economy.

But no sooner was this plan suggested to lady Arlington, than she, who had
drunk too deeply of the Circean cup of British dissipation, to be able quietly
to relinquish the intoxicating draught, began to play off the usual round of
arts, so often successfully practiced by females, when they wish to turn a
husband aside from any purpose, which may not be pleasing to them.

But it was all in vain. Lord Arlington was resolved: and he was not of such a
wavering disposition, when once resolved on any thing, as to be easily shaken
in his purpose; he had, therefore, made a considerable progress in settling his
affairs, previously to his departure, when his wife, finding all her endeavors
to move him ineffectual, determined to pursue a plan of her own forming, and
eloped with one of those kind hearted knights errant, who are always ready to
fly to the assistance of females, in lady Arlington's distressed situation.

Lord Arlington immediately sued for, and obtained, without difficulty, a
separation from her in Doctor's Commons; and thus being relieved, though in a
painful manner, from this great obstacle to his economical plans, and, indeed,
as it ultimately turned out, relieved from all expense on his wife's account --
for though a proper maintenance was settled for her, yet, as she went abroad,
and lord Arlington never heard of her more, that allowance was never paid, --
he pursued with alacrity, the schemes he had formed, and very soon after
arrived with his son at Arlington castle.

This first step taken, the next was to institute a strict inquiry into the
real state of his affairs. But in this investigation, lord Arlington only found
mortification rise on mortification. The more he enquired into his affairs, the
more embarrassed they appeared. Every day produced some fresh mortgage or claim
upon him; 'till wearied with chagrin, he had several times nearly given up the
enquiry, and determined to go abroad, as concluding all lost. At last, however,
by the most unwearied perseverance, he so far arranged his affairs, and put
them into such a train, as to give reasonable hopes, that if his plans were
strictly adhered to, his estate might, in a course of years, be quite freed
from all embarrassment.

These cares, together with the education of his son, upon which he spared no
proper expense, -- wisely judging, that this was the only branch of expense,
wherein a very rigid economy would be improper, -- occupied the greatest part
of his time during the first years of his residence at Arlington castle. He saw
little company, only visiting those of his neighbors, who had sense enough to
respect him, for the prudent manner in which he lived. These, indeed, were few;
it being the opinion of much the larger part of the country, that it was
degrading to a peer, to live in so economical a manner.

Among these with whom he principally associated, was colonel Conolly, who had
a small estate, with a pretty house on it, at Airville, about four miles from
Arlington castle. The colonel had acquired a very large fortune in the
East Indies, where he had served as an officer in the company's army, and was
now retired to his estate, to enjoy in peace his large possessions: for, unlike
many of those who acquire their fortunes in the East Indies, he could enjoy his
in peace, having no qualms of conscience to torment him with the idea of any
thing am^ss in the acquirement of those possessions. All was fairly gotten,
that is, as far as any thing can be said to be fairly gotten, which is acquired
by the murder of our fellow creatures: for, though murder was his profession,
yet he had not extented an a^ to the injury of any one, but in the fair way of
that profession.

He had married an English woman while he was in India, by whom he had only one
child, a daughter; and his wife dying on her passage to England, he
immediately, on his arrival in England, placed his daughter under the care of a
relation in London, from whence, at a proper age, she was to be removed to a
boarding school, with a charge that she should be instructed in every thing
proper to be taught to the heiress of so large a fortune.

Colonel Conolly was just arrived at Airville, when lord Arlington returned to
his family seat. An intimacy soon commenced between them; which the latter was
particularly assiduous to cultivate, indulging a secret hope, that when their
respective children came to be much together, they might entertain a partiality
for each other: and that miss Conolly's fortune might help to disencumber the
Arlington estate.

At sixteen years of age Theodore Percival was sent abroad, under the care of a
mr. Lewson, a very worthy and respectable gentleman, with whom he traveled
through the greatest part of Europe; and was returning by way of France, having
so settled his journey, that in conformity with his father's wishes, often
expressed in his letters, he should return to Ireland by the time he was of
age; lord Arlington having intented that day to be spent as a day of great
festivity at the castle. His return was, however, somewhat retarded by the
death of mr. Lewson, who had been, for some time, in a very indifferent state
of health, and who, when he arrived at Vienne in Dauphine, was taken too ill to
be able to proceed on his journey, and, after languishing some weeks, died
there.

Mr. Percival deeply regretted the loss of him, as he had in every respect
fulfilled, with the most perfect propriety, the important trust committed to
him. Well assured, that the most effectual method to secure his precepts a
favorable reception from his young pupil, was, to watch the proper
opportunities of instruction, and to mingle, with the utmost caution and art,
amusement and instruction together; he never threw in an observation
mal-a-propos, nor ever attempted to thwart his charge in any innocent plan he
had formed for recreation or entertainment; neither did he ever refuse to
accompany him on such occasions, how much soever he might be disinclined to
them himself. He was, in short, not only the tutor, but the friend and
companion of Theodore, who in all his letters to his father, bore an ample
testimony to his virtues and talents, and at his death lamented, in the most
pathetic terms, the loss he had sustained.

The death of mr. Lewson, however, made lord Arlington more anxious than ever
for the return of his son. He wrote him many very pressing letters on the
subject, in consequence of which, though only two days before he completed his
twenty-first year, Theodore arrived at Arlington castle, to the no small joy of
his father, who beheld in him all the improvements which his most sanguine
hopes could expect.

In his outward appearance, he was tall, and well made, with a countenance at
once handsome, intelligent, and expressive of a mind liberal and well informed,
and of the utmost sweetness of temper; his manners also were those of a perfect
gentleman, without the least tincture of the coxcomb or pedant.

About two years before his return, miss Conolly had been taken from school,
and placed at the head of her father's house. She was mistress of all those
accomplishments, which are denominated genteel; she could dance, sing, play on
the piano-forte, talk French and Italian to perfection; she understood all
kinds of work, proper for her station, and dressed with taste and elegance;
yet, with all these accomplishments, and with a face and person, which were
both much admired, she was quite free from affectation and coquetry. One thing
only was wanting to make her completely amiable; but, perhaps, one worth all
the acquirements she had attained, and that was, a taste for reading and
intellectual improvements; but to have acquired that taste in the manner in
which she had been educated, was not to be expected, and still less could it be
expected, that she would acquire it at her father's house, who himself
considered reading as not at all a feminine employment.

Such were Theodore Percival and Horatia Conolly, at the time of the former's
return from his travels, previously to which event, lord Arlington had, at a
distance, founded the sentiments of mr. Conolly, on the subject of the union,
which he so much wished for; and having reason to think, that he would not be
averse to it, he came at once to the point, and proposed to him, that they
should endeavor to forward the plan with all the interest they possessed, in
their respective children. Mr. Conolly, whose only object in the disposal of
his daughter, was rank, as her fortune would be sufficient to support any rank,
readily assented to lord Arlington's scheme: and it was agreed between these
two fathers, that at mr. Percival's return, the young people should be thrown
as much as possible in each other's way, and every fair means taken, to create
in them an attachment to each other.

CHAPTER II.
The fatal vow
Has passed my lips! -- Methought in these sad moments,
The tombs around, the saints, the darkened al^ar,
And all the trembling shrines with horror shook.
THOMPSON.
FROM the moment when this agreement was made between the fathers, which was
some months before Theodore's return, lord Arlington almost lived at colonel
Conolly's, in order that the views of the parents might be the better veiled
from the young people, who if a sudden increase of intimacy had taken place
immediately after Theodore's return, might have been led to suspect that it was
not without design; for colonel Conolly and lord Arlington both agreed, that if
it should come to be suspected by their children, that they had formed the
scheme we have related, it might at once put an end to all hopes of its
succeeding: for young people seldom revolt at any thing so much as the idea
that they are designedly thrown in each other's way, in order to accomplish the
schemes of their parents. But as scarcely a day passed without some intercourse
between the families of lord Arlington and colonel Conolly, for weeks before
mr. Percival's return, the frequent visits which they intended should take
place afterward, would not appear to have any particular design in them.

At length the day so much wished for by lord Arlington* arrived, and after an
absence of five years, he again clasped in his arms a son, for whom he had
suffered so much anxiety, and to whom he looked up, as the future ornament of
his ancient family. The very same day this dear son was introduced by his
father, with eyes sparkling with joy and hope, to colonel and miss Conolly, who
seemed scarcely less charmed with him, than the enraptured lord Arlington
himself.

Yet amidst all the delight which his presence seemed to diffuse around him,
and the real pleasure which he himself felt, at again seeing a parent, to whom
he (...) so many obligations, Theodore was at times thoughtful and reserved; it
is true, he endeavored to wear a mask of gaiety, and returned, with an
irresistible grace and elegance, the compliments paid him on his return; but it
was apparent, notwithstanding, that his gaiety was but a mask, and that
thoughtfulness and reserve were the natural inmates of his breast.

Miss Conolly was as much pleased with mr. Percival, as the most sanguine
wishes of her father could aspire to; but as to mr. Percival, it was, alas, but
too evident, that miss Conolly's charms made no impression on his (as his
father at once determined it to be) insensible heart.

Lord Arlington, on leaving the colonel's was requested by him to dine at
Airville the next day, an invitation which he most joyfully accepted, but which
his son, though he replied to it with perfect politeness, too plainly wished he
could have declined. In their way home, lord Arlington addressed his son,

'Well, my Theodore, and what do you think of miss Conolly?'

'She is a fine woman?'

'Aye, a charming woman, is she not?'

'I don't doubt but she is; but one cannot form any opinion of a woman at first
sight.'

'Oh, you cannot fail to be charmed with her, when you are more acquainted with
her.'

'Perhaps, then, 'twere best to shun her, if she is so very dangerous.'

'Oh, by no means, cowards only fly from danger; the brave are ever most
forward to face it.'

'It is true, that the brave will face it with firmness, when it must be met;
but it is rashness alone that will seek it unnecessarily. However, to be
honest, my dear sir, I do not think that there is any thing so very dangerous
in miss Conolly's eyes, but that one may encounter their glances, without
incurring the imputation of rashness.'

Lord Arlington felt a little chagrined at this observation, but made no reply.
However, he consoled himself with the reflection, that impressions made at
first sight, are not always the most lasting, and rested on the hope that miss
Conolly's accomplishments, when they came to be known to his son, might work
the effect, which her eyes had failed of.

After supper, lord Arlington could not help observing his son's gravity,
saying, half in jest and half seriously,

'Indeed, my Theodore, you are so serious that one would think you had left
your heart behind you: you used to be all life and spirits before you went
away: I shall begin to hate foreign countries, if they have deprived me of the
cheerful companion I was so long accustomed to.'

'Indeed, I beg your pardon, sir, a thousand times,' answered Theodore, 'I own
it is very wrong, after so long an absence from such a kind and affectionate
parent, to meet him at my return, with a clouded brow: but though blessed in the
living, a pang will sometimes arise for the dead; and recollect, sir, what a
friend I have lately lost, and how much every object here reminds me of him;
nor blame me if a cloud now and then appears, to break the sunshine which ought
to beam on my countenance.'

''Tis true, indeed, my son,' answered lord Arlington, and I no longer wonder
at, or blame the sorrow you appear to feel. Mr. Lewson was worthy of every
respect you can show him; and not deeply to feel his loss, would be brutal
indeed in you, who owe him so much.'

Lord Arlington, indeed, secretly rejoiced to hear his son's appearance of
gravity and thoughtfulness so well accounted for. He had himself, though fully
sensible of Mr. Lewson's merit, and the obligations which he owed him, so lost
in the first joy of seeing his son, all recollection of the loss of that
valuable friend, that it never once occurred to him, that his son had that
cause of sorrow. But he no sooner heard it mentioned, than he immediately felt
the full force of his remarks, and wondered not that Theodore, who had for so
long a time been his constant companion, and had gone through the painful scene
of attending him in a long illness, which he saw him at last finally sink u^
should deeply feel what could not, from a differen^ of circumstances, make the
like impression on his own mind.

Theodore, however, felt this reproof of his father's deeply, and resolved,
that nothing more of this melancholy should, if possible, appear. The next day,
therefore, at colonel Conolly's, he was much less reserved, than on the former
occasion; he was perfectly easy and polite -- talked much of foreign countries,
their manners and customs -- entertained the company with many anecdotes of hie
travels, and, in short, was quite the hero of the circle.

Horatia was charmed with him; she sung and played; she exhibited specimens of
her talents in drawing and painting; she talked of London, and the beau monde;
but Theodore was insensible to all her attractions, though perfectly polite to
her. On the whole the day passed off pleasantly; and at parting in the evening,
lord Arlington reminded the colonel and his daughter of the festival which was
to take place at Arlington the next day, when his son would be twenty-one years
of age, and which mr. and miss Conolly both said they enjoyed too much in idea,
to have wanted to be reminded of.

Great preparations had been making for some time, for the celebration of this
day; the rooms, which from the desertion of the house by his ancestors, and
from the retired plan of life which lord Arlington himself had adopted, had
been shut up for many years, were now opened, having been repaired and
decorated for the occasion; not that by a foolish and wanton extravagance, lord
Arlington, meant now to undo all that years of prudence had been accomplishing.
The festivity was conducted at the same time with economy and hospitality.
Nothing gaudy or frivolous was mixed with it; but every thing was good of its
kind, and served in plenty, without profusion.

A most elegant dinner, a concert, with a ball and supper, were served within
the house, attended by the nobility and gentry for many miles round. Without
the house, an ox was roasted whole, with plenty of other beef, pies, plumb
puddings, ale and punch, for the tenants, both farmers and peasantry, men,
women, and children; and in the evening there was a display of very fine
fireworks, with rural music, and a dance upon the green.

The whole was a scene of elegance and cheerfulness, of jollity and
hospitality; and was conducted with the utmost regularity and order: nor did
one untoward circumstance intervene during the whole of the entertainment.

Mr. Percival, on whose account it was given, was present in every place by
turns, and was alike admired wherever he went; he was no less easy among the
company without doors, than amongst those within; he ate some of the ox with
them; drank health and happiness to them all; joined with them in their dance,
and while he continued with them was as one of themselves.

Nor was his elegance of manners a less source of admiration to the company
within doors; he charmed them all, and it was with peculiar pleasure that lord
Arlington and colonel Conolly both observed, that Horatia was not amongst the
number of those who were the least sensible to his attractions. In fact, she
that day completely lost her heart; it became wholly and solely mr. Percival's.
But the love still remained entirely on her side: though she was dressed to the
best advantage, though she danced to perfection, and was allowed by all
present, to be the finest woman in the room, she was not at all the particular
object of Theodore's attentions, she came in for no more of them than her share
in common with the rest of the company.

Lord Arlington observed this indifference of his son's with the deepest
regret: a regret, which time only increased, instead of diminishing; for time
only showed more and more plainly, how little prospect there was of Theodore
ever voluntarily fixing on Horatia in his choice of a wife. And this regret,
which was felt so deeply by lord Arlington, was doubled in the heart of colonel
Conolly; as it became every day more apparent, how much his daughter's
affections were engaged to a man, who repaid them with perfect indifference;
and appeared, indeed, as much as possible to shun her. This, indeed, was but
too true. Theodore soon perceived what the aim of both parents was; and as he
had no inclination to comply with their wishes, he thought it the most
honorable mode of proceeding, to avoid the lady whenever he could do so,
without being guilty of incivility.

Eight months had elapsed thus, mr. Percival at some times appearing quite
thoughtful and melancholy, at others easy and cheerful; when lord Arlington
growing impatient of delay, determined to lay open his mind to his son. He
called him, therefore, one day into his study, and thus addressed him:

'My dearest son, it is my most earnest wish to see you well settled in life;
nor could any thing, I think, be more desirable for you, than an union between
your family, and that of colonel Conolly, by a marriage with his daughter. She
is a very amiable and accomplished woman, to whom you cannot possibly make any
objection, and her fortune is beyond what your most sanguine wishes could have
dared to think of. I have sounded the colonel's sentiments on the subject, and
though he might have formed much higher views for his daughter, yet he is
content, he kindly says, to wave all other considerations, in the happiness he
should feel at bestowing his daughter on a man of your worth and
accomplishments. I hope therefore you will raise no obstacle to an union, which
would give so much satisfaction to all parties.'

Theodore heard his father out, without attempting to interrupt him; but being
well aware, that such a proposal was likely to be made to him, he was prepared
with his answer, and replied with a calm but firm tone, as follows:

'I am perfectly sensible, my dearest father, of your kind intentions toward
me, in the alliance you propose. I am perfectly sensible too, of the merits of
miss Conolly, and of the honor done me by her father; but indeed, dear sir, I
must entreat of you not to think of pressing this match any farther. I am sure
miss Conolly is not a woman with whom I could ever be perfectly happy. She is,
though amiable in her disposition, uncultivated, except in those showy
accomplishments, which may, indeed, attract the senses, but never can find
their way to the heart; and though she may pass off very well as an associate
for an afternoon, she must be an insipid and uninteresting companion for life;
nor can I ever consent to an union, which I am sure would make me miserable.'

Lord Arlington was sufficiently chagrined at the firm and decided manner in
which his son declared his disapprobation of a measure, which he had so much at
heart to accomplish; unwilling, however, totally to give up this darling
project, he often urged it on his son, alleging to him not only the
recommendations of the lady herself, which he thought sufficient to satisfy any
man; but that, added to these, she would bring him a fortune which would
entirely clear his still encumbered estate; and was, therefore, in that light
also, a most desirable match for him.

Theodore, however, continued firm, often repeating to his father, that he
could esteem miss Conolly, but never could love her; and that no happiness
could be experienced in the marriage state without an ardent affection on both
sides.

Lord Arlington could not deny the force of this objection; but strove to parry
it, by urging that esteem was the best possible foundation for love, and that
if he should marry miss Conolly, he did not doubt but love would soon be added
to esteem. But all was in vain. Theodore seemed resolutely determined not to
consent to the match. He grew, too, almost daily, more thoughtful and
melancholy, 'till at last his father, who, as we have already said, was not
easily to be turned aside from any thing he had once resolved on, grew quite
incensed against him.

Colonel Conolly, too, had, for some time past, grown very impatient at the
delay of an union, on which his mind was set as much as lord Arlington's, and
often urged the latter to use authority with his son, as entreaties were of no
avail; till at last his arguments working on lord Arlington's own feelings,
wrought him up to the very point which Theodore had long foreseen and dreaded.
Accordingly, lord Arlington, one day, on his return from a morning's ride to
Airville, called his son into his study, and with a harshness of tone and
manner, which he had never before used toward him, spoke thus to him:

'Theodore, dearest son of my affection, for whose sake I have consented, for
so many years, to banish myself from a world, which had so many charms for me;
how is it, that I am to endure the mortification of seeing you perfectly
insensible to all that I have done for you, while you make not the smallest
return to me for such obligations? One only thing have I ever asked of you, in
return for all I have done, all I have given up for your sake, yet that you
deny me, with an obstinacy that wounds me to the soul. How is this, how can you
be thus ungrateful?'

'Oh! spare me, spare me, my dearest father, wound me not thus,' cried the
agitated Theodore 'Heaven is my witness, with what reluctance I appear thus
ungrateful to you; but the sacrifice you demand -- '

'The sacrifice!' exclaimed lord Arlington, with a countenance pale with anger.
'What is the sacrifice I ask you to make? -- This mighty sacrifice is to marry
an amiable and beautiful woman, whom thousands would rejoice to have in their
power, with a fortune beyond what your most sanguine expectations could hope
for, and thus to render happy the declining years of an affectionate parent,
who has thought no sacrifice too great to make for you; to see your paternal
inheritances freed from their present embarrassments, and in a situation to be
transmitted, unincumbered, to the remotest posterity; -- this, this is the
mighty sacrifice I ask.'

'Oh, it is too much, it is too much!' exclaimed Theodore, convulsed with
agitation: 'I wanted not this to rend my soul in pieces; no, no, my father, it
must not, cannot be.'

'Grant me patience, heaven,' exclaimed the indignant lord Arlington, 'what
insufferable obstinacy! but hear me, sir, my passions once roused, are not easy
to be calmed; comply with my wishes, or I swear -- '

'Oh! hold, hold,' cried Theodore, 'hear me, dearest father, hear me -- '

'By heaven,' said lord Arlington, 'I will hear no more! -- either consent
before three days are expired, to what I desire, or never come into my presence
any more.'

So saying, he burst hastily out of the room, and flew to colonel Conolly, to
relate what had passed, leaving Theodore in a situation more easily to be
imagined than described.

Colonel Conolly applauded the resolution which lord Arlington had at last
shown; and said, he did not doubt but it would have the desired effect. He
added, that his fortune should be disposed of in any way that lord Arlington
and his son wished; for he had no other object but to see his daughter the wife
of mr. Percival.

The three days which lord Arlington had allowed to his son for making his
determination, passed over without his ever seeing him, or even enquiring for
him. Indeed, had be enquired for him, it would have been to no purpose, for
Theodore had been absent from the castle the whole time; nor did any one
belonging to the house know what was become of him. On the evening of the third
day, however, he arrived at the castle, just in time to attend his father's
summons, when he appeared before him, pale, dejected, tottering in his steps,
apparently plunged in the deepest affliction, and most truly an object of
compassion.

Such a spectacle in a moment disarmed lord Arlington's anger, and turned it
immediately into remorse, as he considered himself the author of his son's
misery. He took him by the hand, led him to a seat, and began to say the most
soothing things to him. Theodore could not speak for some minutes: but when the
power of utterance returned, 'No more of this, I beg, my father,' he said,
'your kindness now wounds me as deeply as your anger did, when last we met -- I
am now wholly yours -- do with me as you please -- make me -- make me -- the
husband -- of miss Co -- nolly -- I have no more -- to say -- against it.'

These words were uttered with such a faltering accent, that they were scarcely
articulate; but lord Arlington understanding by them an assent to his wishes,
broke forth into warm expressions of joy at that event, mingling them with the
deepest concern for the state in which he saw his son.

'Pray, pray, say no more,' said Theodore, 'I have consented to this marriage.
Talk not either of joy, sorrow, or gratitude. I must have time to recover
myself. I will propose it in form in a few days: but in the mean time let me be
left to myself -- I shall soon be calm -- I shall indeed -- but reason will
best gain strength in privacy -- excuse me, my father -- forgive me -- I cannot
stay with you now.'

He rose up, and was going out of the room, but was hardly able to support
himself. The astonished lord Arlington offered to assist him, with looks
expressive of the deepest terror. He feared to lose sight of his son, in the
state in which he saw him, yet wished not to distress him farther, by combating
his wish to be alone. Theodore read in his father's eyes what was passing in
his mind.

'Do you then fear me, my father?' he said, 'but you need not -- indeed you
need not -- I am agitated -- I am not well -- but my senses are perfect. I am
not distracted -- indeed I am not -- let me go then. I will see you again
tomorrow, if I can -- but trust me to myself -- you may safely do it.'

'But let me then assist you, my Theodore, to get to your chamber. Support
yourself on my arm; you are weak; you must be very ill.'

'No, not very ill -- a night's rest will do much for me -- pray don't be
alarmed -- there is no cause for alarm.'

At these words he quitted the room, leaving lord Arlington to a train of very
unpleasant reflections. He plainly saw that something sat very heavy on the
mind of his son, and thought that he had pushed the affair of the match too
far. He even resolved to offer to release his son from the consent he had given
to it; and had almost determined to go immediately to colonel Conolly, to
inform him of the state of affairs, and rather to hazard an absolute breach
with him, than to permit the match to proceed any farther. But it grew late in
the evening, and he determined to defer the matter till the next morning.

When the morning arrived* however, his son appeared so much amended in the
state both of his body and mind, that he thought matters were not quite so bad
as they had seemed to be on the preceding night: and he determined to wait for
a day or two, to see how he went on, and not to act with too great
precipitation. In short, by the time that a few days had elapsed, Theodore had
acquired such an ascendancy over himself, that he could conceal, from all but
himself, the anguish that inwardly preyed upon him.

Lord Arlington observed the daily amendment in his appearance, with the
highest satisfaction; and soon lost, with his alarms for his son, the idea of
putting off the match. In a short time, therefore, pursuant to the promise he
had given his father, he made his offer in form to miss Conolly, which was
accepted with transport by her, and her father; and when all things were duly
prepared, Horatio Conolly became the wife of Theodore Percival.

CHAP. III.
We do not know
How he may soften at the sight of the child*
The silence often of pur^ innocence
Persuades, when speaking fails.
SHAKESPEARE.
COLONEL CONOLLY's joy at this event, was as unbounded as his perseverance in
accomplishing it had been; but he did not long survive it. About six weeks
after the marriage took place, he was suddenly taken off by an apoplectic fit,
and put mr. Percival into complete possession of his large fortune. The
remaining debts upon the Arlington estates were immediately paid off: and lord
Arlington would have been the happiest of men, if he could have been assured
that his son was so. But of that he sometimes had his doubts, though he never
suffered those doubts to escape his lips; and Theodore was in general so good a
counterfeit, that it was not often he gave cause for suspicion. However, that
lord Arlington's doubts were not unfounded, the sequel will sufficiently show.

About a year after their marriage, mrs. Percival presented her husband with a
son, to the unspeakable joy of his grandfather. Mr. Percival too, seemed
pleased with this addition to his family; but his joys were always clouded over
by at least an equal portion of chagrin; a chagrin too, which was increased by
the reflection that he was possessed of every thing, which, according to the
opinion of the world, could conduce to the happiness of man. But perhaps we can
in no way paint to the reader so forcibly the then state of his mind, as by
presenting him with a letter, written by mr. Percival himself, at the time we
are speaking of.

A friend of his youth, with whom he had kept up a constant correspondence
during his travels, had frequently written to him since his return to Ireland,
and since his marriage, but had never received any answer from him, except to
his congratulations on his nuptials. He again wrote to him on the birth of his
son, and with congratulations on that event, mingled reproaches for his
silence, adding, that he scarcely knew whether he ought to write to him again.
To this letter Theodore wrote the following answer: 'I acknowledge, my dear
friend, the justice of your reproaches: I have been negligent of you: I am
negligent of all the world, for there is scarcely a worldly object which can
interest me. -- Yes, my friend, that wife whom half the world envies me, whose
worth, accomplishments, and ardent affection for me, I feel and admire -- I am
negligent even of her. I feel that I wrong her, and detest myself for it. But I
have this to urge in my defense, that she never was the object of my choice,
and my indifference for her I cannot conquer; yet her whole study is to please
and recommend herself to me. Oh! why did I ever consent to this ill-fated
union? why did I not restrict, that it was not myself alone that I was
sacrificing to my father's wishes, but Horatia too? I am convinced that I was
wrong, and and that I ought to have resisted my father to the end. Horatia,
though she had given up her heart wholly to me, might, in time, have conquered
her passion, and been happy; but with a husband who is indifferent to her, she
never can be so I thought every thing would be smoothed to me, when I saw my
father happy -- vain thought! -- how often am I forced to break away from the
joy that beams in his countenance, and seems to reign in his soul, to conceal
the anguish that preys on mine? In the deep recesses of the surrounding rocks
and woods, I lie down to give vent to my sorrows, that I may return to my
family with a composed countenance; but though, by these means, I deceive my
father tolerably well, I cannot deceive my wife! she feels, I know -- I see
that she does that my attentions to her are forced, the effect of duty, not of
affection. She sees me kiss my little son, and press him fondly to my bosom,
but sees anguish mingled with my fondness. Such is the situation of one who has
now been, in the estimation of the world, for above a year a happy husband.
Wonder not then, my friend, if, in such a situation, you do not hear often from
your faithful, but wretched

THEODORE PERCIVAL.'




Hitherto, however, self reproaches were the only censures mr. Percival had
incurred; for the world saw no reason to censure him, since, to outward
appearance his conduct was exemplary. The time, however, was arrived, when a
different scene was to be laid open Mrs. Percival was recovered from her
lying-in; and as no reason remained for the family living any longer in
retirement, it was determined that they should pass the ensuing winter in
London. Every thing was accordingly prepared for their departure, and the day
fixed for them to set off for Dublin, from which place they were to embark for
England. On the evening before that day, lord Arlington, his son, and daughter,
were looking over some papers together, in order to the settling of some family
concerns, before they left the place, when a letter was brought to Theodore,
which having read, he changed color, seemed violently agitated, and without
saying a word, went hastily out of the room.

Lord Arlington and mrs. Percival both observed his agitation, but for some
time took no notice of it; but an hour having elapsed, without Theodore's
returning, lord Arlington began to express anxiety about him; for, said he to
his daughter, 'you must have observed how much he seemed agitated when he read
that letter.'

'I did indeed,' answered mrs. Percival, 'but hardly dared to observe it -- I
have seen such emotions so frequently, that I dare not observe upon them.'

'Ha? it is even so then?' said lord Arlington, 'you think my son unhappy.'

'Alas! it is most certain,' she replied: 'he endeavors to conceal it; but it
will sometimes break out. Suppose we enquire if he is still at home.'

'No,' said lord Arlington, 'I will go myself and seek for him.'

Lord Arlington went out of the room -- he searched all over the house, but
could not find his son. He then enquired of his servants, if they knew any
thing of him; they could only answer, that he left the house on receiving the
letter, and had not returned since; but they could not tell which way he went.
They were then questioned, who brought the letter? To which they answered, that
it was brought by a woman, with her face muffled up in a large cap and bonnet,
who seemed unwilling to be seen; she only gave in the letter, desired it might
be carried to mr. Percival, and then walked away as fast as possible.

Here was ground for alarming suspicions; yet lord Arlington resolved not to
proceed too hastily. Two hours more passed, and no Theodore appeared. Lord
Arlington then sent round the grounds, particularly to a wood, which he knew
his son used to frequent very much; but no son was to be found. He sent about
the parish, but could learn nothing of him; he had not been seen by any body:
night came on, but they could not go to bed, and resolved to renew the search
as soon as daylight appeared -- they did so, but with no better success.

At last, as lord Arlington and mrs. Percival were sitting down to breakfast,
the former was called out of the room to a woman, who desired to speak with him
alone, and whom he, therefore, ordered to be shown into his study: she appeared
carrying in her arms a beautiful female child, very neatly dressed, and who
seemed to be about a year and a half old. She drew a letter from her pocket,
and gave it to him, saying, 'that she was ordered to deliver it into no hands
but his own, and to wait while he read it.' Lord Arlington saw it was his son's
writing -- he eagerly opened it, and read as follows: 'Can you, oh! my father,
pardon the presumption of a son, who is driven almost to distraction, and whom,
perhaps, you may never see more? The letter which occasioned my abrupt
departure from you, a few hours ago, has planted daggers in my heart, the
wo^nds of which cannot be easily assuaged. I never can return to you, 'till I
know whether the contents of that letter are true or false -- to obtain that
knowledge, is the cause of my present absence; my future conduct must be
regulated by events. Seas must at present divide us; in the mean time, my
father, condemn not, too hastily, the conduct of a son who may have been
faulty, but who has suffered, and does suffer, severely for it -- and if ever
that son was dear to you, attend to the request he now makes you; perhaps it is
the last he may ever make. Look, dear, dear sir, look on the infant who
accompanies this letter! -- heaven sure never formed a more lovely creature! --
pity her innocence! -- pity the dangers to which an unprotected infant is
exposed; then take her to your bosom, and watch over her youth as her guardian
and protector. She is not the offspring of illicit love; her birth is lawful,
her parents illustrious; yet, ah hard fate! from them she must at present, at
least, be separated; be a hapless outcast! will you then? will my Horatia
supply their place to her? -- yes, surely you will -- it will be enough for you
to know, that your Theodore is interested in her fate. Let her be so educated,
my father, that she may be qualified to adorn the highest station in life, or
to make her way in the lowest: teach her to be able to get her own bread, if it
be necessary, and instill into her principles of charity and benevolence, which
shall impel her to impart bread to thousands, should the means to do so fall to
her lot. Will you too, my father, become the protector of colonel Conolly's
injured daughter? I would have said, of my wife, but scarcely dare call her by
that name -- and of my infant son? Let the child I send you, be educated as his
sister: let them be taught to live in the strictest friendship with each other;
but guard them against other thoughts than those of friendship. Let both their
minds be early stored with knowledge and virtue -- knowledge, the most valuable
treasure they can possess -- virtue, their only true ornament.

'I would say much more, but my senses are so disordered, that I hardly know
what I write. Tell the amiable Horatia -- what -- ah, she knows it well -- that
I revere her worth -- that my heart is grateful for all the affection which she
has lavished on me -- oh! that my affections could have been equally devoted to
her -- but I know she will be ready to cast a veil over my errors -- then, why
say more? -- yet I must add another exhortation, my father, that you will love
the poor little friendless Antoinette, and let her add to that name, the name
of Percival. Remember, dear sir, that if it can be a fault to have given birth
to so sweet an infant, the fault is not the child's, but her parents'; she,
dear soul, is innocent -- then take her to your arms -- cherish her -- love her
-- bless her. And my Horatia, will you not love and cherish her too? -- she
will, I do not doubt, repay your tenderness, when maturity of years shall
render her sensible of it. Farewell, my father -- farewell my Horatia -- farewell
my Henry, my dearest child! -- heaven bless, and protect you all! -- but never,
'till the clouds are dispersed, which now hover around his head, can you again
behold the unhappy

THEODORE PERCIVAL.'




Whether astonishment, horror, or tenderness, prevailed most in the breast of
lord Arlington, on reading this letter, it is difficult to determine; they all
contended for empire. He looked first at the letter, then at the child, which
the nurse had set down, and which instantly ran up to him, and was looking in
his face with all the eloquence of speechless innocence. He could not resist it
-- he caught her in his arms -- kissed her ardently -- 'yes, lovely
Antoinette,' said he, 'he must be more than a monster, who could withstand such
sweetness, such innocence! you shall be my child -- my son is interested in
your fate -- you are unprotected -- what motives can plead stronger?' He kissed
her again -- she smiled -- a tear stole down his cheek -- he remained for some
minutes quite absorbed in contemplating her -- he read the letter again -- he
was more and more bewildered -- she was born of illustrious parents, and in
lawful wedlock, yet thrown on his compassion -- it was affecting to think of.
He inquired of the nurse, if she knew any thing of the child's history; all she
could tell him, was that about fifteen months before, mr. Percival came one day
to her house at Killarney, with this child in his arms, and followed by a
woman, who appeared to be not more than twenty years of age. He asked, if she
would be willing to take in the woman and child as lodgers, and said that he
would pay her whatever she required for it; that it was of importance to him,
his placing them there should be kept a secret; and that she should be well
rewarded for not betraying him. The woman said, she at first hesitated, whether
(...) should undertake this charge; but as he was urge (...) with her to
consent to it, she at last did yield to him; and that they had continued at her
house ever since. She said, that mr. Percival often came to see the child, but
that it was generally, either late in the evening, or early in the morning; and
that he seemed excessively fond of it. That the evening before, he came to her
house in a violent agitation, and took the child's nurse into another room,
where they sat for some time, in earnest conversation; and then desiring a pen
and ink, he wrote the letter which she had brought, and giving it into her
hands, he desired her to carry that, with the child, by breakfast time the next
morning* to Arlington castle; to give the letter into no hands but lord
Arlington's, and to wait with him while he read it. Then he and the young
woman, after both of them had affectionately kissed the child, went out of the
house; but she did not know what became of them.

This relation was no less astonishing to lord Arlington, than all that had
before passed. He then enquired by what names the child and its nurse had been
called? And was answered, that the former was called Antoinette, the latter
Joanna; but no surnames had ever apppeared for either. His next enquiry was,
what sort of a woman Joanna appeared to be? To which mrs. Roberts (for that was
the name of the woman) replied, that she was a genteel appearing woman she
should guess her to be rather of the middling rank of life, but she could not
tell exactly; that she was a French woman, and understood very little English
when first she came over, but could now speak it very well, so as to be
perfectly understood. She said, that often, while she was kissing and caressing
the child, she would shed tears, and lament that it was to live in such
obscurity; but, that she had never suffered a word to escape her lips, relative
to the parents of the child; but (mrs. Roberts said) her own idea was, that
Antoinette was the child of Joanna, by mr. Percival; and that mr. Percival
would have married her, only that he found his father was desirous of his
marrying miss Conolly. All this she said, with an apology to lord Arlington;
but as he seemed to wish to hear all she could tell him, she ventured to
mention her conjectures.

These conjectures were ingenious on the part of mrs. Roberts, but did not at
all satisfy lord Arlington. His son declared the child to be born in lawful
wedlock; and she could not, therefore, be his child by Joanna, unless he was
married to her; and, surely, he could not have been so base as to marry miss
Conolly, while he had another wife living -- it was all mystery. He asked mrs.
Roberts if she had been paid up to the present time? To which she replied, she
had been always regularly, and liberally, paid; and that mr. Percival had
settled every thing of that kind the evening before. Lord Arlington then gave
her a guinea, and dismissed her.

What now was to be done with regard to mrs. Percival? This question agitated
lord Arlington very much: he had left her in such a state of suspense, that she
must be anxious to see him again. He was resolved, himself, to take the child
into his protection: but, what would mrs. Percival say to her husband's
request? He determined, at last, that it was better to break the ice at once;
he, therefore, with the child in his arms, returned to the breakfast room,
where mrs. Percival had spent many an anxious moment, in expectation of him.
Judge of her surprise, at seeing him enter; not alone, as she expected, but
bringing an infant with him. He went to his seat -- he sat down -- he looked
earnestly at mrs. Percival, whose eyes spoke the utmost astonishment.

'Look on this child, my love; is it not a little angel?'

'Heavens! What do you mean my lord?'

'Can you be a mother to this child?'

'Oh God! oh God! Is it then so? -- some other woman.' -- She could say no more
-- she fell back in her chair.

'Be calm, my dearest daughter,' said lord Arlington. 'I know not whose child
this is -- I do not know that she is my son's -- compose yourself -- call up
all your resolution to your aid, and read this letter.'

Mrs. Percival roused herself; 'Oh! if I am thus insulted,' she exclaimed; --
'but let me be calm!' She then took the letter, and read it. Love, horror,
resentment, and mortification, alternately seized her breast, and sparkled in
her eye: but they passed off in rapid succession. She looked at the child --
she had only one sensation left, which was, self-condemnation at the manner in
which she had descended from the true dignity of her sex, in giving her hand to
a man, to whom she well knew at the time, she was an object of indifference, if
not also of aversion. 'Yes!' she exclaimed, 'I am rightly served; but I will
make all the atonement in my power -- she shall be my child -- it is enough that
my Theodore desires it -- come, then, poor orphan, come to my arms.' So saying,
she took the child from lord Arlington, kissed it, and burst into an agony of
tears. These, at length, somewhat subsiding, she again kissed the child --
'hapless Antoinette,' said she, 'you shall indeed be my child; I will
endeavor, assisted by my father, to form your infant mind to virtue, that, if
ever that unhappy wanderer, who is so anxious for thy welfare, shall hereafter
see thee, he may know that he has not erred, in supposing me capable of
exerting my benevolence toward unprotected innocence.'

Lord Arlington warmly applauded her sentiments and from that hour the
friendless Antoinette was considered as the child of adoption by them both, and
provided for accordingly.

But not to the child alone was their anxiety confined. No pains nor expense
was spared to find out, if possible, what was become of the distracted
Theodore. But all was of no avail: no traces of the course he had taken, could
be discovered: and after many weeks of fruitless enquiry after him, the pursuit
was given up; and they rested in the hope, that time might throw more light on
this mysterious affair, and discover what diligence had sought for in vain.

They then applied themselves to arranging, and putting in order his apartment,
which was left in the utmost confusion; determining carefully to lock up every
thing which he had left, considering his papers, and all things belonging to
him, as a most sacred deposit.

CHAP. IV.
In vain the storm-tost mariner repines;
Were he within to raise as great a tempest
As beats him from without, it would not smooth
One boisterous surge; -- impatience only throws
Discredit on mischance, and adds a shame
To our affliction.

THIS unhappy affair had put a total stop to their intended journey to Great
Britain. After some time, lord Arlington mentioned it again to his
daughter-in-law, and proposed to travel about some parts of the country during
the summer, and go to London in the winter. Mrs. Percival replied to this
proposal, that she by no means wished him, at present, to think of leaving
Ireland, alleging, with good reason, that if any hopes could be entertained, of
hearing again of their lost friend, it must be by remaining on the spot. 'And
what pleasure, my lord,' added she, 'can I hope to find from the gaieties of
London, in the unhappy situation in which I am now placed? -- no, my lord, the
time was, when indeed I should have sought, in dissipation, to chase away
sorrow; but after living more than a year with my Theodore, I have learnt, that
reading and reflection are the most powerful cordials to heal a wounded mind.
And though, alas! they could not work a complete cure in his, yet I am well
convinced, that it was from those sources he derived all the little intervals
of tranquillity that he ever did attain; and we know not to what a depth his
soul was wounded; perhaps, even beyond the power of the strongest medicines to
heal.

'In a word, my lord, since my connection with that beloved Theodore, I have
found that my father (who I am well assured meant to do every thing that was
kind to me) mistook the path of prudence in my education, and in giving me
every shewy accomplishment, which it was possible to acquire, neglected to give
me one, which, though of a less splendid nature, is worth all others put
together -- a taste for reading and intellectual improvement. How often have I
felt -- with the deepest mortification felt -- my total insufficiency to be the
companion of a mind so highly cultivated, as that of my Theodore; and sighed in
secret, to render myself more worthy of him!

'Let me then, my lord, live still in retirement, and so enrich my mind with
knowledge, that should heaven ever give back to my arms a husband, whom I
almost adore, I may show him, that I have a soul capable of emulating even the
perfections of his.'

Lord Arlington heard her with equal astonishment and delight. He very much
feared himself, that her deficiency as a domestic companion, had been one very
principal cause of his son's indifference to her; and hoped, when that obstacle
was removed, if he ever did return, he would find such an alteration, as would
entirely reconcile him to his situation.

He therefore highly applauded the resolution she had taken, and clasping her
in his arms, 'Ah, my daughter,' said he, 'how much do you deserve a happier
fate! -- would to heaven that my son could have seen with my eyes -- how
different, then, would your situation be!'

'Oh! blame not your son,' she answered, 'blame me only, -- it was in my power
to have prevented an union, which, had not passion and vanity blinded me I
might have foreseen could never have been a happy one. But let us drop so
painful a subject: repining is of no avail, and the uneasiness which I have
thus brought on myself, I am determined to support with fortitude -- my own
sensations ^e my sufficient punishment: vain as I was of (...) powers of
pleasing, my vanity has been no less mortified than my love. But I am resolved
that such a source of mortification shall not exist to that dear charge he has
left me, if it be in my power to prevent it. He bids me store her mind with
knowledge -- his request shall be sacred to me. But how am I to store it? with
what I do not myself possess? Ah! then, what an additional motive is thus held
out to me, to spur on my industry! Yes, dear Antoinette, child of my Theodore's
love, I will inform myself that I may impart knowledge to you: such knowledge
as shall teach you to shun the rock on which my peace of mind has been wrecked.'

The idea of rendering herself a fit companion for her husband, and
instructress for her children, having thus strongly taken possession of the
mind of Horatia, she lost no time in applying herself to such studies as would
contribute to the furtherance of her views; and when, to a good capacity, an
ardent desire of improvement, and an eager thirst for knowledge, are united,
the knowledge so desired is not difficult to be attained. The truth of this
position mrs. Percival strongly exemplified. She made a rapid progress in her
pursuits, with the assistance of lord Arlington, and another gentleman, a
friend of the family: this was a doctor Schomberg, a clergyman, who was a
widower, with one son and one daughter, both married and settled; and who,
being an excellent scholar, and a perfect gentleman, and having a great deal of
leisure time, was solicited to undertake the office of mrs. Percival's
instructor.

With such assistance, and her own indefatigable industry, mrs. Percival made a
very rapid progress in various branches of knowledge, so that by the time the
children were of an age to want her instruction, no one was more capable of
instructing them; nor did she ever depute that task to another, giving an
excellent example to the daughters of affluence, who are too apt to imagine,
that wealth excuses them from maternal duties and who think they have done
sufficient for their children, by placing them at a boarding school, or putting
a tyrannical governess over their heads, who teaches them nothing effectually
but to be conceited and to make courtsies.

Four years had now elapsed, since the sudden departure of Theodore; in all
which time, notwithstanding the utmost diligence had been employed, not a trace
of him could be discovered; he had never written to his family, and the whole
business remained as mysterious as ever. Mrs. Percival was settled into a calm
resignation; her whole thoughts were occupied in improving herself and her
children, and in attending to such amusements as a retired country life
affords, and she felt no wish for other amusements. Hope was not totally
banished from her breast, though its rays glimmered there but faintly; and lord
Arlington's affectionate kindness to her lightened all her cares. But that
source of consolation she was now to lose; his health had been rather declining
for some time: the consciousness of which made him more anxious than ever to
hear of his son; and that anxiety again preying on a debilitated constitution
brought on his dissolution, though at no very advanced age.

This stroke called forth all mrs. Percival's philosophy to support with
fortitude. Though almost adoring her husband, and half distracted at his
desertion of her, yet while she still had lord Arlington to look up to as a
friend, counselor, and assistant in the education of her children, she felt
not quite so desolate, as her situation now appeared to be. She had, however,
one friend yet left, doctor Schomberg, who had for more than two years been a
constant inmate in the house, and whom she desired to continue as such; wisely
setting at defiance any censures, which a babbling, ill-natured world might
pass on her, for acting thus contrary to its arbitrary laws, which she
considered as trifles, when put in comparison with the solid advantages, which
she hoped would result to herself and the children, from having such a man
constantly with them.

Lord Arlington left his whole fortune in mrs. Percival's power, while his son
continued to absent himself from his family, but made many provisions in case
of his return; none of which, however, are material for the reader to be made
acquainted with.

Thus was mrs. Percival left for the present, sole arbitress of a large
fortune, with the charge of educating two children, and providing by her
example, and instruction, for their future respectable appearance in life.
There scarcely could, perhaps, be a more arduous situation for a woman to fill
with propriety. Young and handsome, an object of admiration, round whom, had
she chosen to show herself in public, thousands of flatterers would have
flocked; yet deserted by her husband, whom still she could not cease most
ardently to love -- even uncertain, whether that husband were yet alive -- with
two children to educate, one of whom was not her own, and to whom, from the
circumstances in which she was thrown into her care, many women would have
conceived an unconquerable dislike -- with a large fortune solely under her
management -- she was in a situation truly perplexing. Yet all these concurrent
sources of embarrassment, which would have weighed down some minds, and
rendered them almost incapable of action at all, only served to tender here is
more vigorous, and to make her double her exertions to go through her task with
prudence and propriety.

She determined to inform her children precisely of the true situation of the
family, when she thought them of an age to be capable of receiving the story as
she wished, and reasoning properly upon it: but 'till then she thought it
better to conceal from them how they were circumstanced, nor to let them have
any other idea than that they were really brother and sister. And she trusted
that when they had been educated in such habits of friendship, as should
subsist between brother and sister, that those habits would continue, even when
their true situations were known to them; for she equally dreaded that a change
of the ideas they had been accustomed to entertain of each other, should
operate either to an alienation of their mutual regard, or to carrying that
regard beyond the limits of fraternal affection, against which Theodore had, in
his letter, given the strictest caution.

When, sometimes, in the innocence and simplicity of childhood, they would
enquire whether they had no papa, she always told them that their papa was gone
abroad into foreign countries; and she was afraid that he was dead, as she had
not heard of him for a long time. Nor was she at all apprehensive, that
Antoinette might learn by accident, any hints of her own story; for before she
was of an age to have attended to them, that story was almost forgotten in the
neighborhood. She was called miss Percival, as Theodore had requested; and, as
she was generally believed to be a natural child of his, and it was supposed
that he was gone off with her mother, after the neighborhood had amused
themselves with the affair, as long as they found amusement in it, which was no
longer than 'till a more novel circumstance superceded it, it was thought of no
more.

They continued at the castle, 'till Henry had completed his seventh year; when
Antoinette was supposed to be approaching to the end of her ninth. Mrs.
Percival now began to think that it was time for them in some sort to emerge
from the close retirement in which they lived; and she determined, therefore,
to go over to England, for the purpose of completing their education, and
introducing them to more knowledge of the world, a knowledge which she
considered as an essential part of their education.

Her great difficulty was in what way best to dispose of Henry, ^till she
thought him old enough to travel with advantage and improvement, which could
not be 'till he was sixteen or seventeen years of age. As to Antoinette, she
had not a doubt, that it was best to keep her entirely under her own care,
procuring only proper masters to instruct her in such things, as none but
professed masters could properly instruct her in; such as music, drawing, and
all that are generally denominated genteel accomplishments; and as these were
to be best procured in London, she determined to reside there during the
winter, and seek out some pleasant retreat in the country for the summer.

After much consultation with doctor Schomberg, it was determined to find out,
if possible, some eligible situation for Henry, among that description of
gentlemen, who undertake the education of such a number of boys only, as they
can educate themselves; which is, perhaps, the best situation a boy can be
placed in, to obviate the objections which he against an entirely private
education, and the still stronger objections which subsist against a public
school. When this was determined on, doctor Schomberg wrote to a friend in
England, ^o make enquiries after such a situation; and was by him recommended
to a gentleman in Hampshire, who took only eight boys at a time, and who had
just then a vacancy. The account given of this gentleman's character, learning,
plan of education, and general manners, being such as exactly corresponded with
the ideas of mrs. Percival, she immediately agreed on terms with him, and
determined to carry her son thither the ensuing spring.

She, accordingly, arranged all her affairs in Ireland, and having consigned
the management of them entirely to the steward, mr. Mac-Allen, whose fidelity
had been long tried and approved in the family, she left Arlington castle about
the end of the month of April, attended by doctor Schomberg, Henry, and
Antoinette, and arrived at the house of her son's future tutor, mr. Sidney, in
about three weeks after, she having made many little stops by the way, to show
her children such things as she thought worthy of their observation.

Having mentioned to mr. Sidney her intention of seeking out some country
residence for the summer months during the time that she should think it proper
to continue in England, he told her of a pretty retired place about ten miles
from his house, which was then to be let, and which he thought would suit her
exactly. She, accordingly, went to see it, and finding it quite the kind of
place she wished to have, she hired it, and immediately settled herself in it,
with her good friend doctor Schomberg, and the amiable little Antoinette,
leaving Henry under the care of mr. Sidney, with whose appearance she had been
extremely pleased.

After spending a very pleasant summer in Hampshire, mrs. Percival went to
London for the winter, where Antoinette was put under the tuition of proper
masters, and made a rapid progress in her various seize. Mrs. Percival
entered, in a very small degree, into what are called the gaieties of London;
but her house soon became the great resort of men of genius and talents, whose
society she was eager to cultivate, and who always met with a welcome reception
from her.

After a winter spent thus pleasantly and rationally, in the very spot where
the generality of women waste all their time in folly and dissipation, she,
returned in the summer again to her cottage in Hampshire, accompanied only by
Antoinette, doctor Schomberg being gone to Ireland, on private business of his
own.

CHAP. V.
Of youth his form -- but low with anguish bent,
And pined with sallow marks of discontent;
Yet patience, laboring to beguile his care,
Seemed to raise hope, and smile away despair.
SAVAGE.
IN a few days after mrs. Percival's return, her son came over to spend the day
with her. He had not been long in the room, before he pulled out a gold watch,
and putting it into her hand, 'I hope, mamma,' said he, 'you will not be angry
with me on account of this watch; but I really could not help taking it.'

Mrs. Percival, at sight of the watch, turned as pale as death; her hand
trembled; and she could scarcely hold it, for she immediately knew it to be her
husband's, and that he had taken it away with him; but unwilling that the
children should perceive her emotion, she immediately recovered herself, and
said, 'I am sorry, my love, that you have accepted such a present. Who was it
gave it to you?'

'It was the strange man, mamma.'

'The strange man, my love!' said mrs. Percival,

'What do you mean?'

'Why, mamma, he was a man, that came twice into our field, while we were all
at play; and he looked for all the world like a beggar: but, however, he never
begged, and he would make me take this watch.'

'I am sorry you did take it, my dear; you know I ordered you never to accept
presents, without mr. Sidney's leave; and I dare say, he did not give you leave
to accept this?'

'No, mamma; for I had not an opportunity of asking his leave; but he knows I
have it; and he bid me show it to you. I Will tell you all about it. The first
time he came, we were all at play at cricket; and he came up and said, so, my
lads, you seem all very merry; but you have gotten a very bad ball; I have a
much better here in my pocket; try it; and then he pulled out a ball, and gave
it to one of the boys; and then he began asking all our names; and when I told
him my name was Henry Percival, he asked me, whether I had a papa and mamma
alive; and whether I had any brothers and sisters? And I told him that I did
not know, whether I had a papa or not, but that I had a mamma and a sister: and
then he asked me, how it came about, that I did not know whether I had a papa?
and I told him, that he had been gone away a long time, and my mamma was afraid
that he was dead, because she did not hear from him. Then he asked me, my
sister's name; and I told him it was Antoinette -- and a great many more
questions he asked me; and he desired I would read to him, if I had a book in
my pocket; and so I took out Gay's ^ables, and read him one or two; and then he
asked if I could read Latin; and so I read him some of Ovid; and then he patted
me on the head, and said I was a good boy, and bid me behave well to my mamma
and sister: and he enquired where you lived: and I told him at London in the
winter, but you would come down again into Hampshire in the summer, to a place
about ten miles off. And he asked, if you had always lived in London; I told
him no; we lived at Arlington castle in Ireland 'till last year, and then I
came to mr. Sidney's, and you did not mean to go back to Ireland, 'till I was
to leave mr. Sidney again.'

'And what sort of a looking man was he?' said mrs. Percival.

'Why, he was but a queer looking man, he had such a great beard, mamma, as
long as Isaac the Jew's, at Killarney. Oh, and I forgot to tell you, mamma,
that he asked me to let him cut off a lock of my hair, which I did, and he put
it up in his pocketbook.'

'Well, my love, -- but the watch?'

'Oh, mamma, I shall come to that presently; that was not 'till the second time
that he came. I don't remember any thing more to tell you about the first time
he came. But we were talking about him at dinner; and mr. Sidney said it was
very odd, and he told us if ever the man came again, to let him know, and he
would come and speak to him. Well, the next morning, he came, and he pulled out
this watch; and asked me, if I liked it. And I said, yes; I thought it a very
nice one; and then he said, he would give it to me; but I told him, that I was
sure my mamma would not like I should take it, then he said, he was sure my
mamma could not be angry with me for such a thing as that; and then I said,
that she ordered me never to take any present without mr. Sidney's leave; but
that I would go and ask him what I should do, for he seemed so earnest that I
should take it, mamma, that I did not know how to refuse; and, just as I was
going to see for mr. Sidney, I saw him come to the gate of the field, and then
the man laid the watch down on the ground, and ran away into the wood, and we
soon lost sight of him, and he never came any more.'

'And how long ago was this, my love?'

'Why, mamma, it was only last week; I was going to write to you, and tell you
all about it; but mr. Sidney said, that I had better wait, and tell you all
about it when I saw you, as you was coming down so soon.'

What a field of speculation was here opened to mrs. Percival: that this man
was her husband, she could not doubt for a moment; but how strange was his
behavior, and how resolute he still seemed to keep himself concealed from her!
Alas! that woman that went off with him! -- she knew not what to think -- but
mr. Sidney was to come over in the afternoon to fetch Henry back, and then she
might, perhaps, hear more. When he arrived she took him aside, and mentioned
what her son had told her, enquiring at the same time if he knew any thing
farther about this extraordinary man.

'He is an extraordinary man indeed, madam!' said mr. Sidney: 'Yes, madam, I
can give you some farther particulars of him. When first I heard the young
gentlemen's account of him, the same idea struck me, which, pardon me, madam,
you no doubt entertain, that this was indeed mr. Percival (for mr. Sidney knew
his story) and for that reason I desired to be immediately summoned, if he
should appear again. I was summoned accordingly; but as you already know,
madam, he ran away on seeing me approach; I followed him into the wood, but
could not see any thing of him. I immediately made enquiries about the village,
if such a man had been seen; and found that he had been about for two days: but
no one seemed to have concerned themselves about him. He never spoke to any
one, except at the public house, when he asked for what he wanted, and they
could not tell where he lodged. I, with some difficulty, madam, traced him to
your parish, and from thence to Southampton, but there I quite lost him. I have
however deputed a man whom I can trust, to make farther enquiries there; and
pray heaven they may prove successful!'

'But, you did not see him, sir, when he was in your fields?'

'My view of him was indeed very imperfect, madam. I could see that he was
tall, and that his clothes were very much tattered: but I enquired of one of
the boys, a youth of sixteen, what kind of a man he was; and he told me that he
had a very dark swarthy complexion, remarkably fine eyes, a large black beard,
and a great deal of long black hair, which hung very much about his face and
shoulders, as if studiously to assist in disguising him.'

'Ah! too surely it was my husband!' said mrs. Percival, 'but -- still cruel,
still dark and mysterious in his conduct. Oh! sir, you have been kind and
friendly indeed, in the search you have made for him. What more can be done to
discover him?'

'I know not of any thing farther to do,' returned mr. Sidney. 'You may depend
on me, madam, that every exertion possible shall be made to gain you farther
information; but allow me, madam, to suggest, whether it will not be better,
that you should remain quiet in this affair, and leave all enquiries to me; you
may depend on my activity in your service; and my exertions will not occasion
the speculations, that any made on your part might do.'

'Oh! how just is your reasoning, and how more than commonly friendly is your
conduct!' said mrs. Percival. 'Yes! dear sir, I agree with your opinion, and
will myself make no stir about the matter: but oh! my husband, how unkind is
your conduct! -- How have I deserved! -- But no -- I have deserved it all! -- I
will not dare to murmur.' She could not refrain from bursting into tears; but
her fortitude soon rose superior to all weakness, and restraining her emotions,
'No,' she said, 'this weakness must not be allowed!' and after a few minutes,
she returned with mr. Sidney to the children.

Day after day, however, passed over, nor was mr. Sidney able to give mrs.
Percival any satisfaction on the object of her present anxiety. He could learn
no tidings of him, and, at last she sunk again into a despair of his ever
returning to her. She had just abandoned hope, when doctor Schomberg returned
from his journey to Ireland; and she imparted to him what had passed during his
absence. As she finished her relation, he exclaimed, 'Poor unhappy man, and so
he has been in England also!'

'How!' said mrs. Percival, 'Do you then know any thing of him?'

'Indeed, I have now no doubt, that I do,' returned doctor Schomberg. I had,
before I heard your relation, the strongest reason to suspect that he had
visited Arlington castle, just before I went there, and you, madam, have
confirmed me in the truth of my conjectures.'

'Oh! quickly tell me all you know,' said mrs. Percival, eagerly.

'I will, madam,' replied the doctor; 'I had, indeed, hesitated within myself,
whether I should impart the story to you or not, lest it might only be a
renewal of your troubles, but as you know so much already, I will conceal
nothing from you.

'When I arrived at Arlington castle,' he continued, 'I found mr. Mac-Allen
busied in making enquiries after a person, who had been there the week before,
of whom he gave me the following account:'

'I spent last week, sir,' said he, 'at Limerick upon some business of my own;
and at my return, mrs. Simmons, the woman who takes care of the house, told me,
that she had been sadly plagued for three days, by a madman she believed, at
least, she hoped he was mad; for nothing else could excuse his behavior. The
first time he came,' said she, 'which was the day you went away, he spoke very
civilly, and desired to be permitted to look over the house, which, as he
looked like a gentleman, I immediately complied with. He was very quiet, till
he got into the library, when all on a sudden he took a knife out of his
pocket, and run it through mr. Percival's picture, saying, that he looked so
disagreeable, he could not bear to see him. I did not know what to do for my
part,' said the housekeeper; 'for he began to look so wild, that I thought, to
be sure, he was quite crazy. But I thought it better not to let him go any
farther; for there was no knowing what other freaks he might take into his
head; so I told him, that as he did not know how to behave, I could not show
him any more of the house: and then he began to be very angry indeed, and said,
he would see it; and that neither I nor any body else should hinder him; and he
promised he would not do any more mischief, but as for that man he could not
bear to see him, and he wondered my mistress would let the picture hang there;
so as I found that nothing else would pacify him, I went on, and he was very
quiet 'till we came to my mistress's dressing room, and then when he looked at
miss Percival's picture, stood stock still, just as if he was a statue.

'After he had looked at it for about five minutes, he asked me, whose picture
it was? -- And I told him it was miss Percival; and then he asked, 'Is she as
beautiful as that picture?' 'Oh, yes,' says I, 'and a great deal handsomer
too.' -- 'And she is as sweet tempered as she is beautiful: I dare say,' says
he -- 'That she is, to be sure,' says I. 'Then he stared again at it for some
time, and away he walked, without asking to see the rest of the house. Well,
the next day he came again, and begged I would let him go up stairs to have
another look at miss Percival's picture; but I positively told him he should
not see it; and if he did not go away, I Would call the men, and have him turned
away: and then he threw himself on the ground, and said, there h^ (...), 'till
he had seen the picture, and I told him there he might lie, for he should not
see it.

'Well, there he did he for ^^ve half an hour; and then hearing somebody come,
he ^mped up, and ran away. But the third day he came again, and told me that it
was in my power to make him the happiest of men, by letting him take a copy of
the picture; and if I would do that; he would promise not to trouble me again.
So, at last, I thought it was the best way to let him have his wish, and get
rid of him, and I showed him up stairs* and he took out a pencil, and a bit of
paper, and soon copied the picture: then kissing it eagerly, he put it into his
pocketbook, and as he was putting it in, a paper dropped; but I took no notice
of it, and when he had shut up the book he ran down stairs, and he was out of
the house, and out of sight in a moment; then I went up into the dressing room
again, for the paper I saw him drop^ ^d here it is, said she, putting a paper
into my hand; and I have never seen nor heard any thing more of him; and glad
enough I was to get rid of him.'

'Such,' said Mac-Allen, 'was the house-keeper's account to me, which surprised
me very much. I opened the paper, which I found to contain some verses, which I
was very sure were mr. Percival's hand writing. Do not you think they are,
sir?' added he, giving them to me. 'I looked at them, and perfectly coincided
with his opinion.' 'Well, sir,' said he, 'I hardly knew what was best to be
done in such an odd affair, for I thought it seemed certain that he was a
little crazy: however, I determined to make what enquiries I could after him,
but all I could learn about the country was, that such a man as the
housekeeper described, had been for a week at the public-house at Airville,
and the people there all thought him crazy. But there was a young man,' added
Mac-Allen, 'who was in the house at the same time, staying there for some days
in order to see the country, and he told me that he had been exceedingly
interested by this stranger, and thought there must be something particular in
his story. His figure, he said, was strikingly fine; his eyes beautiful, though
carrying in them an expression of the deepest melancholy. He had a large black
patch on one cheek, which appeared, as if put on for a disguise; and then he
wore his hair very much about his face, apparently to conceal it. The young man
said, that having watched him very much, he twice found him sitting on a piece
of rock by the side of the lake, earnestly intent in gazing on a picture which
he always wore fastened round his neck with a riband; and every now and then he
eagerly kissed it, but as soon as he found he was observed, he hastily returned
it into his bosom. He had attempted to enter into conversation with him two or
three times, from mere motives of sympathy, but the stranger always shunned all
communication with him, and he had not now seen any thing of him for three
days. This was all the intelligence,' continued Mac-Allen, 'that I could gain,
for as to the route which he took on leaving Airville, I could get nothing but
the most vague conjectures; some thought he went to Kinsale; some to Cork; some
to Waterford; some to Dublin; but nothing of certainty could be acquired.'

Such was the relation which doctor Schomberg made to mrs. Percival, and
producing the verses to her she read as follows: SONNET TO SLEEP.
Soother of human misery, balmy power,
Sweet SLEEP! -- whom often the long, long night I Have wooed,
Till morn's returning light again I viewed,
But wooed in vain; thou entered'st not my bower;
Ah! now thine absence I lament no more!
Even grief, like mine, thou have at last subdued;
By thy kind aid my harassed strength renewed
Again can face the troubles I deplore.
Sweet SLEEP! -- when cast on bleak Misfortune's shore,
The woe-worn trav'ller through life's weary way,
Hopeless that aught his spirits could restore,
To black despair would yield his soul a prey --
Thou come, his path of life thou smoothest over,
And by a short-lived calm, his sorrows do allay.


'Yes, most surely it is my Theodore's writing,' said mrs. Percival, when she
had finished them, 'and his whole conduct shows too plainly that he is
disordered in his mind; I fear too his derangement proceeds from the oppression
of concealed anguish. Oh! that any charm could allure him back to my arms! With
what affection would I soothe his sorrows, and endeavor to restore to its
right tone, a mind formed by nature for every thing great and noble, but which
circumstances have thus disfigured! -- And how long do you say it is, sir,
since he was at Arlington castle?'

'It is now about six weeks, madam; for it was just before I arrived there.'

'Yes, the time too corresponds with his visit to mr. Sidney's; they must have
been made by the same person. But, alas! his heart seems still alienated from
me! Antoinette alone engrossed his attention at the castle: -- To what hard
trials is my duty, my love, to that child put? But let me preserve both
unsullied; she is not to blame, that she engrosses all the attention which I
would wish to share, nor shall she suffer for it. But, sir, was the search
continued after you got to the castle?'

'It was, madam, but to no purpose; but, indeed, we know now what route he then
^ook.'

'It is true,' said mrs. Percival; 'Well I will think no more about it, but all
my wounds have been opened afresh; I had settled into a perfect calm, but this
affair has raised a tempest again in my soul -- but I will subdue it, I am
determined.' The event, indeed, proved, that mrs. Percival promised no more
than she had resolved to perform. She soon returned to her accustomed routine:
and though placed in one of the most trying situations that a woman could be
placed in, her mind rose superior to all trials, and she conducted herself with
such exemplary prudence, that the tongue of slander did not dare to utter a
word against her.

CHAP. VI.
Aurelius here
Wore out the slow remains of setting life
In bitterness of thought, and with the surge,
And with the sounding storm, his murmured mo^^
Would often mix, often as remembrance sad
The unhappy past recalled.
MALLET.
MRS. Percival continued to visit Hampshire in the summer, aad to live in
London in the winter, 'till her son was arrived at the age of fifteen, when she
supposed Antoniette to be approaching to seventeen, a time of life when it was
proper she should be brought out into the world, if that was ever to be done.
But difficulties arose in mrs. Percival's mind with regard to the line of
conduct, which it might be proper for her in this case to pursue. Her Theodore
had desired that she might be so educated, as to be fitted to adorn the highest
station in life, or to be able to get her bread in the lowest; and she had,
therefore, instructed her in every thing, which she thought was intended to be
included in those directions.

But, could he mean, that with the accomplishments thus bestowed on her, she
should be shut up from the world? -- No, surely -- that could not be his
object. -- Mrs. Percival wished she had been more fully informed as to his
intentions: but he, probably, at the time he wrote, hardly knew himself what
his views were -- perhaps, indeed, had no views at all. Her counselor, doctor
Schomberg, could not advise her in this affair; it was a nice point to decide,
and she must decide it entirely for herself. After well weighing the matter,
she determined, at last, that in the ensuing winter, she would introduce her
into a world, which she was so formed to adorn; well assured, that her mind was
too well guarded against the allurements of that world, to be intoxicated with
its pleasures, or to be unwilling to relinquish them, should that hereafter
become necessary.

But, before she was thus to be brought forth into public notice, mrs. Percival
thought it would be right, for many reasons, to make her acquainted with her
own history. It might, among other reasons, be necessary, in order to put her
properly on her guard against forming any attachment, which might, from her
peculiar situation, be liable to draw her into difficulties. This discovery
therefore, she determined to make, the first favorable opportunity that
presented itself: and she did not doubt, but many such would occur in the
course of the ensuing summer, which it was her intention to spend in Ireland.
She had been so long absent from that country, that she wished much to visit it
again, and, indeed her presence was for many reasons much wanted there. She
left London, therefore, rather earlier in the spring, than usual, and after a
short stay in Hampshire, where she was joined by her son, who, she intended,
should accompany her, she set off for Ireland, and arrived at Arlington castle
the middle of May, just seven years since she quitted it.

^ntoinette had not lost the impression which the romantic scenes of Arlington,
and, indeed, of the whole environs of the lake of Killarney, had formerly made
upon her young mind; and now perfect mistress, as she was, of the art of
drawing, they appeared to her, beholding them with a scientific eye, ten
thousand times more beautiful and sublime than when she left them. She had been
always taught by mrs. Percival, to be above the idle fears of her sex; and not
to think it necessary that she should have an attendant with her whenever she
stirred out. She, therefore, often rambled about by herself, and took sketches
of such scenes as most struck her active fancy.

One day, not very long after their arrival at the castle, mrs. Percival being
gone out for the day on business, and Henry and doctor Schomberg for a visit
some miles off, Antoinette, left alone, amused herself with one of these
rambles, taking a different route from any, which she had gone before. She had
wandered, at last, into a delightful little valley, through which ran a small
rivulet, which meandered beautifully through a sort of meadow, surrounded with
woods, except at one small interval, which opened on the lake, and where the
rivulet emptied itself down a gentle slope into the lake itself. -- It was a
spot, which seemed formed on purpose for the pencil; Antoinette was sorry she
had not provided herself with her implements for drawing; she determined,
however, to bring them the next day, and, in the mean time, to survey the
valley round, in order to fix on the picturesque spot. Having, at last,
determined on one, she was turning about to go home, when her attention was
suddenly arrested by the appearance of a man, who came out of the wood just by
the spot where she stood. He was clad in a long, tattered, threadbare cloak,
tied round him with a cord, at the end of which hung a crucifix; on his head he
had a coarse woollen cap, from under which appeared a few locks of perfectly
silver-hair; and he had a long beard, which with with his eyebrows were also
perfect silver. He leaned on a staff, which seemed hardly able to support his
tottering limbs; and his whole appearance was that of extreme want and
wretchedness.

When he perceived Antoinette, he suddenly started, by which means his staff
slipping he fell down; -- she immediately hastened to his assistance, and
having set him again on his feet, he looked steadfastly up to heaven, 'Great
God! I thank thee,' said he, 'for this mercy. I am unworthy to meet with such
compassion; but of thy goodness there is no end. Thou have spared my life to
enjoy this blessed moment, and I shall now die content. -- Blessed be thy name,
Oh God, throughout all nations and generations!' -- When he had finished this
ejaculation, he turned again, and looking steadfastly at her, he was seized with
a fit of trembling, and fell again to the ground; -- she again held out her
hand to assist him, but in a moment raising himself on his knees, and lifting
up his hands and eyes to heaven in the utmost ecstacy, he exclaimed, 'And is
this the angel form, which my soul has so long panted to behold? -- Heaven and
earth! -- Can it be? -- Let me look at her again: Yes, yes! It Is she herself!
-- Those eyes, that lovely bloom.' -- He was overcome with agitation, and sunk
down again on the ground.

Antoinette was motionless with astonishment, at all she heard and saw; nor
could tell, what she ought to think of it. -- She had heard of strange effects
produced by religious enthusiasm; but could this most unaccountable sally
proceed from that cause only? She, however, held out her hands again to assist
him.

'My good friend,' said she. 'What is the matter? -- Are you ill? -- Accept of
my assistance.'

'Ah!' said he, 'from such hands, who could refuse it? Yet, oh! will it not
contaminate thy purity to touch a wretch like me?' Then making a great effort
he raised himself up, and leaning upon his staff -- 'Resolve me, sweet angel,'
said he, 'from whence do you come? -- Where do you live?'

'Just by,' she replied, 'at Arlington castle.'

'And are you the daughter of lord Arlington?'

'I am.'

'No more, no more!' he cried, ''tis too much, too much! This tide of joy, I
cannot bear! -- Leave me, leave me, at present, but' -- and here he gave a look
of the most anxious solicitude -- 'May I ask it? -- Will you keep this
adventure secret, and meet me here this time tomorrow? -- You need not fear me
-- there was a time when, indeed, you would not have been safe in my hands --
but now for worlds I would not harm you -- tomorrow I shall be more composed;
this interview has quite overcome me.' -- He paused, as expecting her answer.

'I shall come to this spot again tomorrow.' Then he added, 'and may I hope?
Yes, heaven will surely inspire you with confidence to meet me -- Your heart
is, as I have witnessed, the throne of benevolence; three times today have you
stretched out the arm of charity to raise a fallen wretch; heaven bless and
reward thee!' So saying, he returned into the wood, from whence he had come,
and Antoinette soon lost sight of him.

She remained for some minutes fixed to the spot where he had left her, lost in
astonishment, at what had passed; at last she turned homewards, pondering in
her mind whether she should comply with the old man's request or not. At length
she determined so far to swerve from it, as not to keep the matter secret, but
to impart it to mrs. Percival, when she should return home, and be determined
by her opinion whether to meet the old man or not. But before that opinion
could be obtained, Antoinette was called on to act from her feelings, rather
than from deliberation.

About a mile from the castle lived a catholic priest, a man of the utmost
worth and benevolence, whose time was wholly employed in working all the good
in his power in the neighborhood. As he had resided in the same spot for some
time before mrs. Percival had left the country, he was well known to her, and
had occasionally been at the house; he was, therefore, no stranger to
Antoinette, and had, indeed, always taken particular notice of that amiable
girl, who on her part, was always pleased with, and returned, his attentions.

She had not been returned home above two hours, before this benevolent man
came to the house, and desiring to speak with her, was immediately shown into
the room where she was sitting. As she had not seen him before since her
return, she sprang forward with great eagerness at hearing his name announced,
and taking him by the hand, expressed the greatest pleasure at seeing him
again; and he, on his part, expressed equal delight at her return into those
parts.

'But, my dear miss Percival,' said he, 'we must not waste time in compliments,
I have business of importance to impart to you. -- Have you not this morning
seen, and conversed with an old hermit?'

Antoinete answered, that she had, and that he had requested her to meet him on
the same spot again tomorrow, which she intended to do, if her mother should
approve of it.

'I have just now left that old man,' said the priest, 'who seemed very near
approaching to his last moments, and who expressed the most anxious desire to
see you again before he expires. Will you grant his request, madam? I am sure
it will calm his last moments -- You may trust yourself to me, my character is
well known to you -- I will conduct you to his cell -- it is little more than a
mile from hence, and I will be responsible for your safety.'

Antoinette was more and more astonished -- 'Me!' she cried, 'What can he
possibly want with me?' -- But he shall be gratified; you would not ask me, I
know, to do what is improper -- I will then accompany you.' She immediately put
on her hat and cloak, and set out with the priest. As they walked together, she
enquired of him, who this man was, and how long he had been in the country?'
When he gave her the following relation.

'It is now near seven years, madam, since he first appeared here, in all which
time no one has been able to learn any thing of his story. When he at first
came he took up his abode entirely in the open air, lying down at night on the
ground amongst the woods, not even taking shelter in the cavity of a rock, and
living in every respect a most austere life. I had often met him by chance,
before I ventured to speak to him; but, at last, I broke silence, by observing,
that he seemed to have no habitation, and, as winter was coming on, he was in
danger of perishing, if he continued thus exposed to the inclemencies of the
weather.'

'He replied, that a wretch like him, could not be too much exposed to
hardships -- Penances and mortifications were the only road by which he could
hope to reconcile himself to an offended deity,' adding, 'the world hardly
contains such another wretch, such a monster as I am!' -- He then fell on his
face to the earth, but started up again, 'No,' said he, 'I dare not pray! --
prayer from me would be downright blasphemy! -- Pray for me, father, your
orisons may be accepted; mine never can be.' After some further conversation
with him, finding that some actions of his life filled his soul with anguish
and remorse, I pressed him to unbosom himself to me, and make me his confessor,
and in time he might obtain absolution.'

'No,' said he, 'I have an oath registered above, a solemn oath -- I have sworn
by the most high God, the ruler of heaven and earth, never to reveal my secret,
unless -- " Here he paused -- he remained motionless for some minutes, with his
eyes fixed upwards -- 'No,' said he, 'absolution I cannot have -- Even the
mercy of the Almighty can never pardon a wretch like me; and shall man then
dare to pretend to it?'

'I listened to him with astonishment, horror, and pity, but pressed him then
no farther -- but I have since that time had much intercourse with him, and
with some difficulty prevailed on him at last to fit himself up in a cell in
one of the rocks which surrounded the lake, where at first he would only have a
little straw to lie on, and one chair, but by degrees I have persuaded him to
get a bed and some other conveniences. Frequent conversations have passed
between us, in all of which I have found him a man of polished manners, with a
great knowledge of the world, and no inconsiderable share of learning. His
favorite topic of conversation is, the dreadful effects of giving way to one's
passions and appetites, even in the smallest degree, and I am convinced he has
been guilty of some dreadful crime, in consequence of not having controlled his
passions; but what that crime may be, or whether, indeed, it is one crime in
particular or that in general he has seen horrible effects arise in various
ways, from his suffering those passions to rule him at all times, I cannot with
any decision determine: but I rather think that there is some one particular
offense, which thus weighs him down.

'He is a wonderful adopt in languages, and speaks both French and English so
equally well, that I do not know of which country to guess him to be, though I
rather suppose him to be of England, or Ireland, because he s^ems perfectly
well acquainted with the history of lord Arlington and his family. During the
seven years he has lived here, he has never to my knowledge suffered any food
or drink to pass his lips, but bread, ^ots, fruit and water; and when he first
came here, he would frequently inflict on himself the s^crest bodily
discipline, though he has much relaxed of late in that species of rigor.

'Once, when he was very ill, I accidentally happened (...) to his (...); when
he expres^ the greatest satisf^^d (...) seeing me (...) and thus addressed me:

'My (...), my benevo^ friend, heaven has shown an extraordinary degree of
mercy in sending me such a companion as you have been, to soothe my latter
days. I am deeply indebted to you already for a thousand little offices of
friendship. May I yet ask that friendship farther? -- I feel my end
approaching:' Then taking a casket from under his pillow -- 'My story will not
die with me,' said he: 'this casket -- take it when I am gone -- the paper
which is tied on it will give you all directions concerning it.' He then
returned it to his pillow; but recovering from his illness, he has never since
spoken to me on the subject.

'He had often enquired, madam, with great anxiety, whether lord Arlington had
a daughter, and expressed his wonder that the family never came to the castle.
When the first intelligence arrived here of mrs. Percival's intention to spend
the summer amongst us, I informed him of it; he seemed rather agitated. I also
told him of the family's arrival, as soon as I knew of that event; but he
seemed to take little notice of it at the time, though I have observed that
ever since that time, he has appeared restless and uneasy more than usual, and
has almost always been rambling about, which is contrary to his usual practice.

'This morning I met him at the entrance of his cell, pale, agitated,
tottering, and with every symptom of approaching death; I supported him into
the cell* when he sunk down on his bed, and grasping my hand, said,'

'My dearest friend, my spirit is departing, but I die in peace -- I have seen
-- I have seen -- sweet angel, yes, I have seen her.'

'I was astonished at his words, and could not, at first, comprehend their
meaning -- he lay still and silent a few minutes, then starting up, he
exclaimed,

'In peace! -- No. I cannot die in peace, unless I see her again -- Will she
come to me?'

'I begged of him to explain his words -- he was silent for a little while, and
then calmly said.'

'It is past; I am myself again; but the shock has been too much for me.' -- He
then related to me the particulars of his interview with you, madam, this
morning, and concluded with saying -- 'My friend, the hand of death is now upon
me -- go to her -- beg her to let me see her again before I die -- it is of
importance both to myself and her -- no time is to be lost -- I do not know
even now whether I can live 'till she shall arrive.'

Antoinette listened to the priest's relation with the utmost astonishment, nor
could form in her mind any idea, which could give her the least clue to so
extraordinary an affair. Perhaps, had she been acquainted with her own story,
suspicions might have arisen in her mind, that she was about to hear great
discoveries; but ignorant as she was of that, the matter seemed totally
inexplicable. At length she arrived with her conductor at the cell; on entering
which, they found the hermit stretched on his bed in the agonies of death, yet
still with so much sense, as to give a look of satisfaction at seeing them.
Antoinette sat down by him, and involuntarily took hold of his hand; it was
cold as the rocky floor of his habitation. He fixed his dying eyes upon her.
Twice he essayed to speak: but the overflowings of his soul were too mighty for
utterance. He made a sign to the priest to take the casket from under his
pillow, which having done, he again made a sign that it should be put into the
hands of Antoinette, and making a great effort he just uttered, in a voice
scarcely audible, ''Tis of importance to you.' He then raised his hands and
eyes to heaven -- 'Heaven bl --;' a blessing hung on his lips -- he was unable
to utter it -- his hands fell -- his eyelids closed -- his bosom heaved -- he
expired.

Antoinette, by an involuntary impulse, again took hold of his hand, and
pressed it to her bosom. What a scene was here formed for a painter's eye! --
the hermit stretched on his miserable bed, a breathless corpse; his aged and
sorrow-worn features yet displaying the mingled emotions which agitated his
parting soul; one hand fast locked in that of the lovely Antoinette, whose fine
eye spoke all the feelings of pity, astonishment, and benevolence which then
filled her bosom; while at the feet of the bed stood the philanthropic priest,
endeavoring to suppress tears which nature would have called forth, but which
philosophy and religion forbade him to shed.

It was some time before this interesting and affecting scene received any
interruption; but the priest at last taking Antoinette by the hand, proposed
her returning to the castle; to which she assented, and taking the casket with
her, they proceeded thither together in perfect silence,

CHAP. VII.
Approach, sweet maid! thy melancholy mien,
Speaks thy compassionate and feeling heart;
It Is a grave lesson for thy blooming years;
A scene of dissolution!

MRS. Percival was just alighted from her carriage, as the priest and
Antoinette arrived at the door. The moment she looked at Antoinette, she
exclaimed, 'What is the matter, my dear child? -- you look quite agitated! --
Has any thing unpleasant happened you?'

'Not very unpleasant,' returned the priest, 'but a dying scene is always
affecting to a mind of sensibility; and such a scene miss Percival has been
witnessing -- perhaps, too, it was one of the most affecting scenes of the kind
which she could have wit^essed, the death of a penitent, whom sorrow, (so I
guess at least) more than years, has brought to the grave.'

'You surprise me much,' said mrs. Percival, 'Has Antoinette then been
attending the deathbed of any one? -- Tell me how it has happened? -- Your
looks, your words, seem to indicate that it is something particular which led
her to this scene.'

'Indeed, madam, you are right,' returned the priest. 'The story is an
extraordinary one. -- Come, madam,' then he continued, addressing himself to
Antoinette, 'Shall I leave mrs. Percival and you to talk it over at your
leisure?'

'Oh! no,' answered Antoinette, 'Pray do not leave us: -- I shall want you to
assist my recollection with regard to the poor hermit -- I will tell my mother
all that I know; but you, perhaps, will recollect some further circumstances
with regard to his abode in these parts.'

'Come then into the parlour;' said mrs Percival; -- they all went in, and
being seated, Antoinette related what had passed that day relative to the old
man; and concluded with producing the casket, which, she told mrs. Percival,
she had determined not to open but in her presence.

Mrs. Percival heard the relation with no less astonishment, than the whole
transaction had excited in Antoinette. The first thing that suggested itself to
her mind was, that this extraordinary personage was her long lost husband --
But if he was so, how mortifying was the reflection, that his only anxiety was
to see Antoinette; he had not even mentioned the names of herself or her son!
-- Could he be her Theodore then? -- yet circumstances strongly confirmed her
suspicion that it was so. -- It was near seven years that he had lived in that
spot; -- he must therefore have arrived there soon after the time when she was
well assured that her husband had been both in Ireland and England -- his
conduct too was then so ex^raordinary, that no turn he could afterward take
seemed surprising -- besides, it was evident too at that time, that he wished
to remain in concealment. Yes, she was convinced it must be her Theodore.

But, why not satisfy herself at once by visiting the corpse? -- she should
then no longer remain in doubt: The priest said too that sorrow, rather than
age; seemed to have brought him to the grave. Alas! how much had her Theodore
been a prey to sorrow, even before he left her? And what havoc might not
fifteen subsequent years of sorrow have made in his frame? All these
reflections passed rapidly in her bosom: for to Antoinette, who was yet
unacquainted with the true state of the family, she could not abruptly impart
these suspicions: she sat therefore revolving them in her mind, without
uttering a word; but at times clapping her hand on her forehead, as if absorbed
in meditation. -- At length she begged of the priest to accompany her into
another room.

When they were arrived there she asked him 'Whether he had never any reason to
suspect that this man was her husband? Yet why do I ask that question? she
added. 'Had you ever entertained such suspicions, you would surely have
communicated them to me. -- Nay, indeed, you must at once have known my
Theodore.'

'Pardon me, madam,' he answered, 'You will recollect that I did not settle in
these parts 'till very soon after mr. Percival's abrupt departure; but having,
at my first coming here, heard much of that tragical affair, as it was then the
principal topic of conversation in the neighborhood, and consequently being no
stranger to the story, I own I have been sometimes led to suspect that this
might be the husband who has cost you so many hours of sorrow. And I have
therefore been always particularly attentive to catch at any thing which might
remove or confirm my suspicions. But he has been so uniformly wary in all the
conversations I have had with him, that I have never had, in my opinion,
sufficient grounds for ^ing your feelings, by communicating to you the
extraordinary circumstance of a total stranger taking up his abode here in such
a way.

'I did indeed long ago impart the story, by letter, to doctor Schomberg; at
the same time consulting him whether it should be imparted to you or not, and
desiring him to act in the affair according to his own discretion. But he
agreed with me in opinion, that without more grounds to go upon, it was better
not to harass your mind at all on the matter. Doctor Schomberg, since his
arrival here, has several times attempted to see the old man; though, as he
said, mr. Percival was so little known to him, that he should have had
difficulty in recollecting his features, especially under so different an
appearance; but, madam, as the hermit, contrary to his usual custom, has
scarcely ever been in his cell since your arrival at the castle, doctor
Schomberg has never been able to obtain a sight of him.'

'But,' said mrs. Percival, 'has Mac-Allen never seen him?'

'Yes,' replied the priest, 'he has seen him very frequently; but he has always
said he did not think he could possibly be his master; for though, to be sure,
he was about his stature, and very much resembled him in person, excepting that
he was bent, with weakness, he does not think that eight years of sorrow and
fatigue could have given a man of mr. Percival's years, such an appearance of
age, as this hermit had, even at his first arrival. -- Of this, however,'
continued the priest, 'I am well assured, from many circumstances, that the
hermit knew a great deal of mr. Percival, if he was not mr. Percival himself;
and I have also good reason to suppose, that he was not so old as his first
appearance led one to imagine him.'

'Well,' said mrs. Percival, 'I am determined to be satisfied; I will go and
visit the corpse. You will perhaps be so kind as to accompany me thither.'

'I think you are perfectly right, madam,' answered the priest; but as it now
grows late, and would be quite dusk before we could reach the cell, will it not
be as well to defer your visit till the morning? You will then find me at the
cell.'

'Well, then, it shall be so,' answered mrs. Percival, 'to-morrow morning we
will meet there; in the mean time, I must go through the painful task of
opening to my dear charge her true story. It must no longer be kept a secret
from her. Perhaps I have been wrong in not imparting it to her before; but I
have always dreaded, lest the knowledge of it might be a means of abating the
friendship in which we have hitherto lived.'

The priest now took his leave; and mrs. Percival returned to Antoinette, who,
filled with astonishment at what had passed, sat impatiently waiting for her;
she could not conceive the reason why her mother had not made any remark on the
story of the hermit; or why she should so immediately desire a private
conference with the priest; yet as she knew, that there was something rather
mysterious relative to mr. Percival's conduct, she began to have confused
suspicions wandering in her mind, yet of she scarcely knew what.

Mrs. Percival, on entering the room, saw plainly what was passing in the mind
of Antoinette, and that she wished to know much more than perhaps she thought
it was proper for her to enquire. She, therefore, after a pause of a few
minutes, in which she was summoning all her resolution to her aid, to
communicate what she dreaded to impart, but what she thought it would be
criminal any longer to conceal, began the conversation by saying,

'You are, perhaps, surprised, my love, that I have not yet made any remarks to
you on the extraordinary story you related to me -- Alas! my child, you know
not with what sensations it has inspired me.'

'Oh! my dearest mother,' said Antoinette, -- 'I fear -- I know my father.' She
could not arrange her ideas sufficiently; tears burst from her involuntarily,
though she scarcely knew what produced them. -- She looked earnestly and
anxiously at mrs. Percival, but her eyes only, not her tongue, could speak; she
seemed at once to wish and dread to hear more.

Mrs. Percival took her hand; 'Antoinette, my love, my child,' she said, 'it
has been my earnest endeavor to store your mind with virtue and fortitude. --
The latter must now be put to a severe test. -- Tell me, my love, can you
attend with unshaken nerves to a story, which, would to heaven I could for ever
bury in oblivion, but which must one day be revealed to you, -- which, perhaps,
can never be better revealed to you than at this moment, when your mind, called
into a state of exertion, is fortified to receive so great a shock. -- What do
I say* -- never better revealed than at this moment! Ah! If I were to let this
moment slip, when would my courage be again equal to the arduous task -- to the
dreadful task of wounding, as I shall do, my Antoinette, the sensibility of a
soul like yours? -- Tell me, is your mind, my love, armed to hear it?'

'Ah me!' said Antoinette, 'What is it that I am to hear! -- But tell it me at
once, my dearest mother, be it what it may. -- I am armed to hear it; and
trust, that I shall never in any action of my life disgrace the excellence,
which has trained me up, and taught me by example, as well as by precept, to
bear with like equanimity of temper, the bewitching smiles of prosperity, or
the sharp frowns of adverse fortune.'

'Well, then,' said mrs. Percival, 'listen, my child. -- You have been told,
even from the first moment, when reason dawning in your tender mind, led you to
enquire with infant curiosity, if you had no papa, that the fate of that
father, of whom you thus enquired, was unknown. -- But in telling you that, how
little, alas, did I disclose to you! -- My husband's, my Theodore's fate, is
indeed unknown; but heaven only knows, my love, whether that Theodore be really
your (...).'

Antoinette turned as pale as death -- her head swam round -- she rested it on
the shoulder of mrs. Percival -- a pause of some minutes ensued -- all was
silence -- Antoinette, at last, raised her head again -- ''Tis past,' she
cried. I am recovered. My senses had almost forsaken me -- but go on, my
dearest -- what shall I say? -- Mother! -- my tongue would fain utter that dear
sound -- but -- '

'Alas! you are right, my love. -- I am not your mother. But never, never, can
I cease to love you as a child. So saying, she eagerly kissed her trembling
hand, and pressed it to her bosom; then added, 'Shall I go on, my love? Shall I
not quit the subject for the present; perhaps, 'twill be too much to tell you
all at once?'

'Oh! no,' said Antoinette, 'let me hear all: -- I have recovered the first
moment of agony and weakness, and have no fear of a relapse; but oh! my -- '
she paused, she hesitated. 'Mother,' said mrs. Percival. 'Let me not lose that
tender appellation; and even she who has a claim to it from you, can never love
you with more partial fondness than I do -- But I will pursue my story.'

She then related all the particulars of her marriage with mr. Percival; -- of
his strange departure, and recommendation of her (the infant Antoinette) to the
protection of herself, and lord Arlington; and concluded the relation, with
giving Antoinette the letter, which Theodore sent with her, and which would
vouch for the truth of the story she had been telling.

If Antoinette had been surprised with what had passed relative to the old
hermit, how much more was she astonished, and how much was she shocked at what
mrs. Percival had now imparted to her! she fetched a deep sigh as mrs. Percival
concluded, and, 'Alas!' she exclaimed, 'What a change has a few minutes made in
my situation! But now and I was -- '

Mrs. Percival interrupted her. 'Do not talk of a change, my love,' she said.
'Believe me, your situation is no ways ahead; I cannot cease to love you, and
cannot bear the idea, that you should feel a degradation in your own eyes.
Observe the words of my Theodore, 'Her ^^th is lawful, her parents
illustrious;' and, let us hope that it may be a part of the scheme of
Providence, that you should one day know them. -- Why then suppose yourself
degraded, by finding that you are not my daughter? Be comforted, my child, be
assured. -- Here they were interrupted by the arrival of Henry, and doctor
Schomberg, who returned from their day's excursion.

Henry was entering, with all the ardour of a youthful mind, delighted with his
day's entertainment, and eager to relate the particulars of it; -- but his
ardour was damped in a moment, when he beheld Antoinette in tears, and with all
the symptoms, in her countenance, of the deepest affliction, and mrs. Percival,
with the tenderest affection, endeavoring to console her. His eyes, which had
sparkled with pleasure, were in a moment expressive of nothing but anxiety.

'What is the matter with my dear sister?' said he, eagerly.

'My love,' said mrs. Percival, 'You shall know presently.'

'I hope so,' said he. 'I hope my sister will never know a sorrow, in which her
brother will not be allowed to participate.'

Antoinette gave him a look full of gratitude and affection, but could not make
him any other reply.

'Come, my Antoinette,' said mrs. Percival, 'You and doctor Schomberg will,
perhaps, take a walk in the garden; you may talk freely with him, and the air
will be of service to you -- I would have half an hour's conversation with
Henry alone.'

Doctor Schomberg went out with Antoinette, when mrs. Percival related to Henry
all that she had before imparted to his supposed sister. He heard the story
with no less astonishment, than she had, done: and when his mother had
finished, he looked at her with the most earnest mixture of anxiety and
apprehension.

'But I hope we are not to lose Antoinette?' he said.

'Heaven forbid, that we should!' returned mrs. Percival. -- 'No, she will
still be my daughter.'

'And my sister too?' said he, anxiously.

'I hope so,' she answered. 'I hope, my love, you will not cease to regard her
as such.'

'Oh, no,' he replied, 'I should dread nothing so much (next to losing you,
dearest madam, as a mother) as losing Antoinette for a sister. We have been
educated under the same roof, as brother and sister, and have lived in the
purest friendship as such; and life would be but a blank to me,' said he,
putting his handkerchief up to his eyes, 'if that friendship was to be
destroyed.' -- Here he could contain himself no longer, but fairly sobbed out,
and let his tears have their free course.

Mrs. Percival saw them with delight, nor could she forbear to mingle hers with
them: and taking her son's hand, 'Ah! my Henry,' she said, 'dear as you have
always been to my soul, I never loved you to the excess I do at this moment. --
This affection for your sister -- it is charming -- it is enchanting!' She
eagerly kissed him. 'How have I dreaded this moment!' she said. 'It was one of
the greatest consolations of my life to see your affection for each other. I
dreaded lest this discovery should interrupt it. -- Go then, my son, hasten to
Antoinette. She will anxiously expect the event of this interview; and your
renewed assurances of fraternal affection, will be one of the best of cordials
to her wounded heart.'

Henry went out immediately to seek for Antoinette: and mrs. Percival retired
to her room, in order to compose her spirits, after the affecting scenes she
had gone through. She had not been arrived there many minutes before she saw --
the fading light of evening just serving to display the interesting scene --
Henry run up to Antoinette, who, whih doctor Schombergh, was seated on a bench
in the garden, and clasping her in his arms, kiss her with the utmost warmth of
fraternal affection. Mrs. Percival, quite overcome, burst into a torrent of
tears, which she did not for a while endeavor to repress. Her feelings had
been wrought up to a pitch which required, that they should have such a vent:
and she found her mind grow more composed by giving way to them for a while.

Henry, in the mean time, gave Antoinette the strongest assurances of his
unalterable affection for her; assured her that he could never cease to
consider her as his sister, and to love her as such; and conjured her still to
love him as a brother. She returned this burst of affection with reciprocal
assurances on her part, that nothing could wound her bosom more deeply, than
the thoughts of losing his friendship; and soon after this family of harmony
assembled round the supper table with, if possible, even increased affection to
each other.

After supper, Antoinette proceeded to examine the casket, which she had
received from the hermit. She, therefore, unbound the paper, which was tied
upon it, which only contained a request to the priest to deliver the casket
into no other hands, than those of Antoinette, daughter to Theodore, lord
Arlington, and which seemed only meant as a provision, in case he had not the
opportunity of placing it in her hands himself. On opening the casket,
Antoinette found a letter directed to herself; a sealed packet of papers, a
cross of very splendid diamonds; and a very small miniature picture of a lady;
the extreme likeness of which to Antoinette struck every one present. The
letter contained as follows:

'In your hands, unfortunate maiden, I place a sacred deposit, these papers,
this cross, and this picture: let not the former be opened, 'till you have
found a long lost father, whom I have made wretched; in placing these in your
hands, however, I endeavor, as far as lies in my power, to atone for the
injuries I have done him -- for the misery which he as endured in consequence
of my giving way to uncontrolled passion. Oh! would to God, that the past could
be recalled! But if fifteen years of misery and remorse can atone for my
offenses, I may hope hereafter to find that peace, which I have never known on
earth. Wear the cross, and picture, constantly about you! -- They are precious
relics; had their former owners been alive, how dear would you have been to
them! May the God of Heaven ever bless you, sweet maid, and may he have mercy
on my soul!'

New wonders were now opened to them; and mrs. Percival felt more and more
convinced, that this man was her Theodore; he talked of fifteen years of misery
and remorse, and it was just fifteen years since he left her. -- But what could
he mean by having made the father of Antoinette wretched? -- Could Joanna have
been seduced by him from her husband? And could Antoinette be the child of
Joanna by her husband? Yet, surely, Theodore had a soul incapable of so great
villainy; he had always appeared to have a high sense of moral rectitude! -- She
was perplexed beyond measure, as she revolved these things in her mind, and was
impatient for the morning, when she should see the corpse.

The morning, at length arrived, when mrs. Percival, accompanied by Henry,
Antoinette, and doctor Schomberg repaired to the hermit's cell, where they
found the benevolent priest singing a r^quiem for his departed soul. Mrs.
Percival earnestly examined the features of the corpse. She thought she
discovered some faint traces of those of her husband. But age was imprinted on
the countenance of the de^, beyond what she could possibly expect to have found
in him. Yet why? sorrow and fatigue will produce the effects of age on the form
and features, and fifteen years were a long time for those causes to have
operated. -- She looked again. She asked doctor Schomberg's opinion. -- He had
not much knowledge of mr. Percival, and was, therefore, but an indifferent
judge; but he owned, he thought there was a considerable resemblance; that is,
that the countenance of the hermit was such as mr. Percival's might be supposed
to have become from age and misfortunes.

Mrs. Percival looked again and again at the countenance. -- She grew more and
more convinced that this object of misery was the once charming Theodore
Percival; and in this conviction, almost involuntarily, took his clay-cold
hand, pressed it to her lips, and bathed it with her tears; and with this
conviction she returned home, ordering that the corpse should be deposited in a
private manner, in a vault belonging to the family of Arlington.

Yet amidst all this conviction, one doubt still arose in her mind. -- She
could by no means, if this was her husband, account for his thus leaving her in
doubt, as to his fate; but, again, she recollected that he had told the priest
that his story would not die with him; and there might be reasons, why he would
not yet have it developed. The priest called again; -- he had been searching
the cell, but could find nothing in it, except the little furniture he had, a
Latin Bible and Testament, and the Roman Missal; which three books he had
brought to Antoinette, as the hermit seemed to have selected her for the depot
of his few effects.

Mrs. Percival took this opportunity of putting some farther questions to him
concerning the object of her curiosity, but could gain little more information.
The hermit was active and diligent to excess (the priest said) in administering
to the wants of the neighboring poor, a^ (...) as his ^ans would allow; but
his means seemed slender, and I could never make out, madam, continued the
priest, from what source even the little he had, was derived. He used to teach
the poor children to read, purchasing for them such little books as he could
procure at Killarney; and the children were always fond of him, and used to
gather round him whenever they saw him: but, except for purposes of
benevolence, he seldom left his cell. I have often gone there, and conversed
with him; and at first, in those conversations, I endeavored to give them such
a turn, as might draw him insensibly into revealing his story; but he was aware
of my designs, and always eluded me, and, at length, one day said, 'I see your
drift plainly, my good friend; but you will not succeed. I have told you that I
have an oath registered above, never to disclose my story during my life,
unless I am so fortunate as to see --.' There he paused -- looked earnestly at
me, but without any appearance of anger; then continued, 'Do not then entertain
so ill an opinion of me, as to suppose that I shall not be watchful strictly so
observe that oath. I have been wicked -- very wicked. Few people in the world,
perhaps, have greater enormities to account for than I have -- yet I know how
to revere an oath -- I might be rash in making it. On that matter I will not
pretend to determine; but as I have made it, the world united, should not force
me to violate it.'

'There was something so uncommonly impressive and energetic in his manner, as
he spoke these words, that I could never afterward think of attempting to draw
his secret from him. But I have always watched his countenance and manner, when
any species of crime has become the subject of our conversation; yet, though he
at such times would express the greatest horror at the crime mentioned, I could
never observe him more agitated by one thing than another. But free in his
censures of vice in general, and of his own conduct in particular, he has still
observed such uniform caution, that I could never perceive one subject
particularly touch him.'

From all this mrs. Percival could find nothing satisfactory -- nothing which
could tend to assure her either of the truth or falsehood of her conjectures.
She thanked the priest for the trouble he had taken in this affair, and
entreated him, if ever he gained any intelligence, which could tend to throw
light on it, that he would immediately impart it to her, which he promising to
do, retired.

CHAP. VII.
Never yet
Have I passed by the night-bird's custom'd spray*
What time she pours her wild and artless song,
Without attentive pause and silent rapture;
How could I then, with savage disregard,
Hear voices tuned by nature sweet as here is,
Graced with all art's addition?
MASON.
FOR some time this affair entirely engrossed the attention of mrs. Percival
and her family. But no fresh incidents concerning it occurring, it, at length,
sunk gradually, though not into oblivion, yet into that kind of state, that it
was no longer talked of, nor interrupted their attention to other concerns, and
they rested in silent hope, that time would make farther discoveries.

They now began to be visited by the neighbors, amongst whom were many people,
whose society they found very pleasant. But the family, whose company was most
agreeable to them, was that of a mr. Delaval, who had hired mrs. Percival's
house at Airville, where, it will be remembered, she had lived with her father
before her marriage. Mr. Delaval was a widower, with one son and one daughter,
the latter about the age of Antoinette, the former four years older than his
sister.

Mr. Delaval had some years back been resident in Italy for a considerable
time, on account of the ill state of his wife's health, who died at Florence
soon after the birth of Caroline Delaval, but he remained at Florence for some
time after that event. At his return from Italy, he settled near Dublin for
some years, and had taken Airville house only about four years before the time
we are now speaking of. His being tenant to mrs. Percival, of course brought
the two families together, when they became near neighbors, and congeniality
of disposition soon improved their acquaintance into the closest intimacy.

Mr. Delaval and his family were all of a very musical turn; he himself was a
very fine performer both on the violin and violoncello. Francis, his son,
excelled on the flute, and could also play a good second to his father on the
violin, and Caroline sung charmingly. When this family and mrs. Percival's were
together, therefore, they made very pleasant little concerts. Henry Percival,
whose taste for music was not inferior to that of his mother's and
Antoinette's, had for some time practiced on the hautboy, on which he had
attained a considerable degree of excellence, and could join with his voice in
a glee: and mrs. Percival and Antoinette, as has been said already, both played
on the piano-forte, and sung in a very superior style.

They were particularly fond of exercising their musical talents in little
parties on the side of the lake, or upon it, where the echoes reverberating
from the surrounding mountains, added a fine effect to the music, which effect
was much heightened by two excellent French-horn players, who lived at
Killarney, and whom they usually hired to be of their parties on such occasions.

One afternoon they had been on one of these parties upon the lake, and the
weather being remarkably fine, they were induced by it to lengthen out their
excursion 'till moonlight, when perhaps a more soothing and captivating seen
could hardly be witnessed. The air was perfectly still, no breeze rustled
amongst the surrounding trees, or ruffled the serenity of the waters, on which
the moon bea^ played with the most beautiful luster, except where the
lengthened shadows of the over-arching rocks cast a deep gloom on them, which
only served, by contrast, to heighten the beauty of the scene; at intervals
they sang and played pieces and songs adapted to the scene; at others, no sound
intervened but the dashing of the oars in the water.

As they advanced toward the shore, Antoinette began to sing the song of
'Sweet Echo,' from Milton's beautiful poem of Comus, when a hautboy from the
shore answered her with sounds that seemed to come from one of more than human
mould; it conveyed an idea of the music of the spheres. The company were
astonished, were enchanted; -- again, as she proceeded, she was answered by the
same sounds, or even sweeter than before. Mrs. Percival trembled and turned
pale -- she knew that her husband had been a performer on that instrument, when
first he returned from his travels, and though he had never pursued it, from
want of spirits to go through any such exertion, yet she did not know what
might have happened during his absence, to draw him on such a pursuit; and
being always eager to catch at any thing like a shadow of hope on the grand
subject that occupied her mind, without, at the first impulse, absolutely
knowing a good reason for the idea she harbored, she exclaimed, 'Good heavens!
who can this enchanting musician be?' -- but she recollected, and checked
herself -- when mr. Delaval said, 'Oh! What melody! sure never was any thing so
fine;' -- again he listened -- again exclaimed -- 'What a strain was that, --
Oh! if I were on the silver Arno, instead of the lake of Killarney, I should
say that it must be count Marsini himself; for never did I hear such strains
but from him.'

Antoinette finished her song, and in a minute or two the hautboy began playing
again, an Italian air, in strains still more and more melodious -- 'Heavens!'
said mr. Delaval, starting up in the boat, 'it must be Marsini, and he has at
last remembered his promise, made so many years ago. Hasten, rowers, to the
shore. The sound seems to come from near yon creek.'

Mrs. Percival fetched a deep sigh. The sounds were accounted for: and her
hopes, if such a chaos of ideas as filled her bosom might be called hopes, were
crushed again. As they drew near the shore, the music ceasing, mr. Delaval
called 'Marsini! count Marsini!' No answer was made, but the hautboy began
again, and they soon discovered the musician, seated on a rock, just above the
creek, to which they were rowing.

Mr. Delaval again called 'Marsini!' -- still no answer was made but by the
music.

'Heavens!' cried mrs. Percival, 'He answers not to you! -- It is -- it must
be! -- ' she stopped. She thought she had been indiscreet; but fortunately the
attention of the company was too much engaged with the music, to attend to what
she said; and it was unnoticed, except by her own family. The boat, at length,
reached the shore, and mr. Delaval was hastening to the musician, who sliding
down the rock, met him half way, and in a moment the names of 'count Marsini,'
and 'signior Delaval,' were exchanged; for he was indeed the count Marsini,
whom mr. Delaval conjectured him to be.

This count Marsini was an Italian nobleman, with whom mr. Delaval had been
very much acquainted during his residence at Florence, and from whom he had
received very great attention and kindness in various ways. He did not,
however, continue at Florence all the time mr. Delaval was there, which was
near three years, for he had been unfortunate in losing a very amiable wife,
after he had been married to her less than a year, which circumstance had
affected him so much, that it had a visible effect on his health; in
consequence of which, his friends persuaded him to travel about, in order to
turn his thoughts, if possible, into a different channel. It was on this
scheme, that he quitted Florence before mr. Delaval had left it, promising,
however, at his departure, that when mr. Delaval was returned to Ireland, he
would visit him there. But so many years had elapsed, since the promise was
made, without its being fulfilled, that mr. Delaval began to be in despair of
ever seeing him.

He had, however, arrived at Airville house while mr. Delaval, with his son and
daughter, were absent on the abovementioned party, and being informed by the
servants where their master was, and conducted by them to the spot where it was
probable the company would land, he sat himself down to survey the beauty of
the scenery, when his attention was taken off from that subject, by the fine
voice of Antoinette, and a thought instantly occured to him to announce his
arrival by the responsive strains of his hautboy, which he did not doubt mr.
Delaval would soon recognize.

These things being explained, mr. Delaval introduced him to the company and he
was, by mrs. Percival, invited to sup with the rest of the party at Arlington
castle; to which place they all immediately proceeded.

It was on their arrival there, that Marsini first had a full view of the
countenance of Antoinette, on which he no sooner cast his eyes, than he
started, and was scarcely able to take them from her again. Then, as if aware
of his rudeness, he turned them away; but during the whole evening, they were
perpetually wandering toward her, and it seemed to require the exertion of all
his self-command, to keep them one moment from her.

Nor did this admiration cease with the first interview: but it seemed to
increase every time he saw her, which, on account of the intimacy subsisting
between the two families, he did very often.

Marsini was now in the fortieth year of his age, nineteen of which he had been
a widower, and, perhaps, no man ever possessed greater attractions. His
countenance, and person, were such as to prejudice every one strongly in his
favor; for the former had in it an irresistible benevolence, and animation,
and the latter was genteel and well formed. He had been, as we have already
hinted, a great traveller: and from the knowledge he had thus acquired of men
and manners, was a most entertaining and instructive companion, and had the
true Italian taste for music and painting, in both which arts he was a great
adept.

These talents recommended him extremely to mrs. Percival and Antoinette, who
were both passionate admirers of excellence in any way, and both great
proficients in the arts, in which Marsini particularly excelled. But Antoinette
was always the chief object of his attention, nor did he ever appear so happy
as when instructing her. Was music her employment? Marsini was still by her
side at the piano-forte, improving her style and execution, both in singing and
playing. Did nature's charms woo her all-excelling pencil? Marsini was always
at hand to point out the most beautiful spot amongst the romantic scenery
around them, as an object for its exercise. Was her attention engaged by the
sublimity of Tasso? by the sweetly melting lays of love-lorn Petrarch? or by
the bewitching harmony of the elegant Metastasio? Marsini instructed her in
cadence and articulation. Marsini gave grace, feeling, and expression to all.
Still it was silent admiration only which he bestowed on her. She never was the
topic of his conversation, any farther than as the family at Arlington were
often made the subject of discourse amongst mr. Delaval's family, when Marsini
would, in general terms, speak in admiration of them: and though every one saw
that he was deeply struck with the lovely Antoinette, they saw it only; they
never heard it.

Francis Delaval saw, and not without regret, how deep an impression she had
made on the count; not, that he seemed to have made the like impression on her;
but Francis, who had himself too susceptible a heart to have seen Antoinette
with indifference, dreaded lest the perfections of the count should overbalance
with his mistress the disproportion of their years, and at last make a conquest
of that heart, which he wished to retain for himself. He felt, at the same
time, so strongly, that the count was so every way deserving of her, that he
could hardly regret it, should she bestow herself on him.

However, he was determined not to yield up this prize to a rival without any
resistance; and he was, therefore, not at all behind hand with the count in his
assiduities. As he was well acquainted with the country, which he had explored
very much since his residence in it, he contrived parties for a day's
excursion, to any spot which he thought worth viewing; and in these he had
sometimes the inexpressible pleasure of having Antoinette's company with him in
his chaise. At other times, he made parties to dance on the lawn, either at
Airville or Arlington, when he shared, at least, with Marsini, the hand of
Antoinette. Various other amusements, too, he contrived, in hopes of
recommending himself to the object of his affections; who, on her part,
received his attentions, as well as those of Marsini, with an easy politeness,
but without the least appearance of preference, or partiality to either.

Francis, one day, in one of the excursions we have mentioned, conducted the
company to a very curious cell, in a rock, which hung over the sea, and which
was called Alfred's cave, and to which, he said, a very affecting story was
attached, as he had lately discovered in looking over a volume of poems, called
the Muse of Killarney; which story he would, if agreeable, read to them, when
they were all seated in the cell. Accordingly, they all sat down on seats
ingeniously hewn out of the solid rock, when Francis read as follows: ALFRED. A
TALE.
Farewell, sweet Helen! much loved maid,
Farewell my destined bride,
Heavens choicest blessings on thee wait!
The adoring Alfred cried.
For Helen with the friend who reigned
Next Alfred, in her heart,
Was to the distant ocean's verge
Next moment to depart.
Young Alfred's breast with purest love
For Helen long had burned;
And she to Alfred's ardent flame,
An equal love returned.
I do not ask thee, Alfred said,
The ocean still to shun;
I know my Helen's too discreet,
An ill-judg'd risque to run.
I know full well her tender heart,
For her loved Alfred's sake;
All care that prudence may suggest,
Will for her safety take.
Nor would I wish that idle fears
Should occupy her mind;
For though designed for ornament,
They shame half womankind.
Then, dearest maid, if ever a wish
Should in thy breast reside,
When tranquil rolls the untroubled main
Over its smooth face to glide.
I do not ask thee then, my love,
That pleasure to forego;
But wish thee every joy to share,
Thy faithful heart can know.
With that he clasped her in this arms,
Nor scarce could quit his hold;
Farewell, they cried; while their fond looks
Their mutual passion told.
Ah! let not, Helen said, my love,
Mine absence give thee pain;
Not long that absence shall thou mourn,
We soon shall meet again!
At length she with her Anna mounts
The car, that far away
Must bear them from the much loved spot,
Where Alfred still must stay.
And soon they reached the destined port,
Where on the ocean's side,
She, though reluctantly, a while
Must with her friend abide.
Ye scenes, where in my childhood often,
I strayed, she cried, once more
I view your charms, once more I hail
The waves that wash your shore.
Yet can I not with equal joy
Review the spot I love;
As if my Alfred by my side
Could over its beauties rove.
But yet, and then she heaved a sigh,
I Will not, my friend, repine;
This short-lived absence over, my love
Will be for ever mine.
And still, as ofttimes with her friend
On the smooth shore she walked,
Of Alfred's sweetness, Alfred's love,
And Alfred's worth they talked.
One morn together as they roved,
And still that theme pursued,
Delighted all his merit^ scanned,
And all his love reviewed.
They saw upon the sparkling shore,
A jocund train appear;
Intent over ocean's trackless way,
Their cheerful course to steer.
The morning smiled, the sky was clear;
And over the untroubled sea,
The curling zephyrs gently played,
While all breathed joy and glee.
Soon as our wandering friends they spied,
Oh! come our pleasures share,
They said, Oh! come with us inhale
The ocean's balmy air.
Oh! do not tempt me to partake
Your pleasures, Anna cried;
I know by sad experience well
What ills would then betide.
Ere distant from the shore a mile,
I know pale sickness' hand
Would over my enfeebled frame,
Extend his fearful wand.
Oh! do not ask me then to go:
I dare not, Anna said;
But Helen with delight embraced
The offer which they made.
The boat put off, a prosperous gale
Conveyed them far from land;
Whilst Anna watched them as she strayed
Along the neighboring strand.
She watched them 'till in distance lost,
The bark no more she spied,
Yet still she wandered, 'till again
The bark might be descried.
She wandered long, no bark appeared,
Then on a rock she sat;
And here, within herself, she said,
Their glad return I Will wait.
Then to beguile the tedious time,
Her pencil forth she drew;
And sketch'd the landscape, which around
Was present to her view.
But often, as she the beauteous scene
With taste refined sketch'd;
Her eyes she over the extended main,
With anxious ardour stretched.
Yet still the heavy hours moved on;
No bark appeared in sight;
And now the sun's declining course
Bespoke the approach of night.
With boding fears, at length she cried,
Ah! whence this long delay?
But checked them soon, I Will not, she said,
To idle dread give way!
Still night approached; the sun had sunk
Beneath the ocean's bed;
Her fears increased, for darkness now
Its sable mantle spread.
No more she objects could discern;
Yet still the sandy shore,
She traversed on with hurried pace,
To hear the dashing oar.
But, why should I minutely tell
What pangs her bosom burned?
In short, the bark, for which she watched,
No more, alas! returned.
What words the sorrow could describe
Which then her soul oppressed?
Or how could language represent
The pains that racked her breast?
The news she quickly bore herself
To faithful Alfred's ear
Who as the mournful tale she told,
Stood fixed in mute despair.
No sigh he heaved, no tear he shed;
Nor uttered he a groan;
Yet looked such woe, as if his soul
Would strait from earth have flown.
All wild with grief, he to the coast
With speed unequalled flew;
And to the world and all its joys,
Resolved to bid adieu.
A cell within the rock he formed,
Beneath whose awful brow
Poor Helen left the safer shore,
Old Ocean's waves to plough.
And there from all the world retired,
He like a hermit lived;
Thus of the sweets of social life
Through anguish self-depriv'd.
And still the abodes of want he sought
To sooth its every grief,
In hopes by healing other's woes,
Himself to find relief.
One only friend he ever allowed,
His lonely hours to cheer,
To share his sighs, partake his moans,
And answer tear for tear.
'Twas Anna, who with him would often
Upon the sea-beach stray,
And point the spot where Helen's bark
First sought the watery way.
And still they talked of Helen charms,
Still dwelt on Helen's praise;
And to her memory often would join
To chaunt harmonious lays.
Five tedious years had thus passed on*
Since in life's early bloom,
The hapless heroine of my tale,
Had met her fearful doom.
And, still in Anna's friendly cares
Had Alfred left alone,
The only joy that since her loss
His heart had ever known.
But Slander, with her venomed tongue.
Against fair Anna's fame
Had long, through all the country round,
Been loudly heard to exclaim.
And ah! it cried, we understand
The specious name of friend,
We know by long experience well,
How all such friendships end.
These sounds at length reached Alfred's ears;
He told the maid the tale,
How Slander with her blasted name
Filled every passing gale.
And ah! my friend, then Alfred cried,
Since I thy fame have marred,
Permit the wound I have thus made,
By me to be repaired.
And let me at the altar's foot
Thy plighted faith receive;
So shall we Slander's venomed shaft
Of all its force bereave.
So we our sacred friendship still
May keep refined and pure;
And may it still more perfect grow
While life we must endure!
Thou know, dear Anna, that to love
Has Alfred long been dead;
That from this lower world his heart
With Helen's spirit fled.
He only asks thee for his bride,
To keep thee as a friend;
Then on these terms to accept his hand
Will Anna condescend?
Yes, Anna said, while showers of tears
Flowed swiftly down her cheek;
Tears which her feelings spoke in terms
More plain than words could speak.
Next morn they hastened to the church --
Will thou, the priest then cried,
This woman take to be thy wife?
Yes, Alfred quick replied.
When lo! a distant voice was heard,
Oh! stop thy rash design;
The hand thou would to Anna give,
By right is only mine!
Aghast with wonder Alfred stood,
Then turned him to the side
From whence the awful sounds were heard --
'Twas Helen's form he spied.
He flew, he clasped her in his arms,
Long fixed in close embrace,
The blood within his throbbing veins
Outran its wonted pace:
So fierce it flowed, it burst its bounds,
-- Ah, who the tale can tell! --
It gushed in streams -- at Helen's feet
A welt'ring corpse he fell.
The bark, which, from securer land,
On that unhappy day,
Which stands recorded in my tale,
Bore Helen far away.
While still the distant shore (...)
The crew could just descry,
Was (...) a pirate seized, who viewed
The pri^e with joyful eye.
Too much it would extend my tale,
Should I at length relate
The strange adventures that ensued
In hapless Helen's fate.
Suffice it, that at length returned,
In safety to her home,
She sought with eager speed to learn
Her faithful Alfred's doom.
His story heard, she sought the spot,
To which she found he would flown --
Their fatal meeting in the church
Already has been shown. --
When Alfred on the pavement stretched,
A bloody corpse she viewed,
No sighs bespoke her bosom's smart,
No tears were seen to obtrude.
An instant frenzy seized her brain,
To which no human art
Could over, though every means was tried,
The least relief impart.
And still the faithful Anna watched,
With tenderest care, her woes,
'Till at the last death's welcome dart
She saw those sorrows close.
Ye, who from sympathy, the tale
Of misery, love to hear;
Whose heart can bleed for others woes,
Read hero, and drop a tear.


CHAP. IX.
Beneath appears a place, all outward bare,
Inward the dreary mansion of despair.
Has nature this rough naked piece designed
To hold inhabitants of mortal kind?
She has --
SAVAGE.
FRANCIS received the thanks of the company for the entertainment he had given
them; they paid 'the mournful tribute of a tear' to the misfortunes of Alfred
and Helen, and then proceeded to examine the cave. It was very curiously cut
out of the solid rock into various conveniences. In the interior was a recess,
which seemed designed as a chapel, where an urn was erected, on the pedestal of
which was an inscription, the characters of which were so much defaced by time,
that it was perfectly illegible: but it was supposed to be a tribute to the
memory of poor Helen.

After they had sufficiently examined the monuments of industry and sorrow,
which this cave presented, the company returned to Airville, where they were to
pass the evening. There Marsini found a letter from Italy, which having read,
he said, addressing mr. Delaval,

'What think you, signor, of our friend the marquis Vellorno being married to a
young woman only sixteen years of age?'

'Is it possible?' answered mr. Delaval,

'Why, Vellorno himself cannot surely be less than fifty?'

'You are quite right,' said Marsini, 'Vellorno is now in his fifty-first year.'

'Besides,' said mr. Delaval, 'it was always supposed that he was waiting for
the death of count Durazzo, to marry his widow.'

It Is true,' said Marsini, 'that such was the general idea, but it now appears
that it was an unfounded one. -- But you shall hear what his cousin, count
Carletti, writes to me.' Marsini then read as follows:

'How much will you be surprised, my dear Giacomo, to hear that our friend, and
my cousin, the marquis Vellorno, has given his hand in marriage, not to the
handsome widow of Durazzo, whom, during her husband's life, he had so long
served in quality of cicesbeo, and whom every one supposed, at the death of her
husband, he would have advanced to the rank of marchioness Vellorno; but to
count de Portici's daughter, who is only thirty-four years younger than
himself! This match is now the universal topic of conversation and speculation,
and it is supposed by some people* that there are private reasons for it, of a
political nature, and that the poor bride's inclinations have been little
consulted on this occasion. Others, however, are of opinion, that the young
marchioness has, at least her share in the ambition of the house of Portici,
and that she would have married a man, even twenty years older than Vellorno,
for the sake of the rank, to which she is raised; while another description of
people strenuously assert, that it is entirely a match of affection on both
sides.'

'Affection?' exclaimed Francis Delaval, 'Impossible! How can the bloom of
sixteen be united, through affection, to the frozen bosom of fifty? -- No, no:
attachment cannot subsist between people of such disproportionate years. Oh!
how I pity the lady, if she has been made a sacrifice to political ^iews! but I
could almost find in my heart to curse her, if through ambition she could form
so unnatural an union.'

'Why, I own, indeed,' said Marsini, 'that there does seem rather too great a
disproportion of years in this instance, especially considering the extreme
youth of the marchioness. But I have heard many ladies of twenty, or even under
twenty, declare, that they thought the manners of a man of forty, or near it,
commonly much more interesting and attractive, than those of men nearer to
their own age. I must beg pardon for having just fixed on my own age as the
most pleasing; but you will allow, that one cannot help feeling a little vanity
in the hopes of catching the attention of the young and beautiful amongst the
other sex.'

'Francis during this speech, had particularly watched Marsini's eyes, but did
not find them stray once toward Antoinette. He answered; 'No apology is
necessary on this occasion, my dear count, and I will freely own, that if all
men of forty were like you, I should not at all wonder at the preference you
seem to think the ladies in general give to men of that age.'

Marsini interrupted him: 'I meant not, my dear sir, to ask for such a
compliment, of which I feel myself undeserving. I only meant to observe, that,
in general, I think the superior knowledge of the world, which accompanies
superior years, is more pleasing to the female mind than the mere gaieties of
youth, however enchanting they may be at times.'

'Neither did I mean to pay a compliment,' returned Francis. 'I spoke what I
really thought: and I perfectly agree in the opinion, that where a man of sorty
has made a proper use of his advance in years, he must be far more captivating
than a very young man. But it must altogether depend on the use that he has
made of his superiority of years, whether or not he shall be this formidable
rival of youth: for if he has not used it in the acquisition of knowledge* and
improvement of his mind, the empty rattle which is scarcely to be endured, even
in youth, is absolutely insupportable in more advanced years.'

'Most certainly,' answered Marsini, 'no general rule can, in this instance, be
laid down. The only thing that can be said, is, that, where the disposition for
improvement is the same, the man of forty must have this advantage over the man
of twenty; that his years have given him greater opportunity of acquiring those
sources of entertainment, which must recommend him very much to every sensible
woman.'

''Tis true,' said Francis; 'and here we meet pretty much on the same point,
that, where the spirit of improvement is wanting, the man of forty has no
advantage over his juniors, but a manifest disadvantage, in that he has lost
the agreeableness of youth, to which, after all, a certain charm is attached,
without having attained any of the advantages of years. But, I beg your pardon,
sir, I fear I have engaged rather arrogantly in this argument.

'Oh! by no means.' returned Marsini. 'I rejoice to hear you inclined to enter
into such kind of discussions, which few young men ever will engage in; and I
am persuaded they are a great source of instruction, as well as of
entertainment to both parties.'

'I rejoice to hear you say so, signor,' replied Francis; 'for I think one
great cause of the general stupidity of all parties, is, that people banish
from them all topics of speculative discussion, and confine themselves to
talking over passing occurrences, which I think the most tiresome of all
conversation.'

'Ah!' said Marsini, 'How much do your sentiments recall to my recollection a
young man, whom,' said he, addressing mr. Delaval, 'you remember, sir, no
doubt, as he was with me, I think, for some time after you came to Florence,
the chevalier de St. Foix -- he was passionately fond of an argument of this
kind, and a most extraordinary talent he had for it. I have known that young
man, at the age of only twenty, completely baffle many of our sages, both in
churcn and state, by the soundness of his reasonings, and the depth of his
observations. But perhaps, you will think, that less splendid talents than his,
might have sufficed to beat them off from ground so untenable, as the doctrines
of our church, and the principles of our government. However, he was a rare
gem.'

'So he truly was,' said mr. Delaval 'I scarce ever saw such brilliant talents;
but he came, I think, to an untimely end.'

'Alas! he did indeed,' answered Marsini 'he quitted me to go to his sister,
who was, at that time, suffering a cruel persecution from her father, on
account of a marriage he had agreed on for her, to which she would not consent;
and the poor chevalier was killed in a duel with this lover, after which, I was
told the sister was shut up in a convent by her father, whose passions, as I
well know, were of a most ungovernable kind.'

Marsini seemed much agitated; he fixed his eyes for a few moments upon
Antoinette, who sat directly opposite to him, but withdrew them rather in a
hurried manner, and resuming the discourse, said,

'But we are wandering wide of our original question, which was, Whether it
could be supposed possible for a young woman of sixteen, to marry a man of
fifty, from attachment only. What is your opinion, mrs. Percival?'

'I think it not only possible,' said mrs. Percival, 'but even very probable,
that she may do so; and I am inclined to be of opinion, that a woman has a
better prospect of happiness with a man some years older than herself, than
with a very young man, who though he may be very much attached to her at the
time she marries him, yet from a sickleness of temper, often attendant on
youth, may possibly abate in that attachment in a few years, and his heart may
wander after other objects. -- But, why do I say this? For at this moment I
could cite many instances of happy, and many of unhappy, matches, both where
there was a great disproportion of years, and where there was nearly an
equality in that respect. Indeed, with one of the happiest couples I know, the
disproportion of years is on the other side from what we have hitherto been
discussing: for the lady was thirty-two years old when she married, and the
gentleman only twenty-four. Yet their regard for each other has appeared
continually increasing during twenty years, which they have now lived together.'

'Well, then,' said Marsini, 'on the whole we may conclude, that it must depend
on other circumstances, rather than on the relative ages of the parties
concerned, whether a marriage shall turn out an happy one or not.'

'Most certainly,' said mrs. Percival, 'if they are but strongly attached to
each other, the ages are of small importance: but no happiness can be expected
on any other foundation than that of mutual attachment; and for this reason I
am inclined to think, that those marriages are most likely to be happy, which
are the result of long habits of intimacy with each other, and where the
foundation for love is laid in friendship; for in fact, conjugal attachment is
the most refined species of friendship.'

'You now surprise me much,' said mr. Delaval; 'for I have always inclined to
the opinion, that a very long previous engagement was rather inimical to
matrimonial happiness.'

'Mistake me not, sir,' answered mrs. Percival. 'I do not mean by long habits
of intimacy, a long engagement. I perfectly agree with you in opinion, that a
long engagement has often proved a gulf, which has swallowed up all conjugal
happiness. I only mean to say, that I think those have the best prospect of
happiness in marriage, who have been long acquainted with each other before any
engagement takes place. But when an absolute engagement is entered into, it
cannot be too soon fulfilled.'

'But I am afraid,' said mr Delaval, 'that it is not often, that people can
come together on those terms.'

'Perhaps so,' replied mrs. Percival. 'But happy are those to whose lot such a
connection falls. Long accustomed to place their happiness in each other's
society -- to share the same amusements, and the same occupations -- to see,
and make allowances for each other's failings; and to know how to prize each
other's good qualities: I can conceive no happiness equal to marrying under
such circumstances. But where one side is indifferent to the other, it is
madness to suppose any happiness can ever exist; and it is the most dangerous of
all self-deceptions, to expect it.'

She had gone too far in this last speech. It brought home to her mind, rather
too forcibly, her own situation. She began to hesitate, and to falter in her
voice.

Marsini saw she was agitated. He knew enough of her story from the Delaval
family, to guess the cause of it; and willing to divert the subject from the
course which it had taken, addressed himself thus to Caroline and Antoinette:

'And, what do you think, signore?' he said, 'You have not yet given your
opinion on this subject, and perhaps you are the best judges in this case, as
you are about the very age we are speaking of. Do you really think you could
marry a man of fifty years old, from motives of attachment only? -- though
perhaps, it is hardly a fair question.'

Caroline replied without hesitation, that he had, perhaps, gone too far in
mentioning fifty; but she thought it very possible for a young woman to marry a
man of twenty years older than herself, from no other motive but that of strong
affection.'

'So far,' said Marsini, 'the answer is favorable for my side of the question.
But now, miss Percival, what do you say? May we not hope to have your
sentiments?'

'Indeed,' said Antoinette, 'You put a question to me, signor, to which I
hardly know how to give an answer. -- A sensible man of forty or fifty may be,
nay, certainly is, a most desirable companion and friend for a young woman;
perhaps, there hardly can be a more advantageous circumstance to her, than to
have such a friend. Yet I own, for a husband, it seems to me a great
disproportion of years; and I should think it more desirable for a man and
woman to be united in that happiest of all states, with a prospect of neither
of them much out-living the other. For my own part, nothing could weigh in my
mind against the dreadful idea, that my husband might die twenty years before
me.'

During this speech, her eyes had wandered involuntarily toward Francis
Delaval; but she soon recollected herself, and turned them again to the person
she was addressing. Francis's eyes sparkled with delight, whilst Marsini
appeared somewhat chagrined, but Henry Percival soon drew the whole attention
of the company, by exclaiming,

'Well, I am glad to hear that my sister is of that opinion, for I began to be
quite alarmed, lest if the young women were all for taking the old men, we
young men should be reduced to take the old women; and I honestly confess, that
I should not wish for a wife thirty years older than myself.'

This honest declaration of Henry's raised a general laugh, and so put an end
to the conversation.

CHAP. X.
But ah! her vanished form*
Again presented in your living likeness,
Convulses, with the strong extreme my soul!

BUT, though Marsini had heard this declaration of the sentiments of
Antoinette, which certainly was no encouragement to him to continue his pursuit
of her; he did not in the least remit his assiduities: but, as she began to
perceive their tendency, although at first she had received, and encouraged
them only as those of a friend, she found it necessary to alter her conduct,
and she began, therefore, rather to shun him. When he invited her to the
piano-forte, she was not inclined to play, but had something to write, or made
some other excuse. Did he ask her to accompany him to take some view? -- She
had already so many unfinished sketches, that she did not choose to begin any
more 'till some of them were completed. Did he invite her to read Italian with
him? -- She had read so much lately, that she wished for a respite; and by
these means she eluded being alone with him; which, before that time, she had
never scrupled to be.

Marsini saw and felt mortified at her coolness. He wished for an opportunity
of speaking with her in private; but it was plain, that she cautiously avoided
affording him the opportunity he wished. She seldom walked out by herself --
employed herself in her own apartment, that she might avoid seeing the count,
who scarcely ever passed a day, without calling at the house; and she even made
excuses to stay at home when the rest of the family went to Airville. But,
though this behavior on her part, was sufficiently discouraging to his hopes,
Marsini was drawn to her by such an irresistible attraction, that he
determined, at all hazards, to have some private conversation with her.

One day, therefore, when mrs. Percival and her family were to attend a concert
at Airville, the count watched, in his apartment, for their arrival; and,
seeing that Antoinette was not with them, he immediately took his horse, and
rode to Arlington. Antoinette, unsuspicious that he would take this method of
seeing her, had taken no precautions to prevent his gaining access to her; and
he was, therefore, without hesitation, shown into the parlour where she was
sitting, practicing a new song, which had been just sent her from London.

She was so intent upon her employment, and so unsuspicious of interruption,
that she did not perceive Marsini's entrance, 'till he came close to her, and
said,

'I hope my Antoinette has not now a letter to write, but will stay and hear
what I have so long wished to say to her.'

'I am astonished, count Marsini,' she said, 'at this intrusion. It is what I
could not expect from you, whom I have always considered as a true gentleman.'

'I own, madam,' said Marsini, 'that my conduct is hardly to be justified; but
believe me, I have not thrust myself thus into your presence, with any
intention to persecute or distress you, but merely with a wish that we may come
to a right understanding of each other. And I faithfully promise, that if you
will for this time give me a pa^ent hearing, I will never again, if it shall be
your desire, mention the subject on which it is my desire now to open my mind
to you. I will even quit this country, if you shall wish it, and never again
incommode you with the presence of one who is so disagreeable to you. Tell me,
then, may I now speak out?'

Antoinette hesitated.

'You pause, dearest maid,' said he. 'I will take my leave of you this moment,
if you require it.'

'No, no,' she replied; 'You must, I think, be a man of honor, nor will say
any thing, which I ought not to hear. Therefore, speak on.'

'Well then,' he said, 'dear Antoinette, I think you cannot but have perceived,
how deep an impression you made on me, even the first moment that I saw you.'
Tears almost started into his eyes. 'Antoinette, I was married at only twenty
years of age, to a woman whom I loved to a degree beyond the power of words to
express, and which none but those, who have loved to an equal degree, o^ form
an idea of. But fate separated us in less than half a year after we were
united! Oh! Antoinette, when I first saw you, I thought I beheld my poor
Gabrielle returned from the tomb, and could scarcely refrain from clasping you
to my bosom, and welcoming a dear and long lost friend. My sensations at that
moment were indescribable. I had, since the death of my Gabrielle, been quite
insensible to female charms. I now, again, powerfully felt their influence, and
had soon no pleasure, when absent from your society. I wished you had been my
daughter -- with what double transport then, should I have been your
instructor! -- have cherished your virtues, and corrected your failings, though
for that you would scarcely allow me any opportunity! With what transport
should I have beheld your cultivated and enlightened understanding, daily
advancing nearer and nearer to perfection! -- you would have been the solace of
my life, which has been a burden to me since my Gabrielle was taken from me.
But my daughter you could not be: yet I knew not how to live without you, and,
pardon my presumption, I therefore wished to make you my wife.

'Here, then, dearest Antoinette, I offer you my hand and heart. The latter is
entirely devoted to you; and I make this offer, for the first and the last
time. I believe you far above the common female coque^y, which loves to sport
with the passion of a lover, devoted; else would you never have inspired me
with that passion; and I shall, therefore, determine to conquer it, if your
answer now is discouraging to my hopes. I know you have seen my love for you,
for I could not conceal it. This offer can scarcely, therefore, be unexpected;
and you must, already, have well weighed in your mind, what answer you should
give to it. Tell me then, my lovely girl, am I to hope, or must I make up my
mind to bear with disappointment? -- It will be a hard task, believe me; but,
at least, if I must not be your husband^ let me be your friend. It will be
death to me to (...) you entirely; your late coolness has, indeed, half killed
me.'

He paused* and taking her hand, seemed to expect her reply. But the pathetic
tone and manner in which his last words were delivered, had dissolved the heart
of Antoinette so much, that she had burst into tears, and at first could not
speak; but when recovered, she said,

'Count Marsini, you have pleaded your cause in the most eloquent manner that
words could have pleaded it; and your open and undisguised explanation of your
sentiments has made a much deeper impression on my soul, than all the
artificial harangues commonly used on such occasions could possibly have done.
Let me be as ingenious as yourself. Believe me, I most sincerely revere your
virtues, and esteem your character. I feel the most lively gratitude for the
preference with which you have honored me; and nothing can be more grateful to
my bosom, than always to cherish you there as a friend; but think not of any
thing farther. I can love you as a friend: but were I disposed to enter the
marriage state, I must heartily own, that with all my esteem of, and regard
for, you, I could not think of you as a husband. But even supposing my heart
would lead me to accept the hand you offer, I have powerful reasons which would
still make me decline it. -- It is impossible, believe me, count Marsini, it is
impossible, that at present I should marry at all. -- Heaven only knows to what
scenes of sorrow a hasty union on my part might lead. I am obliged, therefore,
to guard my heart with an adamantine shield, and to teach it lessons of
stoicism, that shall enable it to resist every impulse of attachment which
might be inclined to arise there.'

She burst again into tears; for sorrowful reflections were called up in her
soul.

Marsini listened with astonishment. 'Dear Antoinette,' he said, 'how
mysterious are your words? -- Not marr^ at all! -- Heavens! What should prevent
the daughter of lord Arlington from bestowing herself in marriage on a man whom
her heart might approve? -- Did he then, at parting, leave any cruel
injunction?'

'Oh! no,' she said, interrupting him, 'it is not an injunction from him that
prevents me; but ask no more. It is enough, dear sir, for you to know, that I
not only cannot be your wife, but that at present, I cannot be the wife of any
one.

'Well then,' he said, 'I am satisfied; but dearest Antoinette, let me be your
friend, your father! Do not, oh! do not shun me: it kills me to see your cold
and averted looks. Let me still instruct you -- still enjoy your sweet society;
believe me, it will not be dangerous, either to you or to myself. I can control
my wishes so far as never to aspire higher than to your friendship; but I know
not how I could reconcile my mind to being banished from any place in your
heart; yet, if you command my absence, I must, I will obey, whatever it cost
me.'

'Indeed, sir,' answered Antoinette, 'I do not wish your absence; and after the
assurances you have made me, I have no fear of giving up my soul to you in the
most unreserved friendship. -- Yes, I will again be your pupil, your eleve; I
owe much to you already, nor shall you ever find me ungrateful, either for your
past, ^uture kindness.'

'And since I must not hope for more,' said he, 'believe me, that friendship
will be the greatest happiness I can know; for oh! I shall still fancy you the
child of my Gabrielle -- I shall still think, that had my Gabrielle lived, I
might now have been possessed of such a daughter; and sure no daughter could
ever have the features of a mother more strongly impressed on its countenance,
than are those of my Gabrielle on yours.'

Antoinette looked earnestly at him. She knew not what to make of his words.
Her parents were unknown to her. How was it that she bore so strong a
resemblance to Marsini's deceased wife? -- Her thoughts were confused -- she
wished to ask a thousand questions, but prudence forbade her to speak -- time
might unfold more: but, in the mean time, she stored up carefully in her bosom
the things she had heard.

'Well, then,' he said, 'on these terms we now separate. As a friend I still
may love and regard you, but never shall a more aspiring thought find a place
in my heart. Adieu, therefore, for the present, dearest young lady; and though
this interview, which I have so long anxiously sought for, has not ended
precisely as I could have wished, yet I go away more and more convinced of the
excellence of your heart and understanding, and easier in my own mind, for
being released from a painful suspense, and knowing exactly the extent of my
prospects with regard to you.'

So saying, he took her hand gently, which he pressed to his lips, and with a
look full of anxious affection, withdrew, pondering all the way home, on what
she had said, earnestly wishing to unravel the mysterious meaning of her words;
yet unable to form any conjecture which might lead to a probable solution of
them.

When mrs. Percival returned home, Antoinette related to her all that had
passed, and received from her the warmest approbation of her conduct, and thus
matters rested for a short time. Marsini resumed his character of instructor to
Antoinette, and she no longer shunned his attentions; all which Francis
Delaval, who did not know what had passed, regarded with a jealous and envious
eye.

Francis, however, was soon in some sort relieved from his anxiety, by finding,
that though he had no prospect himself of succeeding in his wishes, yet that
the count's prospect was no better; and some consolation is always to be
derived from the knowledge, that a rival has no chance of possessing the
treasure which we ourselves have in vain endeavored to obtain.

Francis had long cultivated an intimacy with Henry Percival, perhaps, at
first, in the hope, that an intimacy with the brother might assist his views
with regard to the sister; but it was afterward continued out of regard to the
youth himself, who certainly was highly deserving his friendship. Francis,
therefore, resolved to sound Henry on the subject of his sister's inclinations,
and try if he could learn, by that means, whether he might entertain a
reasonable hope of her lending a favorable ear to his addresses.

One day, therefore, when they were walking out together, Francis, as if quite
undesignedly, drew the conversation round to Antoinette, and after it had been
carried to some length, at last asked Henry, 'if his sister was not going to be
married to count Marsini, for he said it was generally supposed that the match
was agreed on: and,' said he, 'although strange to say, Marsini, though our
guest, has never hinted a word to us on the subject; yet I can nevertheless
scarcely doubt of the truth of the report, as he and miss Percival so much are
together.'

Henry replied, 'That he believed the count would be very glad to marry his
sister: but, indeed,' said he, 'I think he is too old for her, and I know very
well that my sister is determined not to marry at present, whoever might offer
to her; she says she is too young yet to undertake the care of a family;
besides -- '

He stopped: he thought he had said a word too much.

'Besides what?' asked Francis eagerly.

'O nothing,' said Henry. 'But I am sure my sister would not marry now; and
perhaps she may never marry at all.'

'You astonish me,' said Francis. 'How can such a charming young woman have
made so strange, so cruel a resolution?'

'Why, she has not made it without good reasons,' answered Henry. 'But come,
Frank, don't be so over curious. You have, some how or other, made me say too
much already.'

Francis said no more: but Henry's words sunk deeply into his mind. There was
an air of mystery in them, which astonished him exceedingly; but as he found
that Henry did not like to be questioned, he was too much of a gentleman to
importune him on the subject.

Soon after, in the course of their walk, passing by the cell which the hermit
had inhabited, Francis suddenly exclaimed,

'Ha! I wonder whether the hermit be still alive? -- I have not seen, or heard
of him, for a long time, and had almost forgotten him.' Then, addressing Henry,
'Did you ever hear of him?' said he.

'Oh! yes,' answered Henry, 'and I can tell you that he died very soon after we
came to the castle: -- What an extraordinary old man he was!'

'Extraordinary indeed,' said Francis. 'I often tried to get into conversation
with him; but I never could get him to say much: sometimes I could hardly even
obtain an answer to any question I asked. But once he asked me, with great
anxiety, if I was related to lord Arlington? and on my answering in the
negative, he shook his head, and did not say any thing more. -- Could you ever
get him to talk?'

'I never had an opportunity of trying,' answered Henry. 'I never saw him 'till
after he was dead.'

'Ha!' said Francis, 'What, did he drop down as he was walking about? -- And
did you find him?'

'Oh! no,' said Henry, 'He died in his cell: and I went there on purpose to see
him.'

'And how happened that?'

'Why I went because I had heard such a strange account of him from my sister,
and because she had some conversation with him, that excited our curiosity
about him very much.'

'What then, he would talk to your sister? -- Old as he was, he could not
resist her attractions?'

'Pho,' answered Henry, 'No, no, -- attractions -- pho -- no -- but my sister
had seen him fall, and helped him up, and so he began talking to her. But come,
Frank, let us find some other subject of conversation; for though I love my
sister -- dearly love her, yet I don't like to be always talking of her.'

Francis saw more and more plainly, that there was a something relative to
Antoinette, which Henry did not like should be too closely investigated. He was
distressed about it; but at the same time, felt a secret pleasure, in finding
that he should not have the mortification of seeing her in the arms of a rival.

They soon after arrived in the grounds belonging to the castle, where meeting
with mrs. Percival and Antoinette, the conversation soon became general.

CHAP. XI.
Thou do not know
To what excess of ^nderness I loved her.
I knew no happine^ but what she gave me,
Nor could have felt a misery but for her.

IT was not many days after the two conversations had passed, which are related
in the preceding chapter, that an event occurred, which, while it confirmed
Francis in the belief, that some mystery hung over the fate of Antoinette, at
the same time seemed, in sort, to unravel it: I say seemed, for though there
was a specious appearance of developement as to her birth, enough of cloud
still remained, to leave her mind far from satisfied of the truth of what was
apprehended to be discovered, and far from thinking it right to crown, at that
time, the wishes of her lover, ^ever her inclinations might have prompted her
to it.

One day when the two families were met together at Arlington castle, a
conversation arose which occasioned the company to wish to refer to the Romish
Missal in order to ascertain a point on which they were doubtful, and which,
Marsini said, could immediately be decided by a reference to that book, if one
could be produced. Antoinette recollecting that which had belonged to the
hermit, and which had been in her possession ever since his death, immediately
brought it, and gave it into the hands of Marsini.

He no sooner cast his eyes on it, than he exclaimed,

'Good God! signora! How came this book into your possession? -- These are the
arms of St. Foix!' pointing to the arms in gilding, on the outside of the book.

Antoinette replied, 'That he must excuse her answering that question; that a
history belonged to that book, which she did not care to relate; and perhaps,'
she added, 'I have done wrong in producing it, and exposing myself to any
questions that might be asked concerning it.'

'Nay; but for heaven's sake, dear Antoinette, tell me all you know about this
book;' said Marsini, 'These are indeed, the arms of St. Foix! -- too, too well
do I know them; I cannot be mistaken. -- Look at them mr. Delaval* you know the
chevalier: -- You must have seen the arms frequently.'

Mr. Delaval looked at the book; 'Most assuredly these are the arms of St.
Foix,' he said, 'They are too remarkable to be mistaken; and, pardon me, miss
Percival, but I have always thought, that there was a great resemblance between
you and our truly amiable friend, the chevalier de St. Foix.'

'Oh! and has the likeness struck you, then?' said Marsini, 'Oh! she is the
perfect resemblance of my wife, my Gabrielle de St. Foix, and she was the exact
counterpart of her brother.'

He got up from his seat; he walked about the room for some minutes in a
violent agitation; then sat down by Antoinette, and eagerly grasping her hand,
'Pardon me, pardon me, dearest creature,' he said, 'I am on the rack! Oh!
release me, and say how that book came into your hands!'

Antoinette looked anxiously at mrs. Percival, as if to ask her advice what she
should do, which mrs. Percival observing, said,

'You seem to wish for my opinion, my love, and I will freely give it. We are
surely amongst people who will not betray what passes here, and, perhaps, the
imparting to the count what you know concerning this book, may lead to
important discoveries. But, my Antoinette -- the picture and the cross: You
have them about you, no doubt -- Might you not show them also to the count?'

Antoinette immediately drew from her pocket a little case, in which she always
kept them, and opening it, presented the picture to the count, who exclaimed,

'My wife! -- my wife!' and fell senseless on the floor.

The company looked all astonishment; they immediately applied themselves to
assist the count, but it was some time before his senses returned; when they
did, he exclaimed,

'Merciful God! -- And could then, what I have hitherto considered as a vile
calumny, be really true! -- Yes,' said he, looking first at the picture, and
then at Antoinette, -- 'It must be so -- I cannot doubt any longer; -- But
Antoinette, dearest Antoinette, tell me, whence had you these things?

It was impossible to resist the agitation of the count any longer: and
Antoinette begged of mrs. Percival to relate her story, which she immediately
did; and, at the conclusion of it, she desired Antoinette to show the cross to
Marsini, which he had not yet seen.

Astonishment at the story he had heard held the count for some time in perfect
silence. He looked earnestly at Antoinette for several minutes, and at length,
casting his eyes on the cross, which she held in her hand, he cried out,

'It is St. Foix's! by heaven it is St. Foix's!"

He was again silent a few minutes; and then said, 'Come, I will endeavor to
compose myself, that I may tell my story; and I think, dearest maid,'
addressing Antoinette, 'that I can point out to you one of your parents at
least.'

He went out of the room. He walked a little while about the garden; then
returning, and seating himself by Antoinette, he began thus:

'I have already told you, my dearest creature, that I was married when only
twenty years of age. My wife was the eldest daughter of the baron de St. Foix,
a French nobleman, who have taken an unaccountable and unreasonable dislike to
her, sent her to live with a relation of his at Milan, where I become
acquainted with her, and was irresistibly charmed with her. Good God! that a
father could find any thing to dissike in so amiable a creature; -- she was
faultless! (I, at least, thought so) I soon solicited her hand in marriage; and
the baron being indifferent as to her fate, said, in a cavalier kind of way,
'That I was welcome to take her if I wished it; but he should not give her any
fortune.' Fortune, however, was not my aim. I wished only for Gabrielle, and
was soon after married to her. The baron continued to treat both me and my wife
with the utmost contempt, nor would he suffer his youngest daughter to come
near us; but the chevalier de St. Foix's son, who was in every respect a
perfect contrast to the baron, came to Milan, to be present at our marriage,
and always treated us with the greatest respect and attention. Indeed, from our
first meeting, the strictest friendship commenced between us, which ended only
with the untimely death of the chevalier,

'We had only been married a fortnight, when I was obliged to leave this dear
wife, (whom I loved beyond expression) to attend some business at the court of
Naples. I wished to have taken my wife with me, and should certainly have done
so, but as it was quite uncertain how long I might be detained, and whether I
might not be obliged to take frequent journeys between Naples and Florence, it
was judged best for me, to leave my wife, whose health was rather delicate,
with my father, at Florence, and go to Naples, accompanied only by the
chevalier de St. Foix.

'Ah! How little did I think, when I parted from my beloved Gabrielle, to take
this journey, that I was never to see her more! but so, alas! it happened. I
was detained at Naples for more than five months, and judge, if you can, of my
sufferings, when the night before I was to set out on my return to Florence, an
express arrived from my father, informing me of the sudden death of her, in
whom my whole happiness was centred. I returned, however, to Florence; but
heaven only knows the torments I endured on my arrival there.

'I found my poor father almost as much affected with the loss of my Gabrielle,
as I was myself. He spoke of her in terms of the highest esteem and affection;
but I always found him unwilling to enter on the subject of her death, which I
then thought was owing to his finding it too affecting a subject; alas! I fear
there was another cause for his thus shunning the conversation. He did not,
indeed, long survive a scene, which seemed to have occasioned him such bitter
affliction, for he died in about half a year after.

'St. Foix continued with me for about a year after the death of my wife, when
he was called away in the manner I have mentioned some time ago; soon after
which, to my no small additional regret, he met with his untimely fate.

'But now, my dear Antoinette, to come to that part of my story, which I
suppose to relate to you.

'Some time after the departure and death of the chevalier, and while you, mr.
Delaval, was resident in Florence, a strange rumor reached my ears, that my
Gabrielle died in childbirth, and that the child was conveyed away, in order
that the affair might be kept secret from me; and was then alive; that this
circumstance was known to my father, who thought it better that it should be
concealed from me; for as my poor wife had atoned for her fault with her life,
it was unnecessary that her memory should be blackened.

'This strange report, I at first totally disbelieved, and even disdained to
make enquiries into it; but strong circumstances afterward appearing to lead
me to suspect, that it was not absolutely without foundation, I endeavored,
privately, to investigate the truth of it, with intention, if I could find out
the the child, with sufficient proof, that it was really my Gabrielle's to
adopt it as my own, and educate it accordingly.

'Perhaps, this may appear to many people an odd resolution; but doting on her
as I did, while she was alive, and having so long cherished her memory in my
bosom, as a model of perfection, I could not feel the indignation which it may
be thought I ought to have felt at the deception she had practiced on me. In
short, I had so long been accustomed to live upon the idea of my Gabrielle,
that I should have been more rejoiced at having a representative of her, to
love, cherish, and protect, than chagrined at finding that another had shared
those beauties with me, which I had been accustomed to consider as exclusively
mine.

'But after the most diligent search, I could not find out the child I fought
for, nor could I find either a complete confirmation, or contradiction of the
story I had heard. The circumstance which seemed most of all to confirm the
truth of the story, was, that a woman who had attended on Gabrielle,
disappeared immediately on her death, taking with her, as was supposed, a
number of jewels, which were missed at the same time. This, at the time, I
attributed entirely to the dishonesty of the woman; but I now conceive that it
might be with a view of providing for the child. After all, the affair was so
dark and mysterious, that I hardly knew what to think of it, but have always
been inclined to believe, that the character of my dearest Gabrielle was
falsely aspersed.

'But now, my Antoinette, I see in you her perfect likeness; -- I see you in
possession of articles, which I know must have belonged to the house of St.
Foix, from which she was descended; and cannot, therefore, but suppose, that
there are people who know you to belong to that house. Your story is enveloped
in a cloud of mystery; and all these circumstances convince me, that I now
behold the child, whom years ago I sought for in vain, but whom chance has, at
last, thrown in my way; and that you are indeed the daughter of my Gabrielle,
-- shall I, without offending, hazard the conjecture? -- by lord Arlington
himself; nor can I any longer be surprised at the strong affection I have felt
for you ever since I first saw you; for the child of that dear creature could
not fail to be dear to me.'

He accompanied these last words with ardently pressing the hand of the
trembling Antoinette to his bosom.

She had listened to the story with ^ed emotions of grief and astonishment; and
the whole company, indeed, were deeply affected with his interesting narrative,
and, particularly, with the extraordinary benevolence he had shown with regard
to his Gabrielle and her chil^.

Mrs. Percival was the first to remark on the story, by questioning Marsini,
with some emotion, 'What had occasioned his conjecture relative to lord
Arlington? -- and if he knew of any intercourse having ever subsisted between
him and the house of St. Foix?'

Marsini replied, 'Indeed, madam, I do not know that lord Arlington ever had
any acquaintance with my dear wife's family. That idea was suggested to me by
the anxiety which he seemed to have for the fate of Antoinette, and his
thorough knowledge of her story; besides that, his lordship, according to what
I understand, from the relation you gave me, must have been abroad at the time
I speak of.'

'Still,' said mrs. Percival, 'I am far from being satisfied as to this affair.
My Theodore, in the letter he sent with Antoinette, says, that, She is not the
offspring of illicit love.' -- This is irreconcilable with what you suppose;
and, I think, he would not have imposed on me in such a manner. My affection to
the child, and my attention to the request of a husband I so much loved, would
not have been less, had he waved the subject of her birth entirely, and that, I
think he must have known me well enough to be assured of it.'

'Yet,' said Marsini, 'I cannot give up my belief, that I have discovered the
mother of Antoinette. -- That picture, -- Oh! it is my Gabrielle herself! --
Never did painting bear a stronger resemblance to the original; -- nor ever did
child bear so strong a resemblance to a parent, as Antoinette does to my dear
departed wife. Oh! then, let me consider her as my child; and, how happy shall
I be in such a child, to be my comfort and support in my declining years! Say,
Antoinette, can you from henceforward consider me, live ^h me, as a father?
Believe me, you never shall repent it.'

'Oh! moderate your transports, my worthy friend,' said Antoinette. 'You have,
indeed, short as our acquaintance has been, shown to me the kindness, the
affection of a father; -- but, What do you now mean? I will love you still as a
friend: but, How ca^ we live on any other terms together, than as we do now? --
Consider, dear sir -- '

'True, oh! true,' said Marsini, interrupting her. 'I see what you would say;
-- forgive me, I was transported beyond all bounds -- my senses were well nigh
gone; -- but I am cool again. I believe still, that I have a dearer interest in
you, than I was at first aware of. But time will, no doubt, develope all; and
to time we must consign it, and patiently wait the event.'

The conversation continued some time longer; but the more the matter was
talked over, the less reason did there seem to be for Marsini's belief, that he
had discovered the mother of Antoinette. Notwithstanding which, Marsini
continued in that belief, and declared, that he should always consider her as
his daughter; and thus the company broke up for that evening; Antoinette,
greatly affected with all that had passed, and more strongly than ever
confirmed in her resolution, not to marry while the story of her birth remained
unknown; -- and mrs. Percival more distressed than ever, at the conduct of her
husband, in suffering a matter of so much importance to remain so long in
clouds and darkness.

CHAP. XII.
(...) tell me not my suit is desperate;
Sooth, though you cannot heal; and I will listen,
As if I lived by every sound you uttered,
And death and inattention were the same.
JEPHSON.
THE summer was now on the decline, and autumn began to ^inge the surrounding
woods with her varied hues, which made mrs. Percival turn her thoughts toward
returning to England, where it was her intention to spend the next year and
half, when she meant Henry should go abroad. When she first mentioned to
Antoinette her idea of leaving Arlington, she desired her, at the same time, to
say whether she would like to pass the winter in London, or whether she would
prefer remaining in Ireland; strongly suspecting, that the latter would be her
choice: and as her principal object in returning to England, was to introduce
Antoinette into the world (for Henry, she thought, in very good hands, under
doctor Schomberg), if her wish was rather for retirement, she would certainly
not think of taking her out of it, contrary to her inclination.

Antoinette said, 'Since you, my dearest madam, are so kind as to leave this
matter entirely to my choice, I will freely own, that my wish is, at present,
to remain where I am. I think, while I am here, I have more chance of making
discoveries relative to my own story, than if I were to be at such a distance
as London, where I should constantly be haunted with the idea, that something
was passing here of importance to me.'

These reasons were quite sufficient for mrs. Percival, as, indeed, would the
bare expression of Antoinette's wish have been, without her assigning any
reason at all for it; and she resolved to give up all thoughts of England.

Marsini, whose whole soul was wrapped up in Antoinette, when he found she was
likely to remain at Arlington, took a small house, which was then vacant in the
neighborhood, at which, however, he spent but little of his time; as he was
every day, and almost all day long, at the castle; but his behavior to her was
changed entirely from that of the lover, to the father. This attachment
furnished an ample topic of conversation to all the neighborhood, and
occasioned the long forgotten story of Theodore's abrupt departure to be
revived, as an appendage to that of Marsini and Antoinette; and many were the
expressions of astonishment used, whenever the affair was canvassed, that
Marsini, circumstanced as he apprehended he was with regard to her, should
entertain a partiality for her; -- an astonishment which, I doubt not, has been
anticipated by many of my readers; for, according to all established forms in
the world, the deception, which he was well convinced, had been practiced on
him by his wife, ought to have rendered Antoinette the object of his hatred,
however strongly her youth, beauty, and, above all, her benevolent and amiable
disposition, might plead in her behalf. I will not pretend to apologize for his
thus transgressing the rules of custom. I only give the fact, as it is,
although I am sensible that it will lessen Marsini in the estimation of most
people.

Francis Delaval, who had at first felt the greatest transports, when he found
all ideas of rival^^^ between Marsini and himself done away, did not, however,
find, as time moved onwards, that the removal of that obstacle had greatly
brightened his prospects. He became more and more enamoured every day: yet, to
his mortification, he did not find that his ^remitted assiduities seemed to
forward his progress in gaining the affections of his mistress, whose obscure
fate had not, in the least, abated his wish of possessing her. A ray of hope
did, sometimes, break in upon him, that he was not absolutely indifferent to
her; but despondency was generally the prevailing feature in his mind. He lost
his spirits; he became thoughtful, absent, and fond of solitude, often
wandering about by himself for hours together. One day, in walking on the sands
by the seashore, he wrote the name of Antoinette on the sands, and then
composed the following MADRIGAL.
My stick inscribes upon the sands
The name of her my bosom loves;
It Is mighty love the deed commands,
And, smiling, he the work approves.
Ye waves, from whence arose the fair
Who gave to earth the artful boy,
For thy fair daughter's sake, forbear
The work he ordered to destroy.


Mr. Delaval saw his son's situation with the deepest concern. It was plain
that his happiness depended wholly on the possession of Antoinette: and he
would have done any thing in his power to forward an union between them: but he
saw plainly the strong reasons she had to guard her heart against any
approaches of a passion, which might, if indulged, ultimately involve her in
ruin and wretchedness.

Things were in this situation, when an event happened, which threatened to
hurl mrs. Percival and her family from the height of wealth and affluence, to a
comparative state of poverty, by depriving them of the estates annexed to the
barony of Arlington, which, as the greatest part of mrs. Percival's fortune had
been sunk in freeling them from encumbrances, were now almost their only
possessions.

The next heir to the estates and title of Arlington, supposing Theodore to
have died childless, was a distant relation of the family, who had lived for
some years at Marseilles: as the cheap living in that southern part of France,
enabled him to support a better appearance, with a very small fortune, than he
could have done in England or Ireland. This man having, in his youth, quarreled
with the father of Theodore, no intercourse had subsisted between the two
branches of the family from that time, and mrs. Percival, though she had heard
of such a person, did not know whether he was alive or not.

This man now suddenly appeared at Dublin, to lay claim to the estates and
title of Arlington, under the plea that he had sufficient evidence to bring
forward, that Theodore was married, during his residence abroad to a French
lady, who was alive at the time that he married miss Conolly, consequently,
that the marriage with her was illegal, and the son he had by that marriage,
could not inherit; and that Theodore having died some months before in the
West Indies, the title and estates of course devolved upon him.

This was a stroke so sudden, so unexpected, and carrying such dreadful
consequences in its train, that it would have broken down the minds of the
generality of females; but that of mrs. Percival was superior to most of her
sex. She saw plainly, that if mr. Thomas Percival could substantiate the facts
which he had alleged, the case was clear, and she must submit to her fate; to
the hardships of which she could not be insensible, but which she was resolved
to meet with fortitude. She was inured to troubles, and had learnt by them,
lessons of philosophy, which would enable her to adapt her ideas to any
situation in life, convinced that there is none so elevated, as to be exempt
from troubles; nor any so low as to be devoid of comforts. She could not charge
herself with any thing culpable in her conduct, unless it were the marrying
Theodore, when she was sensible that she was not the object of his choice. But
with regard to her son, though his birth might not be legal, she was guiltless
in that respect; for her mind had no share in the transgression, which,
therefore, in the eye both of God and man, could not be considered as one.

With these, and various other reflections of the like kind, she fortified her
mind against the storms which she had now to encounter; and with the most
unshaken firmness and composure, ordered every thing to be prepared for her
immediate departure with her family to Dublin.

When Francis Delaval heard of the situation into which the family that
contained his adored Antoinette, was likely to be thrown, he immediately
applied to his father for his consent, that he might throw himself at her feet,
and offer her a heart and hand devoted to her, and by accepting which, she
would be placed out of the reach of those shafts, which the malice of fortune
was aiming at the unfortunate mrs. Percival and her son. And this
consideration, added to the still more powerful one, that she might then be
enabled to make some acknowledgment, more solid than in words only, for the
immense weight of favors, which she had received from the hands of mrs.
Percival, Francis hoped would operate on her mind, as an inducement to her to
lay aside her scruples, and accept an offer, which, under other circumstances,
she might have refused. He ^s not, too, quite without hopes, that the
generosity of temp^r, which this offer would carry on the face of it, might
operate in his favor, on a mind so open as that of Antoinette, to every
virtuous impression.

Mr. Delaval, whose disposition was not behind hand in generosity with his son,
entered with ardour into all his feelings and views, and ordered him
immediately to proceed in the affair, as his own wishes should dictate to him;
though he observed, at the same time, that Antoinette had a friend in Marsini,
who would prevent her being involved in the fate of mrs. Percival and her son.

Francis lost no time, but immediately repaired to Arlington castle, where,
enquiring for miss Percival he was told, that she was in the garden, where he
would find her. To the garden, therefore, he repaired, where she was taking a
solitary walk, indulging in the melancholy reflection, that it was, perhaps,
the last she might ever take there. He opened his errand by saying, 'I come not
now, dearest madam, to intrude unseasonably on your sorrows; but I could not
support the thought of your leaving this place, to which, alas! you may perhaps
never return, without laying open my mind to you.'

'Surely, fair Antoinette,' said he, taking her hand gently, which she had not
power to withhold from him, 'my outward actions cannot have been such
unfaithful interpreters of my internal feelings, as to leave you any doubt of
the ardour of my affection for you. I know very well,' he continued, 'the
reasons you have for wishing to keep yourself free from any engagement of the
kind, which my heart pants to propose to you; but, dearest Antoinette,
consider, that your scruples in this instance are quite done away. Though you
are unfortunately a stranger to your connections, mine are well known; nor can
you, in uniting yourself to me, run any risk of forming a connection, which the
ties of blood would prohibit. No secret connections on the part of my father or
mother, have rendered my birth doubtful; it can therefore no ways interfere
with yours. Surely, then, my Antoinette, I have removed all obstacles to our
union on that account; and, will you not, therefore, per^ me to hope, that the
offer I here make you, of a heart and hand devoted to you, may not be
unfavourably received? Believe me, and I speak no common cant, but what I say
comes from the bottom of my heart, that my future happiness or misery depends
on your acceptance or rejection of my proposals. I wait your answer,' said he,
pressing her hand to his bosom, 'Oh!' let it be favorable. -- I have sometimes
dared to hope, that I was not absolutely indifferent to you.'

Tears flowed fast down the cheeks of his fair auditor, while Francis made this
harangue, to which she replied,

'Had any doubts existed in my heart, mr. Delaval, of the true generosity and
sweetness of your disposition, and of the sincerity of your affection for me,
the present moment must at once have dispelled them; but I wanted not this
instance to convince me, that your soul is the seat of benevolence and
philanthropy. -- Oh! that you had not taken me at a moment, when sorrow had
loosened the chains with which I have endeavored to guard every avenue of my
heart! -- But I cannot now dissemble. -- Yes, mr. Delaval, I will own it, my
affections are solely, wholly, yours. I wish I felt less forcibly the truth of
this confession; but let me entreat you to be contented, at present, with the
knowledge of my regard for you, nor press me farther to enter into engagements,
which I must absolutely refuse.

'I grant the justice of the observations you have made, with regard to my
principal objection to marrying, and that objection, I own, is entirely done
away in my mind, with regard to giving my hand to you; -- but still I must at
present refuse, absolutely refuse, to listen to your su^* I cannot bear even
the appearance of taking advantage of the moment of enthusiasm, to accept a
proposal, which, in your cooler moments, you may repent of having made.'

'Oh no,' exclaimed Francis, interrupting her. It Is impossible. I never did,
and I hope never shall, repent of following the dictates of an open,
undisguised heart, which has not a thought that it wishes to conceal from the
world.'

'Yet consider,' returned Antoinette, 'if not for your own sake, for mine at
least, consider, my present situation. My benefactress, my more than mother, is
likely to be reduced from affluence to poverty; and though, from the kindness
and affection of count Marsini, I have a prospect of not being involved in her
ruin, yet consider whether you can, yourself, think it a proper time for me to
accept your proposals. -- Oh! no: assure yourself of my ardent affection for
you, but forbear to urge me to an engagement, which my judgment tells me I
ought not to enter into. Should the generous sentiments which you now profess
for me, continue some time hence. I may then, with more propriety, accept your
proposals, if you should think proper to renew them: -- but at present, I
entreat you, as you value my peace, to urge me no farther.'

Francis silently acquiesced in the sentence, which Antoinette had thus passed
on him. He entered into all her feelings on the subject, which he could not
entirely disapprove; and as he had gained an assurance from her own lips, of
her affection for him, his heart was much more at ease. After taking a most
affectionate leave of her, therefore* he withdrew, to bid farewell to the rest
of the family, who were to set out for Dublin the next day.

CHAP. XIII.
Blow, ye winds,
Ye waves, ye thunders, roll your tempests on,
Shake ye old pillars of the marble sky,
'Till all its orb^ and all its worlds of fire,
Be loosened from their seats: yet still serene
The unconquered mind looks down upon the wreck,
And ever stronger as the storm advances
Firm in the closing ruin holds his way,
Where nature calls him to the destined goal!
AKENSIDE.
FRANCIS, the next day, saw his beloved Antoinette, with an aching heart -- saw
her depart from Arlington castle, and in the evening sitting down by the side
of the lake, he wrote the following stanzas: SONG.
It Is sweet the lake's still shore to trace,
And watch the setting sun;
When its bright orb through boundless space
Its daily course has run.
But sweeter still in deeper night,
Still on the shore to stray;
And view the glittering moon-beams bright
Upon the waters play.
But even these scenes have lost their power
That calm delight to impart;
Since they, alas! are seen no more,
With her who rules my heart.
It Is sweet at early morn to hear
The lark, when soaring high;
With sweetest notes she hails the sphere,
That gilds the orient sky.
But sweeter far the town to leave,
And rove the woods among;
And list at close of silent eve,
To Philomela's song.
But neither lark nor nightingale,
Have power to charm mine ear;
Unless the fair, whose loss I wail,
With me their strains could share.
The scenes I with my Delia see
With ten-fold charms appear:
The sounds my Delia hears with me,
With ten-fold joy I hear.
But when she is absent from my side,
The scenes that charmed before,
The sounds that seemed so sweet to glide,
Alas! ca^ charm no more.


Francis was, however, comforted for the loss of his mistress, by hearing his
father declare his intention of going to Dublin very soon to spend the winter
there.

When mrs. Percival arrived in that city, her first care was to engage, on her
side, some of the most able men in the law department, by whose advice she
solicited an interview with her antagonist, which request he positively refused
to grant, saying, 'That the only intercourse which could possibly pass between
them, must be by means of their respective agents.' Several meetings
accordingly passed between them, by which mr. Byrne and mr. Fitzpatrick, mrs.
Percival's two principal council, got an insight into the evidence which the
claimant had to bring forward.

The witnesses to be produced to the marriage, were Pierre Dupont, and Jeanne
Berger, a man and woman who had been servants at the Celestine convent of
Saint Marguerite, on the banks of the Rhone, about fourteen miles from the
city of Vienne, in the Province of Dauphine. The account they gave of the
affair, and which they said they were ready to depose on oath, was 'That a
rumor arising in the convent, at a time which they mentioned, (and which was
about eighteen years before that, at which they were giving in their relation)
that some days before one of the nuns had been married to a gentleman at the
cell of the confessor of the convent, which gentleman was secretly introduced
at night, by the connivance of one of the superiors of the convent, to the
chamber of his wife; they determined, if possible to investigate the matter, in
hopes, as they said, of bringing wretches, who could be guilty of such
profanation, to condign punishment. The confessor died suddenly very soon
after. They went, therefore, immediately to his cell, in hopes of finding
something there, which might lead them to discover the truth of this dark
affair.

In the cell they found a paper, containing the following memorandum, which
they brought away with them, and which was to be produced in evidence on the
trial: 'I Anselm de la Bruyere, confessor of the Celestine convent of Saint
Marguerite, in the province of Dauphine, think it proper by the following paper
to testify, lest any doubt of the validity of the marriage should hereafter
arise; and I do hereby testify, that I did, on this day, unite in holy wedlock,
with all due forms and ceremonies, Theodore Percival, of the kingdom of
Ireland, and Antoinette de St. Foix. In witness whereof, I have hereunto set my
hand and seal,

ANSELM DE LA BRUYERE.




This paper was also signed by two witnesses, as being present at the marriage,
under the names of Clement Sequin, and Marianne de Mercier; the former of whom,
as the servants said, was a friar of a neighboring monastery, who was often
with Anselm, and the latter the superior, who was reported to have introduced
the gentleman into the men's chamber. This paper, they said, they intended to
have given to the lady abbess, and at the same time to have related to her the
report they had heard; but having had a quarrel with her very soon after, for
which they were dismissed the convent in haste, they, in revenge, kept the
story secret. But, some years after, Pierre Dupont coming to visit some friends
in the neighborhood of the convent, heard that the nun and Marianne had just
made their escape from it together.

The fact of Theodore's death was to be attested by two French sailors, who
could depose, that about a year or a little more back, a person, who was called
Theodore Percival, was brought strongly guarded to Rochelle, and put on board
the ship to which they belonged, which was one of a fleet of merchant ships
bound to St. Domingo; that he remained on board all the time of their passage
to St. Domingo; and after he was landed at that island came frequently down to
visit the ship; but after some time he caught a fever, and died there. The
description they gave of the person of this man, exactly corresponded to that
of lord Arlington; and his own extraordinary conduct, threw a shade of
probability over the whole narrative, which left no room to doubt of its truth.

'And what evidence had the defendants to bring on the other side? -- None --
the case seemed, therefore, a lost one. But, notwithstanding, mr. Byrne and mr.
Fitzpatrick advised mrs. Percival to stand the trial, as it was possible that
contradictions might arise in the depositions of these witnesses, which might
tend to invalidate their evidence.

On the whole, however, it appeared to mrs. Percival, that she had nothing now
to expect but the loss of her fortune, and that, in consequence, her son and
herself would be reduced to very strait circumstances. She experienced,
however, a great consolation in the friendship of Marsini, and of the Delavals,
who were come to Dublin. The former made the most kind and liberal offers of an
asylum to the whole family, in his country, if affairs should take the ill turn
that was to be expected; and both he and Francis Delaval offered to take a
journey, to the convent of Saint Marguerite, to gain, if possible, some
farther insight into the extraordinary transaction, which was reported to have
happened there.

This was mentioned to mr. Byrne and mr. Fitzpatrick; but their opinion was,
that it was best, at least, to delay the journey, 'till they saw more pl^y what
turn the business was likely to take; and if a verdict was given against them;
it was then possible that evidence might be collected there, on which to ground
a motion for a new trial. But if they were to go at that time, it was scarcely
possible they could return before the day fixed for the trial; and on the
whole, it was better to let the cause have a hearing, before they proceeded to
any farther steps, and to rest on the possibility of the evidence produced by
the claimant not being deemed sufficient by the judge and jury, to obtain a
verdict in his favor.

At length the day of the trial arrived. The depositions of the two servants of
the convent were to the effect abovementioned. When they were cross-examined
by the defendant's council, it appeared that they had quitted the country
immediately after they were discharged from the convent, and that the only
reason Pierre Dupont had for saying that Antoinette de St. Foix had eloped from
the convent some years after was, his hearing there that one of the nuns had
escaped with Marianne; and as she was a witness to Antoinette's marriage, he
concluded the nun to be no other than that lady herself. A bold conclusion,
which could by no means stand as evidence in a court of law however strong the
presumption might be, that he was in the right.

There was no evidence, therefore, to prove that Antoinette was alive at the
time that Theodore was married to miss Conolly; but neither, on the other hand,
was there any evidence to prove her death before that time; and as the fact of
the first marriage was established, it became the part of the defendant to
prove, that the second marriage had not taken place 'till after the first was
dissolved by the death of one of the parties.

Pierre and Jeanne were next examined, as to the manner of their becoming
acquainted with mr. Thomas Percival at Marseilles, and for what reason they had
put the paper in question into his hands. They answered to these questions,
that they went to Marseilles about two years after they had left the convent,
having lived, during that two years, at Lions; and as their view in going to
Marseilles, was to get into service there, Pierre, at the recommendation of a
friend, was soon hired as footman into mr. Percival's family. As the name of
his master was the same as that of the gentleman, the certificate of whose
marriage they had found in Anselm's cell, he consulted with Jeanne, whether
they should not offer him the paper, (which might, perhaps, be of value to him)
if he would give them a good sum of money for it.

This being settled between them, the offer was made, and mr. Percival readily
consented to purchase the paper, at the price they demanded; and they believed
it had never been out of his possession since. They had, however, thought no
more about it, 'till not long since, when mr. Percival had asked them to
accompany him to Ireland, for the purpose of attesting all they knew, relative
to the marriage, of which, that paper was the certificate; and told them, they
should be well paid for it; upon which they readily consented to his request.

These people also positively swore to Anselm's handwriting in the
certificate, having often seen him write during three years, that one had lived
in the convent, and two years, that the other had been engaged in its service.

Mr. Percival himself was then examined, as to the reason of his having kept
the certificate of Theodore's marriage so long concealed, and at last producing
it.

He said, 'That he thought his reasons for doing so, must be obvious to every
one, nor should he attempt to disguise them. He had first purchased the paper,
and afterward kept it for the very purpose for which it was now produced. He
knew himself to be the next heir to the Arlington estates, if Theodore died
without lawful heirs; and he therefore conceived it very possible, that it
might be of great service to himself, to be possessed of a paper, containing a
certificate of a marriage of that same Theodore's, in such a secret way; and
that when once possessed of it, he had kept it with care, 'till the moment
should arrive when he could turn it to his own advantage, which moment he
conceived to be at length arrived.

The two French sailors were next called, who were to prove the death of
Theodore, the heads of whose deposition have been already given. In their
cross-examination, they too were questioned as to the manner in which they
became known to the claimant, of which they gave the following account:

That at their return from St. Domingo, after the voyage, when they had carried
over Theodore Percival, they quitted the merchant of Rochelle, in whose service
they had been, on account of a quarrel which they had, in their return home,
with the captain of the ship; and one of them having relations at Marseilles,
they went thither, in hopes of getting employment in their profession.

They had not been many days at Marseilles, before they became acquainted with
Pierre Dupont, who had not long been known to their relations; and hearing him
often mention his master, by the name of Percival, it brought to their mind the
unfortunate man of that name, who had been passenger in their ship, and who
died at St. Domingo; and in the course of conversation one day with Pierre,
they mentioned that circumstance, but with no other view, than as relating a
story, which a similarity of names had brought to their minds.

Not long after this, Pierre told them, that his master wished to speak with
them; and when they went to him, he questioned them closely respecting the
story which they had told to his servant; in consequence of which, they gave
him a full detail of all that they knew respecting Theodore Percival; but at
that first interview, nothing more passed. They afterward frequently saw mr.
Thomas Percival, and he always examined them about the story, and at last he
asked them, 'If they would be willing to go with him to Ireland, in order to
make oath, before a court of law, of the several circumstances, which, at
different times, they had related to him; to which they readily consented.'

They were then asked by mrs. Percival's council, what reward had been promised
them for the trouble they were to take. They hesitated at first; but then
affirmed, that they were to have no recompense, only to have their expenses
paid, and a remuneration for their loss of time, and were to be furnished with
employment, if they should choose to stay in Ireland rather than return to
France. On being hard pressed, however, it appeared, that the remuneration for
their loss of time, was to be at a most extravagant rate, for they were to be
paid about ten times the sum per day, that they could have earned in their
usual occupation; and at last it was dragged forth, that if by their evidence,
the claimant should obtain possession of the contested estates, they were each
to have a considerable annuity settled on them for their lives.

This was, alone, enough to shake the credit of the evidence given by these
fellows. But when they were more particularly and separately examined, as to
the circumstances of Theodore Percival's death, they were neither consistent
with each other, nor with their own former depositions, in the account they
gave of it; neither did they agree in the time that elapsed between his being
landed at St. Domingo, and his death. On the whole, the evidence of these men
was declared by the judge, and thought by the whole court, to be of too a
doubtful a nature, to carry any weight with it, 'till unfortunately a paper was
brought forward, for the purpose of corroborating their testimony, which, in a
moment, turned the face of affairs. This paper purposed to be a copy of the
minutes taken by the captain of the ship in which Theodore was a passenger,
during his voyage to St. Domingo, his stay at that island, and return home, in
which was a circumstantial detail of the illness and death of Theodore,
intermingled with strong expressions of sorrow for his fate, and encomiums on
the goodness of his heart and understanding, and on his affable and pleasing
deportment during his passage: and two men, one the captain's mate, and the
other his steward, swore to it as a faithful copy.

This was evidence not to be resisted, when deposed in court on oath; though
still a suspicion pervaded the minds of many of the auditors, that there was
some vile collusion practiced. By some it was suspected, that mr. Percival, the
claimant, was even the murderer of his relation; but others were content to
suppose, that he had not only taken care to remove him out of the way so far,
as that he might never be in danger of returning to bring him to shame; and it
was thought, by these, not improbable, that he might be sold as a slave in St.
Domingo. Few people thought that his fate was really known.

But whatever private opinions might be formed on this interesting subject,
private opinions could not influence a judge and jury. They could be guided
only by the positive evidence, which was such, that they were under the
necessity of giving a verdict for the plaintiff.

Marsini, who had attended in court during the whole time of the trial, in
order that he might early the first tidings of the event to mrs. Percival, no
sooner heard the verdict given, than he departed, to acquaint her with it. She
heard it with unruffled serenity, and only observed,

'Well, then, I must adapt my ideas, and teach my children to adapt theirs, to
live on the little we have remaining, and my Henry, instead of leading an idle
life, must work for his bread. We are atoms in the immensity of creation, and
must perform the part allotted us, nor will it be performed in vain. One thing,
however, is by those means cleared up to us, and we know, at last, who are the
parents of our dear Antoinette!'

'Indeed,' said Marsini, I think we must now conclude, (for it can scarcely be
doubted) that Antoinette is the daughter of lord Arlington's first marriage.'

'It is surely so,' answered mrs. Percival, 'and wisely did he direct that she
should be taught to gain her living by her own industry, if necessary. Perhaps
he even foresaw the probability of the present event taking place. One thing
only wounds me, that he could be so ungenerous as to pretend to marry me, when
he had another wife alive. What motive could he have for such base conduct? --
What motive indeed? -- Alas! I wrong him; he could not do so; I am sure he
could not? -- He was miserable, I know, too well I know it -- but even now I
cannot believe he was guilty. Perhaps there are yet many circumstances in his
story, with which we are unacquainted, for it is still dark and mysterious --
time may discover more, and if it is part of the scheme of Providence, that
more should be discovered, no human arts can conceal it.'

'Indeed,' replied Marsini, 'I am so well convinced that some vile collusion
has been practiced, that I am resolved to go immediately myself to the convent
of Saint Marguerite, for the purpose of farther investigating the whole
business of the marri^ge; and, if I find no satisfaction there, to pursue my
searches to such other parts, as afford a prospect of opening any light to us.
In the mean time, madam, I insist that you form no new plan for yourselves,
'till my return. I can supply you with every thing you want at present; if you
recover your estates, I will then be repaid, and if not, my fortune is
sufficient for us all. As for Antoinette, I have considered her as my child,
because I really believed her the child of my wife. That belief is now shaken;
but in whatever relationship she may appear to stand to me, I can never cease
to dote on her, and to do every thing in my power for her advancement in virtue
and happiness.'

Mrs. Percival, who had heard with perfect equanimity of temper her terrible
reverse of fortune, could not, with equal calmness, attend to this speech of
Marsini's. His friendship and kindness to her, and her family, seemed now
arrived at their acme, beyond which it was impossible for friendship to be
carried, and she burst forth into tears and sobs of acknowledgment, which the
count endeavored, as much as possible, to calm, saying, 'that he only
considered himself as performing his duty, in rendering himself as useful as
possible to his fellow creatures.'

CHAP. XIV.
Ask the faithful youth,
Why the cold urn of her whom long he loved,
So often fills his arms, so often draws
His lonely footsteps at the silent hour,
To pay the mournful tribute of his tears?
Oh! he will tell thee that the wealth of worlds,
Should never seduce his bosom to forego
That sacred hour, when stealing from the noise
Of care and envy, sweet remembrance soothes
With virtue's kindest looks his aching breast,
And turns his tears to rapture.
AKENSIDE.
MARSINI communicated his intended journey to mr. Byrne and mr. Fitzpatrick,
who declared their approbation of it, saying, 'That they had good reason to
hope, that evidence might thus be procured, which would set aside the present
verdict; for they were well convinced, that the witnesses brought by mr. Thomas
Percival, were a set of perjured rascals, and only wanted some one who could
confute them, to be proved so.'

When Francis Delaval heard of Marsini's intentions, he immediately begged to
be permitted to accompany him; to which his father and the count very readily
consented; and accordingly, they set off together, in a very few days after.

They arrived at the convent of Saint Marguerite, without meeting with any
occurrence worth relating. They requested to see the lady abbess, to whom they
were immediately introduced; when they related to her their story, and
communicated the errand they were come upon. When they had done, she exclaimed,

'Heavens! what a wonderful coincidence! -- Yes, gentlemen, you will indeed
receive here all the satisfaction you can wish for, and much more than you can
have dared to expect. The marriage you mention, did indeed take place, and the
unfortunate lady died in less than a year after; but what is more than all,
know that the very man whose death has been so positively sworn to, is now in
the chapel of the convent, weeping over the tomb of his beloved wife. -- If you
will follow me, I will conduct you to him.'

She arose. Marsini and Francis followed her. On entering the chapel, they
beheld, at the upper end of it, a pale, wretched, emaciated figure, standing by
a small monument, on which he rested one elbow, while his head reclined on his
hand, and in the other hand he held a picture, on which his eyes were
immoveably fixed. Near was an old nun, kneeling before an altar, who seemed
enthusiastically absorbed in her devotions; both together forming a solemn and
affecting spectacle, for each was too entirely occupied with their own
meditations, to appear to notice the other, or even to be sensible of the
entrance of the abbess, Marsini, and Francis.

As they approached Theodore, 'Behold,' said the lady abbess, 'the man, whose
existence will put an end to your troubles.' Then coming up to him, she said,
in a voice loud enough to be heard by the old nun, 'Mr. Percival.' -- The nun
started up, as if struck by an electrical shock;

'What do I hear!' she said, 'Rep^ that sound again.'

'Mr. Percival,' repeated the abbess.

'Great God!' exclaimed the nun, 'Theodore Percival.'

'Yes, Theodore Percival,' replied the abbess.

'Awful heaven! -- My son -- my son!' cried the nun, and fell senseless on the
pavement.

Her last words roused Theodore from his lethargy. 'What did I hear,' he cried,
'God of heaven! Is it possible! -- after so many years! -- he sprang forward,
caught the nun in his arms, and raised her from the ground* -- 'Can it be?' he
said, -- 'Can this be my mother?' -- Then observing the count and Francis, 'Who
are ye?' he said, 'Tell me instantly, -- is she indeed my mother?'

'We know not,' said the abbess. 'We know no more than the words she has this
moment uttered. -- But let us take her to the parlour, and endeavor to recall
her senses.'

'Ah! sir,' said Marsini to Theodore, who still held the nun in his arms,
though from his own weakness, he was scarcely able to support her, 'Let me
assist you: you are incapable of supporting another, you seem scarcely able to
support yourself: -- you seem very ill and weak.'

Theodore, who at first looked rather wild, now composed his countenance; --
'Yes, I am ill indeed,' he said, 'sick both in body and mind -- overcome with
astonishment -- Can this be indeed my mother?'

The abbess, by this time, had fetched a chair, and the nun was conveyed to the
parlour, where, on proper applications being administered, she began to revive.
The first words she uttered, were,

'Where is he? -- Where is my son -- my Theodore?'

Theodore took her hand, 'And, is it then,' he said, 'my mother, whom I now
behold? -- Oh wonderful event! -- after a separation of above thirty years, in
all which time I knew not whether she were alive or dead!'

'Yes,' she said, 'I am indeed your mother, the infamous wife of Edward, lord
Arlington. -- Oh! Theodore! How little did I suppose, that the wretched object
I beheld on entering the chapel, was my son -- the child whom I so shamefully
deserted. -- But ah! answer me quickly, how is it that I behold you thus? --
Have you been the innocent sufferer for my guilt? -- Is it for my sake? -- Has
your father? -- I know not how to ask -- but indeed, when you was born, I had
not been faithless to his bed.'

'No,' answered Theodore, 'Harass not yourself, dearest madam, with that idea
-- true, I have been a sufferer, a severe sufferer, b^ I do not owe one atom of
those sufferings to you -- they were all, alas, self-incurred.'

'Well, well,' she said, in a hurried manner, 'Tell me all, then -- tell me,
does your father yet live?'

'No,' answered Theodore, 'He has long been at rest; long been a tenant of the
peaceful grave, whither, a thousand, and a thousand times, I have wished to
follow him.'

'Have you then been so very wretched?' said she, 'But say, my Theodore, did
your father, in his close of life, ever think of me? -- Ah! he would have been
a kind husband, had I known how sufficiently to prize him.'

'Alas!' replied Theodore, 'I was not a witness to the latter scenes of his
life; -- I closed not his eyes; -- I received not his parting breath; -- I was
then, and have been ever since, a voluntary exile from my home, my family, -- I
have been a wanderer for more than fifteen years; -- I have ill-treated an
excellent wife; -- like you, too, my mother, I have deserted my children. --
But those days are past; I shall soon return to them, beg their forgiveness,
and hope to end my days in peace amongst them.'

Marsini, who had been deeply affected with the whole of the interesting scene
which was passing, could not here forbear to exclaim,

'Thanks! thanks be to heaven! Oh, what joy will your presence diffuse in your
family!'

Theodore looked astonished; he had yet no idea who Marsini was, or what was
his errand; but his attention being thus suddenly arrested, he, in an eager and
hurried tone, cried,

'How? -- Do you know them then? -- Tell me? -- Are they all well? -- Will they
see me? -- Speak -- my heart is bursting.'

Marsini was alarmed, he thought that he had been too hasty; he saw that
Theodore's whole frame was convulsed; weak and exhausted as he was, he could
ill bear such agitation. But Marsini had now gone too far to recede.

'Yes,' he answered, 'I but lately left your wife and children at Dublin; they
are well; -- but, dearest sir, let me entreat you to attend to yourself; you
shall hear some other time; let us take you hence, you are weak and ill; --
Come, sir, come with me.'

'What! and leave my mother just as I have sound her?'

He answered with a quickness, that proved in the clearest manner the contest
of feelings in his bosom.

'But be it so; perhaps it is best; my head turns round; -- support me. -- I
have not slept nor rested from fatigue for three days and nights.'

Marsini saw, indeed, that he was perfectly exhausted, and therefore, proposed
to him, to accompany him to an inn, at a short distance from the convent, to
which he was recommended by the abbess.

'Ah!' said Theodore, on hearing the inn named, 'I know the place well; -- how
many days have I spent there! -- days of sorrow and anguish! -- but no matter!
it is over.' Then taking his mother's hand, he said, 'I will return tomorrow, I
want nothing but rest, and then we can exchange together our respective
stories; -- mine is a chain of disasters.'

He had just power to raise her hand to his lips, and then, supported by
Marsini and Francis, got into the carriage, and went with them to the inn. They
got him there some refreshment, after which he retired to rest, and arose the
next morning much refreshed and amended.

It was now that he first enquired of ^sini and Francis, who they were; what
had brought them to the convent; and how it happened, that they seemed at once
to have taken so deep an interest in him and his concerns. To which enquiries
Marsini answered, by relating to him all that had happened to his family since
his departure. 'And now, sir,' he added, 'let us lose no time, but immediately
return to Ireland, and there put an end to the long years of anxiety which your
family have suffered on your account.'

'Yes,' said Theodore, 'I will use all the speed in my power, but I dare not
take the shortest route for my return; I am not in safety while I continue in
France; I have run a very great risque in coming into the kingdom again, but I
could have had no peace of mind without it. It was my purpose, after my visit
to Saint Marguerite's convent yesterday, immediately to have set off for
Geneva, as the shortest way out of the French territories, and after resting
there a short time, to proceed on my journey, by the shortest and safest route
I could plan. But the extraordinary occurrence of meeting with my mother,
determines me to go again to the convent, and after having seen her, and
dropped a tear once more over the tomb of my Antoinette, I will proceed as fast
as possible from this scene of peril.'

'Well then,' said Marsini, 'since it must be so, we will take the shortest way
to return to Ireland, and carry to your wife and family the welcome news, that
you are on your way back to them. Oh! with what transport they will receive me,
when I am the bearer of such tidings?'

'And, can my wife, then, wish to see me,' answered Theodore, 'after all the
sufferings I have occasioned her? -- But I know her worth, and, though I
deserted her, I have never ceased to esteem her.'

'Doubt not,' said Marsini, 'of the joy your presence will occasion; but,' he
continued, 'cannot you give us some token by which more effectually to convince
her, that we have seen you? -- Will you not write to her?'

'Yes,' said Theodore, 'I will instantly do so; -- he sat down and wrote a
letter to her, then taking from his pocketbook a lock of hair, and putting the
letter and the hair into Marsini's hands, 'Take these,' said he, 'my Henry will
remember, that I cut this lock of hair from his head some seven years ago, it is
the best token I can charge you with.'

'And your story,' said Marsini, 'may I not be charged with that too?'

'No,' answered Theodore, 'it is long and full of disasters: -- Spare me the
repetition of it now; at my return to Ireland, my wife shall know all; when she
will own that though in some respects I am the object of censure, in others I
am an object of compassion.'

'Adieu, then, for the present,' said Marsini, 'I shall set out immediately;
and trust, that you, sir, will use no unnecessary delays. You will possess
yourself of all do^uments that may be wanted from the convent; and I will take
care that every thing be put in a proper train for the business relative to
your estates and marriage, so that every thing may immediately be settled on
your arrival at Dublin.'

Theodore then embraced Marsini and Francis, making the warmest acknowledgments
for their kindness, and then set off for Saint Marguerite, while the latter
proceeded toward Ireland.

When Theodore arrived at the convent, he found his mother tolerably composed
from the agitation occasioned by the affecting scene of the preceding day; when
she told him, that after the elopement from his father (as mentioned in the
early part of this history) she continued for some time with the man who then
seduced her, and accompanied him to France; but he growing tired of her,
consigned her over to a French officer, with whom she lived for two years in
affluence, though not in comfort; for,' said she, 'I was often haunted with
remorse for my past conduct, and as often wished I could recall my innocence,
and the affections of my husband: but ah! How difficult is it to retrieve one
false step! Much as I wished to return to him, I did not dare to attempt it,
but, at length, the officer I lived with dying, I was turned out of doors by
his heir, perfectly destitute of every thing, but the clothes on my back, and
the little money I had in my pocket, which did not altogether amount, to so
much as a louis-d'or.

'In this distress I knew not which way to turn; many times did I resolve to
seek out my husband, throw myself at his feet, and beg his protection and
forgiveness, but, destitute as I was of the means of taking such a journey, I
knew not how to set about it, and, with shame I own it, I was also, in part,
withheld by a false pride, which did not know how to bend to the humiliation I
must undergo. I, therefore, at last, took refuge in the greater humiliation of
prostitution, in which course I continued for several years, enduring miseries
which no imagination can conceive, that has not experienced them; 'till at
last, I was roused by an extraordinary circumstance to a shocking sense of the
life I led, and to ^ resolution to abandon it* and take refuge in a clo^er,
where I might hope by prayers, penitence and mortification, to wash out my
offenses.

'The circumstance I allude to, was no other than the dreadful idea, that I had
been led into a connection with my own son; with you, my Theodore. Oh! Never
shall I lose the remembrance of that moment, when first the idea flashed on my
mind! Hell! hell itself, can have no greater torments, than I than suffered! I
was preparing to fulfill an appointment I had made, when it was first suggested
to me -- Oh God! Oh God! -- I rolled on the floor for some time with agony,
then starting up, I ran out of the house, not knowing whither I went, nor what
was my design. In this state I was met by a man, who seeing me look wild and
distracted, took compassion on me, and carried me to his house, which was a
small, but neat habitation, in the suburbs of Paris. He asked me many
questions, but it was a long time before I could give him a rational answer. At
last, when he got to a knowledge of the cause of my distraction, he said, he
would go and investigate the matter, and, leaving me under the care of his two
servants, he set forth on his benevolent purpose.

'He returned, after an absence of about four hours, bringing with him the
welcome news, that my fears were totally without foundation. The young man,
whom I had apprehended from circumstances to be you, my Theodore, was in fact
an Irishman, but I was perfectly convinced quite a different person from him,
whom I had dreaded finding him to be. The impression left on my mind, however,
was such, that for worlds I could not have returned to my former course, and an
impulse of penitence and remorse having thus seized me, I instantly resolved to
quit a world, in which I had incurred so much guilt and misery.

'I communicated to my benefactor the resolution I had made, who encouraged me
in it; and in order to assist me in carrying it into execution, applied, in my
behalf, to the lady abbess of this convent, who consented to receive me; and
here I have been ever since, which must now be at least fifteen years* during
the whole of that time, I have practiced the most rigid austerities, and been
unremitted in my devotions* and, I hope, I ha^ now made my peace with God,
since he has been so gracious as to bless me with a sight of my son, before my
eyes are closed for ever.'

She ceased. -- 'Alas!' said Theodore, 'To what dreadful scenes will a single
error often lead! And how forcibly is that position illustrated, by the fates
of my father, my mother, my wives and myself! My father erred, in supposing,
that the only thing necessary to attach a woman to a life of retirement, was,
that she should be educated far from the luxuries and vanities of the world.
You erred, madam, in not exerting your resolution to follow the fortunes of my
father, whatever situation they might throw him into. I erred, in entering
secretly into a matrimonial connection, which I ought to have imparted to my
father in an unreserved manner. My first wife erred, in assenting to, or even
more than assenting to, in advising the secrecy I observed; and my present wife
erred, in accepting my hand, when she knew that my heart did not accompany it.
And the long train of important and disastrous consequences that have ensued
from each of these respective errors, will sufficiently show, that man can
never deviate one inch from the straight road of sincerity, or endeavor to
substitute false rules of right, for those immutable and infallible ones, laid
down by the creator and lord of all things, without suffering the punishment
which every such deviation necessarily draws along with it. Listen, madam, to
my story, and own the truth of what I have advanced.'

Theodore then related to her the history of his life, even from his boyish
years; but as we shall have occasion to relate it elsewhere, we forbear to give
it a place here.

After some hours of conversation, in which he endeavored to persuade his
mother to let application to be made for a release from her vows, that she
might come and end her days with him in Ireland, to which she could by no means
be brought to consent, Theodore took an affectionate leave of her.

He then visited again the tomb of his wife, and procured an attested copy of
her death, from the register of the convent; when having settled all his
affairs in those parts, he proceeded on his journey, and arrived safely and
expeditiously at Geneva.

CHAP. XV.
Sure, the swift har^s have posted you by land,
And winds of all the corners kissed your sails,
To make your vessel nimble.
SHAKESPEARE.
MARSINI and Francis met with no interruption in their journey, and arrived
again at Dublin after so short an absence, that mrs. Percival could, at first
sight of them, scarcely believe that they had been to the distance which they
intended at setting out; but when they assured her, that they had been at the
convent of Saint Marguerite, she said, with a look of the most eager anxiety;

'May I not hope, then, that your speedy return is an indication, that you
bring good news?'

Marsini, with his eyes sparkling with delight, advanced to her, and taking her
by the hand, said,

'I know by experience, dearest lady, that the thunder-stroke of adversity has
no power to shake the firmness of your soul; -- but the gushing tide of joy's
overflowing cup is harder still to bear; -- Say, can you support that too with
equanimity of temper?'

'Oh, yes, yes, yes!' she said, her heart palpitating all the time, as if it
would burst the case that enclosed it: 'I can, indeed, I can. -- Tell me then
at once, that my Theodore lives: -- I read it in your eyes -- your manner.'

'He does live, indeed,' said Marsini.

'Then heaven be praised,' she exclaimed, while convulsive sobs and tears of
ecstacy, in which she was joined by Henry and Antoinette, prevented her saying
more; nor could the sympathizing count and Francis themselves refrain from
joining them. At last mrs. Percival recovering herself, said,

'Come, then, tell me all: -- the burst of transport is over, and I can now
hear your story with calmness.'

'Can you?' said Marsini, 'But what says my child, my Antoinette? -- Will it
not overcome her? And, can this dear youth, can Henry bear it?'

'Oh! yes,' they both sobbed out, 'indeed we can; you need not fear us.'

He then proceeded to relate all the particulars of his visit to the convent,
and ended, with saying, 'That he did not doubt, but that lord Arlington would
soon be in Ireland.' Then producing the letter, and the lock of hair, 'and for
a farther proof, madam,' he added, 'that I have seen your husband, he charged
me to be the bearer of these: my Henry,' he said, 'will remember, that I cut
this hair from his head seven years ago.'

'Yes, well do I remember it,' said Henry: 'but, how little did I then suppose,
that it was my father, who asked such a boon of me!'

Mrs. Percival read the letter, which contained such pathetic expressions of
regret for all the sufferings he had occasioned her, and such anxious wishes
for the future happiness of her, and his children, that she could not read it
without tears.

The next thing to be attended to, was to settle every thing with mr. Byrne and
mr. Fitzpatrick, to whom Marsini immediately repaired, and imparted all the
intelligence he had acquired; in consequence of which, they proceeded according
to the forms necessary to be observed. A new trial was moved for, on the plea
that lord Arlington was still alive, and would soon be in Ireland; and a day
was appointed for rehearing the cause, at such a distant period, as it was
thought would leave no doubt of lord Arlington's being arrived before that time.

But fortune seemed determined to sport with the feelings of lady Arlington to
the last moment. Day after day passed over, and no lord Arlington appeared.
Post after post arrived from the continent, but they brought no news of lord
Arlington. The day appointed for the trial approached; still he was absent.
Lady Arlington grew uneasy -- this negligence in her husband was worse than all
his former conduct. -- How could he be so barbarous as to raise her hopes to
such a height, only to dash them down again with a ten-fold violence? Marsini,
too, blamed himself very much for having left lord Arlington; -- a thousand
unpleasant ideas crowded into his mind with regard to him; -- lord Arlington's
health was such, that he might, perhaps, have sunk under bodily debility; -- at
any rate, he wanted some attention to be paid him, Francis Delaval might have
been dispatched to Ireland, and he himself have staid to attend on his
lordship. -- Again, it was possible, that lord Arlington wanted to get rid of
them, and, therefore, framed the story of his not being safe in France, only
that he might be left to himself; and this suspicion gathered confi^mation,
from his begging to decline relating his story to him. In fact, he thought,
that if he had reasoned properly on the subject, he might have seen, that lord
Arlington for many reasons was by no means in a proper situation to be left
without any one with him, and he wondered, that such an idea had never struck
him at the time; but all was then hurry and confusion; he could not, however,
excuse himself for such a piece of inattention.

Reflections, such as these, frequently passed in Marsini's mind, though he
never uttered them to lady Arlington.

Mr. Percival, in the mean time, who had determined not to give up the contest,
'till it should appear to be impossible for him to maintain it any longer, saw,
with a secret exultation, that his opponents seemed to have deluded themselves
with false hopes. Every day he anxiously watched at the port for the arrival of
ships; and every day saw with a transport, which he scarcely attempted to
dissemble, ship after ship arrive, but no lord Arlington with them.

It was now but the day before that appointed for the trial; -- mr. Percival
was taking his usual stand at the port, when the arrival of a vessel from
Leghorn, was announced by three huzzas; and very soon after he saw two men come
on shore, one of them a middle aged man in appearance, and immediately enquired
for the house of count Marsini. Mr. Percival was seized all over with a
trembling; he did not know lord Arlington's person, but he had no doubt, that
he beheld the man whose presence he so much dreaded, and wished it had then
been night, that under the veil of darkness, he might have given him a push
from the boat, that should have sunk him beneath the waves for ever.

He heard the bye-standers give the strangers directions to find Marsini's
house, and following them at a distance, saw them enter there. All day did he
hover about in the environs of that spot: he could hear nothing to relieve his
uncertainty, nor did he retire to his own habitation till after midnight. ^ere
he threw himself on his bed; but sleep fled his eye-^s; he lay restless and
uneasy 'till day break, when he again repaired to Marsini's house, and seeing a
person come out of the house, whom he knew to be a servant at an adjacent inn,
he resolved, if possible, at once to satisfy his anxious soul, and enquired,
therefore, of the man, 'If lord Arlington had not arrived at the count's house
the day before?'

'Who, who said the fellow?'

'Lord Arlington; -- did he arrive at count Marsini's house yesterday?'

'I know nothing of their names, there was two outlandish folks came; -- but if
you want to know their names, I Will ax the servants.'

A servant then coming to the door, 'Pray if you please,' said the fellow,
'this jontleman would be glad to know the names of those two outlandish lords,
that came to your house yesterday.'

The servant, who was an Italian, replied, 'That they were count Carletti and
his servant.'

A drop of water to the parched lips of the fainting, wounded soldier, could
not prove a greater cordial, than this reply did to the harassed soul of mr.
Percival. He flew back to his habitation, eat his breakfast with alacrity, and
then dressed himself for his appearance in court; whither he repaired at the
hour appointed for its meeting.

Not quite so pleasant were the feelings of lady Arlington, on the arrival of
that hour, to which she had once looked forward as the termination of her
troubles. But that event seemed now far off, nor could it be calculated, when
it was likely to arrive.

The court, at length, met; -- mr. Byrne arose, in order to solicit a farther
delay of the trial; but he was scarcely on his legs, when a confused murmur run
through the court, of, 'He is come -- he is come,' and immediately appeared at
the bar the same death-like emaciated figure, which Marsini had long before
beheld at Saint Marguerite.

He begged to be heard for a few minutes, and then said, 'That he had been
detained at sea more than double the usual time for the passage from Bilboa,
which was the last port he left, by a leaky vessel and adverse winds; and at
last, the ship, which was bound to Cork, was driven into Limerick, where she
had arrived two days before, having been kept above water for three former
days, only by dint of incessant pumping, in which every passenger had been
necessitated to take his share. He hoped, therefore, to be indulged by the
court, with an adjournment of two days; for he had left two people at Limerick,
who would be important witnesses in the cause, and who could hardly reach
Dublin before the evening of the next day.'

The judge replied, 'That such an indulgence could not be refused, when
properly applied for by council.' The motion of adjournment was, therefore,
made in due form, and the court was adjourned accordingly.

Lord Arlington, then, requested of mr. Byrne, to accompany him to an inn, that
he might have some conversation with him on the impending business, and that he
might have a little time to rest and compose himself before his first interview
with his wife and family; 'For,' said he, 'notwithstanding the fatigue I had
undergone for three days before my landing, I could not stop at Limerick, ^t
got on horseback immediately, nor rested, 'till ^rived in Dublin, when I learnt
that the court was ^at moment assembled on my business.

Mr. Byrne desired, that instead of going to an inn, lord Arlington would
accompany him to his house; to which he consented; and, as soon as they arrived
there, they agreed to send for Marsini, (who knowing that nothing material
could be done in court on that day, had not attended there) in order to impart
to him the arrival of lord Arlington, that he might prepare his family to
receive him.

Mr. Fitzpatrick, however, who was present when this was settled, said, 'That
he would go himself to lady Arlington's house, from whence he would dispatch
Marsini to mr. Byrne's, and would himself stay with lady Arlington, 'till the
count should return, in order to keep guard, that no intelligence of her lord's
arrival, might come too abruptly upon her.'

Mr. Fitzpatrick, accordingly, went to lady Arlington's, (for by that name we
shall henceforth call that lady) where, as he expected, he found Marsini, and
told him, he was wanted at mr. Byrne's, whither Marsini immediately went, and
mr. Fitzpatrick continued with lady Arlington, talking to her on various
subjects, 'till his return, which was in about an hour, when mr. Fitzpatrick
took his leave.

When he was gone, Marsini said, 'At length, madam, I hope we are arrived at
the wished for haven, and all our troubles are at an end.'

'Lord!' -- She could not give him time to proceed, but exclaimed, 'is he
arrived then?'

'He is, madam.'

It was almost too much for her; -- after a separation of above fifteen years;
after many weeks of anxious watching and expectation, the husband, whom she so
much doted on, was at last in the same town with her: -- she gave an
involuntary scream of ecstacy.

'But, why do I suffer this?' she cried; 'No, let me bear this too with temper,
with fortitude: -- But where is he? -- What has detained him so long? -- --
When shall I see him? -- You have seen him, no doubt.'

'Yes, I have seen him, indeed, madam: but, if possible, he was even a more
affecting sight than when I saw him before. He has undergone dreadful fatigues;
-- he is pale, emaciated, languid, yet he hardly seems to know it. His mind has
been so long in a constant agitation, that he seems rendered insensible to
bodily feelings, 'till nature is perfectly exhausted; he has had a dreadful
voyage, and a hurrying journey from Limerick, by which he is, indeed, nearly
arrived at that acme, where nature can proceed no farther.

'When I entered the room at mr. Byrne's, he was stretched on a sofa, from
which, however, the moment he saw me, he sprang forward, while his eyes seemed
to ask me a thousand questions at the same instant; they seemed to say, tell me
of my Horatia, my Antoinette, my Henry! but in a moment after he sunk exhausted
again on the sofa. I enquired, if he had taken any refreshment, since his
arrival, to which mr. Byrne answered, that he had been urging him to do so, but
had not been able to prevail* I then added my entreaties to those of mr. Byrne,
which were, at last, effectual, and he seemed much revived.'

'Alas! then,' he said, 'What can you have thought of my long delay? -- I must
have been strangely culpable in your eyes; but I have been unfortunate in it,
not faulty.'

He then enquired, 'If I thought his wife would see him?'

'Doubt it not for a moment,' I answered; 'she will fly with transport into
your arms.'

'Well, then,' he said, 'Why delay a moment? -- Let us instantly hasten to her.'

'I begged of him not to think of seeing you at this time, but to wait 'till he
was refreshed with rest, for I really thought him too much exhausted to go
through such an affecting scene.'

'Oh! do not name rest,' he cried, 'I cannot rest, 'till I have seen her!'

'Well, then,' I answered, 'Follow your wishes, for every moment of delay is a
moment of rapture lost to one of the best of women.

'We, accordingly, came hither together, and, madam, he is now below, waiting
my permission to come to you; and I have only kept you thus long in
conversation, to give you both a little time to compose yourselves.'

Lady Arlington scarcely heard these last words -- she flew down stairs, and in
a moment found herself in the arms of her long-lost husband. Who can describe
this scene? -- But it was a scene not to be described; it was only to be felt.
They mingled tears for a while in each other's bosom, which for some time were
the only language which could find vent. -- At last Theodore faltered out,

'What goodness to meet me thus!' -- he loosed his hold -- He sunk back in a
chair. Lady Arlington sat down; she took his hand affectionately;

'This scene is too much for you I fear, my love,' she said.

'Too much, indeed,' he replied. 'Oh! had you met me with frowns and ^aidings,
I could have borne it, -- have knelt at you^ feet, and sued for pardon; -- but,
thus to rush with ecstacy into my arms! ah! it is indeed too much!'

A silence again ensued -- then holding out his hands,

'Come, my children,' he said, 'You too must seal your father's pardon.'

They approached him; -- they eagerly seized the hands he extended to them; --
he raised his eyes upwards,

'May heaven bless both my children!' he said, 'For ye both are indeed my ch^

They knelt by him -- they pressed his hands to their lips, and bathed them in
their tears, with all the eloquence of the most impressive silence.

'No, rise,' he said, 'and let me sold you in my arms.'

They arose, he embraced them tenderly.

'Yes!' Antoinette,' said he, 'You are indeed my daughter; -- hereafter you
shall know all; -- and you, my Horatia, you are indeed my wife; the mother of
that dear child was no more, when I pledged my faith to you. I have not
strength now to relate my story, for I have undergone great fatigues, since I
parted with that good man (pointing to Marsini) Oh! when we parted in France,
how little did I know of the endless obligations which we owe him? but I have
learnt it all from mr. Byrne. But let me not disgrace his friendship, by a too
great profusion of acknowledgments. My Horatia, misfortune has not ceased to
pursue me 'till this moment; -- when you know all that I have gone through, you
will not wonder at the state in which you see me.'

'Come, then,' said lady Arlington, 'let us not protract a scene, which must
wear and harass you. Consent now to attend solely to yourself; endeavor to
take some rest; tomorrow we will share in your attentions.'

'You make me selfish,' he replied, 'but, indeed, at present I believe it must
be so.'

CHAP. XVI.
Often with tears I have mourned
The fatal evils which your life involved,
And grudged you sorrows, which I could not share.
I feared to what extremes the black despair
That preyed upon your mind, might have betrayed you.
AMBROSE PHILIPS.
LORD Arlington arose the next morning, much recovered from his fatigues; he
had enjoyed a repose, rendered doubly sweet by having seen his wife and
children, and having found them in such good dispositions toward him. When he
entered the breakfast room, he found lady Arlington already there; she met him
with looks of the most enchanting sweetness and tenderest affection, and taking
his hand, said,

'What pleasure it gives me, my Theodore, to see you look so much better! I
begin, indeed, to see my husband again, -- yesterday I hardly knew you.'

'I do not wonder at it, my love,' he answered: 'Slavery, imprisonment, toils
by sea and land, eternal anxiety; these, my love, endured for fifteen years,
are enough to subdue even the strongest constitution: but these are over now;
one unhappy passion is conquered, my heart is now wholly yours, and for the
rest of my life I do not doubt, but I shall find that happiness in being united
to you, which formerly my estranged heart was unable to taste.'

These words were followed with so tender and affectionate an embrace, that
lady Arlington, who had never before experienced such symptoms of affection
from a husband, whom she doted on, lost, in that moment, all sense of the
sorrows which she had gone through, and thought of nothing, but the happiness
to which she trusted she might now look forwards.

'Alas!' she said, 'Have you then undergone all that variety of troubles? --
Oh! How often has my anxious heart been torn with conjectures on your fate, and
wished it could share and soothe your sorrows! -- But let us not talk any more
of them; -- let us only now endeavor that the next fifteen years shall be
productive of as much happiness, as the last fifteen years have of misery.'

'Ah! my Horatia,' answered lord Arlington, 'We have but one path to pursue, to
attain that desirable end; -- follow sincerity and reason in every thing; it is
to deviations from them, that we owe all our unhappiness; but I trust that we
have both learnt lessons for our future conduct, and the cause being removed
the effect will cease.'

The conversation continued some time, in which lord Arlington gave unbounded
scope to the esteem and affection which he now really felt for so valuable a
wife as his Horatia, and, perhaps, never was a moment so likely to impress a
man of any feeling, with an extraordinary affection for a woman; -- he had
deserted her in a strange and abrupt manner, nor had he, for more than fifteen
year, ever made her the object even of his smallest attention; yet at his
return, she received him not merely without a frown, but with an overflow of
tenderness, which, not to have returned, must have stamped him as a monster,
below the brutes.

At last they were joined by Henry and Antoinette. This interview opened a
fresh scene of tenderness, which, however, in a short time was broken in upon,
by the arrival of Marsini, who apologized for his intrusion, but urged, in
excuse, his anxiety to hear of his friend; -- but, he added afterward,

'I will own that I am a little selfish too in my visit; I was anxious to ask a
question of lord Arlington; I would have my answer from his mouth, although I
anticipate in my mind what that answer will be.'

'I can scarcely refuse to answer any question put by count Marsini,' said lord
Arlington.

'Well, then,' returned the count, 'You have already declared yourself the
father of the lovely Antoinette: Who, then, was her mother?'

'Her mother,' he replied, 'was Antoinette de St. Foix, daughter to the baron
de St. Foix, a French nobleman.'

'It is enough,' said Marsini, 'her likeness to my Gabrielle is accounted for,
and she, I doubt not, was really faultless.'

'How?' said lord Arlington, 'And are you then the husband of Gabrielle de St.
Foix?'

'It is even so,' returned Marsini.

The conversation was here put an end to, by a note from mr. Byrne, requesting
lord Arlington to attend at his house as soon as possible, to meet mr.
Fitzpatrick, in order that they might arrange the business of the succeeding
day. To this note lord Arlington replied, by going immediately to mr. Byrne's;
but at parting from his family, expressed the deepest regret, that he must
leave them, probably, too, for the greatest part of the day, as he anxiously
wished to ask them a thousand questions, and hear from their own lips, every
circumstance that had happened during his absence; for he was not half
satisfied with what he had learnt from Marsini, when they met in France.

When he was gone, Marsini burst forth into renewed expressions of affectionate
attachment to Antoinette:

'I have called you my daughter,' said he, 'you are indeed my niece; -- but be
my child still; -- I cannot give you up; -- you shall have two fathers.'

He could not help clasping her in his arms and kissing her.

She returned his kind expressions, with like expressions of regard, declaring,
'That she was truly rejoiced to find that she really could claim to be related
to him; though had no relationship subsisted, his kindness had formed a much
stronger claim to her regard, than any other ties could form.

In the course of the day arrived the two witnesses from Limerick, whom lord
Arlington had said, he expected; -- these were Clement Seguin, and Marianne de
Mercier, the people who were present at his marriage with Antoinette, and with
whom the reader will, in a short time, be better acquainted.

When lord Arlington was informed by mr. Byrne, of the names of the two French
sailors who had sworn to his death, he said, 'He knew them well, and knew them
for a couple of complete rascals, who were corruptible to any purpose, for
which they might be wanted; and he thought it probable, that they had,
therefore, been corrupted to swear to his death, for which story there was not
the least foundation, as he had not been materially ill during the whole voyage
from Rochelle to St. Domingo, which island he left again, only two days after
his landing. But that circumstance they did not know, and, probably, concluded
him to be kept prisoner on the island, for it was the general idea in the ship,
that such was to be his fate; and it was, also, probable, that the idea of his
being under a confinement, from whence he was not likely to escape, had tempted
them to swear so positively to his death.'

This clue being given to the council, they, on the day of trial, put such
questions to them, as drew forth, at last, the following confession.

'That so much of their former deposition was true, as related to the manner of
their becoming known to mr. Thomas Percival; but,' they now added, 'That he, in
his conversations with them, often questioned them very closely, concerning the
probability of Theodore's ever escaping from St. Domingo; and, when they
constantly affirmed, (as indeed they believed) that he never was likely to
escape, he began to sound them on the subject of swearing to his death,
offering them large rewards, if they would accompany him to Ireland, for that
purpose. That, allured by the prospect of exchanging a life of labor, for a
life of idleness, which, by their agreement with mr. Percival, they were to be
enabled to do; they consented to swear to whatever he should require of them.
They said, also, that the paper which had been sworn to, as a copy from the
captain's minutes, was an absolute forgery, provided only, in case their (the
two sailors) evidence should be deemed insufficient; and two people from
Marseilles, were hired, under the assumed characters of the captain's mate, and
steward, to swear to it.'

After this ample confession, minutes of which were taken down in writing, and
which had disclosed a scene of villainy, that would be almost incredible, were
not similar instances but too frequent, the sailors were conducted out of
court, under a proper guard, that they might be kept from all farther
intercourse with the claimant, or his party, and he (the claimant) was summoned
into court.

From the moment of lord Arlington's arrival, the state of his mind had been
such, that malice itself could not have wished him a greater torment; he saw
all his aspiring hopes at once dashed to the ground, and in the first paroxysm
of rage and despair, had flown to the seaside, in order, there at once to
close the scene of his guilt and misery. But when he cast his eyes over the
wide extended main, his soul shrunk within him, at the thought of what he was
about; the boundless ocean before his eyes, seemed as a type of that ocean of
futurity, in which he was going to plunge; he thought of the shoals and
quicksands he might there encounter; -- his courage failed him, and he returned
wild and distracted to his own apartment. He laid himself down on his pillow,
but the pillow proved not the friendly counselor, which it is generally
thought to be; -- no; he there meditated new mischief, and determined to
endeavor to prove lord Arlington an impostor.

For this purpose, he had again recourse to the two sailors, and by fresh
promises, had engaged them to fresh perjuries. But when these men were
examined, and found that matters were likely to take a turn, which their
employer did not expect, like true rogues, who are never faithful to each
other, they thought it better, by betraying him, to endeavor to save
themselves.

Trusting, however, to their fidelity, mr. Percival appeared in the court, with
the most unbounded confidence; but when the confession of the sailors was read
to him, his countenance, in a moment, fell; -- he was taken unawares; -- his
presence of mind totally forsook him -- he looked abashed, ashamed, and in vain
attempted to falter out a denial; -- but his confusion spoke too plain; -- and
when he was told, 'That if he attempted to deny what the sailors had advanced,
they would be brought up to confront him,' he saw that all was over, and,
therefore, took refuge in confession. He owned, that all they had advanced, was
true, and said, 'That if the court would forbear to question him, and let him
depart, he would, in private, communicate farther particulars to lord
Arlington.'

The court acceded to his request, and all things being now sufficiently clear
on the side of the defendant, the former verdict was annulled, and lord
Arlington was restored to the quiet possession of his title and estates.

When the court broke up, lord Arlington desired mr. Percival to follow him to
mr. Byrne's house, and when they arrived there, mr. Percival confessed, that
from the moment when he first heard of his (lord Arlington's) strange
departure, which he did by means of a correspondent at Limerick, whom he made a
sort of spy on the family, he conceived hopes, though he hardly knew why, that
it was a circumstance, which might one day turn out to his advantage; and he
had, therefore, ever since kept continually on the watch, for any thing that
might tend to feed these hopes.

The paper offered him by Pierre Dupont, he conceived might be of use to
forward his views; and he, therefore, resolved to purchase it at any rate: year
after year, however, elapsed, and he gained no ground; yet he carefully kept
the paper, as the golden ear from which he one day hoped to reap a plentiful
harvest. He heard from his correspondent at Li^erick regularly, five or six
times a year, and knew from him every occurrence that happened in lord
Arlington's family.

At length, the two sailors arrived at Marseilles, and from the first moment
when he heard their story, he was continually plotting how he might use it to
his own advantage. The death of Theodore without lawful heirs, would secure to
him the possession of rank and fortune, and he therefore turned his whole
attention to the best method of procuring his death, and the illegitimacy of
his son; and for effecting this purpose, he had followed the plan which had
ultimately tended to lay open the whole scene of his villainy. He concluded his
confession, by throwing himself at the feet of lord Arlington, and earnestly
begging his forgiveness, using the strongest expressions of contrition for his
past conduct, and promises of reformation for the future.

Lord Arlington assured him, that he bore malice against him; that he pitied
his errors, and would be glad to assist him in carrying his good resolutions
into effect. He told him to come to him the next morning, when he would have
some farther conversation with him, and then departed to his family, where
mutual congratulations passed on the preceding events; -- all care, all sorrow,
seemed now banished from amongst them, and they sat down to dinner, which was
received by lady Arlington, with a r^lish that she had not known for many
years, in having her husband at the table with her.

After dinner, at which Marsini, his friend count Carletti, whose arrival has
been already mentioned, Clement and Marianne, were guests, lord Arlington, with
an apology to those guests, for making themselves the principal objects of the
company, begged of lady Arlington to gratify him, by telling him all that had
passed in his absence.

'The outline of the story, it is true, I already ^now,' said he, 'my Horatia;
it remains for you to ^dd all the little touches, which must make it a finished
piece.'

Lady Arlington would have waved the relation, ^ut was urged by the company,
who were all of them ^ufficiently acquainted with many circumstances, to make
them interest themselves in all: to gratify therefor, at the same time, lord
Arlington, and every one present, she complied, and omitted no circumstance, or
incident, which she thought worth relating. Often, during the relation, would a
tear involuntarily steal down her cheek, when she dwelt on the many anxious
moments she had suffered; and often did sympathetic tears start into the
animated eyes of her husband; particularly, when she recounted, which she did
with peculiar energy of expression, the thousand apprehensions she had endured,
on account of her children; -- the ardour with which she had watched the
openings of their infant minds; -- the joy she felt at every virtuous
propensity which they displayed; -- and the pangs that rent her bosom, when she
feared that she had discovered any of the deformed features of vice lurking
about their hearts; -- but those fears, she owned, never tormented her for any
length of time, for virtue had ever been the preponderating principle in both
of them.

When she came to the time of Antoinette's meeting with the hermit, she desired
her to take up the narration, which she did, and described her two interviews
with him, with an energy and pathos, that bespoke a soul full of animation an^
sensibility. At length, the story being brought to a conclusion, the two
narrators received the thanks of the company, and they, in their turn,
entreating lord Arlington not to keep their curiosity ungratified any longer,
he fetched a sigh, --

' It Is a tale of woe,' he said, 'that you ask for, but I will endeavor to go
through it.' He paused a minute, and then began, as the reader will find in the
next chapter.

CHAP. XVII.
I have been long a traveller with time,
And through unnumber'd evils have I noted,
Those born of anger to be most deplored.
GLOVER.
WHILE I was absent on my travels, and during the time that I was detained at
Vienne, by the illness and death of my worthy and respected tutor, mr. Lewson,
I became acquainted with the baron de St. Foix, who had a very fine chateau
near Vienne. The baron was one of the true French noblesse, haughty, arrogant,
supercilious; full of his own greatness, and of the antiquity of his family,
and devoted to whatever he considered as tending to the aggrandizement of that
family, of which he was so proud. His father had been for some years resident
in England, while the baron was quite young, where the latter learnt the
English language so completely, that he could speak it as well as the French,
and where, also, he contracted a partiality (as far as he ever contracted a
partiality for any thing, but himself) to the English nation, which led him to
treat all subjects of the British empire, who could claim the rank of
gentlemen, with an affability and attention which he rarely condescended to
show, even to his equals in his own country.

In consequence of this condescension in the baron, I was admitted freely as a
guest at his house; and, indeed, my situation at that time seemed even to have
touched him with a kind of compassion, so as to make him wish to contribute, as
far as was consistent with his dignity, to my comfort, in my then afflicting
circumstances. He gave me free leave to walk in his grounds, whenever I was
inclined; and even permitted me to have a key of a gate to his park, which was
close by the city of Vienne, and by means of which I had a much readier access
to his house, and grounds, than by the common road.

His famil^, at that time, consisted only of himself, a son, and a daughter.
The son was in Italy, with, I suppose, count Marsini, and was, as I understood,
a most amiable and accomplished gentleman. The daughter, the charming
mademoiselle de St. Foix, need I say more of her, than that she was then, in
every respect, what Antoinette is now, both in person, face and mind?

To a soul so full of sensibility as here is, my situation soon became very
interesting; I was on the point of losing a friend, to whom I was under the
greatest obligations, and whom I truly loved and esteemed. -- I saw him daily
sink under the pressure of accumulated ills; and, being far from all my
friends, and in a country to the manners and customs of which I was nearly a
stranger, such a loss would be much more severely felt.

She always, therefore, seemed to endeavor to be particularly animated in my
company, in order to dissipate, as far as was in her power, the melancholy,
which I could not conceal; and her attentions were too pleasing to pass
unnoticed by me.

Sometimes, when she saw me taking a solitary walk in the garden, she would
join me, and by the brilliancy of her conversation, chase from my thoughts, for
a while, the subject that distressed me.

Ah! fatal attentions to my peace! -- while she strove to drive one uneasiness
from my bosom, she paved the way for the introduction of a thousand others. In
short, I had not long been acquainted with her, before I loved her to
distraction; and having some reason to hope, that I was not quite indifferent
to her, I was revolving in my mind how I might lay open my heart to her, when a
blow fell on us, which at once crushed our rising hopes, and which, at last,
terminated in the death of Antoinette, and in my own worse than death, in the
total overthrow of my happiness for a long series of years.

A correspondence had been for some time carrying on between the baron de St.
Foix, and the marquis de Lamoignon, a nobleman no less proud and arrogant, than
the baron himself.

One day the baron called Antoinette into his room, and told her, 'That he had
a glorious piece of new^ to impart to her; that he had just agreed on a match
between her, and the count de St. Pol, son to the marquis de Lamoignon; -- that
the count would be at his chateau that very afternooon, and that she must
prepare herself to receive him as her lover and future husband. You will see,
my dear Antoinette,' he added, 'how much I have consulted your interest, and
happiness alone in this match, since I have engaged to give you a very large
dower, in consideration of the son of a marquis condescending to unite himself
to the daughter of a baron only; not but my family is more ancient than the
marquis's: but deference is certainly due to rank like his.'

The astonished Antoinette, who had not, 'till that moment, the least idea of
what was going on, lost, by so sudden and unexpected a shock, all power of
speech. Indeed, she knew too well, her father's imperious and violent temper,
to have dared to make any direct opposition to him, unless driven to it by the
strongest necessity; and she thought the best way was, to acquiesce in silence,
that she might gain time to consider how she could best counteract a design,
against which her heart revolted. Not that at that time she was acquainted with
the count de St. Pol, for even his person was unknown to her; but his character
was by no means such, as could make her think an^ union with him desirable; --
added to which, there was something perfectly revolting in being thus bargained
for, not only without her consent, but even without her knowledge; -- and,
perhaps, more than all, if I may say so, without vanity, her heart was too
partial to me, to endure the thoughts of marrying another. She made no reply,
therefore, to the baron, but withdrew to give vent to the emotions of her
bosom, in a retired part of the garden.

I was then availing myself of the baron's permission to resort to his gardens
at any time, and was walking in the very part, whither Antoinette had turned
her steps. She did not, however, perceive me, and I saw her sit down on a
bench, d^owned in tears. This was a moment which I could not resist; I
approached the seat; she scarcely seemed to attend to me; I sat down by her:

'Alas!' said I, 'What can thus afflict the charming mademoiselle de St. Foix?
A soul like here is should surely be exempt from sorrow.'

'Oh! sir,' she replied, ''tis the curse of our sex, that we are never to know
what happiness is. Man may sometimes be free, but woman, unhappy woman, is
eternally a slave to some tyrant or other; man is sometimes allowed his choice
in a partner in the marriage tie; but woman must submit to be sold to the first
person who thinks her worth the purchase.'

'Curses light on the heart that could be so hardened, as to think of holding
up to sale such a treasure as Antoinette!' said I, boiling with indignation.

'Oh! hold,' she said, 'Curse him not, for still he is my father, and much is
due to that sacred character, though he may abuse his power; -- I would resist
his tyranny, but cannot bear to sit by and hear him cursed.'

'Pardon my rash and hasty tongue,' I replied, 'I acknowledge my fault, and the
justice of your reproof; but, Oh! dearest Antoinette, surely my eyes have not
been such unfaithful interpreters of my heart, as to leave you any room to
doubt, that that heart is wholly, solely yours. Tell me, then; can I do aught
to rescue you from your present embarrassment? I cannot know a joy equal to
serving you; -- speak, lovely creature! -- I have sometimes been presumptuous
enough to hope, that I was not quite indifferent to you.'

She looked earnestly at me, and after a silence of a minute or two, said,

'I know not whether you may not deem me too forward in the confession I am
going to make; but circumstance, powerful circumstance, demands, that I should
be explicit; -- Yes, mr. Percival, I will own, that I have seen your partiality
for me -- seen it with a pleasure, which I will not attempt to dissemble, and
have been induced to think, that the greatest happiness I could know, was to
spend the remainder of my days with you. Judge, then, what my feelings must be,
at receiving a positive command from my father, to receive the count de St.
Pol, as my lover and future husband; -- a man, whom I never even saw, and whose
pride and arrogance are the theme of universal detestation, by all who are not
as proud and arrogant as himself. And this marriage has been agreed upon by my
father, without his ever having even mentioned the subject to me. What can I
do? Misery must await my refusal of this detested marriage; and misery must, in
all probability, await my consent to it; but that I am determined never to do.
If I must be miserable, at least I will not have to reproach myself as the
author of my own wretchedness.'

It is not necessary to detail at large the particulars of this interview; it
is sufficient to say, that it became at last so interesting to us, that we
exchanged reciprocal promises of unalterable fidelity to each other. and that
we would preserve that faith at all hazards. She said, 'she must see St. Pol
that afternoon, for a refusal to do so, would be a foolish irritation of her
father, which could serve no good purpose; but was determined not to give him
any encouragement:' and when we parted, she appointed me to to meet her at the
same spot early the next morning, that she might tell me how matters were going
on.

Accordingly, we met the next morning, when she told me, 'That her interview
with St. Pol had only confirmed her resolution, never to be his; for she found,
that the world had not done him injustice in the character it had given him. He
was insolent beyond conception, and in that first interview, had treated her
with all the arrogance and contempt, which are too often shown by the husband
to his wife: but are seldom practiced by the lover to his mistress.' She then
proceeded to say, 'When the count left us, a most painful scene indeed ensued,
between my father and me, in which I very plainly told him, that I could never
think of giving my hand to a man, who could not behave with decent civility to
me, even at our first meeting; and after the specimen of his behavior, which
he had just been giving me, I saw very plainly what I had to expect, when the
marriage tie should have given him a legal right to tyrannize over me: that, in
short, rather than give my hand to a man, so destitute as St. Pol, of every
quality of mind, on which to form any rational hopes of happiness, I would take
refuge in the even less i^ksome fetters of a cloister.

'I cannot describe my father's rage,' she continued, 'when he heard me utter
these sentiments, in a tone so firm and decided, as could leave him no
expectation of my resolution being shaken: he stamped on the ground, and
foaming at the mouth, was rendered, by passion, incapable of utterance; and I
know not to what lengths his ungovernable temper might have carried him, had
not a domestic fortunately entered at that moment, and informed him, that a
messenger was arrived at the chateau, with dispatches from the court. He,
therefore, hastily dismissed me, with orders to retire to my chamber, and not
to stir from it, but to be ready to attend his summons, as soon as his business
with the messenger was dispatched. No such summons, however, has arrived, nor
have I seen or heard of my father since.'

We passed an hour in sweet, but melancholy conversation, when Antoinette said,
'That she must leave me, for she dared not stay any longer;' and we parted with
renewed protestations of fidelity to each other; Antoinette promising, 'that I
should hear from her, when she had any tidings to communicate,' and begging, at
the same time, 'that I would not attempt to see her 'till I had heard from her.'

She then turned her steps toward the house, and I returned to my hotel at
Vienne, to the melancholy task of attending my poor friend, whose health I saw
every day declining more and more rapidly, and to whom, on that account only, I
never imparted my affair with Antoinette, which otherwise, I should not have
thought of concealing from him.

For five days I lived on the rack of expectation; but did not hear a word of
my adored Antoinette. At last, a confused rumor reached my ears, by means of
the physician who attended mr. Lewson, that she had been carried away by order
of the baron, and no one knew what was become of her. What horrible images did
this report raise in my bosom? I pictured to myself the object of my ardent
affection, betrayed by the very person, who ought to have protected her from
all outrage, into the arms of a man she detested; for I concluded nothing else,
but that the baron had forced her into the power of St. Pol.

I flew in an agony to the chateau, where the first person I met with, was an
old female servant, wife to the porter of the chateau, who had known Antoinette
from her childhood, and loved her as well as she loved her own daughter. I
asked, with trembling anxiety, 'If her young mistress had left the chateau?'

'Oh! yes, sir,' she replied, and burst into tears: 'She has, indeed, and we
none of us know what is become of her!'

'What is it you tell me?' I cried, 'You do not know what is become of her?'

'Alas! No, sir,' said she, 'It is now five days ago, since the baron and she
had a very great quarrel; after which he ordered the coach to be got ready, and
made my young lady get into it with him, and he returned a few hours after in
the coach by himself, and the next morning he and all his servants went away to
Paris, and that is all I know about the matter, sir.'

For me -- I cannot describe my feelings at this account of the old woman's. --
Excuse me, my Horatia, my dearest wife, it is a remembrance, that gives me such
agony. Lord Arlington paused; -- he got up; -- he walked to the window; -- he
stayed there a few minutes, then returned to his ^eat, and resumed his
narration; but saw that tears trickled fast down the cheeks of some of his
auditors.

I enquired of the old woman, 'If she could tell me which way the coach went?'

'She knew not what road it took,' she said, 'after it got out of the park, and
the coachman who drove it was gone to Paris with the baron.'

I then thanked the old woman for the information she had given me, and went to
enquire in the neighborhood, if they could give me any intelligence of the
route the coach had taken, that I might trace out, if possible, what was become
of my dearest Antoinette. After much enquiry, I at last learnt so far, as that
the coach passed a house about five miles from Vienne; and there I stopped my
enquiries for that day, as I had been longer than usual absent from my friend,
whom, notwithstanding all my anxieties on another subject, I could not bear the
idea of appearing to neglect.

At my return to the hotel, I found that he had such so much in the last six
hours, that it was very improbable he should live the night through; and my
fears were right: he expired before the morning, to my unspeakable regret, for
in him I lost such a friend, as I could scarcely hope ever to have again.
Never, surely, was a man so well calculated to execute, with propriety, the
office of traveling tutor, which he had undertaken, and I can only wish my
Henry the exact counterpart of mr. Lewson, if ever he shall set out on the plan
that I did. But I forbear to dwell farther on his virtues and my loss; my
letters always bore honorable testimony to his worth, and my obligations; and,
perhaps, I lost him at the most critical moment that such a loss could be
sustained, for had he lived, prudent council might have assisted me in winding
my way more judiciously out of the labyrinth in which I was involved.

The next morning, after I had given such orders as were necessary, in
consequence of the melancholy event which had just taken place, I set out again
on my pursuit of my lost Antoinette, and, by dint of unremitted enquiries, at
last traced her to the convent of Saint Marguerite, fourteen miles from
Vienne. Thus was I well assured of the situation of my beloved, and was even
comforted to find her only shut up in a convent, after having pictured her to
myself in the so much more dreadful situation of the legal prostitute of St.
Pol. But, how was it possible to arrive at any intercourse with her? --
Supineness and inactivity, however, I was well assured, could do nothing for
me; -- exertion of mind was the only thing likely to assist me in my present
situation; and I was resolved, that as soon as I had ^id the last sad duties to
poor Lewson, I would take up my ab^de in the neighborhood of the convent, that
I might be in the way to watch opportunity, and to act immediately on any
emergency.

For this purpose, I secured a lodging at an inn, only a mile from the convent,
and which was the nearest place that I could possibly get one at; and, as soon
as I had seen my friend deposited in the peaceful grave, and settled all his,
and my own concerns, at Vienne, I returned to my inn, and there took up my
abode.

I had not been settled there more than two days, when I became acquainted with
this good man (pointing to Clement, who sat on the opposite side of the room)
then a friar, and who was the intimate friend of father Anselm, the confessor
of the convent. After some few conversations with him, and getting what insight
I could into his character, which I found was that of one of the most honest
and benevolent of men; I thought I might venture to trust him so far, as to
tell him I had reason to suspect that a young lady, to whom my heart was
entirely devoted, had been hurried by her father into the convent a short time
before, and I entreated him, if possible, to learn, whether any one had lately
been lodged there, who might answer to this description.

He readily engaged to make the enquiries I wished, and said, 'That he did not
doubt but by means of Anselm, he could gain me the information I desired;
expressing, at the same time, (as though forgetting, for a moment, through
benevolent feelings, that he was a friar) the greatest abhorrence of that
barbarity exercised by parents so frequently, in throwing off young and
helpless females, whom they were bound to protect, not to persecute, into a
situation, which must preclude her from all possibility of enjoying real
happiness; sentiments which did honor to his head and heart, and which long
experience has abundantly testified to me, were not the flimsy cant of the
moment, but the settled principles of his soul.

On the morrow, I had another visit from my friend Clement, who told me, 'He
had made the enquiries I desired of his brother Anselm, and had heard from him,
that a young woman of consummate beauty, and possessed of a firmness and
loftiness of soul, beyond what is to be found in the generality of her own sex,
and in very many of the other, was brought there about ten or twelves days
before. That she seemed in deep affliction, but instead of uselessly yielding
to, and drooping under it, she exerted all her resolution to sustain herself
with dignity and fortitude. That she was watched with more than usual
strictness; one of the superiors (sister Marianne) having orders never to leave
her; that she was never suffered to appear at the grate; and that it was
understood in the convent, that as soon as her year of noviciate was expired,
she was to take the veil.'

So far fortune seemed to have favored me in my researches. I now ventured to
proceed farther, and to sound Clement, Whether I might not, by means of Anselm,
get a letter conveyed to my unfortunate Antoinette. He undertook this business
too, as readily as he had undertaken the other, at the same time giving me the
strongest assurances, that I might depend on both his own, and Anselm's secresy.

I accordingly wrote to Antoinette, informing her where I was, and by what
means I had come to the knowledge of her situation, and obtained the means of
communication with her, entreating her, if possible, to write to me, and let me
know all that had befallen her since our last meeting.

This letter I gave to Clement, who immediately repaired to the convent, and
returned to m^ ^n a few hours, telling me that he had given it to Anselm, who
would take the first safe opportunity of conveying it into the hands of
Antoinette.

Clement spent the rest of the day with me, and every time I saw him, I became
more and more pleased with his company and conversation. I have always found
him sensible, liberal, and well-informed, open and ingenuous, not cunning and
crafty, like most of his order.

'Excuse me, sir,' said lord Arlington, addressing himself to Clement, 'I must
pay you the tribute you deserve.'

The two succeeding days passed over, without seeing Clement; and I began
rather to wonder at his long delay: but on the morning of the third, he came to
me, and said,

'That he had just parted from Anselm, and learnt from him, that he had given
the letter to Antoinette, who received it with transport, but that it was
impossible she should answer it; she could only send through him assurances of
her love and fidelity. -- But sir,' said Clement, 'Anselm bade me ask you, if
yo^ dare show your love to your mistress, by running some hazard to procure an
interview with her?'

'Hazard!' I exclaimed, 'Is there any danger, that I would not brave to see
her?'

'Well, then,' said Clement, 'I will procure a friar's habit for you, and in
that dress you shall accompany me tomorrow morning to the convent.'

Clement then appointed me a place of meeting, whither I eagerly repaired the
next morning, and sound him waiting for me. I arrayed myself in my disguise,
and we set forward to the convent, where we arrived without any interruption,
and went immediately to Anselm's cell.

CHAP. XVIII.
Come what sorrow can,
It cannot countervail the exchange of joy,
That one short minute gives me in her sight:
Do thou but close our hands with holy words,
Then love-devouring death, do what he dare.
It is enough, I may but call her mine.
SHAKESPEARE.
NEVER was I so much impressed with the fight of any one, as when I first cast
my eyes on father Anselm. His countenance was the perfect picture of sorrow,
resignation, and benevolence. He seemed to be of a very advanced age, but his
eyes still full of animation, and he was perfectly upright. His whole
appearance, in short, spoke the remnant of manly beauty, both in face and
person. On my entering, he accosted me with a benedicite, uttered in the most
emphatic tone, and then said to me,

'Young man, you behold before you one, who was in his youth the devoted victim
of parental persecution, as I fear, alas! is too often the case with such as
are engaged in the life, to which I have been for so many years devoted. We are
some of us compelled by our parents, to take upon us the religious vow; and
others take refuge in it, when deprived, by persecution, of all worldly
happiness. I was one of the latter description; -- I loved, and was beloved
again, but my Adeline was torn from my arms, by a cruel father, who thought her
beneath me, nor know I, to this moment, whither he conveyed her.

In despair I resolved to forsake the world, and seek for refuge in the bosom
of my God: but oh! my son, let not despair ever drive thee into the same
course; it is a mistaken idea; Oh! Adeline, Adeline! I thought, that when I was
deprived of thee, no earthly object could ever interest my soul, and I sought
therefore to fill it wholly with heavenly ones. -- But, it will not do;
solitude has but fed a passion that devours me; and while I have seemed devoted
to my God, I have been devoted to my Adeline.'

While loud Hosannas shake the shrines around,
I hear her softer accents in the sound;
Her idle beauties on each altar glare,
And injured heaven has but half my prayer.
CAWTHORNE. 'Then, Oh! my son, if thy passion should end as unfortunately as
mine did, do not follow the course I have done, but seek, by reading and
reflection, and, above all, by leading an active life, to mitigate your
sorrows. But, hark! I hear the steps of some one! -- It Is your mistress, I
doubt not; she comes this morning to confession.'

A gentle t^p at the door confirmed him in the truth of his conjectures; he
opened it, and in a moment I clasped my beloved Antoinette in my arms.

Anselm then conducted us into a closet adjoining to his cell, which belonged
to him, where we could converse freely, without fear of interruption. She then
related to me all that had happened since our last interview, in the following
words:

'When I was returning to my chamber, after I had parted from you, I met my
father on the stairs leading to it; at sight of him, I was ready to sink into
the earth; he sternly asked me, where I had been, and, how I had dared to stir
from my room without his permission? -- I replied, that I had been in the
garden: -- he took me by the arm, pulled me forcibly into my room, and then
said,

'I have found you out, madam; this reluctance to wed the man, whom I had
chosen for you, I find arises from the basest motives. -- Oh! could I have
supposed that the daughter of the baron de St. Foix, could ever have harbored
such grovelling ideas, -- I would have seen that rascally Irishman hurled to
the bottom of the ocean, before he should have been permitted to enter my
doors.'

'I saw plainly by this harangue,' continued Antoinette, 'that my father had
really discovered our attachment, and wondered much by what means it had come
to his knowledge; though, as I afterward learnt, he had gained his information
from one of the servants, who had watched us, and overheard some of our
conversation that morning, unobserved by us.

'My father then burst into a torrent of the most violent invective against
you, and against me; and at last said,

'But I am resolved, madam: and you shall find, that I can be as obstinate as
yourself; either you shall swear to me this moment to give your hand, at the
time I shall name, to the count de St. Pol, or this instant you shall be
carried to a cloister, from whence, mark my words, it is my fixed, my
unalterable determination, you shall never come out alive.'

'He then took up a Bible, which lay on the table, and coming up to me,
attempted to put it into my hands. I shrunk back: I entreated him to pause, and
reflect on what he was about; -- that it gave me pain ever to be obliged to
contest any point with him, but that I never would consent to be the wife of
St. Pol, who was not merely an object of indifference to me, but the object of
my thorough contempt and aversion.

'I begged him only to allow himself a few days to reflect on this affair, when
I could not but hope he would view it in a different light. That with regard to
yourself, though I did not know by what means he had discovered my attachment
to you, yet I certainly should not disavow it, as I thought it a passion rather
to glory in, than to be ashamed of. That I could not understand what he meant,
by calling it a base passion; that you were of an illustrious family in your
own country; and that he had himself often acknowledged, with the warmest
encomiums, that your personal and mental accomplishments were almost unequalled.

'He seemed to hesitate. -- I threw myself on my knees, and taking one of his
hands, which I pressed to my bosom, entreated only three days delay, before he
proceeded any farther in this affair. -- I conjured him to consider the
dreadful consequences that might ensue from hurrying matters on; -- that he
would not only, by that means, endanger the total destruction of my peace of
mind, but would, perhaps, lay up for himself a store of misery for the
remainder of his days; -- misery which he could not avoid feeling, if ever
reflection should come across his mind; -- and he should consider, that instead
of being the protector of his daughter, he had been her tyrant, perhaps her
murderer.'

(Tears here stole down the cheeks of the young Antoinette; she called to mind
the death of the hermit of Killarney, and suspicions arose in her mind, that
her mother's words had been prophetic of the fate of the baron. She gave an
expressive look at lady Arlington, who seemed to enter into what was passing in
her mind, and nodded her assent to it. Lord Arlington observed them: 'Yes,
doubtless,' he said, 'it will hereafter appear, that the words of thy mother,
my dearest child, were prophetic;' and then he proceeded in his narration.)

My Antoinette continued her story thus: 'For a moment my father seemed deeply
impressed with what I said; but then hastily snatching away his hand:'

'No,' he said, 'my honor is engaged to St. Pol, and cannot be recalled; --
delay is impossible; -- I am summoned to court; -- I must set out for Paris
tomorrow; -- either this moment then repeat the oath, which I shall dictate,
or a cloister shall receive you; from which, I repeat my words again, you never
shall come out alive.'

'Seeing him thus determined, and that neither arguments nor entreaties could
more him, I found nothing remained for me, but to be equally decided. Well
then, sir,' I answered, 'Since such is your cruel determination, hear mine; --
You may make me miserable, but my own lips shall never seal my misery, by
consenting to a prostitution which my soul abhors; -- I am resolved never to be
the wife of St. Pol.

'Never shall I forget the look which my father gave me; -- it was a mixture of
unutterable rage and astonishment; -- of astonishment, to find such resolution
in a female bosom; -- and of rage, at finding himself thus thwarted in his
favorite plan of aggrandizing his family, for so he considered the misery to
which he would have doomed me.

'He burst from me, opened the door, then violently clapped it to again; --
looked sternly at me:'

'And are you thus resolved?' he said, 'But take care, for if you now let me
quit your appartment, without taking the oath which I demand, the world united
cannot save you from my just indignation.'.

'I went up to him, took his hand, and was going to kiss it, but he spurned me
from him.'

'I will not be thus fooled,' he said, 'Take the oath this moment, or I am
gone, and then -- '

'He paused, and looked for my reply.

'I cannot, dare not, perjure myself: -- Can my father wish that I should?'

'You will not take the oath then?'

'I can never yield to be the wife of St. Pol; -- Yet hear me, oh! my father!

'I caught hold of his coat; he flung me from him, so that I fell on the floor;
he then burst open the door, went furiously out of the room, and locked it
after him.

'I lay for some minutes on the floor, almost without sense or recollection;
stunned scarcely less by the ferocity of my father, than by my fall. But the
more I recollected myself, the more I was convinced of the folly I should be
guilty of, were I to give way to despondency, at an hour which called for the
most active exertion: that it was my duty, as well as my interest, not weakly
to sink under my troubles, but to endeavor to combat them; and that though
others might oppress my body, my mind could never be conquered without my own
consent.

'With these reflections I fortified my soul against the storm, which I saw
approaching, and rising from the floor, began to arrange my concerns for a fate
which seemed inevitable.

'In about half an hour my father returned to me, attended by two of the
servants.'

'Take her,' he said to them, 'and carry her to the coach.'

'It is unnecessary to use force,' I said, 'I shall make no resistance. -- I
walked down stairs with composure, and seated myself in the coach, into which
my father also got, and we drove hither. Not a word passed between us on the
way; -- my father seemed much agitated, but he never once looked at me.

'When we arrived here, we were immediately shown into the parlour, which we
found empty. My father then looked full in my face, for the first time since
our leaving the cheateau, and taking me by the hand.'

'Antoinette,' said he, ''Tis not yet too late; but this moment must seal your
doom; -- the oath; -- you may still save yourself.'

'Not at that price; -- Would my father have me seal my own damnation?'

'Oh! invincible obstinacy!' he exclaimed; 'Then here it must end.'

'So saying, he rushed out of the room, and I saw no more of him; nor did I see
any one else for about an hour, when, to my surprise, he again entered the
room.'

'You are resolved then, Antoinette,' he said, 'to be immured here for life?'

'I am resolved never to marry the count de St. Pol.'

'Good heavens!' he said, 'Could I have thought it?' -- He turned toward the
door; he looked at me again; -- 'I am going, Antoinette,' he said.

'And, cannot I recall you, my father!'

'Yes, Antoinette, there is one way, and only one; -- my honor is pledged, and
that I cannot sacrifice.'

'Nor can I ever wed as you desire.'

'Good God! Good God!' he cried, and went out of the room violently agitated;
and in a few minutes I heard the coach drive off.

'I was immediately put under the care of one of the superiors, who has orders
never to leave me, except when I come here to confession; -- but she is kind to
me, and really seems to compassionate my situation. I am not permitted to see
any one, and, at the expiration of a year, orders are given by my father, that
I should take the veil.'

Such was the relation given me by Antoinette, of the contests which she had
had with the baron, and the baron with himself; in which it seemed apparent,
that the latter had suffered false notions of honor, at last to overcome
paternal affection, though that had maintained the contest to the last moment;
and it was even probable, that the baron himself was scarcely less a sufferer
from the conflict, than the victim of his persecution. I then imparted to
Antoinette, how much I had been urged by my father to return to Ireland, as
soon as ever, by the death of poor mr. Lewson, I should be released from my
attendance on him; for he earnestly wished me to reach Ireland against the time
when I was to come of age.

She begged me earnestly not to let my attachment to her interfere with this
wish of my father's, and urged me to set out immediately on my return, and
leave her to her fate.

'How can my Antoinette,' I said, 'suppose that I could desert her at a moment
like the present? But I would suggest a plan, which I hope would make us
mutually happy, and end our troubles at once.'

'And, how can that be?' she asked eagerly.

I then ventured to suggest to her the possibility of our being privately
married in Anselm's cell; and that by his assistance also, I thought it
possible that we might accomplish her escape from her convent, when she might
accompany me to Ireland, where she would be under the protection of my father
and myself; and as to my father, I doubted not of obtaining his ready
forgiveness for the step I had taken.

She paused and hesitated what answer to make to my proposal, and at last said,
'She could not then determine what to do, but bade me meet her again in three
days at Anselm's cell, by which time she would have taken her resolution, and
if it should be to comply with my wishes, the ceremony should at that time be
performed; but bade me not be too sanguine in my hopes; that even when united,
our troubles would not be at an end, for she saw nothing but rocks and shoals
around us, on some of which it was scarcely possible but that we should sp^^t.'
We then took our leave of each other for that time, as she said she did not
dare stay any longer, and after agreeing with Anselm that we should meet again
in three days, she retired to her room, and I returned with Clement to my inn.

At the expiration of the term agreed on, Clement and I hastened to the place
of appointment, where I had not been arrived many minutes, before Antoinette
appeared, accompanied by the superior, to whose care she was entrusted. I
started on seeing another person enter with her, but she said,

'Do not be alarmed, my Theodore, the compassionate Marianne has entered warmly
into our cause, and will promote the success of our schemes to the utmost of
her power. I come now in the presence of her, and father Clement, to receive
your faith, and to pledge mine to you. -- Haste, Anselm, perform the ceremony,
let me not have more time for reflection.'

The holy man pronounced the proper vows and blessings, and in a short space of
time I was blessed with the delightful reflection, that Antoinette was my wife.
She told me to remain with Anselm, and at night Marianne should conduct me to
her apartment, and then hurried away, almost overcome with the variety of
feelings which agitated her soul. To myself, I can hardly describe my
sensations. -- One moment all other ideas were absorbed in the happiness I felt
at being united to Antoinette; -- the next moment I was almost weighed down
with anxiety, at looking forward to the many dangers and difficulties we might
have to encounter, before we could really enjoy the possession of each other.

In these alternate hopes and ^ears, I spent my time, 'till the arrival of
Marianne, under whose conduct I arrived safely, by various turnings and
windings, at Antoinette's apartment, and returned by the same means to Anselm's
cell the next morning, from whence I departed undiscovered to my inn, after he
had opened to me a plan, which Marianne and he had been concerting, for
Antoinette's escape, in which Marianne meant to accompany her, as she ardently
sighed to quit her monastic life; and this project, he said, he hoped would be
more matured, when I should return in the evening, which he allowed me to do.

In the evening, then, he imparted to me the whole plan which they had
concerted, and which was to be carried into execution in three nights from that
time. I passed the night again in Antoinette's apartment, when we agreed to
meet no more, 'till she was without the walls of the convent. Every thing was
settled with Anselm, before I departed in the morning, and a place was agreed
on, where I was to attend with a chaise, on the night appointed, from whence we
were to proceed, with all possible expedition, to Marseilles, and there take
shipping on board any vessel we could find, which would convey us to a place of
safety.

Those, and those only, who have been in a like situation, can form an idea of
my feelings, during the painful interval of suspense, between the settling of
this scheme, and the time of action. Oh! How truly did I feel the force of the
great poet's observation, Between the acting of a dreadful thing
And the first motion, all the interim is
Like a phantasma or a mortal dream;
The genius and the mortal instruments
Are then in council; and the state of man;
Like to a little kingdom, suffers then
The nature of an insurrection.
SHAKESPEARE.

Only six hours were remaining to the appointed time of my meeting with
Antoinette, when Clement came to me, and with a voice and countenance, which
sufficiently spoke the interest he took in the melancholy news, of which he was
the bearer, told me, that Anselm had that morning been found dead in his cell.
Of this event a vague rumor had reached his (Clement's) ears, which caused him
to go immediately to the convent to inform himself, whether it were true or
not, when he received a full and melancholy conviction, that the rumor he had
heard was founded in fact. He had obtained a moment's interview with Marianne,
who had only time to tell him, that in consequence of this event, all thoughts
of their flight from the convent, must for the present be at an end, and that
Antoinette would, if possible, convey a letter to me in a day or two; and, in
the mean time, she charged me, as I valued our mutual safety, not to attempt
coming to the convent.

Thus, in one dreadful moment, was the cup of joy and transport, which I had
been flattering myself with the idea of draining to the bottom, at once dashed
from my lips, and I was left a prey to the most horrible apprehensions for her,
whom my soul doted on to such excess. -- But let me not think of it: -- I
really was half frantic, and, I believe, that nothing but the kind and friendly
attentions I received from Clement, preserved to me any portion of my senses.
He promised to do every thing in his power to assist us, and bade me hope that
this delay, however dreadful it appeared, would prove only a temporary
disappointment; and he promised to go the next day to the convent, and collect
for me, if possible, some new^ of my Antoinette.

Three days, however, elapsed, during which time he constantly hovered about
the convent, before he could bring me any intelligence of her. But on the third
day the porter of the convent told him he was wanted in the parlour, whither he
accordingly went, and found Marianne there, who put a letter into his hand, and
bade him be gone again directly.

He lost no time in bringing the letter to me, which I opened and read with as
much eagerness as the parched traveller feels, when he spies a lonely shell
with one single drop of water standing in its cavity. It contained many
assurances of her affection, and lamentations for our late disappointment; but
she earnestly entreated me not to think any more, at that time, of her escape,
for it was then a matter of impossibility. 'Return then,' she said, 'my dearest
Theodore, to a father, who is anxious to be blessed with your presence; but at
present, let me entreat* and, believe me, I have good reasons for what I ask,
that you do not mention the subject of our marriage even to him. I have written
to my brother at Florence, giving him a full account of my present situation,
and begging of him to come to me, as I know his disposition is such, that he
will be anxious to render us every assistance in his power, toward extricating
us from our present embarrassment. An awkward circumstance has happened, which
gives me very uncomfortable feelings. Anselm had, before his death, prepared a
certificate of our marriage, signed by himself, and attested by Clement and
Marianne, which was to have been given to me at the time of my departure, and
this paper cannot now be found, though Marianne has searched, with the utmost
care and caution, every corner of the cell. Heaven only knows into whose hands
it may have fallen! -- Once more, my dearest Theodore, let me entreat, let me
conjure you, to fly from these parts, and return to Ireland; your stay here may
be fatal to us both. Fly, then, fly without delay, as you value the repose of
your beloved and truly affectionate

ANTOINETTE DE ST. FOIX.




This letter was not calculated to compose into a calm a mind so tossed by
storms as mine then was. I resolved, however, to comply with the injunctions of
my Antoinette; had it been my own safety only, which my stay would have
endangered, I should not have hesitated a moment to brave any dangers, rather
than quit the spot which contained that dearest object of my affection; but she
told me, that my stay might endanger her safety too, and this was an argument
not to be resisted: I, therefore, took my leave of Clement, who engaged to let
me have frequent and faithful accounts of the state of affairs at the convent,
and immediately set forwards for Ireland, and as you well know, my Horatia,
arrived at Arlington castle two days before that on which I completed my
twenty-first year.

CHAP. XIX.
Why comes she not? -- It Is torture for the unblessed
To suffer such suspense as my heart aches with.
What can it be? -- This secret dreadful cause?
This shaft unseen, that is winged against our love?
JEPHSON.
IT is needless to relate the public events which followed, on my arrival in
Ireland; you, alas, my Horatia, knew them but too well; it is sufficient that I
relate those secret events, which are known to myself alone.

Week after week passed over my head, still finding me in anxious expectation
of hearing from my Antoinette, and still leaving me disappointed. I knew not
what to think of it; I thought it unjust to Clement, to suppose that he had
deceived me, and been unfaithful to his promises; but I knew not how to account
for his silence. A thousand times was I on the point of disclosing the whole
affair of my marriage to my father, but the secrecy enjoined me by my
Antoinette, as often withheld my tongue. I wished to have left Arlington
castle, in order to have thrown, if possible, a greater damp on (...) plan,
which I saw my father so eagerly pursuing; but I did not dare to stir, while I
was kept in such uncertainty, as to my Antoinette; and while my absence from
the castle might have endangered a letter falling into hands that I should not
wish.

At length, after six months spent in most dreadful suspense, a letter arrived
from my Antoinette, which brought me the pleasing intelligence, that by the
assistance of her brother, the chevalier de St. Foix, a plan was formed for her
escape from the convent, which was to be carried into execution in the course
of a few days, from the time of her writing; and that the chevalier would
conduct her to Ireland, where he would stay 'till he heard the event of the
baron's being made acquainted with their proceedings. Still she wished that the
affair should be kept secret from my father, 'till her arrival in Ireland,
which she hoped would be in about a month.

She told me too, that various plans had been formed for her escape, but
obstacles had occurred, to prevent their execution; and hinted the additional
anxiety she felt to get away from the convent, on account of her own situation,
which made her stay in it every day more and more unsafe for her. There were
allusions also to a former letter which she had written to me, and to two
letters from Clement, none of which, as I have already said, I had ever
received.

My anxiety for my Antoinette was not at all relieved by this letter; I had
still every thing to fear for her, and yet it was impossible for me to attempt
going to her assistance; I was vexed and fretted too, at her continuing her
injunctions of secrecy, for it placed me in a most painful situation with
regard to my father, to whom I earnestly wished to lay open my heart; but as
Antoinette desired me to be secret, I was determined to be so at all hazards.

If the first six months, however, had been a stare of dreadful anxiety to me,
judge what I must have suffered, when near six months longer elapsed, without
my hearing any thing farther of the object, for whom all this anxiety was
suffered. You know too well, my dear Horatia, to what extremities matters were
brought between me and my father; -- a thousand times had my secret been ready
to burst from my lips, but as often did I revolt from a disclosure, which I
found I had every reason to dread. I, however, certainly should have told all
to my father, at the moment when he had passed the dreadful sentence on me,
'That I should consent in three days to wed as he desired me, or be banished
his presence for ever:' had he not gone so hastily out of the room, that he
left me no time to collect my spirits for the painful communication, and all my
thoughts of that communication were immediately after put an end to by the
events that followed.

My father had not quitted the room more than five minutes, when a servant came
and informed me, that a woman desired to speak to me in private I ordered her
to be shown to my own room, whither I immediately went myself, when the woman
told me that she brought me melancholy news of my Antoinette: but as the story
was long, she hoped I would excuse her imparting it to me then, but begged me
to meet her at an inn she named at Killarney. I would have accompanied her
thither, but she said, 'It is better that we should not go together.' She
therefore departed, by herself, and I set out in a few minutes after, taking a
different route from that which she had pursued.

When I arrived at the place of appointment, she conducted me into a parlour,
where sat the mistress of the inn, with a child in her arms. Joanna (for that
was the name of the woman who had requested my attendance there) took the child
from her and then desired her to leave the room. When she was gone, Joanna drew
from her bosom a sealed packet of papers, and placing them, together with the
child, in my arms,

'Behold, sir,' she said, 'the dying present of your dear Antoinette! -- She
charged me to deliver this infant, and this packet, into your own hands, and
here I discharge my trust.'

She then burst into a torrent of tears; -- I pressed the infant to my breast,
and fell back in my chair almost senseless.

Lord Arlington rose up from his seat; -- he walked up and down the room for a
few minutes, violently agitated, then sat down again.

'Excuse me,' he said, 'I cannot dwell on this s^ene; no words can describe it;
and I can hardly bear to think on it. After a long silence, I desired Joanna to
tell me the whole story.'

'Those papers, sir,' she replied, 'contain it as far as the departed angel
could tell of it; -- what is wanting there I will supply.'

I opened the packet, which contained a detail from Antoinette, of the events
that had happened to her since her last letter to me, which was in substance as
follows:

She got safe from the convent at the time appointed by her brother, but was
unfortunately, at last, obliged to leave Marianne behind, for only two days
before that appointed for their departure, she had broken her leg by a fall,
which made her flight, at that time, impossible; and as it was equally
impossible for Antoinette to delay her departure, she was obliged to escape by
herself. She found her brother in waiting for her with a chaise, about a
quarter of a mile from the convent, and they got to Marseilles without meeting
any interruption. They there agreed for their passage in a ship, which was to
sail for Lisbon next morning; but in the evening, as they were getting from the
boat which conveyed them to the ship itself, another boat which they had
perceived to put off from the shore very soon after theirs, came up, and four
men from it jumped into their boat, and seized on the chevalier and Antoinette,
exclaiming, that that they were their prisoners.

The chevalier attempted to make some resistance, in which he was seconded by
the men belonging to his own boat, and a severe scuffle ensued, in which the
brave, but unfortunate chevalier was pierced through the breast, by the sword
of one of the assailants, when he staggered against the side of the boat, f^ll
overboard into the water, and was seen no more.

'Good God!' exclaimed Marsini, 'And was such the fate of the most amiable of
men? -- I had always understood that he was killed in a duel.'

'So it was reported,' said lord Arlington, 'but the fact is as I relate to
you; he fell a sacrifice to fraternal affection, which, from the account given
me of him, by my poor Antoinette, he carried to a height far exceeding the
usual level of that amiable disposition.'

'Oh, she told you truly!' said Marsini; 'But I beg your lordship's pardon for
this interruption. -- Pray go on.'

Lord Arlington proceeded. -- This dreadful disaster cast such a damp over the
minds of every one, that no farther resistance was made, and Antoinette was
carried off by the ruffians; who, without regard to any thing but their orders,
hurried her away, nor stopped 'till they had deposited her safe in the chateau
de St. Foix, where she was doomed to meet alone, and unfriended, the frowns and
menaces of an enraged father, to mourn the untimely fate of a brother, whom she
doted on, and who had fallen in her service; -- and to reflect on the dreadful
situation to which an infant, she was likely soon to bring into the world,
would be exposed.

An unfortunate circumstance had attended the flight of Antoinette, which she
could not foresee or prepare against. The baron, whom she believed still at
Paris, nor likely for some time to return to the chateau, had suddenly arrived
there the evening of her flight. He knew that his son had been for some time
returned from Italy, and had been resident at the chateau, and he therefore
inquired for him immediately on his arrival there, when he was told that he had
gone that morning to the convent, to see his sister, and he perhaps would not
return for two or three days.

As the baron was really anxious to see his son, who had so long been absent
from him, he resolved to go very early next morning to the convent, where he
did not doubt but he should meet with him, and where he should also see his
daughter, and find what temper she was in, after some months of confinement.
He, accordingly, set off, and arrived at the convent just after the first alarm
had been spread, that Antoinette was missing; and just as intelligence arrived,
from two scouts who had been sent out to make enquiries, that a chaise had been
seen going in great haste the road to Marseilles, which was supposed to contain
the fugitives. The baron therefore lost no time in sending four men after them,
who succeeded in their errand but too well.

Antoinette was all astonishment when she beheld her father, whom she supposed
to have been at that moment so many miles off. He approached her with eyes
sparkling with rage, and vented the most bitter reproaches against her; -- but
soon after, his reproaches were changed into expressions of the most poignant
affliction for the death of his son, who was, he said, the only support in a
direct line of his ancient house, and his titles and estates would now go to a
collateral branch, twenty degrees removed from himself.

Thus, in alternate reproaches and bewailings, he gave vent to his feelings,
'till, at last, he ordered Antoinette to her chamber, and told her to prepare
herself, for returning, in a few days, to the convent.

'Yes,' said Antoinette firmly, 'I will prepare myself to return thither, and
shall go with the l^ss concern, as I know my captivity cannot be of long
duration, for the grave will soon release me from it.'

The baron looked sternly at her; 'Yes,' said he, 'That is the common cant of
your sex, when they are thwarted in their perverse inclinations; but I am not
to be so fooled; but it is in your own power, madam, to shorten your captivity
as much as you please; consent to marry St. Pol, and it is at an end;
otherwise, at the end of the year you take the veil.'

'And I would rather,' she replied, 'take the veil, than consent to so detested
an union.'

She was then conducted to her chamber, and a servant, devoted to the baron,
was ordered to attend her, and strictly to guard her.

In this confinement, however, she was not absolutely destitute of comfort.
Joanna, daughter to the porter of the castle, was just then come on a visit to
her father. She had, by means of the baroness de St. Foix, received a much
better education than young women in her situation usually obtain, and being
but little older than Antoinette, had been much her companion; 'till Joanna,
when she was about seventeen, went to live with a relation, who was in a very
profitable branch of trade at Lions, where she married a young man in the same
line of business as her uncle, but who died about a year after their marriage,
and left her with a very fine boy, and it was not more than three months from
the death of her husband, that she, with her child, came to the chateau de St.
Foix, to visit her father.

She well knew the unfortunate situation of Antoinette, and when she found that
she was to be kept in such strict confinement at the chateau, she determined,
at the hazard of the baron's anger, to administer all the consolation to her
that was in her power, for she was a young woman of more than common spirit and
resolution, and whose affection for Antoinette was such, that nothing seemed
formidable to her, when she thought she could render her any service, as the
sequel of my story will show. This young woman's attentions alleviated the
confinement of Antoinette, while she remained at the chateau, and when she was
carried back to the convent, which was in about ten days, she promised often to
come and visit her.

But all this time, the baron never appeared to have any suspicion of his
daughter's situation: he, indeed, saw her but seldom, and when he did see her,
he was always much more occupied in bewailing the loss of his son, than in
attending to her. He several times mentioned the match with St. Pol; but she as
constantly refused to hear any thing he had to say on that subject. When he
talked of carrying her back to the convent, she pressed him to let her continue
at the chateau for the short remainder of her days, offering to give him her
solemn assurance not to attempt escaping from thence.

He ridiculed the idea of her not living much longer; -- said that the ruddy
hue of her cheeks did not look as if her end was very near; mistaking the
hectic flush of fever, for the florid bloom of health; and as to her promises,
he said, he knew very well how far a woman's word was to be taken; and that, as
he was obliged to return again to Paris very soon, he should choose to place
her where he knew she would be most effectually secured, and he should take
care that she should not have it in her power to escape again from the convent.

These cruel taunts wounded poor Antoinette even more deeply than all the other
cruelties her father had exercised toward her. She plainly perceived that her
health was daily declining, from the fatigues of body and anxiety of mind which
she had undergone, and only dreaded, that she should not live to bring her
infant into the world. With emphatic expressions of these feelings; with the
warmest expressions of her regard for me; with ardent wishes for my happiness,
and an anxious recommendation of her child, if it should live to come into my
hands, to my love and protection, she closed the interesting narrative she sent
me, which Joanna then pursued to the following effect.

Lord Arlington's voice had several times been almost choked with stifled
agony, while he went through this affecting recital; but the most distressing
part still remained untold. -- He paused; -- he wiped away tears which he could
no longer repress, and, at length, proceeded thus, speaking in the person of
Joanna, by whom the latter part of Antoinette's story was related to him.

I had frequently visited Antoinette at the Convent: for the abbess, more
sensible to the alarming state of her health, than the baron, was desirous of
affording her every possible comfort, and, therefore, allowed me to have free
access to her. She had often talked to me of the persecution she had received
from her father on St. Pol's account, and appeared as if there was more she
wished to say to me, relative to herself, but that she hardly knew how to give
it utterance. At last, one day, when I found her particularly ill and dejected,
I pressed her much to unbosom herself entirely to me, as I saw there was
something sat heavy on her mind, which it would be a relief to her to disclose;
indeed, from her appearance, I had no difficulty to guess, in part, the secret
which she seemed hardly to have power to disclose. She sighed and hesitated
what answer she should make, but at length, said,

'My dear Joanna, you ask for a story which I have scarcely power to relate;
but I have received such kind attention from you, as encourages me not only to
tell my story, but to communicate a request which I have for a long time
ardently wished to make to you; -- the boldest, sure, that ever was made, but
which I have reason to believe your resolution, and strong affection for me,
will induce you to comply with.'

She then related to me all the particulars of her connection with you, and
concluded with saying,

'I feel, Joanna, that it is impossible I should survive my approaching
confinement; can you resolve to take my child under your protection as soon as
it is born, and if I should die, to carry it to Ireland, and place it in the
arms of its father?'

To this request I yielded a ready, a hearty assent; for the dangers of the
undertaking seemed nothing to me, when it was to gratify the wish of
Antoinette* and never shall I forget the transports which sparkled in her eyes,
at the assen^ I had given.

''Tis vain,' she said, 'my dearest Joanna, for me to attempt to thank you: How
poor are words, to express my obligations to you, or the gratitude I feel for
them? -- the heart, which, like yours, is capable of performing such an action
as you have undertaken, can alone feel what is due to it for the action it
performs: nor would I disgrace you by offering only the common effusions of a
grateful mind.'

She gave me many directions concerning the child, and said, 'that she had
expressed her wishes with regard to it, very fully, in her letters to her
husband* which she should give me to carry with the child.' She often too,
after this, talked to me of her husband, mentioning him with the most ardent
expressions of affection, and regretting all the uneasiness which she had
occasioned him. -- 'He was happy,' she would say, ''till he knew me: would to
heaven he had never known me!'

At length the moment arrived, when in the presence only of Marianne, myself,
and a surgeon, whom we had privately engaged for the purpose, this sweet infant
came into the world* Antoinette survived her delivery, but it seemed scarcely
possible that she should survive it for many hours; a rapid consumption had
preyed upon her for some weeks, under which she was apparently sinking. She
called me to her bedside; I had the child in my arms;

'Let me give her one kiss,' she said, 'It is the first and the last she will
ever receive from her unfortunate mother. -- Take her, Joanna, take her to my
Theodore, place her in his arms, and tell him it is the dying gift of one who
fondly and faithfully loved him, and who will bless him with her ^atest breath.'

I took the child; I was so wounded in my heart, that I could not bid the
mother farewell, although I was convinced that I should never see her more; I
wrapped the child carefully in my cloak, and having lulled her to sleep,
conveyed her away unobserved from the convent.

I carried her to my father's house, and I determined, that as my own child was
perfectly healthy, and did not want my nursing, I would transfer that
nourishment from him, to the infant Antoinette, for so I called the child,
after her mother; and the next day I went to the convent, where I learnt, that
Antoinette had expired about an hour before my arrival there: but I did not see
Marianne.

I now began to plan all things for my intended journey. I told my father and
mother what I had undertaken, and desired them to carry my child to my uncle at
Lions, who had often said he would adopt him as his son. They thought me rash,
but if any thing could excuse it, they said certainly the obligations they had
to Antoinette would. My journey was hastened too, by a rumor which came that
very day to the chateau, that the baron would be there in a day or two; and I
thought it would be highly imprudent in me to delay my departure 'till after
his arrival.

I accordingly set out two days after the death of Antoinette, and arrived
safely at Marseilles, where I had a cousin, who was master of a ship in the
Lisbon trade, and by his means I got a passage on board that ship, which
conveyed us to Lisbon, and by means of my cousin's connexions there, I was
recommended to a captain of a ship, bound from Lisbon to Cork, at which place I
arrived two days since; and, according to the directions which I received from
Antoinette, came on to Killarney, and have thus, I hope, faithfully discharged
the sacred trust which she committed to me.

Lord Arlington had, with difficulty, got through the latter part of this
narrative; -- he now got up* -- 'Oh! Excuse me,' he said, he went out of the
room; -- it was some time before he returned. On entering again, he said, 'I am
ashamed of myself, but I will go on*'

CHAP. XX.
Dire was the scene with whirlwind, ha^, and shower,
Black melancholy ^d the fearful hour;
Beneath tremendous rolled the flashing tide,
While sat on every billow seemed to ride.
FALCONER.
MY attention was now turned entirely to considering what course I had best
pursue, with regard to my dear infant, and to the union which my father was so
earnest to accomplish. At length I resolved to comply with him, and for the
present to keep my child in concealment. Joanna promised me to stay with her at
least as long as she wanted a nurse, and I therefore looked out for a situation
for them, and soon engaged mrs. Roberts to take them. How many tears did -- no,
why tell my folly? -- At the end of the time my father had allowed me to
consider of the point he had urged, I declared to him my readiness to obey his
commands, and soon after was united to one, with whom I ought to have been
happy. -- But no more of that.

The letter which occasioned my abrupt departure from you, my Horatia, and
which you so well remember my receiving, was to the following effect, as near
as I can recollect.

'You have been cruelly deceived, sir, in supposing your Antoinette to be no
more; she is now alive, and in the convent, where you left her. She took the
veil at the expiration of the year, but that would be no bar to her attempting
an escape again, if her husband were to come and assist her in the undertaking.
I have an unexpected chance of sending you this letter. I wish Antoinette could
avail herself of it, to send one also, but that is impossible. I hope this will
reach you safe, and that you will immediately hasten to the rescue of your
beloved Antoinette, and of your sincere friend,

MARIANNE DE MERCIER.'


'Good God!' I exclaimed, when I got out of the house, 'And is this greatest of
miseries reserved for me? -- Am I then the husband of two wives?'

I flew to Killarney, to mrs. Roberts's house, and enquired of Joanna, whether
it was she who had brought the letter to me? and by what means it had come to
her? -- She told me that it came enclosed in a parcel to her from her father;
and that as she knew I was to leave Arlington castle the next morning, she
immediately carried it there for me, never suspecting what the contents might
be.

I immediately resolved to set out without delay for the convent, that I might
satisfy myself of the truth or falsehood of what had thus been communicated to
me; for I could not bear the idea of remaining for a moment with my second
wife, while there was a possibility that my first might be yet alive. When I
declared my design to Joanna, she said, 'She wished I would find some means of
disposing of my child, and let her accompany me, as she was desirous of
returning to her own child and country.'

This request was too reasonable for me to hesitate a moment about complying
with; it was one which indeed I could not refuse; my only difficulty was, how
to dispose of my Antoinette. I revolved many plans in my mind, and at last
determined on that which I executed; and having written my letter, and given my
directions to mrs. Roberts, Joanna and I set off for Limerick, where we got on
board a vessel bound for Bilboa, front whence we determined to cross the
Pyrenees into France.

In the bay of Biscay we were overtaken by a violent storm, which drove us out
of our course, and after encountering dreadful perils at sea, we were at last
wrecked on the coast of Portugal. We then made the best of our way to Lisbon,
where we agreed for a passage to Marseilles, on board a Lisbon ship; but after
we had passed the streights, we were overtaken by another storm, more violent
than that we had encountered in the bay of Biscay, and which drove us toward
the coast of Africa. Our ship rode it out for a considerable time, but at last
the captain bid us all repair to the boats, for the ship could not hold
together for two hours longer. The boats were accordingly hoisted out, and as
many of us as could, got into them; but here I met with another disaster, which
rea^ly almost made me think that there was a something in myself, which was
contagious to every one who had any concern with me, and that I and misfortune
were so coupled together, that whoever was connected with the one, must
inevitably experience the baneful influence of the other. As my faithful and
friendly Joanna was descending from the ship, her foot missed its hold, she
fell into the sea, and a vast billow in a moment swept her from our fight.

We had not left the ship many minutes, before we plainly perceived her
foundering, and in a short time she vanished for ever. We got safe, however, to
the coast of Africa, but there we all were made slaves by the Algerines. I had
the good fortune, however, to fall into tolerable mild hands, so that I had,
from the first, a prospect, that I might, by industry, one day work out my
freedom; and so, in fact, I did. After a servitude of seven years, I had, by
care and prudent management, a^assed a sum sufficient to purchase my freedom,
and procure myself a passage to Marseilles: and this I managed too, without
parting with my gold watch, which I had the fortune to conceal at my first
landing, and the loss of which I should have regretted, as much as one who had
so many deeper causes of sorrow, could have regretted a bauble.

I no sooner found myself again on French ground, than I hastened to the
chateau de St. Foix, in order to seek out the father of Joanna; but I met him
straggling about, looking very melancholy, before I reached the chateau. He
knew me the moment he cast his eyes on me, and lifting up his hands and eyes,
thanked heaven that he had seen me again, and eagerly enquired for his
daughter, whose sad fate I related to him, clothing it in as tender terms, as
so sorrowful a tale would admit of. He was deeply affected by it, but said, at
last, 'That it was more satisfactory to him to be certain of her fate, than to
live on in the dreadful uncertainty about her, in which he had spent the last
seven years.'

I asked him then, 'Whether the baron was at that time at the chateau?'

'Alas! sir,' he replied, 'the baron is in a melancholy situation; deranged in
his mind, I fear.'

He then proceeded to tell me, that he had very lately sold all his movables,
and as much of his estates as was in his power; and that the rest of his
estates he had consigned over to his next heir, who was a distant relation;
that he had then discharged all his servants, and went away himself by night,
nor did any one know what was become of him; 'And thus, sir,' said the porter,
'I am thrown out of a place, where I had lived for so many years, and never
failed in my duty, that I know of: to be sure, it makes me a little heart
broken; but thank God I am not starving; I have enough, however, to live upon,
and that is, at least, some comfort.'

I then mentioned to him the letter I had received, which reported Antoinette
to be still alive, and enquired how it came into his hands, as it was through
him that it was transmitted to me. He said, 'That he perfectly well remembered
transmitting me a letter at the time I mentioned, and that it was brough^ to
him by a person in the dress of a peasant, who told him that somebody at St.
Margueri^e's convent, bade him bring that letter, and desire me to transmit it
to my daughter.

'As to the death of Antoinette,' said he, 'I never heard the truth of it
doubted; but convents are strange places, and we don't always know what is
going forwards in them. But my master made a great storming when he came here,
and found that his daughter was buried at the convent; and he threatened to
have the body removed to his own vault, in the chapel of the chateau; but
however, he never had it done: -- but to be sure, his lordship was very strange
then, and so he was from that time 'till he went away; but at first he was all
anger, and there was no such thing as pleasing him, and he would swear and
storm for nothing almost: -- but then, all on a sudden he grew mild and
melancholy, and was always moping about; -- and then he* used to go for ever to
the convent, and would come home with his eyes swelled with crying; and it is my
opinion now, that he is gone on some penance. -- But then,' said the porter,
starting, 'to be sure madame Antoinette must be dead, for my lord has put up a
grand monument in the chapel for her, and his other two children. -- I could
get you a sight of it, if you like.'

Though I by no means thought with the porter, that the erection of this
monument was an indisputable proof of the death of Antoinette, which from his
whole story seemed to me indeed to be very doubtful, yet I wished to see the
monument he mentioned, and therefore accepted his offer. He then took me with
him to his own house, and said 'he would go and see how the land lay for
getting to the chapel, as we could not go if monsieur de St. Foix was at home.'
He presently returned, and said, 'that if I would accompany him, we might then
see the monument.'

We accordingly went: -- it was indeed a beautiful piece of sculpture, but the
inscription on it was of so singular a nature, that it rather confirmed me in
the idea, that Antoinette was still alive, and was known by her father, to be
so. On a sarcophagus are three busts, in white marble, of the chevalier and his
two sisters: the chevalier in the middle, Gabrielle on the right hand, and
Antoinette on the left; and below them is the following inscription: Oh! Thou,
whoever thou art, that contemplatest
THESE BUSTS!
If thou have a soul capable of feeling,
DROP A TEA^!
They represent the three children
OF RENE BARON DE ST. FOIX;
More of whose ashes
are mingled with those of their
ANCESTORS.
They were beauteous flowers
CUT OFF
even in their prime
of youth and sweetness;
And now rest at peace far
from this spot,
and from each other,
One sleeps at the bottom of the ocean,
Another lies interred at Florence,
And the body of the third is enclosed
wit^in the walls
of Saint Marguerite's convent.


The body of the third is enclosed within the walls of St. Marguerite's
convent! -- What an equivocal kind of expression! thought I within myself, as I
read it, and I determined if possible to be better informed about the matter.
I, therefore took my leave of the porter, and immediately set forwards for the
convent.

My first enquiries, when I arrived in its neighborhood, were, for my worthy
friend Clement; but I learnt that he had left the place a short time before,
without mentioning his intended departure to any one. I was then entirely at a
loss how to proceed: I would have applied to the lady abbess, but I thought
that I should hardly receive any satisfaction from her; and, if my Antoinette
really was alive, and in the convent, enquiring of the lady abbess would put
suspicions into her head, which might tend to frustrate any plan, that might be
formed for her escape.

I continued to hover about the convent in a pilgrim's garb, which I had
procured at Vi^nne, for the purpose of a disguise, 'till I at last attracted
the notice of the porter of the convent, who, like the generality of his
profession, was of a very talkative dispos^n.

He asked me many questions relative to my pilgrimage, and from whence I came,
and whither I was going; to all which I gave him rather evasive answers, and
afterward drew him into conversation on the affairs of the convent, which he
seemed very willing to communicate: and amongst other things he told me, that
they had had a very great bustle in the convent, two or three weeks before, for
one of the superiors had escaped, and taken a young nun away with her.'

I instantly caught at this story, and inquired the names of the fugitives; he
said the old one was called Marianne, and the other, he believed Agnes; but he
was not sure of her name. He did not know how long either of them had been in
the convent, for he had been there but two years, and they were both in before
he came. I made particular enquiries, then, concerning the precise time of
their flight, which the porter, after a little recollection, and tracing back a
few circumstances, and laying them together at last, fixed to a certain day,
which he named to me. When I had made all the enquiries I wished, I took my
leave of the porter, fully convinced that Agnes, as he called her, was my dear
Antoinette, who had very likely changed her name, as it was common to do on
taking the veil.

I did not doubt, likewise, that Clement had accompanied them; but I was
determined to be ascertained of that, by enquiring into the exact time when he
disappeared; which, by diligent investigation, I at last made out to be the
very time, when the two nuns escaped from the convent; and I had, therefore, no
doubt remaining, that the three were all gone to Ireland, whither I was
determined immediately to follow them.

For a short time joy, at receiving full conviction, as I thought I had done,
that my Antoinette was yet alive, entirely superseded all other sensations in
my bosom; but the dreadful reflection soon obtruded itself, that if so, I had
then, alas! two wives in existence at the same time; a thought that filled me
with the deepest horror. I however resolved, at all events, if possible, to
find my Antoinette, and I accordingly traveled from the banks of the Rhone to
Breast, with almost incredible swiftness, considering that I went every step of
the way on foot, preferring that mode of traveling, as that, in which I could
best be concealed, and for which my pilgrim's dress was well suited. When I
arrived at Breast, the weather being remarkably fine, I got on board an open
fishing boat, in which I was safely conveyed to Cork, where I was no sooner
landed, than in spite of all my fatigues, I proceeded onwards, nor stopped
'till I arrived at the public house just by the entrance of the grounds
belonging to Arlington castle.

I cannot, by description, give any idea of the feelings which agitated my
soul, when I came within sight of the mansion, which I had so strangely left
many years before. I was well convinced that I should now again, in a few
hours, behold my long lost Antoinette: but alas! in what a situation was I to
see her? -- nor was that the only uncomfortable sensation I felt; for I not
only was to meet my Antoinette as the husband of another, but I was to meet the
averted looks of a justly incensed father, and of an injured wife?

Such were my reflections; -- but, alas! none of these things were to be
encountered. On making enquiries, I found that the fugitives I was in search
of, whom I wished, yet half dreaded to see, had never arrived in those parts;
that the father, whose anger I feared to encounter, was no more; and that my
wife had left the castle half a year before, and was not likely to return to it
for several years. I wished however, to see the house; it was an odd kind of
curiosity, but I knew not how to suppress it, nor can I give the least reason
for it. But, as I did not like to appear in my own character, or any one that I
thought would lead them to suspect who I was, I feigned myseft to be disordered
in my mind.

But it is needless to dwell on this part of my story: you know my strange
behavior, my Horatia, both at Arlington Castle, and at mr. Sidney's house.
Indeed, I have often looked back with wonder at my conduct at that time, and
been tempted to excuse it to myself, by believing, that I really was what I
feigned myself to be, disordered in my senses, I was indeed wounded to the
soul, that I could not find the least trace of Clement, Marianne, and
Antoinette having being either in England or Ireland, and I was determined not
to give up the pursuit of them, till I had either seen them, or arrived at some
cerainty with regard to them.

Yet much I wished to see my wife and children, and leave them some testimony
that I was yet alive, and had not totally forgotten them. I, therefore, went to
see my Henry at the place, where I had learned he was fixed for his education;
and drawing from him that his mother and sister had a house not far off, I went
thither, in hopes of seeing them; but there I was disappointed. I then went to
London, in hopes of meeting with them there; but there too again I missed them;
and I durst not return into Hampshire, for fear, after the alarm which I knew I
must have raised there, I should be in some manner secured, if I was to be seen
there again; and I was firmly resolved not to remain in England, or live with
my Horatia, while a possibility re^ained, that I might have another wife alive;
though, when I found the people I was in pursuit of, had never been in England
or Ireland, I began much to doubt whether Antoinette could really be one of
them, as I could not bear to think that she would not, immediately on her
emancipation, have endeavored to find me out. Yet on the other side, she might
think, that she had just cause of offense against me, as I must appear to her
to have been very negligent, when so many years had elapsed since the time of
the letter being sent to me, which announced her being still alive, without her
hearing or seeing any thing of me. All these doubts, however, only made me more
and more resolved to continue the pursuit I was then engaged in; and, for that
purpose, after a few weeks stay in London, where I know I could be concealed, I
once more crossed the seas, and for the third time in my life, landed in the
kingdom of France.

CHAP. XXI.
Ah! what a scene of horror! withering there,
Were men, by despots robbed of light and air;
In fetid dungeons left* to rot alone,
Their cause unpleaded, and their crime unknown;
Doomed to hold converse with thick damps, and tell
Their flinty beds, they found this earth a hell.
From vigorous youth, to feeblest age confined,
And stripped of all possession but the mind.
MERRY.
BUT when I was landed, I was utterly at a loss what course to take, in order
to accomplish the end, which I was pursuing, and almost left it to fortune to
decide my route.

At length, without knowing why, I took the road to Paris, at which city I soon
arrived; but when there, was quite as much at a loss as ever, in what way I was
to proceed, whether to stay there, or whether to go on; and if I went on, which
way to go. I was exhausted with uneasiness and vexation. I felt, that I wanted
something, but I hardly knew what* day after day I wandered about the city, not
knowing what to do with myself, and hardly knowing which way I went: indeed,
scarcely in my senses. Often did I stand, with my eyes fixed for many minutes
together, on some person or thing, till something roused me, and I perceived,
with chagrin, what I had been doing.

In one of these rambles, I wandered one morning into the Fauxbourg St.
Antoine, where I was suddenly struck with finding myself under the walls of the
Bastile. A thousand occurrences, relative to that horrible dungeon, crowded
themselves in cunfusion into my mind, and I voluntarily fixed my eyes on the
mighty fabric; it was to me like the basilisk, and I was like the bird Which
when its eye
By the guileful snake's keen glances caught,
Flutters, and flutters round, and still would fain
Avert by speedy flight the impending stroke;
Yet still it looks, still drinks the deadly bane,
'Till quite intoxicated by the draught,
It sinks, and sinks, and senseless drops at last
Within the monster's wide extended jaws.


So my eyes once attracted by the fabric of despotism, could not turn aside
from it: -- there they remained immoveably fixed, till, like the poor bird, I
dropped into the mouth of the fell monster; for I was only roused from my
lethargy, by finding myself seized on by two men, and without any ceremony
hurried within the walls I had been contemplating, and given in charge to the
governor, to be kept a close prisoner, as a dangerous man to the state. I in
vain urged, that I had no ill design whatever, and that, at the moment when I
offended, I ^ as scarcely in my senses: all the answer I could get, was, that I
should soon be brought to my senses there.

Thus, after the many dangers which I had encountered, the many hours of
horrible anxiety, which I had suffered myself, and which I had occasioned to
others, I was, at last, likely to end my sorrowful life in a dismal dungeon,
'My fate unknown, my person soon forgot.'

For two days I almost abandoned myself to despair; but, at last, I roused
mysel^ from it, and began seriously to reflect upon the for of that ^onduct
which had brought me i^^o such a situati^n, into which I never should have
fallen, had I not given way to a despondency, which was stealing almost
imperceptibly upon me. Had I exerted a proper energy, and resisted every
approach of mental debility, though I might not have been perfectly happy, yet
I should have been in a state of comparative happiness to that, in which I then
found myself, for I should still have enjoyed the blessed light of the sun, and
breathed freely the circumambient air; I should not have been shut from human
society, enveloped in 'ever during dark,' and been buried alive within
impenetrable masses of stone.

These, and various such reflections, occupied me, and helped to wear away the
dismal solitude in which I found myself, and to compose my mind into a settled
calm; that mind, which was the only comfort the ingenious malice of my
persecutors could not deprive me of, and which daily grew stronger and
stronger, and enabled me, finally, to struggle, through a state of existence,
which I am convinced is the most irksome that a man can be placed in, that of
total inactivity; for after having experienced the hardships of a slavery,
which, though my master was a comparatively lenient one, was pretty severe, and
those of a solitary confinement, I hesitate not to affirm, that slavery is even
less galling than the horrible vacuity experienced by those, who were confined
in that dungeon of despotism to which I was condemned.

After I had collected myself tolerably well, and brought my mind into a
settled state, I began to compose, both in prose and in poetry; and it was a
great amusement to me to impress on my mind, and arrange into forms, the ideas,
which presented themselves; and so much did I do in this way, that I have now a
large collection of essays, poems, etc. which I formed in my mind during that
time, and have since put down on paper, which hereafter, Horatia, you may,
perhaps, like to look ^ver.

But after a while I met with a companion, which proved a great comfort to me;
you will smile; but this solace of my solitude, was a little mouse, which, by
degrees, I rendered quite familiar. He first introduced himself to me one day,
while I was eating my miserable dinner: any thing alive was a cheering sight to
me, and I resolved to cultivate an acquaintance with him, if it was possible. I
threw a few crumbs on the floor of the cell; he at first retreated from them,
but afterward finding that nothing molested him, he advanced and nibbled at
them; I can scarcely express how much I was pleased to see him feeding before
me; after running about the cell for a while, he at length went away, and I saw
no more of him that day; but as I had watched him very narrowly, I saw whither
he retired, and determined to court his company, by putting some crumbs near
his hole the next morning, when I had my breakfast; this I accordingly did, and
he soon came forth, and eat the morsels I had provided for him, and in return,
ran about my cell for some time. I continued the same practice for several
days, and he seemed every day to grow less and less shy of me; at last, by dint
of constant encouragement, grew so very familiar that he very seldom left me.

He would, sometimes, run up my leg, and sit and eat on my knee, or out of my
hand, and then hide himself in my clothes, and sleep there; nor can I express
how great an affection I contracted for him. I really was as anxious lest he
should be discovered by the people who brought me my food, as if he had been a
child; for I knew that if he was, I should be deprived of his company, and
perhaps have endured the painful sensation of seeing him killed before my face,
for no other offense than because he had amused my solitude. I however
preserved him safe through several 'hair breath escapes,' and at last brought
him in safety away with me. But, poor fell^w, he died on our passage to St.
Domingo; I however embalmed him, and have him still in my possession, and it
was a great satisfaction to me, that he lived to come out of the Bastile, when
it was in my power to preserve him.

I was detained a prisoner there from that time, 'till about eighteen months
ago, when an officer came one morning to me, and said, 'the grand monarque had
been graciously pleased to allow of my release from captivity, provided I would
consent to quit the kingdom immediately, and to be guarded to the port from
whence I was to embark.' I was rejoiced to regain my liberty on any terms, and
immediately consented te the stipularions required. I was accordingly let out
of my cell, and put under the care of a guard, who had received their orders
previous to my appearance, and were now only commanded to proceed with me to
the place of my destination.

Never shall I forget the sensations of transport which I felt, an he^ring the
gates of that accursed fortress close behind me, and knowing that I was at last
released from the horrible and loathsome confinement, in which I so long
lingered. I was hand-cuffed, and tied by a string to one of the guards, before
I quitted the Bastile, and thus was I led on, taking pretty long days journeys,
'till we arrived at Rochelle; by which time my feet, which had been for so long
a time totally unaccustomed to walking, were one continual blister, and I was
so fatigued, that for the last few miles I could scarely get on at all.

On our arrival at Rochelle, I was immediately consigned over to the care of
the captain of a St. Domingo ship, on board of which I was carried the same
evening, and in two days after we set sail. From the moment when we cleared the
coast of France, I had my perfect liberty, and ingratiated myself so much with
the captain, (who was a polite and benevolent man ^uring the voyage, that he
made me the kindest offers of assistance, in seeking my future fortune.

I told him that my earnest wish was to get to Lisbon, for I was determined, at
all hazards, to go again to St. Marguerite's convent, and by an immediate
application to the lady abbess, get my doubts at once resolved. But, as I did
not like to communicate this design, I determined, if possible, to get to
Lisbon, from whence I would take a passage once more to Marseilles. On our
arrival at St. Domingo, therefore, the captain, as the best means of promoting
my plan, procured me a passage to the Portuguese settlement of Rio Janeiro, on
the coast of Brazil, at which place I should have frequent opportunities of
making my way to Lisbon.

The captain, at my departure, trusted me with a sum of money, and letters of
credit on a correspondent of his at Lisbon, which would enable me to take up a
sufficient sum to last me till I got b^k to my own country, I having acquainted
him who I was, and told him, that after I had settled some affairs at Lisbon,
and at some other places, which I wished to visit, I should return to Ireland.

I made many warm acknowledgments for this kindness, and at first indeed
hesitated to accept it; for I thought it almost too great a confidence for him
to repose in me, as I had still many hazards to encounter, and might not at
last, arrive safe at home; in which case he would lose all that his generosity
had entrusted to me. But he would hardly listen to what I urged, telling me
that he had the fullest confidence that I should repay him, if it was in my
power; and even if he were certain that he should lose every farthing, he
should think himself criminal in a case like mine, to withold his assistance
from me, from paltry motives of self-interest. I own I parted from this man
with regret, but we parted with a mutual agreement, to keep up a
correspondence, if I ever arrived in Ireland, and that he would, if possible,
one day come and visit me there.

I arrived at Rio Janeiro without any interruption, but there I was
unfortunately detained a considerable time. One day as I sat by the seaside,
when it was pretty rough, and I saw several vessels tossed about by the waves,
and laboring very hard, I was touched by the sense of the dangers they were at
that moment encountering; dangers which I had more than tasted, for I had even
drank deeply of them; and I could not help running a parallel in my mind,
between the different sensations felt at the contemplation of calamities
arising from natural causes, and of those arising from moral causes.

At length I quitted Rio Janeiro, and after a prosperous voyage, arrived at
Lisbon. But there I heard such dreadful accounts of the depredations of the
Algerines in the Mediterranean, that I was resolved not to run the hazard of
falling again into their hands, and I, therefore, determined rather to traverse
Spain and cross the Pyrenean mountains, although I must then run the hazard of
going over a larger part of the French territories, than if I went by sea to
Ma^sei^es; but still I thought this the less dangerous experiment of the two;
and to return to Ireland without going first to St. Marguerite, was what I
could not bear even to think of.

Having purchased a mule, therefore, I set forwards on my journey; but, after a
while, I parted with my beast again, for I found myself reluctant to make the
animal to great a sharer in my fatigues; and yet I knew not how ^o allow time
to rest him; and I therefore proceeded on foot, and at last, after enduring
great fatigues, arrived at the place of my destination.

I immediately desired to be permitted to speak to the lady abbess, who
received me very courteously, and to whom I immediately laid open my story, and
my errand, in the most unreserved manner; for I had suffered enough from
reserve, to be warned against ever practicing it again.

In return to my enquiries concerning the fate of Antoinette, she told me,
'that she died within a few hours after the birth of her child: that before her
death, but when she found it was fast approaching, she desired Marianne to
communicate to her (the lady abbess) under a strict injunction of secrecy, the
story of her marriage, and of the birth of her child, and to entreat her to
come to her bedside, for she wished to say something to her before she expired.

'When I went to her, sir,' continued the lady abbess, she begged my pardon
earnestly for her conduct, since she had been in the convent, which she said
reflection had convinced her had been wrong; -- she told me how she had
disposed of her child, and desired, that when such a time had elapsed, as was
likely to have placed the child out of her father's reach, I would tell him the
story of her marriage, and of the birth and disposal of her child; for me said,
she was well convinced that her father had no idea either of her marriage, or
of the situation she was in, when she last parted from him; and she ended her
discourse with desiring that she might be buried in the convent. All that she
thus requested, sir,' continued the abbess, 'I have punctually fulfilled. The
baron came to the chateau about three weeks after the death of his daughter,
when I communicated to him her death, and what she had on her deathbed desired
me to impart to him.

'The baron was violently incensed at hearing the story, venting the most
bitter execretions against that vile Irishman who had thus seduced his dauhter,
and laying all her resistance to him, upon the arts which her husband had
practiced, to alienate her affections from him; and perhaps, sir,' said the
abbess, 'it is to that rage of the baron's, that you owe the letter which has
cost you so much trouble; for Marianne, I am convinced, could not be the writer
of it. I wish she was here herself, to satisfy you, but she has been gone from
hence some years; and to you, sir, I will own, that I did at last connive at
her escape, and at her taking with her a beautiful young nun, whose name was
Agnes, and whose case I thought peculiarly hard.'

Thus was I at last satisfied of the truth, with regard to an affair which had
kept me in a continued state of agitation, in a greater or less degree, for
fifteen years. I inquired of the abbess, if Antoinette was buried in the
convent, and she told me, 'that her body was deposited, according to her
desire, in the chapel of the convent; and,' said the abbess, 'from compassion
for her sufferings, and a love for her virtues, I was tempted, at my own
expense, to erect a small monument to her memory.'

When I heard the abbess mention this circumstance, I immediately desired she
would let me see the monument, and drop a tear over it, with which request she
instantly complied, and led me to the chapel. You already know what passed
there; it is sufficient therefore for me to say now, that I met with no
interruption in my progress to Geneva, where I had not been long arrived, when
as I was wandering about the town, I met with my worthy friend, Clement Seguin.
I looked hard at him, and he did so at me; but I first spoke; seventeen years,
which was the time that had elapsed since we met, had not altered him so much
as it had altered me, and I thought that I could not be mistaken; therefore I
said, 'surely I see Clement Seguin.'

'Ha!' said he, 'then it must be (...), Theodore Percival.'

'The same,' I replied; he was half frantic w^^h joy.

'And,' said he, 'what a^sed event, to see you again! -- I thought you must
have been dead long ago, as I have not heard of you for fifteen years; -- but
do come with me to my house;'

I a^^ordingly accompanied him thither, when he presen^ed me to Marianne, as
his wife. A long conversation ensued, in which we communicated our respective
stories to each other, and I engaged them to accompany me to Ireland, as their
testimonies might be of importance to me in the suit which I had told them was
impending. I wished to have engaged them to settle in Ireland, but of that they
would not give me any expectation; they said they were happy in their own
situation; their means, it was true, were small, but they were contented with
their situation, for they were free; 'And after the lives we have formerly
led,' said Clement, 'to be free is every thing; for, if freedom is sweet to
those who have never known any other state, how much more to us, who were, for
so many years, held in a servile bondage; in a bondage of the very worst ^ind
too, the bondage of the mind!'

We consulted about the best means of getting to Ireland, and, at last, agreed
to go by land to Genoa; from thence to make a coasting voyage to Barcelona,
then crossing the kingdoms of Navarre and Arragon, to go to Bilboa, where we
could take shipping for Ireland. This route, tedious in itself, has proved
doubly so to us, for we have, in one way or other, met with endless delays;
but, thanks to that power which rules the universe! we have at last got through
them all; and now I shall think no more of slavery, imprisonment, or disasters,
and look forward to such scenes of happiness, as in all human calculation, I
cannot fail to taste, surrounded as I am with numerous blessings; and enjoying,
as I do, the first of all blessings, a heart perfectly at ease.

CHAP. XXII.
Oh! what a curse is life, when self conviction
Flings our offenses hourly in our face,
And turns existence torture to itself!

THUS did lord Arlington conclude the long and interesting narrative of his
sufferings. -- Often did he, in relating it, -- Beguile his audience of their
tears,
They swore in faith 'twas strange; -- 'twas passing strange!
'Twas pitiful! 'twas wondrous pitiful!


Marsini, in particular, had been deeply affected by it, for his own connection
with the family, to whom the narrative so particularly related, rendered it
doubly interesting to him; he paid that tribute to it, therefore, of which
might truly be said, No radient pearl which erested fortune wears,
No gem that twinkling hangs from beauty's ears,
Not the bright star^ which night's blue arch adorn,
Nor vernal suns that gild the rising ^orn,
Shine with such luster as the tea^ that breaks
For others' woe, down virtue's manly cheeks.
DARWIN.

When lord Arlington ceased speaking, he exclaimed,

'Oh! my brother; for as my brother I shall hence forth always consider you;
how severely have you felt the dreadful effects of the ungovernable passions of
the baron de St. Foix! Perhaps my Gabrielle was more fortunate, in being the
object of her father's aversion, than her sister was in being his favorite;
for he never offered to make any objections to Gabrielle's following her own
inclinations in the affair of marrying, but seemed to feel the most perfect
indifference as to what become of her; but poor Antoinette, whom he professed
to be extremely fond of, he did not cease to persecute, 'till her death removed
her from his cruelties.'

'Your remark is just,' said lord Arlington: 'it was a fortunate circumstance
for any one connected with the baron, to be the object of his aversion; for,
when once he had got such a one removed from his sight, his aversion subsided
into indifference, and he neither thought nor cared more about them; but those
whom he loved, w^ incessantly persecuted by him. It was thus, as I have heard
from Antoinette, with the baroness her mother, who was compelled to marry the
baron against her inclination, and who really was worn out with his
persecutions, in various ways; though he did appear to he, after his own
fashion, extremely fond of her.'

'And this,' said Marsini, 'I am sorry to say, is no very uncommon character,
especially amongst those people, who are educated with such vast ideas of their
own importance, as the French noblesse are; they think the world ought to be at
the mercy of their nod, and like froward children, when any thing crosses them
in their way ward humors, they persecute every body about them, and could even
beat the post, because in their fury they had run their noses against it. Oh!
could such distinctions ever be designed by the Creator of the universe? --
surely not; -- or if they were, it is only to show mankind the folly and
wickedness of them, that they may taste, with a higher relish, the time when
they shall exist no longer.

'Yes,' said count Carletti, who had hitherto sat nearly silent, 'and how
doubly odious does this peevish tyranny appear, when exercised toward the
female sex, who ought to be the rational companions and friends of man, not the
wretched slaves of their husband's caprices! and I trust, that, as reason
prevails, in the world, against its hitherto too successful antagonists, error
and prejudice, this truth will be better understood, and, that in future times,
amongst other reforms in the state of society, the female character will be
formed on such a model, that women shall be sitted to bear that important part
in the great scale of creation, for which they were designed.'

'Amen, amen!' said lord Arlington, I say with all my heart: and I hope that
the time is not very far distant, when we shall behold this ameliorated state
of mankind, in its meridian splendor; for the early rays of that sun of
reason, which will undoubtedly one day illume mankind, have already begun to
appear above the horizon, and we now behold them struggling amidst the
surrounding vapors; in which, though they may meet with a long and obstinate
resistance, their glory can never quite be obscured; and we may be well assured
that they will, in time, repel every opposition that can be made to them.
'Nor,' said he, 'let any one presume to say, that the female mind is incapable
of the highest degree of cultivation and improvement; or, if any one should
dare advance such a thing, I would say, 'look there, and silence him at once;'
and he cast a most affectinate look at lady Arlington.

She bowed in acknowledgment to the compliment, and was proceeding to make some
remarks on lord Arlington's story, but he took her hand, and said,

It Is a melancholy subject, my Horatia: let us, therefore, drop it, and
henceforward banish melancholy from amongst us. But,' he added, 'one thing yet
remains, to search the papers left by the old hermit, who, I think, we must all
by this time suppose, will appear to have been the baron de St. Foix. Will you
let us see them, Antoinette?'

Antoinette immediately produced them, and gave them to lord Arlington,
desiring him to look them over. Lord Arlington unfolded them, and read from the
outward cover these words.

"To you, oh! injured daughter of that child, whom I persecuted to her grave,
are these pages addressed, by one whose crimes have not been more heinous, than
his sufferings have been grievous, by thy grandfather, Rene baron de S^. Foix.
They contain a dreadful lesson to all who suffer themselves to be guided by
their passions. Oh may thou never fall into the snares which I had not
fortitude enough to resist, but let reason be the constant guide of thy
actions, so shall thou live happy, and die contented; so shall thou obtain a
seat in that blissful mansion, into which thy grandfather has never, 'till
lately, dared to hope he might ever be received."

The papers contained a particular detail of the history of the baron and his
children; of the death of the chevalier, and of the misfortunes and death of
Antoinette; with all the circumstances of the baron's life, subsequent to those
events. But, as all that the former part of the narrative contained, has been
already related, we shall not take it up 'till the time when the lady abbess
communicated to him the death of his daughter. After expressing, in the most
emphatic terms, his disappointment and bitter regret, at the death of his son,
which he considered as the extinction of his family, the next heir to his
estate and title being of so extremely remote a branch, he thus proceeded:

"But heaven, as if determined to pour on me the most consuming phials of its
wrath, now furnished me with another source of sorrow. I was scarcely returned
again to my chateau, before I received a message from the lady abbess of St.
Marguerite's convent, to say, that she wished to see me on an affair which very
nearly concerned me."

Then followed a particular detail of his interview with the abbess, together
with some other circumstances already known; and then he went on to thi^ effect:

"All my anger against my poor child, being thus buried in the g^ave with her
passion, that all-swaying inmate of my bosom, immediately sought out another
object, on which it might vent itself, and I now conceived mr. Percival alone,
to be the guilty person; that he alone had seduced my daughter from her duty,
and that if it had not been for him, she would never have made any opposition
to the marriage which I proposed to her; and her own life, and her brother's,
might thus have been spared.

"These sentiments were continually working in my mind; they followed me every
where by day; -- I brooded over them on my pillow at night; if I to^ up a book,
I could read nothing but the villainy of mr. Percival; -- if I walked out, I saw
him in every path, in every alloy, walking with my daughter, and pouring into
her ears the poison of his honied accents: -- 'till wrought up at last to a
degree of phrenzy, I resolved never to rest 'till I had executed some dreadful
revenge on him, for the wrongs which I thought he had done me.

"I laid various schemes for this purpose, but they were all by turns,
rejected; yet still I was planning new ones; and the new ones, after dwelling
on them a while, were then thrown aside too; but, at last, an opportunity of
revenge presented itself, which for malice, exceeded my most sanguine hopes,
and I eagerly caught at it. I was walking about the gardens very early one
morning, having left my bed at that time, tired with a sleepless night, and
seeking, if I could, to walls away from myself, when I overheard two people in
earnest conversation, and looking round, saw that they were seated on a bench
pretty near me. I approached them without their perceiving me, as their backs
were turned toward me; and almost without knowing why I did it, I placed
myself in a situation^, where I could overhear*" they said* without the least
danger of their perceiving me.

"I found that one of them was the porter of the castle, and the other was the
uncle of his daughter's husband. The former was reading a letter to the latter;
and from the letter, and their subsequent conversation, I collected, that the
porter's daughter had been entrusted with the care of my little granddaughter,
and was with her in Ireland, at a house not far from that in which Theodore
lived with his father; and that s^e the death of An^te, Theodore had, purely to
oblige his father, married a woman of large fortune in the neighborhood; but
that he seemed very unhappy, and still bitterly lamented the death of
Antoinette, and often less his wife, to come and weep over his little daughter,
whom he talked of introducing into the family very soon. The conference of
these two people ended in the porter's telling his companion, that he should
very soon send a parcel to his daughter in Ireland.

"This was enough for me; I saw plainly how I could wound the object of my
malice and revenge, in the most sensible part; and I immediately wrote that
letter, which, as I have found since I have been in these parts, did even more
mischief than I could have dared to hope for; then disguising myself like a
peasant, I carried it to the porter, and told him it came from a person in the
convent, who desired that he would enclose it to his daughter."

Here lord Arlington, who was reading the narrative, paused.

"Alas!" said he, "Then absence was not always a curb to the baron's
resentment; for, though I was far removed from him, I was not therefore at all
less the object of his implacable persecution. -- But I beg pardon for this
interruption;" and then he proceeded, and read as follows:

"But the wickedness I had been guilty of was soon followed by the most
poignant remorse. Oh! never let the angry man hope to derive real satisfaction
from the gratification of his distempered feelings; a momentary flash of
something like pleasure which dazzles his mind, may glance like lightning over
it; -- but like lightning, while it excites admiration, it scorches; and when
the flame that dazzled us is past, naught but anguish is left behind.

Such was truly my case; conscience soon spoke to my soul; not in gentle
whispers, but in the loudest thunder, that I was one of the blackest of
villains; that the murder of my daughter was a deed of innocence, when compared
with the more cruel stab, which I had now given her husband; a stab, which
would perhaps make him die a lingering death, in the most dreadful agonies. I
grew hateful to myself; solitude was a torment to me, and in society I was
restless and miserable. I dreaded the approach of night, for my bed was hell
itself to me. If wearied nature ever sunk me into a slumber, hideous phantoms
seemed to flit before my eyes: -- sometimes I saw Theodore writhing in
torments, and the ghost of my Antoinette looking on, and upbraiding me for my
cruelty: -- when starting, I woke with a hideous shriek. At other times, I
thought the day of judgment was arrived, and I stood before the throne of my
offended God, when my three children appeared as my accusers; my son, with the
blood streaming from his wounded breast, and with dripping locks pointing to
them, as the effects of my brutal rage; -- and when I awoke, I could hardly
believe that these objects were not really before my eyes. Shame alone
prevented me from having somebody to sleep in the room with me, for it was
misery to me to be thus left to myself. Nor were these phantoms always confined
to my sleeping moments for my imagination was sometimes wrought up to so
exquisite a pitch, that I have fancied, as I sat by myself, attempting to read,
rather than reading, that I actually saw the form of Theodore before my eyes,
pale, ghastly, and expiring with grief; and have even summoned my servants, on
the most trifling excuse, that my imagination might be relieved with the sight
of some real object. Oh! my child! my child! May I not hope that these torments
have, in some measure, atoned for my sins; for hell cannot have greater
torments than I then suffered.

"Almost worn out with them at last, a sudden thought one day flashed on my
mind, that my misery might be relieved by the performance of some exemplary
penance, which might appease an angry deity; and from the moment that that idea
first struck me, I found it a kind of relief to my soul: -- a relief which
cannot appear surprising, when it is recollected, that the impression of one
new idea on my mind took it off, in a degree, from the old one, which had so
long entirely absorbed it; and every moment of interval from thinking on that
subject, was to me a moment of comparative ease.

"I was not long in determining, what the nature of my penance should be, I
resolved to turn as much of my property, as was in my own power, into gold and
jewels, which I intended to consign over to the injured Theodore; and then
resigning my estate to my next heir, to seek a retreat in some lonely spot;
where, by living on roots and water -- by disciplining my body, and practicing
all sorts of austerities, I might hope to gain a pardon for my soul.

"I immediately settled all these affairs; I sent the deeds of my estate to the
person who was to inherit it, with notice, that at such a certain time, he
might take possession of the chateau; and sent round to my tenants, to notify
to them, that they were from that time to consider him as their lord.

"I then went to Paris, taking with me my personal property, which though of
considerable value, was now reduced to a small compass, and placed it in the
hands of a banker there, with a provision, that he should not deliver it up to
any one, unless the person who claimed it, should produce a paper which I then
showed him, and of which I left a counterpart in his hands. -- That paper, my
dearest child, you will find amongst this roll which I have bequeathed you; and
it will put you into possession of all my property, whenever you choose to
claim it.

"I referred to myself, however, a picture of my Antoinette, and a splendid
cross, which had been presented to my son, for some services he had rendered to
the court; which cross he had fortunately left, with some other things, at the
chateau, when he went away with his sister. Both these, my dear child, I shall
also consign to you; Oh that I could myself show thee thy mother's picture 'ere
I die?

"With these, and a small sum of money which I had reserved for my own use, I
came hither, having first assumed the garb of an anchoret, which I meant to
wear for the rest of my life. I intended, however, before I fixed on the spot
for my seclusion, which I had planned to be amongst the Alps, to throw myself
at the feet of the injured Theodore, to make confession of my wickedness, and
by investing him with my property, to endeavor to make him all the amends in
my power for the injury I had done him.

"When I arrived here, I found the sad situation to which the man, whom I
sought for, was reduced: that after absenting himself from his family and
country for some years, he had returned to them, in a state of distraction. Oh
God! Oh God! what strokes were these to me? for I knew myself the author of
all. I determined, however, to fix my abode amidst this romantic scenery, 'till
something more was heard of the unhappy lunatic, or 'till I could see his
daughter. Week after week, month after month, year after year, has however
passed on, nor can I find that lord Arlington is yet restored to his family.
Often have I anxiously enquired of my good friend the priest, who lives near
me, whether the family were not likely to come to Arlington castle: for I
should consider it as a blessing indeed to see my granddaughter, the child of
my Antoinette; but it is a blessing which I hardly dare to hope for. I trust,
however, that all I have destined for my wretched son-in-law, and his daughter,
will at last come into the hands of one or other of them, by means of that
benevolent man, to whom I am indebted for a thousand little acts of kindness
and for contributing toward restoring me to that degree of peace I have
attained since I came here.

"When first I determined on my seclusion, I, in my usual intemperate manner,
made a rash oath, that I never would reveal my story, and the cause of my
seclusion, to any one. This oath, though rashly made, I have strictly observed;
but in leaving it thus written, for the information of those whom it really
concerns, I think I can hardly be guilty of violating it; at least I think it
is a case where to break the oath is less criminal than to conceal the story. I
have now been here seven years, I have, at times, found my mind tolerably calm,
but at other times it has been a troubled sea, tossed about by a whirlwind of
contending feelings.

"At length, however, the bright sun of hope has dawned upon my soul. The life
I had led for these latter years, has unavoidably thrown me into a train of
deep reasoning and reflection; -- occupied by no wo^dly concerns, but such as
were brought on by the attention I have paid to my poor neighbors. I have
spent a great deal of time in contemplating the stupendous works of creation
daily before my eyes. Every object I behold assures me, that its creator must
be a being of the most unbounded benevolence. -- Wherefore, then, should I
despond? Though I have been one of the worst of sinners, yet he knows the
sincerity of my repentance, and therefore may possibly extend the arm of mercy
even to me.

"As far as the means which I reserved for myself would permit me, I have
assisted the needy with my purse; but I have held, as sacred, all that I at
first destined for hapless Theodore and my grandchild. I have never totally
remitted my penances and mortifications, or my bodily discipline; for though
reflection has convinced me, that to mortify the body cannot really be pleasing
to the creator, who wishes all his creatures to enjoy, with thankfulness and
moderation, the thousand, thousand blessings which he has placed around them,
yet as bodily penance had first awakened my soul to reflection and repentance,
and as I dreaded nothing so much, as a return to the slavery, in which I had
formerly lived, to my intemperate passions, I have not dared entirely to remit
it, left such a remission might be attended with fatal consequences.

"I do not mean here to recommend to general practice the life I have chosen; I
have found it a wholesome physic, it is true, but better, far better is it, by
keeping from earliest youth, a strict guard over the passions, and subjecting
them entirely to the sway of reason, never to have occasion to seek our remedy
in such a bitter draught. That virtue is very imperfect, which can only avoid
falling by a cowardly desertion of the post of danger: -- he alone, who amidst
surrounding snares and temptations, has preserved his heart pure and
uncorrupted, can be said to have fought a good fight, and really to deserve the
crown of glory which is reserved for him."

Here followed the date when the narrative was finished, which was not above
three months before the baron's death, and below the date was the following
memorandum.

"I have written over my narrative several different times, with different
reflections, according to the then state of my mind. I have now written it,
probably, for the last time in my life, for I feel life ebb apace. I fear I
shall, at last, die without seeing either my Antoinette, or her father; yet I
hear that the former will be soon in these parts; heaven grant that it may be
so! -- but whether I see her or not, with my last breath I will bless her, and
pray for her happiness both here and hereafter. And Oh! my child* when you read
this, hate the vices, but pity the sufferings of your grandfather.

RENE DE ST. FOIX."


CHAP. XXIII.
Fair the face of spring*
When rural songs and odours wake the morn
To every eye; but how much more to him
Round whom the bed of sickness long diffused
Its melancholy gloom.
AKENSIDE.
YES, surely, exclaimed lord Arlington, as he finished reading, "thy sins,
unhappy man, will be blotted from heaven's holy archives, and only thy
penitence, and latter deeds of charity, will remain enrolled there! Ah! Who can
read this narrative, and not shudder at the thoughts of crimes, which could
draw such heavy sufferings in their train! -- How much do I rejoice that his
wish was gratified, and that he at last saw you, my child, before he died. How
affecting must the scene have been!"

"It was affecting indeed," said Antoinette, "never, never shall I forget it! I
have been witness to affecting scenes since; our meeting, my father, two days
ago was so; but the dying features of the baron have left an impression on my
mind, which no language can describe. Neither could language describe the
emotions of his soul, which were so deeply painted on his countenance; but
though language could do litttle in the description, the pencil might do much.
Look here, my father," she said, taking a painting from a closet in the room,
"I have tried from memory to give a sketch of his dying countenance: Can you
trace in this penitent the features of that baron de St. Foix, whom you knew?"

Lord Arlington looked at the work with astonishment; -- it was the first
specimen he had seen of his daughter's talents in that way, and it would have
been no disgrace to the first masters. He cast his eyes first on the painting,
then on Antoinette; "And is it possible," he said, "that you can be the artist
who has executed so finished a work. Yes, indeed, these features are the wreck
of those of the baron de St. Foix; which, when not overclouded with passion,
had something commanding in them, and you have given them their full force."

The introduction of this piece, insensibly turned the conversation into a
different channel from that in which it at first began to flow; and the arts
having been once introduced, Marsini, who was so great a proficient in them,
had an opportunity of displaying his fine taste to the greatest advantage, and
convinced lord Arlington how great an acquisition such a companion would be to
him.

The next morning mr. Thomas Percival attended on lord Arlington, according to
appointment, and renewing his expressions of penitence and sorrow for his
conduct, and his resolutions of reformation, lord Arlington told him, that
relying on his sincerity, he would do all in his power to serve and assist him.
He gave him a large sum of money toward defraying the great expense he had
been at in his lawsuit, and promised to assist him in amending his fortune, if
he would go into the mercantile line, instead of leading a life of idleness, as
he had hitherto done, under the idea, that being a branch of a noble family, he
should degrade himself by going into trade; thus foolishly choosing rather to
keep a large family* which he had, in indigent gentility, than to amend their
situations by working himself, and making them work too.

But his mind was now so wrought upon by the generosity of lord Arlington's
behavior to him, that he thankfully accepted his proposal, and by his advice,
fetched his wife and family from Marseilles; after which, he was established by
lord Arlington as a merchant at Cork, where, by industry and frugality, he soon
rose to affluence, and was, in time, enabled, even to discharge all the
pecuniary obligations he was under to his truly illustrious relation.

It is now time that we turn our attention to Francis Delaval, who, the readers
will scarcely need to be informed, had been no unconcerned spectator of the
scenes which had been passing.

He, with his father and sister* were invited to dine at lord Arlington's the
day following the trial; in the course of which visit, Francis took an
opportunity of slipping the following jeux d'esprit into the hands of
Antoinette, as a memento of his attachment to her.

TO ANTOINETTE.
You say, dear maid, that you believe
The love I vow to you, sincere;
You hope my heart would never deceive,
But to the vows I make adhere.
Then faith and hope it is plain, combined,
Thou do within thy heart possess?
Let charity to these be joined,
And with thyself my passion bless.
Antoinette read* it, and smiled. Lord Arlington thought, during the whole of
the day, that there seemed to be a good understanding between them, and saw it
with pleasure, as he was much pleased with that young man. When lady Arlington
and he were alone, he hinted to her what he thought he had observed; to which
she replied, that he was quite in the right, and she only delayed to mention
the circumstance to him, 'till he was a little less harassed with other
concerns, and she doubted not but the business would be opened in form very
soon, by the Delavals. In this supposition she was perfectly right; Francis
soon found an opportunity of renewing his suit to Antoinette, who now accepted
his proposals without hesitation; and when the subject was mentioned to lord
Arlington, he as readily assented to the union, and Francis and Antoinette were
soon made happy in the possession of each other.

But before their marriage was concluded, Francis took a journey to Paris, for
the purpose of claiming the property of the baron de St. Foix, which had been
so long in the banker's hands there. He undertook this journey, as lord
Arlington could not himself go to Paris; end after he had settled all affairs
in that city, he went, at lord Arlington's desire, to Rochelle, to look for his
friendly captain. Him Francis found without difficulty, and having discharged
all lord Arlington's obligations to him, and made him, according to his
directions, a handsome compliment besides, he embarked at Rochelle, and
returned in perfect safety to Ireland. He would fain have brought the captain
over with him, but he could not spare so much time from his business.

During the absence of Francis, count Carletti, the friend of Marsini, had had
such frequent opportunities of improving an acquaintance with his sister, which
had commenced before Francis set out, that at his return, Carletti desired him
to use his interest in forwarding the suit which he wished to propose to
Caroline; nor did Francis find his sister at all averse to receive Carletti as
a lover: and his addresses having received the sanction of mr. Delaval, the
same day that gave Antoinette to Francis, also joined the hands of count
Carletti and Caroline Delaval.

When the property of the baron de St. Foix came to be examined, it appeared to
amount to about fifteen thousand pounds, to which lord Arlington and mr.
Delaval added sufficient to enable Francis and Antoinette to live in even more
than affluence, (...) profusion. -- Not in the profusion of gilded trappings
and costly ornaments, but in that kind of profuse hospitality, which while it
throws a luster over those who practice it, at the same time deals out comforts
and blessings to thousands.

Marsini was also highly liberal to his dear Antoinette, whom he never ceased
to love as a child. He was scarcely ever separated from her and her husband;
sometimes living in Ireland, at the house he had purchased near Arlington, and
at other times v^ting his own estate in Tuscany, whither mr. and mrs. Delaval
always accompanied him, and where he was also sometimes visited by lord and
lady Arlington and their family, which, in time, became numerous; and at his
death, which was not till he arrived at an advanced age, he left the principal
part of his fortune to Francis and Antoinette.

Henry Percival continued to grow in virtue as he advanced in years, and was in
due time married to a very amiable woman, whose worth and beauty were her only
fortune.

Doctor Schomberg continued in lord Arlington's family, as an assistant to lord
and lady Arlington, in the education of their children, and was highly beloved
and esteemed by them both.

To conclude. -- Lord and lady Arlington continued to live together many years,
tasting even greater happiness in each other, from the contrast which they had
formerly experienced; esteemed and beloved by all who knew them, and dealing
out blessings all around them; and when death at last called them to the
regions of eternal bliss, they left behind them, in their children, faithful
representatives of their virtue and happiness.

FINIS.

