TALES OF THE HERMITAGE; WRITTEN FOR THE INSTRUCTION AND AMUSEMENT OF THE
RISING GENERATION.

PHILADELPHIA: PUBLISHED BY JAMES THACKAR^ H. MAXWELL, PRINTER 1800.

CONTENTS.
Introductory Chapter 5 Pride subdued by Adversity 8 Innocence justified and
Art detected 34 Filial Ingratitude 65 History of Mr. Middleton 70 The Amiable
Brothers 82 The Fruits of Disobedience 106 A Cure for Satire 126 The Faithful
Slave 144
TALES OF THE HERMITAGE.
AN INTRODUCTORY CHAPTER.
IN a part of Flintshire, nearly contiguous to the famous well of St. Winifred,
which tradition mentions as endowed with qualities to heal the sick, and
recover the diseased, was an ancient cavern, or hermitage, formed out of one of
those rocks or mountains with which that country is so abundantly overspread.

Within this humble dwelling resided an aged hermit, whose sanctity of life,
and gentleness of manners, insured him both the love and veneration of all who
were improved by his advice, or benefitted by his example.

H^^ life was spent between devotional exercises and christian duties; and he
seemed to consider that time totally mis^^^^oyed, which was not passed either
in serving his Maker, or rendering himself useful to his fellow creatures.
Experience and application had taught him the use of various plants and
minerals; in preparing those for the cure of disease and the restoration of
health he generally passed the early parts of the day; and his fame as a
physician at length became so great, that he was more frequently applied to for
his medicines than for prayers and benediction. Whatever had been Father
Cuthbert's motive for secluding himself from the world, he seemed to possess
none of that misanthropy of character which is generallv the occasion of so
total a retirement; but, on the contrary, he was endowed with all those amiable
sentiments which render man an ornament to society, and at the same time teach
him to enjoy its pleasures.

Although his mind appeared laboring under some severe calamity, yet a placid
resignation to the divine will, united to a consciousness of rectitude, enabled
him to support his misfortunes with an appearance of cheerfulness; and though
he never entered into his own affairs, yet his conversation was at once both
instructed and entertaining. His partiality for the society of children was
astonishing: and he (...) sit whole summer evenings amusing them with stories,
or listening to their observations.

As it was impossible for the little peasantry of the neighboring hamlets to
extend their walks to the Hermitage, during the severity of the winter months,
the amiable Father Cuthbert used to amuse his leisure hours by writing stories
for their entertainment, which he read to them when the summer returned, and
they were again able to pay their accustomed visits. As the practice of writing
these little histories for the children of the lower class of people was
productive of so much satisfaction to the worthy old man, he resolved to extend
his amusements by forming a collection of tales calculated for those in a
higher station, and this little work he had just completed, when he was
summoned before his Maker, to receive the reward of his virtues, and to enjoy
the fruits of his piety and benevolence.

PRIDE SUBDUED BY ADVERSITY, AND VIRTUE TAUGHT BY EXAMPLE.
As Mrs. Cleveland was one Sunday morning going to pay her accustomed visit to
a school which had been recently established for the poor inhabitants of the
parish in which she resided, an elegant equipage drove briskly past her, and
she heard a female voice cry out -- "It is my aunt; I am convinced it is her!"
and instantly the carriage stopped. A servant who was on horseback alighted,
and opening the door, two young ladies, the one about fifteen, and the other
apparently a year younger, sprang out, and, running after Mrs. Cleveland,
exclaimed -- "Surely, Ma'am, you cannot have forgotten Emma and Eliza!"

"My dearest girls, my beloved nieces!" replied the amiable Mrs. Cleveland,
pressing them alternately to her heart, "how unexpected is this pleasure, and
h^^ delightful this unlooked-for meeting! I did not indeed recollect you: for
four years has made such an alteration in the little ruddy round-faced girls I
parted from, that I should certainly have passed you without claiming a
relationship. But where is Mr. Fitzhenry? and why do you travel without his
protection?"

"Oh! this letter, aunt," replied Emma Fitzhenry, drawing a large packet from
her pocket, "will explain every thing, and will put that affection to the test
which you have so often told papa you had transferred from our dearest mother."

"If any thing was wanting to call forth that affection," said Mrs. Cleveland,
"the strong resemblance you bear that dear lost angel would certainly be the
means of doing it; but Mr. Fitzhenry cannot pay me a higher compliment, or give
me a higher gratification, than by placing you under my protection; and if the
time is proportioned to my wishes, we shall not separate very shortly; but let
us return to the vale, my dear girls, for I am sure you must require some
refreshment after such a fatiguing journey.

As soon as Mrs. Cleveland had ordered coffee, fruit and cakes, for the
accommodation of her guests, she retired to her apartments, to peruse the
letter, which explained the motive of their visit, and (...) her utter
astonishment, discovered (...) Mr. Fitzhenry had accepted the post of governor
to one of the East India islands; and not knowing whether the situation would
be advantageous for young women, had resolved to leave them under Mrs.
Cleveland's protection, until, from personal observation, he had made the
discovery.

This intelligence both astonished and pained Mrs. Cleveland, who began to
apprehend that the accounts she had heard of her brother-in-law's extravagance,
since the death of his amiable wife, were but too well founded, and imagined he
was going abroad to retrieve a fortune which nothing but gaming could have
materially injured.

Upon the death of Mrs. Fitzhenry, Mrs. Cleveland was very anxious to have the
children under her care, but the father pretended he could not exist without
their society. At first, he sent them to Queen's Square, and had them home
every Saturday; but in less than six months he engaged a French governess for
them, and they resided constantly with their father.

Mrs. Fitzhenry's woman, upon her death, had been promoted to the office of
housekeeper; and it was from Mrs. Langford's pen that Mrs. Cleveland was
informed of the uncommon splendor of Mr. Fitzhenry's establishment. Her nieces
wrote sometimes, but it was evident the letters were the composition of the
governess, and therefore they afforded her very little satisfaction.

Mrs. Cleveland was so astonished at the intelligence she had received, and so
unable to account for it, that she remained longer in her dressing room than
she was aware of, and might have extended her stay, had she not been roused by
a tap at the door.

"Well, aunt," said Eliza, as she entered, "what do you think of my father's
East India scheme?"

"I think, my love," replied Mrs. Cleveland, "that I am benefitted by it; and I
hope you will not be injured: yet I confess myself astonished that a man with
your father's fortune should quit his country and dearest connections for the
sake of augmenting it."

"He certainly has a large fortune, Ma'am," said Eliza; "but I am inclined to
think he has injured it; and so Madam Lemoine imagined, and she knows more
about it than I do." At that moment, Lady Luton's carriage drove up to the
door, and Mrs. Cleveland hastened to receive her, and introduce her nieces.

As soon as dinner was ended, Mrs. Cleveland invited the Miss Fitzhenrys to
accompany her to the Sunday school, informing them that she was going there in
the morning, when their arrival had so pleasingly defeated her purpose.

"Sunday school! La, Ma'am!" said Emma, "why I thought you had all been too
religious at this distance from town, to work upon a Sunday! But fashion is
wonderfully prevalent, and I suppose our card parties in London gave the first
idea to the country boors of occupying a day which their forefathers devoted to
psalm-singing and praying."

"I hope, Emma," replied Mrs. Cleveland, looking very grave, "your father
thought you too young to be initiated into a vice destructive of principle,
piety, and virtue."

"Dear Ma'am!" said Emma, "have you forgot how old I am? for I assure you I
have presided at the card tables at least a year and a quarter."

Mrs. Cleveland lifted up her eyes in astonishment, and, after explaining the
nature of Sunday schools, again inquired if they were inclined to accompany her.

"You are very polite Ma'am," said Emma, looking rather embarrassed; "but as I
cannot suppose we shall derive much entertainment from hearing a parcel of
dirty children read and say their catechism, we will postpone our visit, if you
please, until country air, rural occupations, and your example, have given us a
relish for such amusements."

Mrs. Cleveland made no reply to this sarcastic speech; but, ordering the
footman to have tea ready against her return, she put on her cloak, and walked
toward the school house. The slight specimen she had received of her nieces'
dispositions was not calculated to impress her with a favorable idea of them;
but when she reflected upon their being the children of one of the most amiable
women in the world, she attributed their little failings to an improper mode of
education, and was forming a thousand schemes to counteract its baneful
influence.

She made her visit to the Sunday school as short as possible, and the evening
was passed in hearing an account of their manner of spending their time in
Grosvenor Square. Without appearing to endeavor to find out their natural
pro^^ndities. Mrs. Cleveland was at the greatest pains to make the discovery,
and soon perceived that a love of grandeur, show, and distinction, were the
leading features in Emma's character; but that Eliza's heart seemed more likely
to be attracted by interesting than glaring objects, though she appeared to
have no objection either to show or magnificence.

Upon taking leave of his daughters, Mr. Fitzhenry had presented each with a
five hundred pound note for clothes and pocket money, with a promise of making
them ample remittances, if they were not sent for to India.

Mrs. Cleveland's fortune was a very large one; and though she had hitherto
lived materially within it, yet upon the arrival of her nieces she thought it
right to alter her plan of economy; an extra-man servant was hired, a new
carriage bespoke, and a farmer's daughter engaged as waiting-maid to the Miss
Fitzhenrys.

Mrs. Cleveland was passionately fond of music, and played both with taste and
execution upon the piano and harp, and was much disappointed at the tame style
in which the young ladies performed upon those instruments, as she knew they
had received instruction from the first masters. Some days they refused
touching the instrument at all, and at others would not play more than a
quarter of an hour at a time. Mrs. Cleveland at first suffered them to indulge
in a listless inactivity, but finding their indolent habits rather increase
than diminish, she informed them that it was her wish that they should devote
their morning to improvement; and as she was very well versed in history,
geography, Italian and French, she would be their instructress in any of those
branches, and read such authors with them as she thought most edifying.

"Dear Ma'am," said Emma, with a great deal of pertness in her tone of voice,
"I am sure my father never intended to depute you our governess, and indeed we
were so thoroughly informed by Madam Lemoine, that there is very little left
for us to learn."

"I am very happy to hear it," replied Mrs. Cleveland; "then there is a great
deal for you to lose, and that would be terrible, after so much pains have been
taken with you: but do, my dear, walk into the library, and fetch the first
volume of Metastasio; he is a favorite author of mine, and I wish to hear you
read him."

" I hate Italian," said Emma, and Eliza reads it better than I do; so fetch
the book, Eliza.

"If you read it ill," replied Mrs. Cleveland, gravely, "there is the greater
necessity for you reading it often; besides, my dear Emma, I am always obeyed
by every part of my family -- and, surely, a girl of fifteen would not think of
disputing a rule that is positive."

Emma walked into the library, fetched the book, and began reading; but her
tone was so monotonous, her accents so misapplied, and her pronunciation so
improper, that Mrs. Cleveland could not bear to hear her proceed; and, taking
the book from her hand, said -- "I am much obliged to you, my dear, for
attempting to amuse me, and am sorry to say what may appear discouraging; but
certainly Madam Lemoine was perfectly ignorant of the Italian language. I
happen to be very fond of it, and had one of the first masters; and if you will
take the trouble of attending to my pronunciation, you will easily discover the
imperfection of your own."

"I am much obliged, Ma'am, by your kind attention," said Emma, "but as I
really have no passion for knowledge, and happen to possess so large a fortune
as to render it unnecessary for me to take the trouble of attending to those
accomplishments which girls in less elevated stations are taught to consider
necessary, I must beg leave to decline your offered instruction."

Mrs. Cleveland could hardly credit the evidence of her senses while she
listened to her niece's improper manner of replying to her friendly proposal,
and before she could express her disapprobation, the footman entered, and
delivered into her hands the following letter:

"MY DEAR SISTER,
"Tortured by remorse, and overwhelmed by despair, how shall I acquaint you
with the dreadful intelligence that sooner or later must reach your knowledge!

"I cannot with prolixity prepare you for being acquainted with my calamity,
but must briefly inform you, that I am ruined! Oh, my children, how will you
bear to hear the horrid truth! fostered in luxury, encouraged in expense, how
will you be enabled to sustain this fatal blow, which levels you with the
needy, the unfortunate, and the beggar!

"I saw the precipice on which I tottered, and yet had not resolution to avoid
its brink! My motive for accepting the East India employment proceeded from a
knowledge of my embarassed affairs. I sold my estates with a view of placing
their produce in the funds, that in case of my death my girls might receive
their fortunes without trouble or inconvenience, and this morning's sun saw me
the master of sixty thousand pounds; a sum which many people would have thought
immense; but to me, who had squandered three times its value at the gaming
table, it appeared little better than poverty. In an evil hour I resorted to
the spot from which I had dated my former misfortunes, and there, alas!
completed them.

"I have sent in a resignation of my India post, and shall hide my head in some
obscure corner of the globe, and end my days in poverty and repentance!

"Do not attempt writing to me, for I am not in a frame of mind to support
pity, or submit to censure. Protect my children for their dear mother's sake,
and teach them to abhor a practice which has forever destroyed the peace of
their unhappy father,

"ADOLPHUS FITZHENRY."


The Fitzhenry arms attracted Eliza's attention, and the changes in Mrs.
Cleveland's countenance while she was perusing the letter, called forth her
fears.

"Is my father ill, Ma'am?" she exclaimed; "or what can he have said to
occasion you to appear so agitated?"

"Your father is quite well, my love," replied Mrs. Cleveland: at the same
time, bursting into a flood of tears, she uttered in a low tone of voice --
Poor girls! Poor girls!"

Emma and Eliza overheard the expression, and looking at each other with
curiosity and astonishment, seemed each afraid of requesting an explanation.

The sentiments which Emma had expressed just before the arrival of the fatal
letter, convinced Mrs. Cleveland that the loss of fortune would, in her
opinion, be the greatest of all earthly calamities; and the little satisfaction
they had both testified in a life of quiet and rationality, at once proved
their passion for dissipation, gaiety and expense.

Had there been a probability of their feeling happy in their altered mode of
life, Mrs. Cleveland would never have repined at their father's misfortunes,
but would rather have rejoiced in being enabled to prove her affection, and
convince them of her friendship; but the idea of daily beholding their
dissatisfaction, and hearing them pine after lost pleasures, was an evil she
looked forward to with dread and apprehension, and she resolved to adopt a plan
which at that moment struck her as being likely to reconcile them to their
future residence.

Eliza at length had courage to entreat her aunt to explain the cause of her
anxiety; and if they could not remove it, to let them have the satisfaction of
sharing it.

" Share it, indeed, my dear girl!" said Mrs. Cleveland; "would to Heaven I
could exempt you from that misfortune! for heavy as it falls upon me, you are
still more affected by its weight."

"Gracious Heaven!" exclaimed Emma, "what can have happened! I beseech you,
aunt, ease me of this suspense! Surely," she continued, in a voice scarcely
articulate, "my father has not materially injured his fortune at the gaming
table?" -- Mrs. Cleveland shook her head without replying. "Oh, dreadful!" she
continued: "but, dear madam, the estates! -- surely the estates are left for
Eliza and myself? -- Another shake of Mrs. Cleveland's head convinced her that
hope was without foundation; and, unable to sustain the weight of such an
unexpected misfortune, she gave a violent scream, and went into a strong
hysteric.

(...) less upon outward circumstances than people were apt to imagine.

In less than a fortnight every thing was arranged for their Welsh excursion,
and at the request of her nieces, Mrs. Cleveland consented to take the name of
Owen to prevent the possibility of any person discovering the real situation of
their affairs.

Just at the time of Mrs. Cleveland's quitting the Vale, a putrid fever broke
out amongst Lady Luton's servants; three of them died, and the rest went home
for change of air after their recovery. This circumstance induced her friend to
entreat she would make use of here is, and Emma and Eliza imagined they were
hired by her ladyship. The singularity of traveling in a post-chaise seemed
likely to create great surprise to Mrs. Cleveland's neighbors and servants,
and, to prevent conjecture, she said she was going to pass six months at one of
Mr. Fitzhenry's country seats, and should neither want carriage nor servants.

Nothing material occurred during the journey, and at the expiration of the
fourth day they arrived at Barmouth in good health and tolerable spirits.

Mr. Pratt's description of the scenery around, and the simplicity of the
manners of its inhabitants, was the inducement for fixing upon that spot, and
Mrs. Owen (as she was then to be called) met with a small house close to the
sea side, which she immediately hired; and the Miss Fitzhenrys, who had
hitherto been accustomed to live in a house large enough for a palace, were now
inhabitants of a mere cottage, with one maid and a boy to attend them.

The absolute poverty of the peasantry around Barmouth afforded ample scope for
the indulgence of Mrs. Owen's benevolent disposition; and the heartfelt
gratitude which the poor creatures expressed for the slightest donation, proved
at once both their worth and want.

Without amusement to occupy their time, or company to engage their attention,
Emma and Eliza naturally sought relief from those avocations they had once
despised, and reading and drawing became favorite amusements. The country
round Barmouth was picturesque in the highest degree, and in rambling between
the rocks, or climbing up the hills, the Park and Kensington gardens were both
forgotten. The winter months at length approached, and Emma expressed her dread
of the dreariness and gloom which would attend the tedious evenings; and
expressed an earnest desire for a piano forte.

"Well," said Mrs. Owen, "I will examine my purse, and if I can any way
contrive it, your inclination shall be gratified; but I have this morning
promised to take little Sally Burford, the fisherman's child, whom I observed
had attracted both yours and Eliza's notice, and she will afford you some
amusement."

"Oh, a little angel!" said Emma, "did you ever see so complete a beauty, aunt?"

"She is uncommonly lovely, indeed," replied Mrs. Owen;" "but it was not her
charms that interested me; there are seven children, and it is with the utmost
difficulty the poor man is enabled to support them, notwithstanding those who
are old enough to do something toward maintaining themselves; yet the poor
creatures are so contented with their situation, and so resigned to the decree
of Providence, that I felt it a duty to endeavor to relieve them: and as I
perceived you were partial to little Sally, I preferred taking her to any of
the others, though she is so young that I believe you must become nurses."

"Oh, we'll be nurses, and nurse maids too, I assure you, aunt:" said Eliza,
"for I am quite delighted at the idea of our having the little cherub; and do
you let us go for it directly, that we may begin making it some better clothes."

Sally was immediately sent for, and the two nurses with the assistance of Mrs.
Owen, had entirely completed frock, cap, shift, and petticoat, before bed time,
and the next morning Emma arose an hour earlier than usual, that she might have
the pleasure of dressing her in them.

Just as the gloomy month of November set in, Emma was astonished one morning
at perceiving two men bringing a large deal case toward the cottage, and not a
little delighted when it was opened at perceiving a very nice looking new
piano. Charmed at the sight of what she was once indifferent to, and grateful
to her aunt for complying with her wishes, she instantly ran to her apartment
to express her thanks: then untying a large bundle of music that accompanied
it, she sat down and played a set of Clementi's Sonatas, and upon Mrs. Owen's
entrance besought her to forgive her former conduct, and take the trouble of
becoming her instructress.

Mrs. Owen tenderly embraced her, applauded the general alteration in her
manners, and instantly performed the lesson she had just played in a style that
proved the superiority of her skill.

Music, reading, drawing, and geography, alternately occupied their leisure
hours; and the engaging prattle of the little Sally, was at once an antidote
against dullness, and a source of entertainment.

Mrs. Owen's kindness was not confined to the Burfords only, and the prevalence
of example induced the nieces to become charitable.

Upon the first discovery of Mr. Fitzhenry's ruined situation, Emma and Eliza
delivered their five hundred pound notes into their aunt's hands, who placed
them in the bank for their future use, promising to allow them thirty pounds a
year for pocket-money. Small as that sum then appeared, they found it more than
sufficient for all their wants; and they were enabled not only to show their
generosity to Sally's father and mother, but to be essentially kind to several
other poor families.

They had resided very near a twelvemonth in their little cottage, when Mrs.
Owen began to feel a wish to return to a spot which was so dear to her on many
accounts; and, convinced that her nieces had entirely conquered their love of
pleasure and dissipation, she began to think it wrong to deprive them of those
innocent amusements it was so natural for them to sigh for: she, therefore,
determined to make them acquainted with the real situation of her affairs, and
explain her motive for having acted with so much duplicity.

Scarcely had Mrs. Owen formed this resolution, when both the young ladies
entered the room where she was sitting, and, with countenances expressive of
the tenderest sympathy, informed her that poor Burford, in jumping from his
boat to the shore, had struck his foot against a stone, and, in endeavoring to
save himself from falling, had by some means or other twisted his leg, and
displaced his knee-pan: -- "And now," said Eliza, "those poor children must
absolutely be starved: for it is impossible their mother can earn enough to
support them!"

"Oh, we must all contribute our mite," said Mrs. Owen, "and prevent so
dreadful a calamity as you seem to apprehend, my love; but whilst I lament poor
Burford's misfortune, I congratulate myself at perceiving that your hearts are
susceptible both of tenderness and humanity, and that apathy and indifference
are never to become inmates of your breast! To describe," continued that
amiable woman, "the gratification I experience at beholding the pleasing
alteration that has taken place both in your sentiments and manners, is
impossible: and I think your angelic mother (had she been in existence) could
not have felt more joy and pride in owning you for her daughters, than I do in
declaring, that, though I bear not the maternal name, my heart is alive to all
its feelings, and that I anticipate the liveliest satisfaction in the prospect
of presenting you to the world as my adopted children, and joint heiresses to
eighty thousand pounds!"

"Heiresses!" exclaimed Eliza. -- "Eighty thousand pounds!" said Emma, "What
new change, my dear aunt, has fortune yet in store for us?"

"There is nothing new in this, my dear girl," said Mrs. Cleveland; (for I
shall no longer style her by the name of Owen) for soon after I had the
misfortune of losing your amiable mother, I made my will, and except a few
trifling legacies, left my whole fortune between yourself and sister." -- She
then explained her reasons for having imposed upon their credulity, and then
tenderly embracing them, said, "After having spent a year at Barmouth in
solitude and seclusion, I have no reason to apprehend you will complain of the
dullness of Cleveland Vale; but had you been stationed there immediately after
your removal from Grosvenor Square, I am convinced that the difference of the
scene would have created disgust and dissatisfaction, and, instead of having
the gratification of perceiving you were happy in my society, and contented
with my mode of life, I should have been rendered miserable by murmurs and
complainings.

"Your sentiments and ideas have happily now taken a different turn; you have
felt adversity, and know how to pity it; you have acquired a habit of amusing
yourselves without the aid of variety, or the arts of dissipation; and you will
return to the world in a temper of mind calculated to enjoy its pleasures with
moderation, and to support its disappointments with reason and resignation."

"Oh, my dearest madam," said Emma, "how can we ever deserve your kindness, or
merit your indulgence! but for your friendship, how unpleasing must have been
our conduct, and how despicable our characters! You not only instructed us to
be amiable, but by your own example invited us to be so likewise; and if ever
upon my return to the gay world, I feel a propensity to be vain, or an
inclination to become proud, I will think of Barmouth, and again grow humble."

"You are a dear girl," said Mrs. Cleveland, "and I every day have the
satisfaction of finding something new to love and admire in you. The
imperfections you formerly discovered were solely the effects of bad example
and ill advisers; your governess, of whom you had so high an opinion, attended
only to superficial accomplishments, whilst the improvement of the heart was
wholly unattended to: but come, my dear girls, let us go to the cottage, and
see what we can do for poor Burford."

The unfortunate man was in such acute agony that Mrs. Cleveland was fearful
the bone was broken; however, the next morning she had the satisfaction of
finding that the fomentation she had ordered had abated the swelling, procured
ease, and convinced Burford that the bone was whole. The poor fellow heard of
her intention of quitting Barmouth with the most unfeigned sorrow, which not
even the promise of an annual allowance of ten pounds a year was able to
control.

Lady Linton was apprised of her friend's intended return, about a month after
her own house was completed* and the servants were almost wild with joy at the
prospect of again beholding a mistress whom they both loved and venerated.

Although Mrs. Cleveland had deputed Lady Luton the almoner of her bounty
during her absence, yet there was something in her manner of bestowing it, that
made them sigh for the return of her who augmented kindnesses by her manner of
conferring them.

On the day that she was expected, the village bells began to ring before it
was light, the charity children were dressed in their Sunday clothes, and an
universal holiday was proclaimed.

All the peasantry assembled on the lawn before the house, anxiously waiting
the arrival of their benefactress, who was so moved by this proof of affection
and attachment, that she burst into tears, whilst they, with the most
respectful expressions of gladness, testified their love, their joy, and their
fidelity.

INNOCENCE JUSTIFIED, AND ART DETECTED. A STORY -- IN TWO PARTS.
As Mrs. Cavendish and her daughter Matilda were one summer evening straying
along the banks of the Thames, in the environs of Kingston, they perceived a
female in the Chinese dress, seated on a tuft of grass by its side, attentively
watching the fate of a wicker basket, which appeared to pass slowly on,
actuated by the motion of the ebbing tide.

Curiosity induced Mrs. Cavendish to approach the margin of the stream, and
scrutinously examine the basket which seemed so calculated to attract the
stranger's attention. A sudden gust of wind drove it from the shore, and at
once defeated her wishes, and disappointed her expectation.

The curiosity which had been awakened by the singularity of the circumstance,
was increased by the improbability of gratifying it: and whilst Mrs. Cavendish
was reflecting on what she had seen, the woman rushed by her, and, with
impatience and anxiety in her countenance, followed the object that had called
forth her solicitude.

A fisherman at that moment passed, and going directly to the water's side,
began unfastening a little wherry which was chained to a post that was fixed
there for the purpose of securing it.

"My good man," said Mrs. Cavendish, "I am particularly anxious to see the
contents of a little wicker basket, which by rowing fast you will soon
overtake; and if you will bring it to me you shall not go unrewarded for your
trouble."

The man instantly jumped into the boat, stripped off his jacket, and in less
than five minutes Mrs. Cavendish perceived he had obtained the prize, and was
returning with it as fast as possible.

As soon as the Chinese had observed this transaction, she quitted the bank of
the river, and moved slowly toward London.

The waterman soon reached the spot from which he had embarked, and, throwing
his chain round the post to secure the boat, saluted Mrs. Cavendish with -- "I
warrant ye, Madam, this pretty babe belongs to that there baggage who run'd
away as soon as she saw me row up to it."

" Babe!" exclaimed Mrs. Cavendish, (at the same time turning her eyes upon the
basket the man still held in his hand) "what supplicating innocence is
pourtrayed in its countenance! how interesting is its smile! my heart already
compassionates its unfortunate situation! but put down the child, my good
friend," she continued: "and if possible overtake the abandoned wretch whose
heart has been capable of forming so inhuman a design as that of depriving a
lovely babe of existence."

The man did as he was directed, and in less than a quarter of an hour
returned, dragging with him the object he had been in pursuit of. The moment
she beheld the infant in Mrs. Cavendish's arms, she dropped upon her knees, and
regardless of the questions that were put to her, continued for some minutes
fixed in her devout attitude; at length, upon Mrs. Cavendish pulling her by the
vest, and asking if the child did not belong to her: -- she replied: "Mine
child! mine child! -- yes, mine poor baby!"

"Then how," replied Mrs. Cavendish, "could you have cruelty and inhumanity
enough to commit so helpless an innocent to the mercy of the waves? you must be
a very wicked woman, and deserve that punishment which the law will inflict."

"Me no wicked -- me love mine child, but me have no bread, no rice, no noting
at all to give it; and me not like to see it starve, so me do as dey do in
China; me put it in de water, and some good soul come and pick it up, and den
my poor child have all dat it wants, and Ousanque lie down and die, and den go
to good place, and never more cry after cruel husband again!"

Mrs. Cavendish was much affected by the artless relation of the unhappy woman,
and immediately recollected that it was the custom in China for parents to
expose their female children to the mercy of the waters, if their own income
was insufficient to support them in comfort. Her abhorrence of the act was
immediately converted into compassion for the unfortunate being who had
committed it; she began asking her a variety of questions, and found that her
beauty had attracted the affection of one of the sailors who had accompanied
Lord Macartney in his embassy to China, and who had acquired sufficient
knowledge of the language to be enabled to plead his passion, which he did with
so much energy, as to induce the credulous Ousanque to alter her dress to that
which was worn by the other sex, and request the captain of the ship to indulge
her with a passage to England. The request was easily obtained, and the
unfortunate girl quitted her country, home, and friends, for an ungrateful and
abandoned seducer, who, soon after the ship was paid off, entered on board
another bound for the East Indies, leaving her in a strange country, without
money to support or friends to comfort her. The landlady of the public house at
which she lodged at Portsmouth, compassionating her forlorn situation, gave her
fifteen shillings out of her own pocket, (though she owed near five-and-twenty
for the room) and a letter to lord Macartney, describing her situation, and
entreating his assistance. With this letter in her pocket, and the child
fastened to her back, the poor creature set off for London: but just as she had
reached the skirts of Kingston, she was knocked down, robbed of a little bundle
that contained her purse, wardrobe, and letter, and, in all probability, would
then have ended both her misery and her life, but for the humane interference
of a stage coachman, who, perceiving something lying on the road, jumped from
the box, and observing the insensible state to which she was reduced, lifted
her into the coach which happened to be empty, stopped at the first public
house he came to, and left her in the care of the mistress, promising to pay
all expenses when he returned the next day. This benevolent design was
frustrated by the horses taking fright about ten miles from Kingston, running
away with the carriage, and dashing it with violence against a gatepost, by
which means the poor fellow was thrown from his box and broke his leg.

The wretched Ousanque, thus reduced to the most abject state of misery,
wandered round Kingston in a state of mind little inferior to distraction,
which was heightened by the constant cries of the infant for that nourishment
which nature denied it, and which the unfeeling inhabitants refused to bestow.
Then it was the idea of committing it to the waves first occurred, and the
consequences attending it were no less favorable to Ousanque, than they were
to the child.

Whilst Mrs. Cavendish was attentively listening to the poor woman's relation
Matilda was amusing herself with admiring the beauty of the child; and when she
heard her Mamma declare it was her intention to take both home with her, the
delight she felt was visible in all her features, and she protested she would
nurse it all day long, and never play with her doll again.

The singularity both of the mother's and child's dress attracted her notice,
and called forth her astonishment; and when she perceived that the poor little
creature was bound up so tight with a swathing band that it could not use any
of its limbs, she was absolutely shocked at the sight, and declared it was more
cruel than drowning it; "for then, Mamma," said she, "it would have been out of
its pain, but now it has a whole life of misery."

Mrs. Cavendish informed her it was a custom with the Chinese to confine the
limbs of the children, from an idea that they would grow crooked if they were
suffered to twist them about in any one form that inclination dictated; and
their feet in particular were subject to confinement, as the men of that
country were more attracted by the beauty of a small foot, than the charms of a
pretty face.

Ousanque's joy and gratitude when Mrs. Cavendish promised to befriend her, and
represent her forlorn situation to Lord Macartney, was testified by a thousand
marks of respect and veneration: she knelt at her feet, kissed the hem of her
garment, and seemed to consider her as an absolute deity.

Matilda entreated that the child might be dressed like an European, and that
she might have the satisfaction of making it clothes, a circumstance which
astonished her mamma, as she was by no mean^ fond of work.

Mrs. Cavendish fulfilled her (...) of writing to Lord Macartney (...) of the
unfortunate Ousanque (...) daily expectation of a (...) poor creature was (...)
^^tremely ill. An (...) sent for (...) thought (...) smallpox. (...) to (...)
short (...)

Every kindness that humanity could dictate and feeling pay, the unhappy
sufferer received from her benevolent benefactress, and at those lucid
intervals which the fever sometimes permitted her to experience, she expressed
her gratitude in such terms of genuine feeling, that Mrs. Cavendish was often
obliged to leave the apartment to disguise her emotions, and drop a tear to her
misfortunes.

From the first appearance of the disorder, Mr. Longford the apothecary was
convinced it would be fatal; he informed Mrs. Cavendish that no art could save
her: and the event soon proved the clearness of (...) judgment.

(...) little infant began to sicken on the (...) poor mother died: and as Mrs.
(...) then considered it an absolute (...) and support it, she resolved (...)
upon it such an educa^^^^ (...) it to earn its own (...) was respecta^^^ (...)

(...) the death (...) made a (...) Mr. and (...) ^^^ticular (...) ^^ming
sponsors. Matilda wanted it to be called after herself; but Mrs. Cavendish
pointed out the inconvenience that would attend it; and it was at length agreed
that Pekin should be the name, by way of reminding it of its unfortunate
mother's country.

Although the little Pekin received the infection from such a fatal and
dreadful kind, yet it had the complaint in a most favorable manner, and in
less than six weeks not a single mark of the disorder was visible upon her skin.

Matilda's affection for the child daily increased, and the little soul soon
testified that it was grateful for her kindness. As soon as it could speak she
undertook to teach it the alphabet, and by the time it was four years old it
could read any of Mrs. Trimmer's little stories as well as its governess, who
at that period had entered her tenth year.

Mrs. Cavendish's youngest brother had, to the great displeasure of all his
family, married the daughter of a country shopkeeper, whose beauty had pleased
his eye, and whose art and duplicity had imposed upon his understanding. He was
then a young ensign in the forty-second regiment, and though of good family,
was possessed of a very small fortune, and therefore it was both an impolitic
and imprudent measure.

None of his relations except Mrs. Cavendish would ever condescend to have any
intercourse with him, or the object of his affection; and though she was no
less vexed at his marriage than they were, she invited both himself and bride
to pass the summer with her at Kingston.

The vulgarity of Mrs, Roper's manners, the low cunning of her mind, and the
design and artifice which was visible in all her actions, was so obvious to
Mrs. Cavendish, that she was astonished that even a youth of nineteen could
have been duped by them. The young ensign, however, did not live long enough to
repent the folly of his conduct; for a violent cold settled upon his lungs when
he had been about five months married, which brought on a rapid decline, and he
died whilst on a visit to his affectionate sister, recommending his wife and
her expected little one to her tenderness and protection.

Mrs. Cavendish was at that time in deep mourning for an amiable husband, and
had her sister-in-law been a different kind of woman, her company and society
would have been a great acquisition, as Matilda was then only nine months old;
but the dissimilarity of their tempers, dispositions, and manners, was too
striking for such a plan to be adopted; and Mrs. Cavendish preferred allowing
her sister a hundred a year out of her own income, to letting her remain an
inmate of the family, and hoped that she would return to her own connexions,
and spend it in what manner she thought proper.

But Mrs. Roper knew her own interest too well to quit the neighborhood, and
under pretense of violent affection, declared that all her happiness was
centred in being able to trace her dear Edward's features in the lovely
countenance of his amiable sister!

A small first floor was accordingly hired at Kingston, and under the pretense
of admiring one thing, and wishing for another, Mrs. Roper contrived almost to
double her hundred a year.

The little child, which proved to be a girl, was extremely like its deceased
father, and Mrs. Cavendish felt for it almost a maternal tenderness; as there
was not more than twelve month's difference in the age of Charlotte (which was
the child's name) and her cousin Matilda; they spent a great deal of time
together, though the difference of their dispositions occasioned frequent
disputes between them.

From the moment Mrs. Cavendish adopted the little Pekin, Mrs. Roper became
restless and dissatisfied, and with much difficulty refrained from expressing
her disapprobation even before her sister; but this restraint was amply
compensated for, in her absence, and Charlotte was taught to consider Pekin as
an absolute obstacle to her happiness and her interest. Mrs. Roper would be
continually teazing all her acquaintance with accounts of her own misfortunes,
or ill-founded complaints of her sister's injustice, in giving away property
which ought to belong to her and Charlotte, to a good-for-nothing, worthless,
little vagabond, who she knew would requite all her kindness with scorn,
artifice, and ingratitude; every body knows (she would say) what a horrid set
of creatures the Chinese are; that they live by cheating, plundering, and
theft; and that little wretch has already given proofs of its national
depravity.

Although this was the general tenor of Mrs. Roper's conversation when she was
not in her sister's company, yet when she was, Pekin was the sweetest of all
sweet creatures, and Mrs. Cavendish the most amiable of women. Charlotte was
not of an age to be an adept in hypocrisy, and therefore she testified her real
dislike by a thousand ill-natured, spiteful tricks, which poor little Pekin
submitted to in silence, without murmur or complaint; for, notwithstanding Mrs.
Roper's malignant assertions, it was impossible to find a child more completely
agreeable.

PART THE SECOND.
As this beautiful, amiable, and interesting girl, advanced in years, Mrs.
Roper had the mortification of perceiving that Mrs. Cavendish's affection
increased, and that her own child seemed daily to lose ground in her good
opinion. The truth was, Mrs. Cavendish had discovered in her niece's temper an
inclination both to jealousy and envy, and a littleness of mind that was
capable of stooping to any meanness, which lessened her regard, and decreased
her esteem.

It was Mrs. Cavendish's wish to give her little protogee such an education as
would enable her to undertake the instruction of young ladies, and in the
capacity of private governess render herself both useful and respectable; and
therefore, she took lessons from the same masters, and received the same
attentions from them, as Matilda and Charlotte did. This circumstance was at
once pleasing to Matilda, and painful to Charlotte, whose inveteracy against
Pekin was increased by the encomiums which were bestowed upon her, and who,
finding herself unable to injure her in Mrs. Cavendish's opinion by ill-natured
hints and sly suggestions, was at length resolved upon her ruin by the practice
of maneuvers which were as deeply laid, as they were iniquitously designed.

At the back of Mrs. Cavendish's house was an excellent garden, which was
abundantly stocked with every kind of wall-fruit -- this fruit Mrs. Cavendish
was particularly choice of, for the pleasure of presenting to such of her
friends as were not accommodated with the convenience of a wall.

Charlotte upon perceiving her aunt's desire to preserve the fruit, was
resolved to defeat it, and watched her opportunity of going into the garden
with such admirable nicety, that she contrived to ^witch three or four peaches
and nectarines from the trees every time she entered it, the stone of which she
always placed at the bottom of a little box which Pekin kept in her own bed
room.

For some days Mrs. Cavendish imagined the trees were thinner, without being
positive as to the circumstance; at length she resolved to count the fruit
without mentioning her suspicion to a single soul. The next morning she walked
into the garden and discovered that eleven of the finest peaches were missing
-- Matilda and Pekin, Mrs. Roper and Charlotte, were all at work in the
drawing room when Mrs. Cavendish entered, and expressed her vexation at the
circumstance, and her wish to discover the person who had been guilty of such
disgraceful conduct.

"I thought Pekin," said Charlotte, "you could not eat all those peaches and
nectarines, which I have seen you gather, without being discovered; and had I
not known that my cousin would have called me tell-tale, I would have called my
aunt to look at you the first time I saw you take them."

"Saw me take peaches! Miss Roper," said the child, evidently embarassed at the
boldness of the charge. "I (...) upon my honor I have never touched a peach
this year but what Mrs. Cavendish was so kind as to give me."

"Yes," replied Charlotte, "I saw you take peaches and nectarines too, if
that is English: and saw you carry them up stairs in your bed room -- what say
you to that, Miss Honesty? Can you deny that?"

"Yes, that I can," said Pekin, bursting into tears, "and wonder how you can be
so wicked as to say such a thing."

"What do you ^ean, you little presumptuous vagabo^^* exclaimed Mrs. Roper, "by
daring (...) accuse my daughter of uttering an untruth? I thought how my sister
would be requited for her generosity, for the whole tribe of your country men
are thieves and swindlers."

"My dear Mrs. Roper," said Mrs. Cavendish, "that little girl is under my
protection, and I can neither suffer her to be insulted nor oppressed; if she
has taken the peaches, she has been guilty of a very great fault, and I am the
person to judge of the proper mode of punishing it; but I am inclined to think
my niece must be mistaken."

"Oh, indeed aunt, I am not mistaken," replied Charlotte, "for I met her eating
one up stairs, and saw the juice quite run down to her fingers' ends."

"Suppose," said Mrs. Roper, "you were to go up stairs, sister: most likely the
stones might yet be remaining either in her drawers or boxes."

Mrs. Cavendish followed the advice, and returned in five minutes, with not
less than forty stones belonging to peaches and nectarines.

Pekin colored like scarlet, and, in a tremulous voice, said "You did not find
those in my room, (...) am."

"Yes," replied ^^s. Cavendish, "but I did: and I must confess, that I should
as soon have expected to have found a dagger there: Indeed, Pekin, this conduct
of yours has wounded my peace, destroyed my hopes, and sapped the very
foundation of my friendship. The taking the fruit I could very easily have
forgiven; but to assert an untruth with all that calmness of affected
innocence, is what I could not have expected, and what I am resolved not to
forgive; therefore, go this instant to your apartment, and do not let me see
you until my feelings are less exasperated, and my anger more subdued."

Fearful of offending, by presuming to plead for mercy, the agitated Pekin left
the room, and in an agony of grief retired to her own apartment. Matilda was
not suffered to go near her friend; and had not the servants who carried up her
food informed their mistress that scarcely any part of it was eaten, and that
the little prisoner was overwhelmed with grief, her confinement would have been
protracted much beyond three days; but the apprehension of her making herself
ill, induced Mrs. Cavendish to forgive the fault, and Charlotte had the
mortification of seeing her restored to favor.

Mrs. Roper, who had been accessory to the scheme, was heartily vexed at its
ill success; yet both Charlotte and herself were resolved to attempt another,
which, though more hazardous, was likely to be attended with more certain
consequences.

Mrs. Cavendish was particularly partial to a small miniature of her late
husband, which was set as a bracelet, and was kept in a small box that was
opened by a spring-lock, and stood upon her dressing-table. This box she made a
point of never opening in the presence of the servants, but all the children
were acquainted with the secret spring; Charlotte, therefore, resolved to make
herself mistress of this valuable treasure, and disclosing her intention to an
ignorant girl, who had formerly lived servant with Mrs. Roper, and was then
going to London, persuaded her so far to second the design, as to undertake the
disposal of it; and if any questions were asked, to say she was sent by the
little girl who lived at Mrs. Cavendish's, and that it was a picture she had
found as she was walking by the river side.

As Mrs. Cavendish had never lived at Kingston, and the girl was known to have
been servant to Mrs. Cavendish's sister-in-law, the jeweller had no reason to
doubt the truth of the circumstance she related; he therefore took the picture,
paid a guinea down for it, and promised another, if it was not claimed in the
course of a month, which he thought likely to happen, as he concluded it
belonged to some person in the neighborhood, and would be advertised.

As Mrs. Cavendish never wore the bracelet but when she was particularly
dressed, a fortnight elapsed after it was sold before the loss was discovered,
and Charlotte's patience began to be almost exhausted. At length the wished-for
day arrived which was to hurl destruction upon the object of her hatred, and
give her the delightful satisfaction of beholding the ruin of one toward whom
the felt a most unconquerable aversion.

Mrs. Cavendish's astonishment, at opening the box, and not perceiving the
valued treasure, was excessive; but conceiving the bracelet could not be lost,
she imagined she must have put it away with some other part of her dress.
Drawers, boxes, and cabinets, were searched in vain; and then her vexation
amounted to absolute uneasiness. She perfectly recollected having taken it off
when she returned home from paying her last visit; and the more she reflected
upon the singularity of the circumstance, the more she was bewildered in doubt,
suspicion, and alarm. Her servants had lived with her thirteen and fourteen
years, and their fidelity had been frequently put to the test. Pekin had never
but once deceived her; and of what use could a bracelet be to a child of her
tender age? Charlotte she believed to be capable of a thousand sly tricks, but
then some interested motive actuated their practice.

Not knowing how to act, and completely mortified at the loss of what she
considered so very estimable, Mrs. Cavendish at length resolved to have it
cried, conceiving she might be mistaken in her opinion of having had it after
her (...) from Mr. Fowler's, and that it might have been dropped in the way
home.

The jeweller was standing at the shop door as the crier announced the loss,
and described the manner in which the picture was painted, and the form in
which it was set. Examining the one he had purchased, and perceiving that it
exactly corresponded with the crier's description, he immediately informed him
of the manner in which he had obtained it, and both expressed their suspicion
of Pekin's dishonesty, as they justly observed, she could not have lived ten
years in Mrs. Cavendish's house, without knowing the picture was her property.

The jeweller and the crier agreed to go together, and inform Mrs. Cavendish by
what means the picture had come into the possession of the former, and request
a reimbursement of the guinea he had paid, in addition to the reward proclaimed
by the crier.

Mrs. Cavendish and Matilda were just gone out to pay a morning visit, when the
men arrived; but Mrs. Roper and her daughter were sitting in the parlour, and
saw them pass the window. "There Is the crier and Mr. Martin have both rung at
the gate together," exclaimed ^^s. Roper, "and I Will lay my life we shall hear
some tidings of the bracelet."

"I hope we shall, I Am sure," said Pekin; "for it will make my dear god-mama
very happy." And so saying, she was going to run out of the room, to inquire
whether their expectations were likely to be realized.

"Stop, you little forward chit," said Mrs. Roper, catching her by the
shoulder, and pushing her with violence to the other end of the room, "I
believe I am as much interested in your dear god-mama's property as you are,
and much more capable of evincing it." -- So saying, she bounced out of the
room, leaving the child petrified with astonishment and drowned in tears,
whilst Charlotte sat maliciously smiling at the success of her invention, and
the accomplishment of her scheme.

In less than five minutes Mrs. Roper re-entered, followed by the jeweller and
the crier, and in a voice half choked with rage, exclaimed -- "You vile,
wicked ungrateful hussy! is this the way you requite my poor sister's
kindness? What! rob her of the most valuable thing she possessed on earth; and
then, with the art and hypocrisy of an old offender, pretend to be going out to
inquire after the very thing you knew you had first stolen and then sold! but I
see through your tricks, you baggage, I do: you was fearful your countenance
would betray your guilt, and you wished to get out of the room to hide it. But
where is the guinea you received from Mr. Martin? Give that to me this moment,
you abandoned, wicked hussy!"

Whilst Mrs. Roper was uttering this volley of abuse, the unfortunate child had
involuntarily dropped upon her knees; and the moment that lady ceased speaking,
she protested her innocence of the crime that was alleged against her with all
the eloquence that conscious rectitude could inspire.

"Come, come, child," said Mr. Martin, "don't add the sin of lying to those you
have already committed; but confess what you have done with the money, and
likewise what induced you to commit such a wicked action."

"Aye, aye, come, Pekin, (for I suppose one need not be very nice, and Miss you
over) said the crier; be a good girl, and tell the whole truth to Madam, and
mayhap that may make her plead for you to Madam Cavendish; for you are but a
young thing, God knows: and that makes one feel some sort of mercy for you: but
if you once come to be obstinate, and persist in lying, why then you will have no
friend to speak a kind word for you."

"Indeed -- indeed," replied poor Pekin, almost suffocated with the violence of
her grief, "I know no more about the picture than you do; and as to a guinea, I
never had such a thing in my life. Oh pray, dear gentlemen," she continued,
"pray don't let my god-mama think so hardly of me. Oh! I shall die, if she
thinks I could do such a wicked thing."

"Thinks!" exclaimed Mrs. Roper, "she shall more than think, I assure you, for
she shall know it this moment, I promise you; -- yes, and your friend Mrs.
Fowler, and all the town shall know it." So saying, she turned toward the door
with an intent of putting her threats into execution.

Frantic with terror, and agonized with dread, the wretched supplicant caught
her by the gown, and in the most moving accents besought her pity. It was with
the greatest difficulty that her hands were separated from Mrs. Roper's
drapery, who, the moment she felt herself at liberty, ran out of the room,
desiring the crier to remain there, and watch the little wretch.

Mrs. Cavendish was just informing Mrs. Fowler of an amiable trait in her
god-daughter's conduct, when Mrs. Roper entered, and in a tone of manifest
pleasure and exultation, exclaimed -- "Well, sister! I believe you will allow I
am a true prophetess! -- A fine kettle of fish this is! but, however, it is only
what I have long expected -- long expected, I assure you, Mrs. Fowler," said
she, turning and addressing herself to that lady: and she then related the
whole circumstance with such exaggerations as she thought most calculated to
call forth her sister's indignation.

Mrs. Cavendish listened to the recital with a mixture of pain, regret, and
astonishment, whilst poor Matilda burst into an agony of tears, and besought
her mama not to condemn poor Pekin without allowing her an opportunity of
endeavoring to exculpate herself.

"That she can never do, my beloved girl," replied Mrs. Cavendish; "the
circumstances are too strong against her; and I would really spare myself the
mortification of beholding her contrition and remorse, because an action of
this kind proves to me they would not be permanent. Poor lost child!" she
continued, "I declare I am more distressed at the idea of what a dreadful end
she must come to, than I am at my own disappointment. What to do with her I
know not; and it will require some time for me to reflect upon the best method
to adopt. In my house she must not stay, even until I have resolved upon her
future destination."

"Let her come to me," said Mrs. Roper; "for though the idea of opening my
doors to a confirmed thief, is not the pleasantest thing in the world, yet to
oblige you, my dearest sister, I would submit to any inconvenience."

"You are very good," replied Mrs. Cavendish; "but I know Charlotte's aversion
to the poor child too well to allow her an opportunity of insulting her; for
though she is fallen, she must not be trampled upon."

"I will take her," said Mrs. Fowler; "and Clark shall go for her the back way,
and by that means, my dear friend, you will avoid the interview you seem to
dread."

When Clark arrived at Mrs. Cavendish's, she was astonished at the tale that
met her ear, yet soon began to think with the rest of the servants, that there
was some artifice at the bottom, and that poor little Pekin would be proved
innocent at last; they therefore embraced the child with tenderness, and
pretending that her god-mama had sent for her to Mrs. Fowler's, easily
persuaded her to accompany Clark; but had she imagined she was to return no
more, not any thing but force would have made her quit the house.

When Mrs. Fowler informed her she was to reside with her until her
banefactress could think of some plan for her future support, her grief was so
excessive, and her expressions of innocence so strong, that Mrs. Fowler began
to doubt the truth of the circumstance that had been alleged against her, and
her worthy husband went to the jeweller, to inquire particulars.

The man's account increased his suspicion, and at all events he was determined
to see the girl who had sold the bracelet; with much difficulty he discovered
her abode, and by the united aid of threats and promises, soon drew from her
the intelligence he wanted: then sending his servant for a post-chaise, he
insisted upon her accompanying him back that evening to Kingston. He ordered
the postillion to drive to Mrs. Roper's lodgings; but not finding her at home,
they followed her to Mrs. Cavendish's house. As soon as he alighted from the
carriage, he took his companion by the arm, and without waiting to have his
name announced, walked unexpectedly into the drawing room.

"It is rather a late hour, Madam," said he, "to introduce a London visitor;
but when suspicion can be removed, and guilt detected, I think we have no right
to attend to ceremony." Then darting a fierce look at Mrs. Roper -- "As to you,
Madam," said he, "introduction is unnecessary, as this young woman is your old
acquaintance."

Unable to support the expected explanation, she arose from her seat, and
catching Charlotte by the hand, said -- "come child, let us quit this hated
house, where we have all our lives received insult and neglect:" so saying, she
bounced out of the room, leaving Mrs. Cavendish petrified with astonishment.

Mr. Fowler then made a brief recital of the circumstances that have been
related, which were corroborated by the girl's testimony; who declared, she
would not have taken the picture for twenty half crowns, instead of one, could
she have known the wickedness of the plot.

Mr. Fowler could hardly dissuade Mrs. Cavendish from going that night to the
rectory, for the purpose of restoring her beloved god-daughter to the place she
had formerly held in her affections; and before eight o'clock the next morning
she pressed her to her bosom, and expressed her concern for the injustice she
had done her, and promised never again to be biassed by the insinuations of the
artful, or the invention of the interested.

Little Pekin's joy was as violent as her grief, and the tears she shed at
being restored to her god-mama's favor, were nearly as abundant as those which
accompanied her disgrace. Matilda's happiness was equally sincere; and, to
complete their felicity, a letter was delivered to Mrs. Cavendish, informing
her that Mrs. Roper had taken a final leave of Kingston, and intended residing
with her elder brother, where she expected to receive the payment of her
annuity.

FILIAL INGRATITUDE.
ON a tempestuous night, in the dreary month of December Sir George Clifford's
attention was withdrawn from the fictitious woes of the heroine of a favorite
romance, which he was then perusing, by the real tones of supplication and
distress.

Sir George's heart was composed of such susceptible materials, that it was
impressed with pity by the voice of sorrow, and ringing the bell with an effort
of violence, he desired the butler would take a lantern and discover whence the
sounds proceeded.

The man obeyed, and returned in a few minutes, leading in a venerable looking
figure, whose whitened locks seemed to claim respect, and whose extreme
distress demanded sympathy; big drops of sorrow rolled copiously down his aged
cheeks, and deep groans issued from his laboring bosom!

"My venerable friend," said the amiable Sir George, taking the old man's
withered hand, "your misfortune's, I fear, have been of an afflictive kind; but
here, be assured, you shall find a shelter from them. Compose your sorrows,
restrain your griefs, and learn to bow submissively to the will of Heaven!"

"Generous stranger!" replied the old man, endeavoring to check the rising
sigh that burst involuntarily from his tortured breast;" "how much am I
indebted to your hospitality, and how greatly am I comforted by your
compassion! my woes, indeed, are heavy and oppressive; because the hand that
wounds, ought to have shielded me from them! but for your benevolence, the lamp
of life, which nature shortly must extinguish, had been put out by accident;
for having wandered out of my path, and not being able to discern my way, I had
inevitably walked into the pond, not far distant from the house, had not my
dog's sagacity discovered the water, and his fidelity induced him to snatch me
from it by the flap of the coat. Still unable to perceive my danger, yet
convinced I was surrounded by it, I thought my only method of escaping was to
utter those complaints which called forth your compassion, and have been the
means of proving that virtue and humanity are still residents upon earth!"

At the close of this speech the poor creature's strength seemed quite
exhausted, and, leaning his head upon his hand, he for some moments appeared
absorbed in thought. The butler in that time reentered with refreshments, which
Sir George pressed his guest to partake of, with an urgency of manner that
would not suffer a refusal; and whilst the venerable old man satisfied the
wants of nature, he expressed his gratitude to his amiable host in terms that
proved him of no common race.

A bed was ordered to be immediately prepared: and upon the stranger's
expressing a wish to begin the relation of his story, Sir George besought him
to compose his spirits, and leave the painful task to a future period. "You are
old, my good sir" said that estimable man, "and I perceive you are unfortunate;
you need not, therefore, wish for stronger claims upon my compassion, and I
have only to assure you that you may rely upon my friendship."

The old man's tears flowed afresh, though the channel which supplied them had
taken a different course; and, after repeating his acknowledgments, and
expatiating upon the goodness of Heaven in directing his footsteps to the abode
of benevolence, he requested permission to retire to his own apartment,
promising to impart his history on the following morning.

As it was Sir George's orders that the stranger should not be awakened by any
obtrusive civility in the servants, and as nature was perfectly exhausted both
by bodily and mental exertions, he slept soundly until past nine o'clock, and
did not enter the breakfast parlour until Sir George and his son Edward had
just finished their morning repast.

After the usual salutations of the day were over, and Sir George had made some
fresh tea for his venerable guest, he desired his son to quit the room,
imagining the old man would net choose to enter upon his story in the presence
of a boy.

But Mr. Middleton (which was the stranger's name) turning to Sir George, said,
"If I may presume to make a request, it is, that your son, Sir George, may hear
the story of my misfortunes; and may he," continued he, clasping his hands, and
lifting up his eyes to heaven, "be impressed with an abhorrence of those vices
which have brought me to my present misery! and, whilst he pities my
misfortunes, may his breast glow with filial tenderness, veneration, and esteem!

Edward, who loved a story with a greater degree of fondness than most boys,
heard the stranger's request with evident marks of satisfaction, and addressing
his father in a tone of persuasion, said, "Do, I entreat you, papa, suffer me
to stay; I assure you I Will sit quite still, and not interrupt the gentleman."

"If I can give you pleasure, or afford you instruction, my dear boy," replied
Sir George Clifford, "I always experience sincere gratification in so doing,
and I hope you will attend to what you hear with a resolution of endeavoring
to benefit by the relation." -- Edward promised to fulfill his father's wishes,
and as soon as the servant had taken away the breakfast apparatus, Mr.
Middleton began his history in the following words:

THE HISTORY OF MR. MIDDLETON, OR, FILIAL INGRATITUDE.
I am the younger son of an ancient and respectable family in the north of
England; and, as my father wished my elder brother to support the name with
that degree of consequence which had ever been attached to it, I was sent at an
early age to try my fortune in the East Indies. My mother died at giving me
birth, and my father had three daughters by a second wife, who long before my
departure from England had so far attracted his affection from the children of
the former marriage, that except for Frank, which was his eldest son's name, he
seemed to feel neither tenderness nor anxiety.

Upon my first arrival in the East Indies, I generally received a few lines by
every packet: but instead of breathing the affection of a parent, or the
solicitude of a friend, they merely contained a slight account of his health,
etc. and a caution to be prudent in the management of my salary; and in less
than two years all intercourse between us was suspended; for though I wrote by
every packet, I never received a line in the course of five-and-twenty years.

In that period I had not only amassed a comfortable, but a splendid fortune;
and resolved to return to England for the purpose of enjoying it. I had,
unfortunately, remitted vast sums to an eminent banker, and when I arrived in
town, I had the mortification of hearing that he had become a bankrupt about
six weeks before that period, and that hundreds were involved in the dreadful
ruin. Happily I had still property enough remaining in my own hands to enable
me to enjoy the comforts, though not the luxuries of life; but I resolved,
before I fixed upon my future resting place, to trace out my family without
disclosing my real situation. I therefore ^^rew myself into the York
post-coach, left my servant at the inn, and in a short time reached the place
of my nativity. My father, I heard, had been dead some years, and my brother
Frank was in possession of the estate; my other brother was also dead, and my
mother-in-law and her three daughters were all married and settled in London.

Middleton-Hall is a large Gothic building, situated in one of the most
beautiful, though remote parts of Yorkshire, and about two miles distant from a
neighboring town. As I was anxious to make tri^l of a relation's disposition
whom I had not seen for many years, I dressed myself particularly plain, hired
a boy to carry a small leather trunk which contained my wardrobe, and walked
anxiously toward the hall. I was received at the well-known gate by an
imperious puppy, who, imagining by my appearance that I was some needy
dependant, would scarcely inform my whether his master was at home: at length,
with some difficulty, I obtained the wished-for intelligence, and by begging
and entreaty got myself (...) as a person from Indi^* who (...) ^o^sequence
(...) from (...)." haughty, insolent, and presumptuous. -- Our persons were
totally forgotten by each other, and therefore I gave a circumstantial detail
of the banker's failure, and my own misfortunes, without giving him a suspicion
of my own identity, and concluded by saying his brother was in London, anxious
to fold him to his fraternal bosom, and convinced that he would not only
commiserate his misfortunes, but endeavor to prevent him from suffering by
their weight.

I will not, my dear Sir, trespass upon your time, or wound your feelings, by
relating my cruel brother's reply; suffice it to say, it was inhuman as a
relation, and disgraceful as a man; -- and induced me to quit his abode,
resolving never more to have any intercourse with so bad a character, though
not before I had disclosed my name, and the real situation of my affairs.

On my return to London, I saw a villa in Devonshire advertised to be sold, and
pleased with the plan I became its purchaser. Soon after my establishment in my
new abode, I became acquainted with a neighboring gentleman whose family
consisted of three daughters and four sons; the eldest of the former was at
once attractive, amiable, and engaging: and though there was so great a
disparity in our years, I soon discovered that I had made an impression on her
heart; in short, Sir, we were very soon married; and if perfect happiness is to
be met with on earth, I am the man who once enjoyed it! -- Cruel reverse!
Dreadful vicissitude! -- But I will proceed with my narration without
digression, or taking a retrospect of my own misfortunes.

In less than a twelvemonth after my marriage, my lovely Emily blessed me with a
pledge of her affection, and my felicity was unbounded; but, alas! our joys
were of short duration, though our miseries are permanent! My loved Emily was
snatched from me in the prime of life, at the time our little darling most
wanted her maternal tenderness. Mr. Cleverly, which was her father's name, soon
followed the object of my affection, and the rest of the family removed to
London. The society of my little William was at once a solace for my grief, and
an amusement for my mind; and my fondness increased beyond the bounds of
prudence. Naturally high-spirited, he required restraint; but my tenderness was
so violent, I could not bear to see him unhappy; his resemblance to his beloved
mother increased with his years; but, alas! how different were they both in
nature and disposition! To send him to school was impossible; I, therefore,
engaged a gentleman as his tutor and instructor. The total unrestraint which
had hitherto been put upon his inclinations, made him both daring and
untractable, and in less than six months the worthy man requested to decline
the office he had engaged in. At length by promises on my part not to interfere
between him and his pupil, and the attracting charm of an increased salary, Mr.
Pemberton consented to remain an inmate in a family, the head of which he must
both pity and despise. His friendship for me, however, induced him to stay
until my son had reached his fourteenth year, when the arrogance of his
behavior, and the insolence of his conduct, absolutely compelled him to resign
the post, and leave his unthinking charge to the practice of his own devices,
though not without repeatedly conjuring me to conquer my weakness, and seed my
son to school; prophetically pointing out the dreadful consequence of my not
doing it.

Upon the departure of his preceptor, William's temper submitted to no control,
and too late I felt my error. His person, I before observed, was like his
mother's; but to all the sensibility of female softness was united a manly
grace that at once attracted and delighted the beholder. Oh! how often have I
gazed with parental fondness on the beauteous false deception, until I imagined
a form so striking, and a face so manly, could never be capable of an act of
baseness!

Amidst the various amusements which my son was fond of as he grew up, dancing
bore the greatest pre-eminence; and there was not an assembly within twenty
miles round that he did not make a point of constantly frequenting. The graces
of his person, and the excellence he had attained in that accomplishment,
rendered him an universal favorite with the ladies; and, in addition to his
other follies, was the means of inspiring him with vanity and conceit.

Within a few miles of our residence lived a Scotch earl, whose pride and
poverty were equally conspicuous; and the eldest daughter of this great
personage, forgetful of her noble blood, deaf to her father's strong
remonstrances, and lost to a sense of female delicacy, proposed to my son (whom
she had frequently danced with at different balls) an elopement to Scotland.

Elated at the spirited proposal, and delighted at the prospect of marrying a
title, my headstrong, unthinking boy, eagerly grasped the splendid phantom, and
making a variety of excuses for requiring a large supply of money, set off in a
chaise and four the following morning, without giving me the slightest idea of
the destructive scheme he was going to adopt. The young lady had been more
explicit: for a letter left upon her dressing table informed her father, that
unable to conquer the strength of her attachment, and convinced that she should
never obtain his concurrence, she had resolved to please her eye, though she
might lower her consequence.

The old earl, imagining I had been privy to this transaction, sent me a letter
full of invectives; upon the receipt of which, I not only explained my total
ignorance of the affair, but promised to make such an establishment for my son,
as should enable him to support his wife in perfect gentility. Softened by my
conciliating letter, and convinced be was unable to give his daughter any
fortune, his Lordship called to apologize for his petulence.

In a few days the young people returned, and Lady Lucy was introduced as the
wife of my beloved William. I forgot to mention, that a few years after the
death of my Emily, the banker, who had been in possession of so large a share
of my property, was, by the death of a distant relation, heir to an estate of a
vast amount, and had justice and generosity enough to vest ten thousand pounds
in the funds in my name, by way of compensation for the losses I had sustained.

This sum I settled immediately upon my son, with permission to consider my
house entirely as his own, reserving to myself two separate apartments, and
retaining my old servants, choosing still to be considered as their master.

My daughter-in-law soon proved that she thought me rather an intruder in my
own family; and as to my son, I never saw him but at the hour of dining.
Pleasure, gaiety, and dissipation, occupied the time of both; and the little
affection he once felt for his father, was converted into neglect,
indifference, and scorn.

Several months passed tediously away, whilst grief and age seemed jointly to
hasten the approach of that period which was to end my sorrows -- when a sudden
transition took place in the conduct of my son and daughter; indifference was
converted into kindness, and neglect into zeal and attention. The satisfaction
which their altered mode of conduct conveyed to my mind, produced a visible
effect upon my health, and I seemed to have taken a new lease of life.

In one of those confidential conversations which filled my breast with
gladness, my son expressed a desire of making some alteration in the house, and
after a little embarassment, entreated me to let him be considered as the
master of it, as it would save me the trouble of looking into the domestic
concerns.

Unable to refuse a request of one I loved so tenderly, I put him in possession
of what he required, and in an evil hour rendered myself dependant upon him for
the means of existence. Whilst the deeds were drawing up for this fatal
purpose, both Lady Lucy and himself doubled their attentions; but no sooner
were they completed, and they were in full possession of my estate and
property, than the mask dropped, and I awoke to wretchedness. The first step of
filial authority which my ungrateful son took upon himself, was to discharge my
faithful Trincard, a fellow whom I had brought from India, under pretense that
he was too old to render me any service, and too bigoted to my interest, to
wish well to his present master.

To describe the various methods that were adopted to degrade and humble me, is
impossible! at length, worn with grief, a prey to misery, and the victim of
misguided affection, I resolved to quit an abode which was rendered the seat of
wretchedness, and endeavor to trace out the connexions of my long-lost Emily.
For this purpose I set out on Friday morning, intending, if possible, to walk
to London; (for since the unfortunate day that I gave my property out of my own
hands, I have never received a sixpence from my worthless son, and half a
guinea is the amount of my purse) -- I had imagined I could reach the
neighboring town, when night overtook me, and Providence directed me to this
hospitable abode. -- "And now, young gentleman," said Mr. Middleton, turning to
Edward, "you have heard a lesson to caution you against disobedience; and if
ever you feel a repugnance to fulfill the injunctions of your amiable parents,
think of my misfortunes, and the misery I have endured, and check the impulse
of disrespect and disobedience. Vice is a plant of a regular and progressive
growth, and never rises by sudden transitions -- stop it as it first appears,
or the pestilential weed corrupts the soil, and totally destroys the tender bud
of virtue." -- Here his emotions checked his proceeding, and he burst into a
flood of tears.

"I have to thank you, my dear Sir," said Sir George, "for a tale which has
both roused my indignation, and called forth my compassion; but if the
soothings of friendship can in any measure compensate for the loss of filial
affection, that consolation you may fully claim; my house, my purse, and my
servants, are at your command; and here you must spend the residue of your
days; consider me as your son, your brother, or your friend, and in all those
capacities you will find me ready to prove my sincerity, and evince my esteem.

THE AMIABLE BROTHERS, OR, THE INHABITANTS OF THE TOWER.
FORSAKEN by her friends, neglected by her family, and lost to every social
enjoyment, the Hon. Mrs. Montgomery, at the age of eight-and-twenty, retired
from the world with two lovely boys, and became the inhabitants of a solitary
tower, which was situated in one of the most romantic parts of Scotland. This
tower, which for years had been falling into decay, had often attracted her
observation and attention, when parties of pleasure had been formed from Lord
Macdonald's seat, to view the wonderful water-fall of Coralin, which, dashing
over precipices more than an hundred feet high, was at once an object of wonder
and sublimity.

Lord Macdonald was one of those rigid fathers who falsely imagine that to
obtain respect they must practice austerity, and who, self-conceited of his own
supremacy, would not suffer any part of his family to dispute it. The
unfortunate Lady Macdonald had too often felt the inutility of attempting to
oppose his will, to persevere in a mode of conduct which was always attended
with heartfelt misery, and at length patiently submitted to her Lord's
caprices, without presuming either to repine at their injustice, or murmur at
their severity. In the society of her loved Louisa, she found an antidote for
her distresses, and a balm for her sorrows; and when encircling her lovely form
within her maternal arms, would totally forget her own misfortunes. Beauty,
which ought always to be considered a secondary charm, Louisa possessed in an
eminent degree; but the perfections of her mind infinitely transcended those of
her person; for she was gentle, humane, liberal, and benevolent. The
accomplishments she had acquired were equal to the virtues she possessed, and
Glasgow resounded with the praises of her perfections. Lady Macdonald, proud of
possessing a daughter so deservedly admired, anticipated the hope of seeing her
united to a man who would value her for her merits, and love her for her
virtues.

Far different were the hopes and expectations of her Lord, who, disappointed
in not having an heir to his estate, resolved to marry his daughtet to some man
of high birth, and remote pedigree; that if he could not perpetuate his name,
he might exalt his nobility; and the Marquis of Clyde, a nobleman of immense
possessions and high honors, was the man destined to become the husband of his
beauteous daughter.

Had the marquis possessed one virtue, or acquired one accomplishment, the
gentle Louisa might not have shrunk with such an excess of horror from her
father's proposal; but when she compared the disgusting manners of her future
husband, with the insinuating elegance of her cousin Montgomery, her heart
sickened at the comparison, and she, who had never, in the slightest instance,
presumed to dispute her father's authority, ventured to inform him that she
could never become Marchioness of Clyde.

At this intelligence his rage and indignation were unbounded; and Lady
Macdonald, perceiving that it could never be appeased but by her daughter's
sacrificing her present and future happiness, by an union with a man she
despised, at length gave her consent to a private marriage with the object of
her affection, with whom she immediately left the kingdom, and embarked for
America, where he flattered himself he could live much cheaper than in England.

Ten years of perfect bliss flew rapidly away, in which time the amiable Mrs.
Montgomery became the mother of two lovely boys, and was indulging the hope of
returning to England and obtaining the pardon of her enraged father, when she
was destined to sustain the most heart-rending misfortune; for the object of
her increasing tenderness was suddenly snatched from her by the violence of an
epidemic disease; and it was with the utmost difficulty the lives of her
children were prevented falling a sacrifice to the same fatal disorder.

As soon as Mrs. Montgomery had disposed of her effects at Charlestown,
herself, two children, and a female servant, embarked in the first ship that
was bound for Scotland, where she arrived without the occurrence of any
particular circumstance during the voyage. All her endeavors to trace her
father's residence, or find out his abode, were fruitless; her mind, naturally
inclined to the pensive cast, became habitually melancholy; and the very cool
reception she met with from those persons who had once been proud of her
acquaintance, at length induced her to fix her abode in the romantic situation
I have before described.

Mrs. Montgomery was too tenderly attached to her children to support the idea
of a separation: yet she was convinced that they required more instruction than
she was capable of affording them, (as Malcolm had just entered his eighth, and
Duncan his seventh year) and she, therefore, engaged a young man, who had been
usher in a capital school, as preceptor to them, and had the gratification of
perceiving that both their minds and manners were improved by his talents.

As Mr. Maclean's father and mother resided within twelve miles of the Tower,
he always passed Saturday and Sunday in their society, and returned to his
pupils on the Monday morning; and during his absence Malcolm and his brother
used to amuse shemselves by fishing in the ^^^de, and in visiting the little
hovels of the Scotch peasantry within the vicinity of their mother's dwelling,
to distribute to each some proof of her liberality, and some mark of her
benevolence.

Although nothing could be more opposite than the dispositions of the boys, yet
there never were two brothers who lived in greater harmony, or more readily
sacrificed their own inclinations for the sake of promoting each other's
happiness. Malcolm was grave, studious, and fond of solitude; whilst Duncan was
volatile, inattentive, and delighted in variety; yet as both possessed an
uncommon share of good nature, they had more satisfaction in promoting each
other's pleasures than in the gratification of their own. Duncan would
frequently lament the retired life his mother had made choice of, and
anticipate the happiness he should enjoy when old enough to be sent to the
university of Glasgow, of which his tutor informed him he was intended to
become a member -- whilst Malcolm would declare he had no greater idea of
happiness than what he derived from the society of two persons so tenderly
beloved, in relieving the distresses his fellow creatures, and in admiring the
stupendous works of nature, which were so wonderfully displayed around their
dwelling.

It was Mrs. Montgomery's constant practice to enumerate the qualities of her
lamented husband in the presence of the children, and to inspire them with a
wish of emulating his virtues; but their grandfather's name was never
mentioned, neither had they an idea of his exalted rank. They were early taught
to despise that greatness which could only boast of hereditary distinction, and
to consider superiority of birth as only entitled to respect when it was
attended with superior merit "The benefit of society," she would often say,
"demanded the introduction of subordination; but the human mind, feeling the
influence of its own independence, spurned the bondage of oppressive greatness
-- it may easily he led to bend to power, my beloved boys," said that
intelligent woman; "but it rebels at the bare idea of compulsion. If you would
be loved and respected by your dependants, let your conduct prove to them that
you deserve it; and instead of forcing them to the performance of their duty,
convince them that you are sensible of the services they do you, and in return
endeavor to promote their happiness; by that mode of behavior you will find
their zeal strengthen, their affection increase, and their respect amount
nearly to veneration."

These precepts of kindness and benevolence were made doubly impressive by the
force of example: and nothing but a naturally corrupted mind could have
rendered the two Montgomerys unamiable. Every thing they saw -- every thing
they heard, was ultimately calculated to promote the love of virtue; and though
their mother thought it necessary to convince them that there was such a thing
as vice in the world, yet they would listen to her accounts of its practice,
with an incredulity of countenance that seemed absolutely to indicate a doubt
of its existence.

As his pupils advanced in years, Mr. Maclean saw the necessity of introducing
them into that world of which they must shortly become members, and pointed out
to Mrs. Montgomery the hazard they would run in being placed at college before
they had acquired some knowledge of mankind. "There is as much difference
between books and men, my dear madam," he would say, "as there is between the
inhabitants of one country, and those of another; and it is absolutely
necessary that your sons should become acquainted with both."

Convinced of the propriety of these sentiments, Mrs. Montgomery was resolved
to be guided by them, and taking a small house near the cathedral in Glasgow,
removed thither on the day Malcolm entered his fourteenth year.

Although the boys had accompanied their tutor to Glasgow in two or three
visits which he had paid his brother, (who was one of the canons of that
ancient cathedral) yet their time was so short, that they were unable to
gratify their curiosity by a survey of a place that appeared to abound with
wonders; every thing, therefore, was new; every thing was astonishing; and the
variety of questions which were put to their mother and tutor, proved at once
the simplicity of their minds, and that thirst for information which nature has
implanted for the wisest purpose.

Although it was contrary to Mr. Maclean's interest that his pupils should be
sent to school, yet he strenuously advised Mrs. Montgomery to that mode of
conduct; and at length it was agreed that they should pass their mornings with
Mr. Macnamara, who kept an eminent academy, and the afternoons should be
devoted to receiving the private instruction of Mr. Maclean, whom Mrs.
Montgomery persuaded to remain as part of her family.

Upon entering the school, where not less than ninety boys were assembled,
Malcolm at first felt rather embarassed; but the natural freedom of Duncan's
manners made him perfectly easy upon the occasion. They were soon called up to
be examined by Mr. Macnamara, that he might judge in what class they ought to
be placed; and the perfect ease with which they answered his interrogations,
and their very great forwardness both in the Greek and Latin languages,
procured them not only an eminent situation, but immediate attention from many
boys much bigger than themselves. The facility with which they performed
exercises, and the ease with which they learned their tasks, frequently induced
the other boys to apply to their assistance, and the Montgomerys became
universal favorites.

The first thing that called forth Malcolm's astonishment, and roused his
indignation, was the seeing a boy go to his schoolfellow's desk, and scribble
an exercise all over, which he had just completed, whilst he went to the other
end of the school to deliver a message Mr. Macnamara had sent to one of the
ushers.

"Why have you done that?" said Malcolm to the boy, whose name was Campbell;
"for surely it is a very ill-natured trick." -- "He deserves ten times worse,"
replied the boy; "for he is what we call a larum, and is hated by the whole
school."

"A larum!" said Malcolm, "I don't understand the meaning of the word: but if
he has done you an injury, why don't you resent it openly? surely, that would
be more manly."

"More manly, perhaps;" replied the boy, "but less prudent; for he would
certainly tell the ushers of me, and is too great a coward to fight his own
battles -- and larum's a nickname for tell-tale, and he is the greatest in the
school."

The truth of this account was instantly authenticated by the boy's returning
to the desk, perceiving the mischief that had been done during his absence, and
taking the paper up to his favorite champion the usher, who blustered
violently about the school, and declared he would punish every boy in it,
rather than not discover the author of so malicious a contrivance.

As soon as school was ended, the boys always retired to the play-ground, and
the Montgomerys generally accompanied them; and one morning, after they had
been about ten days members of the society, they were invited by Campbell, to
join him in a scheme of robbing the hot-house of their next door neighbor,
who, though it was only the latter end of spring they were informed had plenty
of ripe fruit.

"Rob his hot-house!" exclaimed Malcolm, scarcely crediting what he heard. --
"What! steal the fruit!" said Duncan, in equal amazement; "why do you know you
run the hazard of being hanged; and besides, that it is breaking the eighth
commandment."

"Breaking the eighth fiddlestick," replied Campbell; "I tell ye what, when you
have known old Sanderson as long as I have, you will not think of the eighth or
the ninth commandment either; for he is always telling our master some tale
about the boys, and has had five or six severely flogged; it is not that we
want the fruit, only we know the old dog prides himself upon it, and has saved
it all for a grand feast which he is going to give the heads of the college
tomorrow -- so come, and be enlisted, and make one of our party,"

'Twas in vain for Malcolm or Duncan to remonstrate; for the plan was arranged
in spite of all the arguments that either their fears or their principles
suggested, and they went home to dinner, shocked at such an instance of early
depravity. Malcolm was peculiarly grave, and Duncan seemed to have lost his
wonted spirits. Pained at observing this sudden change, Mrs. Montgomery
tenderly inquired into the cause, but could not obtain any satisfactory reply:
at length being earnestly pressed by their indulgent mother, they revealed it,
declaring they could never be happy at school if the boys were in the habit of
acting with so little principle.

Mrs. Montgomery applauded their sentiments, but gave them to understand, that
the wanton pranks of an unthinking boy deserved not the severe epithet of want
of principle: and at the same time told them, that retaliation ought to be a
school-boy's motto, for that they made it a rule never to suffer an injury
without returning it with fourfold interest.

"But pray, mamma," said Duncan, "is not that very wicked?" -- "I should, for
their sakes, my love," replied Mrs. Montgomery, "hope it is not very wicked,
though it certainly must be allowed to be very wrong; but a school-boy's vices
generally proceed from want of reflection, and are therefore much more
excusable than a premeditated crime."

The boys had arranged their plan with so much method, and executed it with so
much skill, that the whole hot-house was stripped of its contents, and two of
the finest apricots were the next day presented to the Montgomerys, who
strenuously refused the offer, alleging, that as they were not sharers in the
danger, they had no reason to be partakers of its reward -- though in fact
their real reason was, that they considered them as stolen goods, and were
resolved not to share them.

Just as school was ended, and the boys had entered the play-ground, Mr.
Macnamara's servant passed, "Well! what is the best news with you, Thomas?" said
one of them. -- "I know of none that is good," replied the fellow. -- "Do you
know of any that is bad?" said the same boy. -- "Yes, bad enough, Sir; for poor
Ben, Dr. Sanderson's gardener, has been taken up, on suspicion of having robbed
his master's hot-house, and sold the fruit."

Campbell, who had just joined them as this intelligence was communicated,
turned as pale as death, and catching Malcolm by the arm, led him away to
another part of the play-ground, and asked his advice how he ought to act.
Thomas's intelligence soon spread, and before Malcolm could give his opinion,
the three other boys who had been concerned in the theft, joined Campbell in
equal trepidation.

One was for sending by a porter a sufficient sum of money to pay for the
fruit, with a letter to the old doctor, assuring him of his servant's
innocence. Another was for soliciting a friend to go to the justice who had
committed the gardner, and get him on their side; and a third was of opinion
that his father would take the man to live with him as soon as he was out of
confinement, and that they might easily make up money enough between them for
the purpose of supporting him comfortably whilst he was in prison -- but all
these plans Malcolm disapproved, and advised them to wait upon the old man,
acknowledge the crime, and entreat the poor gardner might immediately be
liberated. This was at first opposed, and all declared they would as soon face
a tiger.

At length it was agreed that Mr. Macnamara should be made acquainted with the
whole affair, and Malcolm was entreated to undertake the office. Every thing
that could be said in mitigation of the crime he thought of saying, and Mr.
Macnamara heard him with much more calmness than had been expected. He ordered
the boys into close confinement, and then waited immediately upon his crabbed
neighbor, who insisted that all the boys that had been concerned in the theft,
should immediately be expelled. That demand Mr. Macnamara informed him could
not be complied with, but he promised they should all be severely punished. --
Upon finding he could not have the satisfaction he demanded, the old man began
abusing the schoolmaster, declaring he was an incendiary, and had actually
been at the bottom of the plan.

This unmerited impertinence provoked Mr. Macnamara so completely, that he
protested he would not punish a single boy in the school, and, returning home,
gave them immediate liberty; but desired them all to assemble in the school. He
there entered into a long dissertation, first upon the crime, and next upon the
meanness of robbing gardens and orchards; and after expatiating near half an
hour upon the subject, he promised to forgive the recent outrage that had been
committed, on condition that every boy in the school would make a solemn
promise never to be guilty of such a thing again.

"I promise! -- I promise! -- I promise!" -- was vociferated from every part of
the room, and three cheers were given to the liberal-minded superior as he rose
to quit it.

Time rolled rapidly away, and each day Mrs. Montgomery had the happiness of
observing that her sons acquired fresh knowledge. They had been at the school
upwards of a twelvemonth, when their mother determined to pass the summer
vacation in her favorite Tower, as she had left some furniture in it, and an
old woman whom her benevolence supported, to take care of it.

The boys were delighted to retrace the haunts of their early days, and even
Mr. Maclean was pleased at the new arrangement. He still adopted his former
plan of spending Saturday with his parents; and as Saturday was fixed for Mrs.
Montgomery's departure from Glasgow, it was determined that he should follow on
the Monday morning.

When Mrs. Montgomery first returned from America, her liberal mind endured
several severe mortifications from the cool indifference with which she was
received by the very people who courted her acquaintance when she appeared as
the heiress of a nobleman of distinction; but when that nobleman had publicly
declared his intention of leaving every sixpence of his fortune to a distant
relation, who was to inherit his title, his daughter was then considered as a
weak, infatuated young woman, who had justly exasperated her father by an
alliance every way degrading to a girl of high rank; and the reception they
gave her at once proved their disapprobation of her conduct, and their wish of
dropping all further acquaintance. This illiberal mode of behavior was Mrs.
Montgomery's first inducement to make choice of a solitude where she would
neither be subject to the coldness of the interested, or the impertinence of
the arrogant; and though she had never visited any of the families during the
twelve months she had resided at Glasgow, yet she returned to her favorite
spot with sensations of joy, pleasure, and tranquillity.

Lord Macdonald, who, after the death of his amiable wife, found the family
mansion gloomy, dreary, and uncomfortable, resolved to endeavor amusing his
mind by variety of scenes, and change of place: but, still preserving an
inveterate hatred against his daughter, resolved to keep his intention secret
from every creature except his banker, who, true to the trust reposed in him,
protested ignorance of his lordship's motions whenever he was applied to by his
anxious and still affectionate daughter.

This banker, upon Lord Macdonald's return, informed him of the inquiries which
had been made, and also of Mrs. Montgomery's present abode, and said every
thing in his power to promote a reconciliation, though without effect.

As there was a great quantity of timber upon his Lordship's estate which he
wished to dispose of, it was necessary for him personally to give directions;
and to prevent the possibility of his daughter's knowing he was in that part of
the world, he resolved to travel unattended in a hired carriage, and quit
Scotland us soon as he had given the necessary orders. This resolution he put
in practice a few days before Mrs. Montgomery removed to her favorite Tower:
and as the two boys had rambled a great distance from it, and were climbing a
barren rock for the purpose of beholding distant objects, they plainly
discovered, by the help of a telescope, (which they always carried in their
pocket) a post-chaise lying broken in the high road, from which they were about
a mile distant.

Curiosity, or perhaps a better motive, induced them immediately to descend,
and make the best of their way to the spot where the accident had happened; but
no person was remaining near it to give them the information they were so
anxious to obtain. A quantity of blood was lying in the road, and by that they
traced the unfortunate person who had met with the accident to a miserable
hovel about two hundred yards distant.

As soon as they entered this wretched hut, which was merely composed of stones
and dirt, they beheld a venerable looking man, about sixty, supported in the
arms of a forlorn female, whilst the blood was fast issuing from a wound he had
received in the temple.

"Ye hae came in guide time, my bonny lads," cried the woman; "for my heart
seekens at the sight of blude, and Sandy's gane to fetch the doctor." So
saying, she laid the apparently dying man upon the earth floor, and walked into
the air to recover her sickness.

Malcolm took the handkerchief out of his pocket, and bound it tight round the
stranger's head, whilst Duncan snatched up a wooden bowl, and drew some water
from a neighboring well, with which they plentifully sprinkled the poor man's
face, who in a few moments opened his eyes, and in a tone of faintness and
astonishment exclaimed -- "Where am I? What has been the matter? And why am I
reduced to this forlorn situation?" -- The two boys soon explained every thing,
and expressed a desire that he could be removed to their mamma's abode.

"Removed!" said the stranger, "Oh that I never shall be! I feel -- I feel," he
continued, "that this will be my death stroke; but I deserve it. Oh, my child!
could you know the situation of your wretched father, you would think him
punished for all his severity!"

"Child:" repeated Malcolm: "Oh, Sir! do tell us where to find any of your
connexions, and I Would run twenty miles to bring them to you." "We had better run
home and tell mamma," said Duncan: "for you know she always keeps medicines by
her for the poor people, and I dare say she can do the gentleman a great deal
of good."

"Do something, for heaven's sake!" replied the unfortunate man, "or I shall
die; for I am incapable of moving any part of my body, and believe every bone
in my skin is broken." Duncan did not require twice telling, but flew out of
the house directly, leaving his brother to watch by the stranger's side. As his
senses returned, his agony increased, and his groans and complainings drew
tears of sympathy from his humane companion.

In less than an hour Duncan returned, followed by Mrs. Montgomery, and a
female attendant laden with cordials, medicines, and embrocations.

The suffering stranger was still lying upon the floor, with his head raised by
a bundle of coarse rags, when Mrs. Montgomery entered, and caught a glance of
his pallid countenance. "My father!" she exclaimed, "my beloved father! and is
it thus we meet?"

Roused by the sound of her well-known voice, he faintly articulated, "Oh my
child!" -- At this interesting moment the doctor appeared, whom Jenny's husband
had been to fetch, and examining his patient, said the shoulder was dislocated,
and two ribs broken; but that when those were set, he might safely be removed
to Mrs. Montgomery's dwelling; a litter was accordingly prepared, and his
Lordship placed carefully upon it, and in about three hours the cavalcade
arrived at the Tower. The excess of agony was so great, that a violent fever
was the consequence, and his Lordship's life was absolutely despaired of.

During that period, his daughter watched him with unwearied attention and
filial tenderness, and never left his bedside for a moment but to obtain that
repose which wearied nature absolutely required.

Lord Macdonald, at length sensible of his daughter's merits, and shocked at
reflecting upon his own severity, sent for an attorney, and made every
reparation in his power by leaving her heiress to his immense property,
imagining it impossible he could ever recover. In that, however, he was
mistaken; for his fever suddenly abated, the wound on his temple healed, and
the dissevered bones perfectly united.

As soon as his Lordship was able to bear company, his grandsons were
introduced into his presence; and whilst he bestowed upon them the fondest
caresses, he could not help regretting his inability to give them his name and
title.

At the moment when his feelings were softened by disease, and his mind subdued
by tenderness, intelligence arrived of the death of that relation who must have
inherited the estate and title, and he resolved to solicit his sovereign to
permit it to descend to his eldest grandson.

The boon was immediately granted, and a patent rapidly made out for Malcolm
Montgomery, to take the name of Macdonald.

That amiable and deserving boy, instead of being elated by this prospect of
future greatness, thought himself called upon to set a pattern of virtue, and
was ten times more circumspect in his conduct than when he thought himself a
mere private gentleman.

His attentions were equally divided between his mother and grandfather, who
resided together at the family seat. Once a year they constantly revisited the
Tower, and wandered over scenes which recollection made dear to them. The
neighboring poor were cherished and supported, and the gratification the boys
experienced in being enabled to extend their charity, was of that
heart-cheering kind which is only to be conceived by the truly benevolent.

THE FRUITS OF DISOBEDIENCE; OR, THE KIDNAPPED CHILD.
IN a beautiful villa, on the banks of the Medway, resided a gentleman whose
name was Darnley, who had, during the early part of life, filled a post of some
importance about the court, and even in its decline, preserved that elegance of
manner which so peculiarly marks a finished gentleman. The loss of a beloved
wife had given a pensive cast to his features, and a seriousness to his
deportment, which many people imagined proceeded from a haughtiness of
disposition; yet nothing could be farther from Mr. Darnley's character; for he
was affable, gentle, benevolent, and humane.

His family consisted of an only sister, who, like himself, had lost the object
of her tenderest affection; but who, in dividing her attention between her
brother and his amiable children, endeavored to forget her own misfortunes.

Mr. Darnley's fortune was sufficiently great to have enabled him to place his
daughters in the first school in London, but he preferred having them under his
immediate instruction; and as Mrs. Collier offered to assist him in their
education, he resolved for some years not to engage a governess, as Nurse
Chapman was one of those worthy creatures to whose care he could securely trust
them.

An old friend of Mr. Darnley's had (...) bought a house at Rochester, (...)
gentleman and his sister were (...) pass a few days there: and as (...) rather
too big for the nurse's (...) Mrs. Collier resolved to (...) party, leaving
Sophia, (...), under that good (...).

It (...) wish that the young (...) rise early, and take a long (...) morning
before breakfast; (...) strictly ordered never to go beyond their own grounds,
unless their aunt or father accompanied them. This order they had frequently
endeanoured to persdade Nurse Chapman to disregard; but faithful to the trust
reposed in her, she always resisted their urgent entreaties.

The morning after Mr. Darnley went to Rochester, the poor woman found herself
thoroughly indisposed, and wholly incapable of rising at the accustomed hour.
The children, however, were dressed for walking, and the nurse-maid charged not
to beyond the shrubbery, and they all sallied out in high good humor.

"Now, Susan," said Sophia (as soon as they entered the garden) "this is the
only opportunity you may ever have (...) obliging us; do let us walk the
villag^ (...) then you know you can call and (...) father and mother."

"Law, Miss!" replied (...) you know it is as much (...) is worth if Nurse
Chapm^^ (...) it out."

"Find it out, indeed (...); "how do you think she (...) out? Come do let us
go, the (...), good creature," -- "Yes, dea^ (...), do let us go," said Eliza,
(skipping on before them) "and I Will show you the way: for I walked there last
summer with papa."

Whether it was the wish of obliging the young ladies, or the desire of seeing
her parents, I cannot pretend to say; but in a luckless hour Susan yielded, and
the party soon reached the village.

Susan's mother was delighted at seeing her, and highly honored by the young
ladies' presence. "Oh sweet, dear creatures!" said the old woman, "I must get
something for them to eat after their long walk, and my oven's quite hot, and I
can bake them a little cake in a quarter of an hour, and I Will milk Jenny in ten
minutes." -- The temptation of hot cake and new milk was not to be withstood;
and Susan began taking down some smart china cups, which were arranged in form
upon the mantle-piece, and carefully dusted them for the young ladies' use.

Eliza followed the old woman into the cow-house, and began asking a thousand
questions, when her attention was suddenly attracted by the appearance of a
ta^e lamb, who went bleating up to its ^^stress, with a view of asking it is
accustomed breakfast.

"You must wait a little, Billy," said the woman, "and let your better's be
sarved before you -- don't you see that we have got gentlefolks to breakfast
with us this morning?"

Eliza was so delighted with the beauty of the little animal, that she wanted
to kiss it, and attempted to restrain it for that purpose, whilst Billy,
ungrateful for her intended kindness, gave a sudden spring and frisked away.
Eliva followed, in hopes of being able to catch him, but he ran baaing along
into the high road.

A woman, whose appearance was descriptive of poverty, but whose smiling
countenance indicated good nature, at that moment happened to pass, and
accosting Eliza in a tone of familiarity, said, "That Is not half such a pretty
lamb, Miss, as I have got at home, and not a quarter so tame; for if you did
but say Bob, he would follow you from one end of the town to the other; and then
he will fetch and carry like a dog, stand up on his hind legs, when my husband
says up for the thing, and play more tricks than a young kitt^^"

"Oh, the pretty creaturel" rep^^^^ Eliza, "how I should like to see it!"

"Well, come along with me, Mi^^ said the woman, "for I only lives (...) across
the next field; but you must run as hard as you can, because my husband is
going to work, and he generally takes Bob with him."

"Well, make haste then," said Eliza; "for I must not stay half a minute." --
"Give me your hand, Miss," replied the woman; "for we can run faster together;
but there goes my husband, I declare: and there is Bob as usual skipping on
before."

"Where? where?" exclaimed Eliza, stretching out her little neck as far as she
possibly could, to see if she could discern the lamb. "You are not tall
enough," said the artful creature; "but let me lift you up, Miss, and then I
dare say you will see them; and instantly catching her up, she cried out, "look
directly toward the steeple, Miss; but I Will run with you in my arms, and I Will
warrant we'll soon overtake them."

Eliza looked, but looked in vain; and perceiving the woman had soon carried
her out of sight of the cottage, begged she would set her down, as she dare not
go any farther.

The vile creature was absolutely incabable of replying, for her breath was
^early exhausted by the rapidity of the motion, and Eliza continued entreating
her to stop, and struggled violently to elude her grasp. At length, after a
quarter of an hour's exertion, the woman found herself incapable of proceeding,
and stopped suddenly, sat down on a bank, keeping tight hold of Eliza's arm,
who cried dreadfully, and besought her to let her go.

"Let you go!" she replied; "what, after all the plague I Have had to knab you?
No, no, you don't catch me at that, I promise you; but be a good girl, and
don't cry, and then you may see Bob by and by, perhaps."

"Oh, my sister's! my sister's! let me go to my sister's!" cried the child. --

"I Will find plenty of sister's for you, in a few days," said the vile creature;
"but they will not know you in them there fine clothes, so let us pull them off in
a minute, and then we'll have another race after Bob." So saying, she stripped
off the white frock, hat, and tippet; the rest of the things shared the same
fate, and she was compelled to put on some old rags, which the inhuman creature
took out of a bag she carried under her petticoat: then taking a bottle of
liquid from the same place, she instantly began washing poor Eliza's face with
it, and notwithstanding all her remonstrances, cut her beautiful hair close to
her head. Thus metamorphosed, it would have been impossible even for Mr.
Darnley to have known his child, and they proceeded onwards until her little
legs would carry her no farther.

At this period they were overtaken by the Canterbury wagon, and for a mere
trifle the driver consented to let them ride to London. Eliza's tears continued
to flow, but she dare not utter a complaint, as her inhuman companion protested
she would break every bone in her skin, if she ventured to make the least noise.

When they arrived in town she was dragged (for walk she was unable) to a
miserable hole down several steps, where they gave her some bread and butter to
eat, and then desired her to go to bed. The bed, if such it might be called,
was little else than a bundle of rags thrown into a corner of the room with a
dirty blanket spread across it, and there she was left by her inhuman seducer
to mourn her misfortune, and lament having disregarded her papa's injunctions.
The next morning she was forced to rise the moment it was light, and to walk as
far as her little legs would carry her before they stopped any where to take
any refreshment. The next night was passed in a barn, and about five o'clock
the third afternoon they knocked at the door of a neat looking cottage, where
nine or ten children were sitting in a little room making lace.

"Why, Peggy," said the woman, as she opened the door, "I thought you never
would have comed again! however, I see you have got me a hand at last, and God
knows I Am enough in want of her; for two of my brats have thought proper to
fall sick, and I Have more to do than ever I had in my life." -- On the following
day Eliza's filthy rags were all taken off, and she was dressed in a tidy brown
stuff gown, a nice clean round-eared cap, and a little colored bib and apron;
and she was ordered, if any person asked her name, to say it was Biddy Bullen,
and that she was niece to the woman who employed her. The severity with which
all this wretch's commands were enforced, wholly prevented any of the helpless
victims who were under her protection from daring to disobey them; and though
most of them were placed under her care by the same vile agent who had decoyed
Eliza, yet they all were tutored to relate similar untruths.

But I now think it is high time to carry my little readers back to the cottage
scene, where Susan was arranging things in order for breakfast, and Sophia and
her sister were anxiously watching the moment when the cake was pronounced
completely ready.

The old woman soon returned with the milk pail on her arm, and Susan eagerly
demanded, "Where Is Miss Eliza?" -- "Oh, the pretty creature," replied her
mother, "she will be here in a minute, I warrant her; but she is gone skipping
after our Billy, and two sweet innocents they are together." -- She then went
to the oven, produced the cake, and began buttering it with all expedition,
whilst Sophia joyously ran to the door of the cow-house, and began loudly
calling her sister Eliza. No answer being returned, Susan began to feel
alarmed, but the young ladies told her not to be frightened, as they knew it
was only one of Eliza's pranks. But, alas! too soon were they convinced it was
no joke, but that some dreadful misfortune must have happened.

"Miss Eliza! Miss Eliza!" was vociferated through the village, not only by
Susan and her mother, but by all the neighbors who had heard of the calamity,
whilst her sisters ran about frantic with grief, crying, "Eliza, my love! my
darling! Oh! if you are hid, for pity's sake speak!"

Nurse Chapman got up about half past nine, and hearing the children were not
returned from their walk, sent the housemaid directly after them.

The garden, the shrubbery, and the lawn, were all searched without success;
and just as Betty was returning to inform the nurse they were not to be found,
she perceived Susan and the two children enter a little green gate at the
bottom of the shrubbery.

"Where Is Miss Eliza?" called Betty, in a voice as loud as she could articulate.

"God knows! God knows!" replied the careless girl, sobbing so loud she could
scarcely speak. "How! Where! When!" said the other -- "Why poor nurse will go
quite stark, staring mad!" By that time the poor woman had quitted her room,
and walked into the garden to see what had become of her little charges; and
not directly missing Eliza from the group which were then fast approaching
toward the house, she called out, "Come, my dear children, come along; for I
thought you would never have returned again;" -- and observing Eliza was not
with them, she continued; "But, Susan, what is become of my sweet bird? Where Is
my little darling, Miss Eliza?"

"Oh, nurse! nurse!" said Sophia, "my sister's lost! indeed she is lost!"

"Lost!" exclaimed the poor old woman; "lost! what do you tell me? What do I
hear? Oh, my master! my dear master! never shall I bear to see his face again!"

Susan then repeated every circumstance just as has been related, and with
sighs and tears bewailed her own folly, in suffering herself to be
over-persuaded. And the children declared they dare not encounter their papa's
displeasure!

The men servants were instantly summoned and sent on horseback different ways.
That she had been stolen, admitted of no doubt, as there was no water near the
cottage, and had any accident happened, they must have found her, as they had
searched every part of the village before they ventured to return home.

One servant was sent to Rochester, another toward London, and a third and
fourth across the country roads; but no intelligence could be obtained, or the
slightest information gathered, by which the unfortunate child could be found,
or her wicked decoyer's footsteps traced.

When Mr. Darnley was apprised of the calamitous event, the agitation of his
mind may be easily conceived, but can never be described. Hand-bills were
instantly circulated all over the country, the child's person described, and a
reward of five hundred guineas offered for her restoration.

Sophia and Amanda were inconsolable, and Susan was ordered to be discharged
before Mr. Darnley returned home, which he did not do for more than a month
after the melancholy circumstance happened, as he was not satisfied with
sending messengers in pursuit of his lost treasure, but went himself to all
those wretched parts of London where poverty and vice are known to dwell, in
the hope of meeting the object of his solicitude; and at length gave up the
interesting pursuit because he found his health rendered him incapable of
continuing it.

Nine tedious months passed away without any intelligence of the lost Eliza;
and time, which is a general remedy for all misfortunes, had not softened the
severity of their affliction. Mrs. Collier had engaged a lady to be governess
to her nieces, as her attention had been wholly devoted to her unfortunate
brother, whose agitated state of mind had produced a bodily complaint, which
demanded her unremitting care and tenderness.

Although Emily loved Eliza with the fondest affection, yet her grief was much
less poignant than either of her sisters, as she could not accuse herself of
being accessory to her loss. "Never, never shall I forgive myself," Sophia
would often say, "for having deviated from my dear papa's commands! Oh, so good
and indulgent is he to us, how wicked it was to transgress his will. I was the
eldest, and ought to have known better, and the poor Eliza is the sufferer for
my crime!" Thus would she bewail her folly and imprudence, until, agonized by
the torture of her own reflections, she would sink down in a chair quite
exhausted, and burst into a flood of tears.

While the family at Darnley-hall were thus a prey to unavailing sorrow, the
lovely little girl, who had occasioned it, was beginning to grow more
reconciled to the cruelty of her destiny, and to support her different mode of
life with resignation and composure. She had acquired such a degree of skill in
the art of lace-making, (which was the business her employer followed) as
generally to be able to perform the tasks which were allotted her, and if it so
happened she was incapable of doing it, Sally Butchell, a child about two years
older than herself, of whom she was very fond, was always kind enough to
complete it for her.

The cottage in which the vile Mrs. Bullen resided, was situated about a
quarter of a mile from High Wycombe; and whenever she was obliged to go to that
place either to purchase necessaries, or to dispose of her goods, she always
went either before her family were up, or after they had retired to rest,
locking the door constantly after her, and putting the key in her pocket; so
that the poor little souls had no opportunity of telling their misfortunes to
any human creature.

One intense hot afternoon, in the month of August, as the children were
sitting hard at work with the door open for the sake of air, an elderly lady
and gentleman came up to it, and begged to be accommodated with a seat,
informing Mrs. Bullen their carriage had broke down about a mile distant, and
they had been obliged to walk in the heat of the sun.

The appearance of so many children, all industriously employed, was a sight
peculiarly pleasing to the liberal minded Mrs. Montague, and she immediately
began asking the woman several questions about them; but there was something of
confusion in her manner of replying, that called forth Mrs. Montague's surprise
and astonishment.

"They really are lovely children, my dear," said she, "turning to Mr.
Montague, who had stood at the door watching the approach of the carriage,
which he perceived coming forward: "and as to that little creature, with the
mole under it is left eye, I declare I think it a perfect beauty." Mr. Montague
turned his head, and regarded Eliza with a look that at once proved that his
sentiments corresponded with those of his lady.

"What is your name, my love?" said he, in a tone of kindness which poor Eliza
had long been a stranger to. The child colored like scarlet, and looked
immediately at her inhuman employer, who catching the contagion, replied with
evident marks of confusion. "Her name is Biddy Bullen, Sir: she is my niece: but
it is a poor, timid, little fool, and is always in fright when gentlefolks
happen to speak to her: go, Biddy," she continued, "go up into my bed-room, and
wind that thread which you will find upon the reel."

"You should try to conquer that timidity," said Mr. Montague, "by making her
answer every stranger who speaks to her: but by taking that office upon
yourself, you absolutely encourage the shyness you complain of. Come hither, my
little girl," continued he, observing she was retiring up stairs, "and tell me
boldly what your name is."

Encouraged by the kindness of Mr. Montague's address, the agitated child
obeyed the summons, although Mrs. Bullen attempted to frown her into
resistance. "Well," continued the old gentleman, patting her on the cheek, "and
where did you get that pretty mole?"

"My mamma gave it me, Sir," replied the blushing child; "but I did not see her
do it, because Nurse Chapman told me she went to heaven as soon as I was born."

"Your mamma! and what was your mamma's name? said Mr. Montague.

"Darnley, Sir," said the child, and suddenly recollecting the lesson that had
been taught her, "but my name is Biddy Bullen, and that is my aunt."

"Darnley!" exclaimed Mrs. Montague: "the very child that has been for these
twelve months past advertised in all the papers:" then turning to convince
herself of the fact, "and the very mole confirms it!"

Mr. Montague immediately attempted to secure the woman, but her activity
eluded his grasp, and darting out at the back door, she was out of sight in a
few moments.

"Is she really gone? Is she really gone?" all the little voices at once
demanded -- and upon Mr. Montague assuring them she was really gone forever,
their joy broke out in a thousand different ways -- some cried -- some laughed
-- and others jumped. In short, there never was a scene more completely
calculated to interest the feelings of a benevolent heart.

Mr. Montague's carriage at this period arrived, and the footman was desired to
fetch a magistrate from Wycombe, whilst the worthy clergyman resolved to remain
there until his arrival, and began questioning all the children. Two had been
there from so early a period, that they could give no account of their name or
origin; but all the rest was so clear in their description, that the benevolent
Mr. Montague had no doubt of being able to restore them to their afflicted
parents.

The magistrate soon arrived, attended by the worthy rector of the place, who
hearing from Mr. Montague's servant that a child had been stolen, came with an
intent of offering his services. All but Eliza were immediately put under his
protection, but Mrs. Montague was so anxious she should be their earliest care,
that she begged her husband to order a post-chaise directly, and set off
immediately for town. This request was willingly complied with, and by three
o'clock the next afternoon the party arrived at Darnley-hall.

Mrs. Collier was standing at the window when the carriage stopped, and looking
earnestly at her niece, suddenly exclaimed, in a tone of rapture, "My child! My
child! My lost Eliza!"

Mr. Darnley, who was reading, sprang from his seat, and flew to the door in an
extacy of joy; in less than a minute he returned, folding his Eliza to his
throbbing heart! -- The joyful intelligence ran through the house, and the
other children impatiently flew to this scene of transport. To describe their
feelings, or express their felicity, would require the aid of the most
descriptive pen, and even then would be but faintly told; and therefore had
much better be passed over.

From that moment the children all unanimously agreed strictly to attend to
their father's orders, and never in the slightest instance act in opposition to
his will.

Mr. and Mrs. Montague were laden with caresses, and earnestly entreated to
remain Mr. Darnley's guests. The hospitable invitation would have been gladly
accepted, had not the thoughts of the poor children, who were still at Wycombe,
seemed to claim his immediate attention; and so great was the philanthropy of
Mr. Montague's character, that he could never rest satisfied if a single duty
remained unfulfilled.

A CURE FOR SATIRE; OR, THE DANGER OF RIDICULE.
PERCY PRIORY, the seat of a worthy baronet of that name, was situated at a
short distance from Bath, and from its vicinity to that scene of dissipation,
was generally crowded with a variety of guests, who were either attracted
thither by the ties of friendship, or the force of hospitality; for as there
were no children to inherit an ample fortune, Sir Edward thought himself at
liberty to dispose of it in a manner best suited to his disposition and
inclination.

Although he was not a brilliant, he was a most amiable character, and the
practice of virtue more than compensated for the want of greatness. His
fondness for children was excessive, and his disappointment at not becoming a
father was at first rather severe; but after having lamented the circumstance
five and twenty years, he was unexpectedly gratified by the birth of a little
girl, whose peculiar beauty was so extremely striking, that it was impossible
to behold it without admiration.

The happiness which had for so many years subsisted between Sir Edward and
Lady Percy, seemed so perfect, that nothing could increase it; but the
appearance of the little stranger soon convinced them it was capable of being
augmented. A circumstance which gave Sir Edward so much joy, he was resolved
should not pass uncommemorated; and as soon as her ladyship was recovered, an
universal invitation was sent to all the peasantry round the Priory, to partake
of a rural fete champetre, prepared solely for themselves, where they were
regaled with an excellent dinner, a supper, and a dance, and at their departure
each was presented with a new half guinea.

During the period of Amanda's infancy, Lady Percy confined herself wholly to
her mansion, which, as Sir Edward was fond of society, was crowded with a
succession of fresh company, to all of whom the doting father presented his
little treasure, under the fictitious name of his Euphrosyne. The name of one
of the Graces.


The beauty of the child was of that striking nature, that it was impossible to
behold it without admiration; but the too partial fondness of its worthy
parents threatened destruction to its future peace; for they were alike
incapable of correcting or controlling, and the most extravagant of her wishes
were immediately complied with. The servants were taught to obey her mandates
with an alacrity never wished for by themselves; and a tear or a sigh from her
absolutely seemed to agonize their hearts.

Her understanding was quick, and her ideas were correct; but she had a natural
propensity for ridicule, which her too doting parents always encouraged rather
than reproved; for her liveliness pleased, her wit charmed, and her father
perfectly delighted in them.

Mrs. Ann Mordant, the only sister of Lady Percy, arrived at the Priory on the
day her niece attained her fourth year, and was absolutely captivated with her
personal charms; but a few short hours soon wearied out her fondness, and she
totally forgot the child was handsome. She easily perceived she was ruined by
indulgence, and was grieved that a temper naturally sweet, frank and open,
should become fretful, turbulent, and untoward.

Mrs. Mordant, lamenting the error of her sister's conduct, besought her
earnestly to change it, and Lady Percy beginning to feel the effect, of her own
imprudence, promised to be guided by her sister's counsel, and begin a
reformation on the following day.

At an early hour the next morning, Mrs. Mordant was roused by a most
unpleasant and unusual noise, and ringing her bell to inquire the occasion of
it, was informed, as the morning was rainy, Miss Percy had chosen to have her
little chaise driven up and down the gallery, and that the noise proceeded from
the footman's running with it.

"Tell my sister," says Mrs. Mordant, "I beg the child may be immediately taken
out, or I shall absolutely be unnerved for a week. Did ever mortal hear of such
indulgence?"

The servant carried the message, convinced in her own mind it would not be
attended to, as she had known much more extravagant things than that, not only
permitted, but applauded, and was extremely astonished at seeing her lady slip
on her dressing gown and go to the child.

"That noise, my dear Amanda," said her mother, "affects your aunt's head this
morning; if you will come out, my love, for half an hour, you shall ride again as
soon as she is up."

"No, no," replied the child: "I must ride now; drive away, Thomas, drive away;
I Am going to Bath, mamma, to buy some pretty things."

"You shall buy them presently, my angel," continued Lady Percy, attempting to
take her gently from the chaise; but a violent scream soon checked the sudden
impulse, and brought the frightened father to the scene.

"What are they doing to my little angel?" he exclaimed, in a voice that proved
his fears and apprehension.

"Mamma will not let me ride," said she, pouting her lip and putting on her frown.
-- Lady Percy was then under the necessity not only of repeating her sister's
message, but explaining the conversation which had passed the preceding
evening, the justness of which Sir Edward could not but allow, though he found
himself unable to be guided by her counsel.

As there was no possibility of getting the child ont of the carriage without
her screams being much more likely to disturb, than the noise of it. Lady Percy
ordered the servants to strip the beds immediately of their blankets, and
spread them thick along the gallery; and as the novelty of the circumstance
happened to recommend it, Amanda consented to the adoption of the plan, and she
had enjoyed her ride about a quarter of an hour, when the door opened, and Mrs.
Mordant entered.

Both Sir Edward and Lady Percy were completely embarassed at the proof she saw
of their too partial folly, and stammering out some awkward excuse, they
declared their child too timid for subjection.

Mrs. Mordant, who had plainly perceived that timidity made no part of her
niece's character, expostulated with them upon the error of their plan, and
conjured them to permit her to try her ascendancy upon the occasion, and
without waiting their reply, desired the servant to stop the carriage; when
going up to the child, she took her tenderly by the hand, and inquired if she
would accompany her into her dressing room.

"No," replied Amanda, "I cannot go with you, because I Am driving to Bath to buy
some pretty things for the new doll you bought me." -- "But you should always
do what you are asked," said Mrs. Mordant, "or you will find, when you request
a favor, no one will be inclined to gratify it; and I would never love a
disobliging child."

"Papa and mamma will always love me though, and that is best, and so I shall
not care; but drive on, Thomas, or we shall not be back to breakfast." -- Mrs.
Mordant desired the servant to desist, and taking her forcibly from out the
chaise, carried her into her own room, notwithstanding her kicks, screams, and
violence.

Restriction of any kind was so entirely new, that it was not likely she would
receive it with composure; but as soon as she was quiet enough to listen to
conversation, her aunt informed her she would tell her a little story, if she
would kiss her, and acknowledge she had been wrong; and the child instantly
wiped her eyes, put up her little mouth, and owned she had been a very naughty
girl.

The liveliness of Mrs. Mordant's imagination easily supplied her with a proper
subject, and she worked up a little affecting tale, calculated to make an
impression on her niece's heart, the heroine of which was introduced of the
same age with herself, who from being indulged in all the little caprices she
required, became both turbulent and proud, and made her parents so completely
wretched, that they were unable to support the weight of their afflictions, and
both fell victims to her violence, at a time of life when she most wanted their
protection and support.

The wonderful effect which the little tale instantaneously made upon Amanda's
feelings, convinced her aunt that she would become as amiable as she was
lovely, under any tuition but her parents; and entreated them immediately to
let her have a governess; but notwithstanding they had both a very high opinion
of Mrs. Mordant's judgment, they could not bear the idea of their child being
subject to control at an age they thought too early to receive it, and by that
mistaken proof of fondness, they suffered those habits, which might then have
easily been conquered, to obtain an ascendancy which at a future period it was
very difficult to surmount.

During the month Mrs. Mordant remained at the Priory, she had several quarrels
with her little niece; but a story applicable to the subject which had
occasioned it, always produced a harmony between them; and though she was the
only person who opposed her inclination, yet the child became really attached
to her.

Soon after Amanda had entered her ninth year, Sir Edward Percy was taken
extremely ill, and even his daughter's cheerfulness became fatiguing; and as
Lady Percy spent a great deal of time in her husband's apartment, it was at
length determined to send the child to school, as the widow of an officer, a
most accomplished woman, had just opened a seminary for young ladies at Bath.

The few restrictions which Amanda had met with, for some time rendered the
discipline of a school extremely irksome; but as Mrs. Dawson's manners were
both soft and gentle, she soon became completely reconciled, and improved daily
both in mind and manners.

Amongst the number of boarders in Mrs. Dawson's school was a young lady of the
name of Blisset, whose father having amassed a large fortune by the slop trade
in London, retired to Bath to forget his own insignificance, and by making an
ostentatious display of the greatness of his wealth, acquire the title of a
gentleman. This girl, who happened to be about two years older than Amanda,
possessed all her failings without any of her virtues; for to liveliness and
wit, were united cunning and duplicity, and to a tolerably good temper, a very
bad heart.

It has been before observed, that from her earliest childhood, Amanda
testified a turn for ridicule; and as Miss Blisset was a professed mimic, she
required no other recommendation to her favor; and in less than six months
they were professed friends. Mrs. Dawson, the teachers, the masters, and the
scholars, by turns afforded them amusement; and to strengthen the force of
their satirical productions, they were generally accompanied with a caricature,
and the different subjects of their art were handed about for the amusement of
their companions.

As Sir Edward's health was visibly on the decline, Lady Percy's confinement
gradually increased, and instead of visiting Bath twice a week, she at length
omitted going there at all, but sent for her daughter and her friend to the
Priory, regularly every Wednesday and Saturday afternoon.

About four years after Amanda had been under the care of Mrs. Dawson, her
friend, in one of their visits to the Priory, made a caricature sketch of Sir
Edward wheeling himself round the room in one of Merlin's chairs, and preserved
the likeness so distinctly, that it was absolutely impossible not to know it.

This picture, upon her return, was indiscriminately shown to all the scholars,
who naturally despised a girl that could be capable of ridiculing the father of
her friend, when sickness made him an object of compassion; and those who were
not partial to Amanda, imagined she was privy to the scheme, and longed to name
it to their governess: but as every tale was totally prohibited, Mrs. Dawson
never heard it; and Amanda was removed from school in less than three months
after it happened, in consequence of the death of her worthy father, whose loss
was universally deplored.

Lady Percy's distress was of the most poignant nature, and Amanda for a while
was lost to gaiety; but time, the sovereign antidote to care, at length
softened their afflictions, and her Ladyship was persuaded to mix again in
general society.

As Amanda's beauty had improved with her years, and her manners had acquired a
peculiar degree of gracefulness, Lady Percy was both mortified and astonished
at observing her attract so little attention; yet flattered herself it
proceeded from envy and ill nature, as she could not imagine it had been
occasioned by any display of an unamiable disposition.

About twelve months after the death of Sir Edward Percy, Mrs. Mordant returned
from the south of France, where she had resided several years for the recovery
of her health, and was highly delighted with the appearance of her niece, who
was at her arrival making preparations for a ball at Lord Darwin's, in honor
of his son's birthday.

As Lady Percy was engaged to accompany her daughter, she persuaded her sister
to join the party; and as Mrs. Mordant had only traveled twenty miles that
morning, she was easily prevailed upon to accompany them.

When they arrived at Darwin Hall, the greater part of the company were already
assembled, and every eye was directed toward Amanda the moment she entered the
scene of gaiety, and her fond mother's heart beat high with exultation, when
she beheld the admiration that was involuntarily paid her.

As the entertainment was entirely intended for young people, the band struck
up soon after their arrival; and when the gentlemen got up to select their
partners, Amanda and her friend were totally neglected.

This circumstance, so unexpected and so astonishing, mortified her pride and
tortured her feelings; and, unable to support the affront she had received, she
conjured her mother to return home.

Mrs. Mordant, who had beheld the applause with which she had been gazed at
upon her first appearance at the assembly, could not possibly account for the
mortifying treatment: but resolving to discover the real cause, she joined a
lady, who seemed remarkably loquacious, but whose back was toward her when she
entered.

After some usual observations upon the performance they were viewing, she
carelessly inquired the name of the two young ladies who were unemployed, and
expressed her astonishment at the blindness of the beaux in suffering the most
beautiful girl in the room to be without a partner.

"She is certainly most uncommonly beautiful," replied Mrs. Winter; "but I
believe the boys are all afraid of her, for she has such a wondrous talent for
the ridiculous, that even her father, during his fatal illness, became the
object of her satire; and one of her schoolfellows, envious of her beauty, has
circulated the story round the room; and though it certainly proved a corrupted
heart, I cannot help pitying the poor girl's mortification."

"Do you know the lady," replied Mrs. Mordant, "who has been illiberal enough
to spread a report so completely detrimental? for I really cannot help doubting
its veracity, and, like yourself, participate in the embarassment I perceive
she feels."

Mrs. Winter immediately pointed her out, and Mrs. Mordant waited until she
reached the bottom of the set, and then requested a few moments audience.

Miss Collet was not much delighted with the idea of being drawn from an
amusement of which she was passionately fond; but when Mrs. Mordant requested
her to explain her motive for prejudicing the party against her niece, her
confusion was so great, it was with difficulty she could reply; but as she was
rather encouraged than repressed, by the gentleness of Mrs. Mordant's manner,
she heartily owned that, in consequence of Miss Percy's having ridiculed and
caricatured her during the time she was at school, she had always felt an
unconquerable aversion to her, which had been greatly increased by having heard
that she had made a jest of her papa's infirmities.

"That you should be exasperated against Miss Percy," said Mrs. Mordant, "for
indulging her vein for ridicule at your expense, Miss Collet, I can really
forgive; but that you should adopt this paltry method of showing your
resentment, I most heartily despise, and am inclined to think there is more of
ill nature than truth in the report you have fabricated."

"I did not fabricate it, Ma'am," said she, coloring with resentment; "for
Miss Blisset, who is her particular friend, has the caricature by her, which
she drew, and I am certain Miss Percy assisted in the performance."

"Well," continued Mrs. Mordant,"as it is necessary to investigate the matter,
you will do me a favor by accompanying me across the room to Miss Blisset; and
if my niece is a stranger to the circumstance, you will certainly do her the
justice to contradict a report, so much to her discredit."

Miss Blisset was much less wounded by the mortification she had received, than
the young lady, who much less deserved it, and had actually proposed that they
should dance together; but when Mrs. Mordant taxed her with having caricatured
the father of her friend, her embarassment became completely distressing, and
bursting into tears, she acknowledged her culpability.

"What!" said Amanda, testifying the utmost astonishment, "could you think of
ridiculing my dear papa, who always was so good and kind to you? Eliza, surely
you never could be so ungrateful?"

"You perceive, Miss Collet," said Mrs. Mordant, "my niece is not so despicable
as you imagined: and though she might, in the height of girlish folly, have
amused herself by satirizing your little imperfeetions, she would have
shuddered at the idea of exposing her father's infirmities; and I must insist
upon your publicly acknowledging the injury you have done,"

"O my dear aunt," replied Amanda, "spare me the mortification, I beseech you,
of becoming an object of general observation; we have already attracted the
attention of the party, and I entreat you to suffer me to leave the room." Lady
Percy, whose attention had for some time been occupied by the sight of an old
friend, at this moment joined the party, and perceiving her daughter bathed in
tears, whilst her sister's countenance was glowing with resentment, anxiously
inquired into the cause, and finding Amanda's agitation had rendered her
conspicuous, she led her to a different apartment, and tried to sooth her into
more composure.

Mrs. Mordant was so extremely hurt at the malignity of Mrs. Collet's conduct,
that she resolved to explain the circumstance to Lady Darwin, who had observed
with astonishment the pointed incivility Amanda had received, and had been
extremely displeased with her son in consequence of it. Her indignation was, if
possible, superior to Mrs. Mordant's, and she insisted upon all the young
gentlemen's offering an apology; and entreated Amanda to return again to the
ballroom: but the mortification she had received was too painful for her to be
capable of such an exertion, and she requested her mamma immediately to return.

As soon as they were all seated in the carriage, Mrs. Mordant took her niece
tenderly by the hand, and conjured her to let the incidents of the night make
an indelible impression upon her mind. "Miss Collet," said she, "has certainly
acted mort despicably, but you provoked it by unjust severity; we can most of
us bear to be told of our failings, but few of us can submit to having them
ridiculed, and satire is certainly the most dangerous of weapons."

Amanda felt the truth of the observation, and promised to subdue the unamiable
propensity; and whenever, at a future period, she felt inclined to be severe,
the recollection of Lady Darwin's ball completely checked her.

THE FAITHFUL SLAVE; OR, THE LITTLE NEGRO BOY.
"PAPA," said Julius Godfrey, addressing himself to his father, "I wish you
would buy a little boy for me whom I saw begging in the street this morning;
for he says he has neither father nor mother in this country, and that he is
fearful of being starved to death."

"Buy you a little boy! Julius," said Mr. Godfrey; "if you had asked me to have
bought you a little dog, I should not have beed astonished; but boys are
neither to be bought nor sold in this happy spot of earth."

"O indeed, papa, they are," replied Julius: "for Charles Henley's father
bought him one, and he has such fun with him, you cannot imagine. Sometimes he
makes a horse of him, and sometimes a harlequin, for his sisters have made him
a very pretty jacket; and then if he will not jump over the places Charles wants
him, he whips the wooden sword from his side, and straps him till he flies over
like a race-horse. Oh, it is such fun, papa, you cannot conceive!"

"And so," said Mr. Godfrey sternly, "your only motive for wishing me to save
the boy from starving, was, that you might have the gratification of killing
him with cruelty, and purchase pleasure at the expense of the poor creature's
pain."

"No, papa," replied Julius, "I would not hurt any body for the world: but you
know black people have no feeling; for Charles Henley says, their skins are as
thick as a lobster's shell, and if they were to be boiled, they would be as
red,"

"Then Charles Henley is as weak as he is wicked, and deserves boiling
himself," said Mr. Godfrey. "But where did you see the unfortunate child, whose
situation you have given me reason to imagine is so peculiarly distressing, and
so very miserable."

Before Julius had time to reply to the interrogation, a servant entered, and
informed Mr. Godfrey, a little negro was at the door, who requested to speak
with master Julius; and who was crying and moaning in a most piteous manner;
"And really, sir," said the man, "the poor boy seems almost starved."

"Give him something to eat then," said the benevolent man, "and then send him
into my study; for I flatter myself I shall have the power of relieving his
wants more completely than my son."

As soon as the little fellow had supplied the pressing calls of hunger, the
servant conducted him into his master's study, where he related such an artless
tale of sorrow, as instantly made an impression upon Mr. Godfrey's feeling
heart. He told him he had been purchased by a lieutenant in the navy, who had
treated him both with affection and kindness; but that upon his arrival in
England, his master had been seized with a putrid fever, and had died in a few
days; and that his mother, who was a widow, was scarcely able to support
herself, and therefore could not be at the expense of keeping a servant. The
simple manner in which he described his forlorn situation, and the sympathetic
one, in which he lamented the death of the young man he served, convinced Mr.
Godfrey that his natural disposition was generous and amiable: and he resolved
immediately to become his friend; but without replying to the account which had
so completely interested his humanity, he opened the door, and calling to his
son, addressed him in the following language:

"As you know, my dear Julius, I have a real gratification in complying with
your desires, when they spring from benevolence, or are founded upon prudence,
you will not be surprised at hearing that I intend taking this little fellow
into my service, and placing him entirely about your person, on condition, that
you promise to treat him with the good nature of a companion, not the sternness
of a master, and always recollect that there is something so peculiarly
attractive in kindness and affection, that the heart which is insensible to its
effects, must either be cased in coldness, corrupted by vice, or dead to the
finest feelings of nature. But as this unfortunate child has proved that he is
capable both of fidelity and attachment, it will be your duty to strengthen the
growth of both, and by uniform civility, and uninterrupted good nature, cherish
those sensations he is inclined to feel.

"The impression you seem to have received from your friend Henley, are an
affront to your understanding, and a disgrace to your heart; for can you for a
moment suppose, that the color of a skin canalter the acuteness of its
feeling; or that by being born in a fervid climate, the natural sensations can
become condensed? If any race of people have a peculiar claim upon the
compassion of their fellow creatures, it is those who are born in a state of
slavery and subjection; who, torn from those connexions which made that state
supportable, are doomed to drag on a miserable existence in a distant country,
where the tender sound of father, son, or brother, can never reach their
afflicted hearts."

"Oh mine father -- mine poor dear father!" sobbed out the agitated child, "no
Yanko never see de more!" -- "You shall find in me a father," said Mr. Godfrey,
taking the little African by the hand, "and in my son a brother; so dry your
eyes, my little man, and try to merit our regard."

"Yes, massa," said the grateful child, "me try to be good boy -- me vill love
you all day long -- and me vill die for you ven you be sick! -- O Yanko vill be
very best of all de boys."

Mr. Godfrey then informed his son, that though it was to be Yanko's business
to brush his clothes, clean his shoes, attend him when he went a fishing, and
become the partner of his general sports, yet he was also to become his daily
pupil, and be taught the rudiments both of reading and writing; "for though,"
said that benevolent man, "the intellectual and moral powers of those
unfortunate people are generally totally uncultivated, nature has been as
bounteous to them as to any other of her children, and they are equally capable
of becoming great, noble, and disinterested."

Julius promised to obey his father's precepts; and instead of indulging the
idea of making Yanko subservient to his pleasures, he only thought of promoting
his happiness; and reflected upon Charles Henley's conduct with a mixture of
disgust, pain, and sympathy.

"The ease and composure of Yanko's mind soon produced a wonderful effect upon
his person; and those features which had been sunk by famine and dejected by
misfortune, acquired so great a degree of liveliness and animation, that it was
impossible to look at him without pleasure; and whilst Julius received the
highest gratification in instructing him, Yanko's rapid improvement under his
tutelage, proved the quickness of his understanding, and the acuteness of his
perception.

As Mr. Godfrey was one day crossing the yard, unperceived by Yanko, (who was
beating one of his young master's coats) his attention was called forth by the
harmonious sound of his voice, and his mode of beating time upon the coat to
the tune he was singing; and drawing near, without being discovered, he
distinctly heard the following words, which at once proved the simplicity of
his taste, and the happiness of his feelings.

YANKO's SONG.
Yanko happy -- Yanko bright,
Like de stars dat gild de night;
Yanko's bosom ever seem
Like de Niger's silver stream.
Ever flowing, ever free,
Ever full of joy and glee,
Yanko love his massa dear,
Love, because he can no fear,
When no cat-o-nine tails' near.
Julius, who from a window had perceived his father attentively listening to
what was going forward, immediately joined him, and was highly amused at the
specimen he heard of his pupil's talents for poetry, and eagerly inquired of
his father, if he did not think it very pretty?

"I think it very gratifying," said Mr. Godfrey, "and seldom felt a sensation
of pleasure more delightful, than I experienced in hearing him repeat it; for
what my dear fellow," said that amiable man, looking at his son with an eye of
tenderness, "can afford the mind so refined a satisfaction, as the knowing we
have rescued a fellow creature from distress, and filled his breast with joy
and gladness? and how different must our feelings have been, had we heard the
poor fellow lamenting his misfortunes, and execrating our severity!"

"O papa," replied Julius, "how I wish Charles Henley could have heard him! it
is very unlucky he has been in the country ever since Yanko came; or perhaps,
when he had seen how kindly he was treated, he might have behaved differently
to little Peter: for I am sure he does not think he hurts him, or he would not
use him so unkindly; and his papa is never angry with him for it."

"His papa," said Mr. Godfrey, "is much more blameable than himself. But people
in general, who have been brought up in the West Indies, acquire an arrogance
of mind, and a hardness of heart, that renders them dead to the feelings of
humanity; and are apt to consider those unhappy beings, whom slavery has put
within their power, as created merely for their pleasures and convenience."

Mr. Godfrey was prevented from continuing the subject, by the entrance of the
very boy of whom they had just been speaking, who after shaking Julius
cordially by the hand, said, "So I see your papa has bought little Mungo for
you -- he looks rather different to what he did the morning that he solicited
our charity."

"Yes," replied Julius, with animated warmth, "he may well look different, poor
unhappy fellow! for I believe he then was almost starving, and had not a friend
in the world to help him; and now he feels the comfort of kind treatment."

"Is he full of tricks?" said Charles, "or are you forced to flog him into fun?
I long to have some sport with him; for Peter's been so ill since we have been
gone, that he has never once played harlequin; and now my father's going to
send him to the hospital, for he will not be any longer plagued with him; he
goes moping about the house like a hen turkey in a snowy day."

Though this conversation was spoken in a half whisper, Mr. Godfrey had been so
attentive to it, that he retained the greatest part, and turning to Charles, he
said, "I am extremely sorry, young gentleman, to hear you mention the illness
of a fellow creature, with so little sympathy, and such unfeeling indifference.
If you were to be suddenly indisposed, the anguish of pain would be softened by
the tenderness of your friends, and the attention of your servants; yet though
they might administer to your comforts, they could not assuage your feelings,
and you would still suffer from the acuteness of disease. But if you had no one
to pity your anguish, administer to your wants, or sooth your affliction, how
much more lamentable would your situation be; and how do you conceive you could
support such an accumulation of misery?"

"Support it, Sir!" replied Charles; "why, I am never likely to support it, for
I have a father who loves, and a mother who doats upon me, and who never leaves
me one moment, if I have but a little headache."

"And poor Peter," said Mr. Godfrey, in a tone of tenderness, "was once,
perhaps, in that enviable situation; blessed in the affection of a father, and
cherished by the fondness of a mother: and yet how dreadful now the alteration!
This world, my dear Charles, is a scene of changes and vicissitudes: the
morning sun is suddenly overshadowed by clouds of darkness, and these clouds as
rapidly illumined by a cheerful sky. If, therefore, your heart is so completely
adamantine, that you cannot feel from nature, endeavor to do so from prudence;
and remember, that no one in this life can be exempted from misfortune, or
shielded from transitions. You are too young to become callous; and I hope the
unfeeling indifference with which you named the unfortunate child, whose
situation is so very pitiable, proceeded rather from want of thought, than want
of humanity; and that, when you go home, you will give proofs of that
compassion which ought to inhabit every human breast." So saying, Mr. Godfrey
left the room, whilst Charles appeared not much flattered by the preceding
conversation.

"What an odd man your father is, Julius!" he exclaimed; "and yet there was a
great deal of truth in what he said about me and Peter; for, to be sure, if he
ever had a father and mother as fond of him as my parents are of me, he must be
very unhappy now he has no one to take notice of him."

Julius repeated to his friend all the excellent principles his father had
taken such pains to inculcate; and after entreating him to consider negroes as
fellow creatures, subject to the same passions, and endowed with the same
feelings as themselves, he concluded his oration by saying, that he never felt
half so much pleasure when they amused themselves by making Peter perform
harlequin, as he had done in hearing Yanko sing an artless ditty of his own
composing, expressive of his own happiness, and his attachment to himself.

Although Mr. Godfrey was so amiable a character, and delighted in promoting
both the interest and happiness of his dependents, yet amongst the number of
them was one, whose depravity of heart was artfully concealed by a specious
appearance, and whilst he appeared warmly attached to his master's interest,
was insidiously planning his future destruction.

This man, whose name was Robert, the faithful Yanko had long regarded with a
suspicious eye, in consequence of having accidentally overheard a few words
that passed between him and a pretended brother, who spent the greatest part of
his time in Mr. Godfrey's kitchen, and who, when they retired to their country
seat, also followed them into Hampshire.

A large party was assembled at the Grange, which was the name of the
respectable mansion Mr. Godfrey inhabited, and amongst the number, an
East India family, just arrived from Bengal, laden with the treasure of that
rich soil; and Yanko, as he was watering some flowers at the extremity of the
shrubbery, providentially heard Robert and his companion arranging their plan,
not only for robbing the strangers of their prize, but murdering them and his
generous master, if they attempted to make the least resistance.

Shocked at the atrocity of the inhuman design, and eager to frustrate its
execution, it was with the utmost difficulty he could restrain himself from
breaking in upon their conversation, and proving at once he was acquainted with
their villainy; but a few moments reflection checked his impetuosity, and he
concealed himself behind a tree until the intended assassins had departed. At
that moment, Mr. Godfrey, Julius, and two of their friends, drew near the spot
of his concealment when the agitated boy stepped forward, and throwing himself
on his knees before Julius burst into a flood of tears, exclaiming, "Oh, de
vicked Robert would kill mine own dear massa! de vicked man, de vicked man! but
no, Yanko die for massa! Yanko die for massa!"

Mr. Godfrey's astonishment may be easily imagined, and after raising the
faithful Yanko from the ground, and thanking him for his attachment, he desired
him to explain the cause of his suspicions; and after hearing a circumstantial
detail of the whole affair, he immediarely sent for the officers of justice,
who arrived at the Grange before the abandoned men had any idea of their being
suspected; and finding they had only to rely upon their master's clemency, they
made a full confession of their intended crimes, and earnestly besought that
compassion they so ill deserved.

Whilst Mr. Godfrey was painting the heinousness of their guilt in the most
glowing colors, Julius and his friends were loading the faithful Yanko with
applause; and Mr. Blussat, who considered him as the savior both of his life
and property, testified his gratitude by presenting him with a purse containing
fifty guineas, which he strenuously refused, saying, "No, massa; me want no
money -- me want no clothes -- and me no like paying when me do what is right."

THE END.

