REASONS OFFERED FOR LEAVING THE SHAKERS.

By REUBEN RATHBONE.

PITTSFIELD: (Mass.) PRINTED BY CHESTER SMITH. FEBRUARY, 1800.

REASONS, etc.
WHEREAS I have been a professor among the People called Shakers, and have
zealously labored, both in public and private, (whereof many hundreds are
witnesses) to promote and build up the profession; but have of late separated
myself from that people, it seemed to me not unreasonable and no more than what
might be justly expected, that I should show some reason or cause for so doing.
In order for this I shall endeavor to give a short account of my life and
experiences, from my youth up to this time, including my manner of faith before
I heard of this people, the manner of my entering in among them, and the faith
I received in hearing their testimony, and my perseverence in it. Together with
my trials and tribulations which I have had of late, which has effected my
separation. Avoiding, if possible, every thing that may create or increase a
spirit of hatred or envy against this people, for it is to be lamented there is
a great deal too much already. But as it is my purpose and intention only
simply to state my reasons, and submit the matter to God the judge of all, I
hope it may give no offense, neither to Jew nor Gentile, nor to the Church of
God.

To give a particular account of my life, and the exercises of my mind from the
days of my infancy, would be a labor too tedious for me to endure at this time,
as my health is much impaired by a continued series of afflictions But I shall
only say, that from the time I began to know between good and evil, till I was
about eighteen years of age, a great part of the time my mind was exercised
with fearful and awful apprehensions of a future judgment; sometimes to that
degree, that I could wish myself a toad or a snake or any thing that had no
soul to exist in futurity. At length I was brought to experience a change of
sensation, the particulars of which may not be necessary to relate now. but I
was made to love God for what he was in himself: I had such a sense of the love
of God, through the Lord Jesus Christ, for the salvation and happiness of his
creatures, that I was no more afraid what he would do with me; but was
determined to serve and obey God to the end of my days. Here I must observe one
thing (as I mean to be an honest man) which I have made use of in support of
one principle of faith, which I afterward received among this people called
Shakers -- the thing I mean is this, I had observed in the course of my life
that one of the greatest things that operated upon the minds of young people,
was a connection between male and female, the mode or manner in which it was
carried on, (which is needless for me to relate) made it appear to me like an
earthly sensual pleasure, so that when my heart was full of love to God, and
was resolved to forsake all carnal enjoyments, for the service of the Lord
Jesus Christ, I though^ I could never get a wife without laying aside my
religion. This I observed to some of my friends at the time: But although I
felt this fensation for myself, yet I did not doubt but what it might be right
for men and women to marry and propagate their species; but whether I was
overmuch righteous or not, is a matter I choose to leave for the present, and
proceed farther, as to the change of sensation which I received. Doubtless it
was thought by professed Christians in general, to be the new birth, or real
conversion, by which the foul is entitled to the kingdom of Heaven: But as for
my own part I never pretended to say whether it was or was not; but my hope of
everlasting life was in loving the Lord Jesus Christ, and obeying his gospel --
believing that what was contained in the scriptures was a sufficient rule to
walk by, and by which I should be judged at the last day.

However, after some time, forgetting the commandments of the Lord Jesus
Christ, to watch and pray always, or, at least, not attending to it, I became
carnally minded, and lost, in a great measure, my confidence toward God, and
that life and comfort which I had before enjoyed. At length, in the spring of
the year 1780 I heard a rumor of a strange people at Niskauna, that was
possessed of remarkable gifts and power, and held to strange doctrines, such as
I had never heard before, one thing particular, which drew my attention, was
the cross against the flesh (as it is called,) or denying all matrimonial
connection between male and female, etc. This brought to my mind what I had
felt before in myself; and I rather believed it must be of God, although I had
never searched the scripture, to see if it was agreeable to the sacred record:
But as numbers of my friends and acquaintance soon went to see them, and
brought back very wonderful reports which increased my faith, so that I was
resolved to go and see them for myself; not doubting but what they were the
people of God -- at length, some time in July 1780, I went with a number of
others to see them, at Niskauna, to hear and see for myself, and having an
opportunity then, and from time to time, after I received the following
principles of faith: viz. But first, I desire to be understood, what I am going
to relate as the principles of my faith, is not what I suggested in myself, but
what I really heard preached, either from the first ministers, or from others
that were authorized by them to preach: that is, That the great and last day
had began -- that the Lord Jesus Christ had made his second appearance in that
person which was called the mother -- hat she was redeemed from all sin, and
stood without fault before the throne of God -- that the fullness of the Godhead
dwelt in her bodily, as really as it did in the Lord Jesus Christ in his first
appearance, and as much greater as his second appearance was to be greater than
the first. I understood and believed that she was the woman spoken of in the
12th chapter of Rev. and in Jeremiah 31st chap. 2^d verse, that as the Lord
Jesus Christ was the second Adam, so she was the second Eve -- that as the
first Eve was first in the transgression which effected the fall of the human
race, so she, as the second Eve, had the first gift and revelation of God, to
effect completely the restoration from the fall, which was to be redeemed and
delivered wholly from the power, spirit, and nature, that produced natural
generation, which was said to be the forbidden fruit that was in the midst of
the garden, that our first parents were forbidden to touch upon pain of death.
I believed that regeneration signified the resurrection from the dead, that
Christ spoke of in Luke, 20th chapter, 35th and 36th verses. where he says,
"But they which shall be accounted worthy to obtain that world, and the
resurrection from the dead, neither marry nor are given in marriage, neither
can they die any more, for they are equal unto the angels, and are the children
of God, being the children of the resurrection." I believed that the mother
with some others which were with her, stood completely in the resurrection, and
were equal unto the angels, and were conversant and familiar with invisible
beings in a spiritual world, and that they were not subject to any natural
disorders or infirmities which were incident to the rest of mankind -- I
believed that God had given them the spirit and power of judgment, to judge the
world both quick and dead, and that their power and testimony would increase
till it should gather all Nations, and set them on the right hand or on the
left, according to what is written in Matthew, 25th chapter and 31st verse: and
soon I believed the day and time had commenced which was prophesied of, in
Isaiah, 2d chapter and 2d verse, etc. and in Daniel 2d chapter and 44th verse;
and 7th chapter, 9th and 10th verses; and in Isaiah 65th chapter, 17th verse,
and so on; and in Revelations, 20th and 21st chapters. Many more places might
be mentioned which purport the same thing, but perhaps it is not necessary.

All this I say I believed, without the least doubt, and my labor and concern
was to come into possession of that which I had faith in. In order for this I
was taught, I must confess all my sins: this I did willingly and honestly;
believing myself to be before the bar of eternal justice, where the thoughts
and intents of my heart were fully and clearly seen and known I was also
taught, that I must take up my cross against all sin; but ^n a special manner
against the lust of the flesh, which included not only all manner of
uncleanness, contrary to the order of nature, and all natural feelings and
actions between male and female; but comprehended all natural union between
natural relations, as being the product and fruits of the flesh: and also to
labor for the power of God to destroy the very nature of the flesh so as to
become an Eunuch for the kingdom of heaven's sake. This I understood to be a
total destruction of the nature of generation, both as to the inclination of
the spirit and the natural faculties of, the body. Although this is not held so
now among the people; yet I am sure it was so communicated by the first
Ministers, and so received and understood by all the people. It was held that
the seed spoken of by the Apostle John in his first epistle, 3d chapter and 9th
verse, was the natural seed of copulation: it was held that the marriage in
Cana of Gallilee, spoken of in the 2d chapter of John, was nothing else but the
union of Christ and his disciples: it was also abundantly taught, that what was
contained in the scriptures was of no use to us, as it respected our travail,
being all in a back dispensation; but that which was the present gift of the
Church must be received as the infallible word of God.

All these things which I have mentioned, I had no more doubt of than I had of
the being of an eternal God; but labored accordingly, in full faith and hope of
obtaining a full and complete redemption from the nature and root of all (...),
which I believed to be the lust of the flesh, as I have before observed, my
faith was so firm that I do not remember ever at one time reading or searching
the scriptures, for my own confirmation but only for the purpose of having
wherewith to prove the truth of my profession, and to convince gainsayets. At
length, being found faithful and obedient, I received an order to labor, with
others, and receive confessions; which I went forth in, according as I was
taught, and received the approbation and blessing of the Church, and the work
seemed to flourish and prosper, to my great encouragement, till some time in
the summer of the year 1783, when an unhappy disunion appeared in the Church,
and as the matter could not be, or was not kept private, but did and has got
abroad among the world, it may not be amiss for me to give a sketch of it;
although it is far from my purpose to be a slanderer, or to set (...) myself as
a judge, to justify or condemn; but to state simple (...), as far as may be
expedient, and leave the matter to him who is the judge of all.

It may be remembered that I before observed, it was unders^^^ and believed
that not only the mother, but a number of (...) had found complete redemption
from all sin; among (...) were WILLIAM LEAS, her natural brother, and JAMES
W^ITTAKE^, an Englishman. It was understood by all, from our first acquaintance
with them, that William Leas stood next to the mother, and James Whittaker next
to him. However in the summer of the year 1783, a strife arose (or at least it
did not appear before to my knowledge) between them, which should be first --
the mother interfered to settle the controversy, and the contention was very
unhappy, and proved the means, I believe, of separating a number that appeared
to be strong believers; but it had no effect to shake my faith at all; although
I was an eye witness to that, which would be really shocking to humanity. My
faith was so strong in the mother, believing she had the sole government of all
souls, both quick and dead, and was actuated wholly by the power of the
invisible God, that if I had seen her smite a man dead I don't know as I should
have dared to give myself liberty to think it was wrong. But finally the
dispute terminated in the death of William Leas, in July, 1784. And by the
death of the mother in September following, the ministration and government of
the Church revolved on James Whittaker; this to be sure was a very trying time
to believers; it being so contrary from what was first expected; but elder
James soon gathered the greatest part of the people to a comfortable faith in
his ministration, signifying it was necessary for the mother to go away in
order for a further increase of the gospel -- he prophesied abundantly of a
great increase and spread of the gospel, which was soon to take place.

He finally ordered the people to sell their possessions and give to the poor,
and to go forth and preach the gospel, in obedience to the gift: some actually
sold their possessions, others were preparing to do it; for my part I had
nothing to sell, but went to the Church to know what the gift was for me, and
spoke to Elder James, his words to me were these, "Go forth and circumcise as
many as you can." In obedience to his order, I went forth and took a journey
down into Connecticut, where for my testimony I was taken ^p, and put into
New London Goal, where I was kept a prisoner four months. However the order
that was given for the people to sell their possessions was taken off -- they
were told the time had not come, but that it was a gift to try their faith --
so that they which had sold, had to buy again, and so the matter rested.

As for me, after I got released from prison, and by the help of some of my
friends, settled all my expenses; I r^turned again to Elder James where I had
the privilege of going several journies with him, and as I had a peculiar
faculty in singing, my gift was chiefly to labor in Songs. But the last journey
I went with him, which was in the year 1787, the latter part of the winter --
on returning home he was taken sick so that he could g^t no farther than
Enfield, (in Connecticut,) where he remained till July following, and dep^^t^^
this life.

This was a very trying scene with me, as well as many others, for I think I
can truly say I loved him as I did my own life. Notwithstanding, I was not at
all shaken in my faith^ but believed that God would carry on his own work --
and as there was several men who seemed to be blessed with great abilities,
which had labored in the ministry with Elder James, we were not left without
hope; but that the gospel would yet increase according to what had been spoken.
At this time there was a very strong labor among three men, who were the
principal ministers that were left, to know which of them should have the first
gift. At length the lot sell upon Elder JOSEPH MEACHEM, a man greatly beloved
and respected by all the people. His labor seemed to be to gather the sensation
of the people to a farther increase, signifying the departure of Elder James
was necessary for the further increase of the gospel, and that it was
impossible to take place while he continued in the body. The manner of the
increase here spoken of, I shall ende^vor to describe in as few words as I can,
so as to comprehend the substance.

It was signified that the believers as a body were all in fleshly relation,
and that the time had come for a number to be gathered out of that relation
into church relation, to be purged and purified from the flesh, and be prepared
to minister the gospel to others. The first gathering took place at New-Lebanon
in 1788, where there was a great number gathered, both ^ale and female; numbers
of which were selected from all the different parts, among believers; some on
account of their peculiar ingenuity and faculties in temporal things, to be
helps in the temporal order of the Church; others (it was signified) were
gathered for the more special purpose of being helps to other souls, in
spriitual things; others were gathered merely, for the^r own protection and
salvation; and others on account of their temporal property. These were all
under a daily ministration, for Elder Joseph and some others, who were
assistants to him in the ministry; but the labors and exercise^ both of (...)
and spirit, which this people were exercised in under the daily ministration,
is not easily conceived by any one who was not a witness of what I shall not
undertake to be particular: but believe it will be sufficient to say, that
their chief labor was to destroy the whole order of nature, expecting to obtain
the power of God, so as to wholly actuate and move the human frame, independent
of any natural strength. How much propriety there was in the undertaking, time
has sufficiently shown; upon which I shall observe hereafter.

However to proceed in relation to the increase of the people, which were
g^t^^red, as has been observed, were called the Church or Church relation, the
rest were all called fleshly relation; but the fire or furnace in Zion, as it
was called, was not wholly confined in the Church. Ministers were sent from the
Church to other parts to kindle the same fire, and in a particular manner to
Hancock, the then place of my residence, where the flame burnt so exceedingly
that it seemed as though nothing would remain but just faith; but that seemed
to be as unshaken as ever. At length, after two or three years of unremitting
labors and tribulation, the time came for the people, in Hancock, to be
gathered into Church relation; Elder CALVIN HARLOW, a very desirable young man,
and one who had the love and esteem of all the peopie, was appointed as a
Bishop, for to gather the Church in Hancock, which took place in the first part
of the year 1791. This seemed to be a time of comfort and satisfaction, hoping
we should now have a privilege to travail out of the flesh, for we had
understood that they which had a privilege in Church relation, could travail
farther out of the flesh in one week than they which were in fleshly relation
could in a year; and as it was the most essential principle of our faith, to
find redemption from the flesh, our hopes of salvation now inereased.

But to proceed farther respecting the increase about or before this time,
there was a further gift in the Church, at Lebanon, which was called and is
still, the Mother Church; the gift was this, they were taught that they had got
to find their order of relation to God, in the li^^ of Church order; that is
they had got to find who their Parents were, and who their Ministers were, and
who their Elders were, and also, their order of relation one to another, as
brethren and fisters; that is, to know who was 1st, 2d, 3d, etc. -- as to their
parents it was doubtless without any difficulty they acknowledged Elder Joseph
to be their father in the Gospel; but as to a mother, it was such a new thing
and so unexpected that there was something of a labor before the matter was
finished: as to the rest, as it does not respect my present purpose, I shall
omit saying any thing about it: but as the same line of order was prcaced to us
in Hancock, and the persons appointed and set before us, we had no difficulty
in acknowledging them to be our Parents and received what they spoke to us as
the oracle of God. Some time after we were called upon to labor, to know who
our Elders were and find our relation to them -- myself and one more male and
two females were appointed, and called upon to labor for the lot of Eldership.
We labored accordingly, believing what we were taught to be the infallible word
of God.

Now perhaps it may be enquired what was the work or business of these Elders,
what was the purpose of their gift. It was this, they were to stand between
their parents and the rest of the family with whom they lived -- they were to
receive the word and counsel of God from their parents, and communicate the
same to the rest of the family -- the family wera to look to the Elders, and to
them only, for every gift of God they received; and likewise, the Elders to the
parents: however it frequently happened that the parents spoke to individuals,
and some times to all, as occasion required. Now after we had labored some
time, according to our first appointment, being called Elder brethren and Elder
sisters, not knowing which was first or which was last; we were all told by our
parents that there was but ^ne Elder brother and one Elder sister; there was
one which was the oldest, and but one, and the family were all required to
labor and manifest their faith who, tha^ one was, They accordingly labored, and
all signified their faith to be in me as their Elder brother, and that one who
was a partner with me to be their Elder sister This being ratified and
confirmed by our parents as the gift of God, they all looked to me as their
Elder, by which and through which they were to receive every gift of God that
came to them. This brought me to a very solemn and weighty concern, to
discharge my duty in relation to my brethren and sifters, so that they might
receive comfort and consolation, and I be acce^ted of God: but as I had full
faith in my parents, and had liberty to ask their counsel upon every needful
occasion, we seemed to enjoy in some measure, a comfortable travail, hoping yet
to see the increase of the gospel as had been prophesied. At length, Elder
Calvin, whom we esteemed as our father in the gospes, was taken very sick, so
that he was not expected to continue in the body; his sickness, however, (which
rendered him unable, a great part of the time, to give much counsel or
instruction in relation to the Church) did not immediately take him away; but
he continued for more than a year, and departed this life the 21st of December,
1795.

This was a time of much affliction and sorrow; but yet my faith was unshaken,
and being encouraged by her whom we called and esteemed to be our mother, that
there would be an increase of the gospel in a short time, therefore we labored
to take courage and hope in God. About this time I understood it was believed
in the Church, at Lebanon, that the time was just at hand for the gospel to be
opened to the world, and about this time the gift of laboring for mortification
came about to an end; it was found that we lost our natural strength fast than
we obtained the power of God to replace it, so that by this means a great many
had gone into eternity, and a great many were very weak: by this time Elder
Joseph, the first Bishop, who was believed in the Church to be the descendent
of David that was to destroy Gog and Magog, became very much reduced and
impaired in his health, though he seemed to labor very strong for a further
opening of the gospel among the world: yet he was obliged to submit to the
decrees of God, and bid adieu to time, which took place the 16th of August,
1796 This however, did not seem to be a matter of discouragement; but the
forerunner of a farther increase, as it was supp^sed be had finished his work
that he had to do in this world, and that the gift for the farther opening of
the gospel was reserved for HENRY CLOUGH, a young man who had labored in the
ministry as an assistant to Elder Joseph, though he was not first in the
ministry, but was subject unto her whom he called his mother, which was the
partner of Elder Joseph; yet he was esteemed to be a very wise man, and
depended on as one who had a great work to do in relation to the farther
opening and spread of the gospel.

Soon after Elder Joseph's decease, she that was called our mother, in Hancock,
was taken sick, and continued a few weeks, and departed this life, which was on
the 19th of September, 1796 Here began a scene of tribulation which exceeded
all my former experience; although before th^^ things sometimes appeared very
dark and unaccountable, having our expectations so cut off from time to time;
but while I had a privilege to be told what to do by them that I believed had
the knowledge of God, it was easy for me to be obedient without giving myself
much trouble about the propriety or impro^^^ty of matters: but now being left
to labor myself and the (...) of the people, whose eyes were upon me as their
leader (...) filled with great concern and labor to know the will of G^^. (...)
relation to myself and the rest of my brethren and sisters. However, having
been taught by our parents the order of our relation to God, and of some things
that would be the gift after their decease, which was not only spoke to me, but
also to numbers of the rest. I was determined to labor according to the
teaching we had received, hoping that God would open the way for our
protection, and for the farther increase of the gospel. About this time or not
long after some things took place in relation to us, by the counsel or order of
the Church at Lebanon, which was a matter of some trial, not to me only, but to
the whole of the Church, as it appeared contradictory to what had been taught
by our parents; but after giving myself an opportunity of being informed, it
seemed to be made to appear that the matter was not inconsistent or
contradictory to any thing which we had before received, but altogether
neceffary for our increase.

About this time there seemed to be a gift in the Church, at Lebanon, that the
time had come for the gospel to be opened to the world -- ministers were
appointed and sent forth under the direction of Henry Clough, or Elder Henry,
as he was called; the gift was for them to go forth and preach the gospel to
the world, and have them confess their sins, etc. and remain where they were
and not come to the Church. They went forth accordingly, time and again, and a
great sound there seemed to be, of abundance, of rain, as it were, which seemed
to be a matter of great rejoicing: however, as there was not much brought to
pass, it was believed that they had not got the right gift, but that it was
necessary to have another gift, which was this, they were to go forth and
preach the gospel and invite all to come to the Church: but this did not seem
to have the desired effect. Finally, it was thought that the lack was in the
ministers; they were suspended and others sent forth; but all to little or no
purpose In the mean time Elder Henry, who was admired for his wisdom and
abilities, and depended on as one whom God had raised up for the defense and
increase of the gospel, was taken sick and in a short time left this world,
which I think was about the first of March, 1798. These things gave me much
exercise of mind, it seemed as though God would destroy the hope of man sure
enough: yet I dared not give way to unbelie^ or to be discouraged; but labored
to put as favorable construction on every thing as I was able; but I was ready
to say sometimes to myself, "Merciful God, what is the matter, is all things
right;" but would check myself, and shut it out, and labor to take courage:
however, there were other things that increased my tribulation -- one of which
was this, there was some who were appointed by the mother Church, as ministers
to reside (...) meeting house, in Hancock, and labor in relation to the (...)
in that order, and to receive counsel from the Church at Lebanon, and minister
the same to the people in their own order -- with these I had labored to
support union and peace, according to the best of my knowledge, which succeeded
in a good degree. But, at length, in the increase, as it was called, there
seemed to be that faith required of me, in relation to them, that I was not
able to obtain, without further understanding, it appeared to me, as well as to
a number of others that in order to believe and receive, what they told me I
must reject, what we had been taught by our parents, and count them as
deceivers and imposters. This brought me under a great trial, and as I was not
able to open my mind to my satisfaction, so as to find any help, I thought I
would try one way more, and with the advice of some of my brethren, I set down
and wrote a pretty lengthy letter, wherein I stated my grievances and trials in
as humble and Godly manner as I was able, desiring to have some help in my mind
if there was any for me in the Church. This letter I delivered to one of the
ministers, and desired i^ might be carried to them who had the first gift in
the Church, at Lebanon, where it was soon carried; but, ^o my surprise, it was
treated with the utmost contempt -- no^even allowed to be read, but committed
to the fire and burnt up. The minister I deliv^^^^ it to, I suppose, read it
and communicated something of the contents, for which, at his return, I
received a pretty severe admonition, being upbraided for some things which I
had mentioned in my letter, and told me that there was none ever known to
prosper, that undertook to write to their Elders, or to that import: so that
instead of receiving any help in my ^aith, or understanding by the means of
opening my mind fully, I received only an addition of trouble, which was so
great it was impossible to keep it undiscovered by the family, who were fo
effected in seeing my tears and hearing my cries to God, that some of them were
almost ready to flee away and leave the place; but as I had so much faith that
I dare not act any thing against that which was the gift in the mother Church,
I humbled myself with submission and labored to be reconciled and to reconcile
the rest to that which was the gift in them, which we held to be before us
according to our profession. However I thought within myself, if I had been
deceived, I should be more watchful so as not to be deceived again, it I had
been deceived by them whom I believed to be as righteous souls, and more Godly
in their example than those who were in the present ministry, it was hard to
know what might be depended on; but I meant to labor to receive every gift that
came, and reconcile the rest to it, as far as I was able whether I believed it
to be the very g^^ of God o^ not, if I could not see as there was any sin in
it; I belie^ed it was better for peace sake to condescend as far as I could,
and not wrong my conscience, than to have any strife or contention; but my gift
and calling in relation to the rest, made it some times very difficult, for I
was required to receive every order that came as the very gift of God for our
salvation, and preach it as such to the rest, and sometimes there was that
given as order, which was impossible for me to believe that God had any hand in
it, for I had learnt by this time that they who stood in the highest authority,
in the mother Church, were liable to be deceived sometimes, believing they had
a very extraordinary gift of God, and afterward it was found by certain
evidence to be a deception: therefore as my faith was shaken in the foundation,
or in them which we looked to as the foundation of our help, I fo^nd myself
under necessity to cry to the Infinite God, the author of my existence, for
some m^nifestation of light, and was led to take a view, in some measure, of
our travail from the first of our faith, wherein I found so many things that
were believed and received as the revelation of God, which were found by
experience to be false and absurd; so many things that were done and undone,
and all under the name of an increase, that I was doubtful whether we were not
deceived in the very foundation principle of our faith, which was this, That
the last and glorious day of the second appearance of the Lord Jesus Christ had
taken place, and that more than fifty years ago; and that we who had embraced
that faith and travailed in the increase were the only people that are
justified upon the face of the whole Earth. I say I was in doubt whether we
were not deceived in this foundation point of our faith, and if this was the
case I was sure that our building would all be in vain: therefore I was
exercised in my mind with exceeding strong labor to ascertain the matter; and
having an opportunity with one who prosessed to be a minister and whom I looked
to as my Elder, I asked many questions in a very familiar manner, taking care
not to discover myself full^, but mentioned the feelings of some others in the
family which indeed felt the same that I did; but by all that I could gather
from him I found he was as dark as I was, and manifested that he himself was
under trials, and said he had a desire sometimes to ask his mother some
questions respecting the same matter; but was afraid of being accused of
laboring out of his order, and be admonished for it, etc.

Here I found there was no light to be had, though he did not signify that be
self any unbelief respecting his profession; but manifested darkness and
ignorance.

Now ^^^med as though there was but one alternative for me to take, (...) I
resolved upon, which was this, to cry incess^ntly to God my creator for his
grace and mercy to help me, that I might be able to take a retrospective view
of my faith and profession from the first, and compare it with the prophecies
which are recorded in the Scriptures of truth.

Before this time we had found by certain experience to a demonstration, that
one essential principle of our faith was no less that a gro^s absurdity, which
I shall endeavor to show -- the principle of our faith was this, we heard and
believed that by confessing and forsaking our sins, we should be able by the
power of God to labor completely out of the nature of the flesh, that is to
say, to wholly destroy that nature and faculty which is created in men and
women for the purpose of propagating their specie. This seemed to be the
greatest and most arduous work there was to be done; but receiving such great
encouragement, under standing and believing that there was a number which had
already attained to it, we undertook the work cheerfully, and labored all
manner of ways that we could conceive would have any tendency to mortify the
flesh; but still the flesh lived, though some were so violent in their labors,
and brought their bodies under so much weakness that there was not much power
of erection in the parts of generation; but the solids being so relaxed and the
retentive faculty so weakened, that they were more subject to involuntary
evacuations than they were before. However as there was abundance of means used
to encourage us in the work, we persevered with unremitting labors till the
Church was gathered i^ Lebanon. Then it seemed as though the flesh would be
destroyed at once -- the testimony against the flesh increased -- the labors
and exercises of body were increased with great zeal and violence, so that in a
short time they who were the most zealous and faithful labored into that degree
of mortification that the natural functions of the body were so impaired, and
the power of retention so relax^^ that they were not able to keep themselves
from involuntary evacuations almost continually, which made some almost despair
of ever being saved, as the natural seed of co^ulation was looked upon as the
most unclean and hateful of any thing in the natural creation. However numbers
labored out of the flesh, that is to say, the blood ceased to circulate in the
veins -- the lungs ceased to do their office -- the soul took its departure out
of the fleshly tabernacle. But the work was carried on with unremitting zeal,
till a great number left the body and went into eternity, who, I have not the
least doubt but that they as really put an end to their own existence in this
world as though they had taken a dose of poison or a raizor and cut their
throats; but it was said they gave up their lives for Christ's sake: let that
be as it may, I have no doubt they believed so.

At length, after a while the gift seemed to abate about laboring for
mortification, till finally it came quite to an end. Physicians were appointed
and set to labor to help the sick and those that were weak, to build up that
which they had been destroying, though it had not been taught plainly to my
knowledge that the idea was wholly given up, of totally destroying that nature
in this world; yet what took place made it appear so.

All these things I had observed and understood, and as I had the care of a
considerable number that frequently opened their feelings and trials to me, and
their unbelief in finding a total end to the flesh in this world; I labored
into the matter thoroughly, till I was fully satisfied for myself: I was
informed, and that from good authority, that the first mother, whom we believed
to be equal with the Angels, was subject to the same natural infirmities which
were incident to other women, which, if true, as I had some understanding in
the theory of the human machine, I was persuaded she was not delivered from the
nature of generation, it being necessary for that purpose, and that only.
Having understood all these things, and much more also, which I could mention
were it necessary; I was fully persuaded that it was as possible to stop the
blood and juices from flowing into an arm or a leg, or to dry up the marrow in
the bones, as to accomplish what we had undertaken. Being fully satisfied I did
not scruple to speak my faith among my brethren; not for their discouragement
but for their encouargement, that they might not be cast down and discouraged
if they felt the flesh ever so strong; knowing we had got it to fight to the
end of our days: however I was exceedingly tried, as well as the rest, to find
we had been so deceived, not knowing but what we might be deceived in a great
many other things as well as that; but being desirous to know how the matter
was held by them who were before us. I took an opportunity with the minister
whom I looked to for counsel, and opened some of the brethren's feelings to him
in relation to the matter. He at first seemed to intimate as though there was
an evil spirit to work with them; but when I come to tell him frankly what my
faith was in relation to the matter he gave the matter up, and joined with me,
telling a number of circumstances to confirm it. But to return to the first
principles of our faith, viz. The second appearance of Christ in that woman
which we called the mother. I have before observed, that she was said to be the
woman spoken of in the 12th chap. of Rev. it was held that the man child she
brought forth was James Whittaker, and her going into the wilderness was her
coming into America. Now when I came to read the scriptures for myself, and
remembered what I was taught and what I believed, I was astonished with myself
that ever I imbibed such absurd ideas; but the reason was, I never searched the
scriptures to see if these things were so, but believed and received every
thing I heard, without giving myself liberty to doubt the truth of it; but when
I came to look and read for myself, the matter looks so plain and obvious that
it seems as though I should be guilty of impertinence to make any comment upon
it, but shall leave every one to read and judge for themselves.

Now I shall leave this matter and observe some things which took place in the
Church which gave me much affliction.

We had some years before entered into covenant to maintain and support a joint
interest one with another, and agreed not to bring one another into debt for
any services or interest we should bestow to the joint interest of the Church.
This was entered into in writtng, with our names subscribed to it: but the
meaning or intention of this thing as we understood it, was this, there had
been a number that had left the people and come with great demands for wages,
etc. -- Some of which appeared to be very unjust, and brought distress upon the
Church. This covenant therefore was intended to cut them off from making any
demand, so that the Church might be able to do that which was just and equal in
relation to them, without being brought into distress and so the matter was
conducted for a number of years. When any one went away, the Deacons and
Overseers came to a settlement with them -- paid them a certain sum and took a
final discharge: whether they did justice or not. I do not pretend to say; but
I had heard it intimated some time past, that the time would come when those
who went away from the Church would not be allowed any thing at all: however, I
did not believe that ever I should see that time come; it looked to me like
such barefaced injustice, that I could not think it would ever be presumed
upon. However it was not a great while before the gift come sure enough, and as
it got among the Deacons before I had knowledge of it, it was divulged amongst
the family, which made no small stir among them; and as they opened their
trials to me in the matter, I labored to pacify them, telling them I did not
believe it: however, I was determined to know the truth of it, and as I had an
opportunity with the Minister, I opened what trials there was among the
brethren, and desired to know the truth of the matter. He was very free and
open to disclose the whole matter, and opened his faith freely -- he said he
believed that those who went away and left the Church has no more right to
receive any temporal property out of the Church as a compensation for any labor
or any interest they had bro't in, no more than Judas had a right to an
inheritance with the Apostles after he had betrayed CHRIST. It was alleged
that the interest or service that was given, was given to God, and to take away
that which was given to God would be committing sacrilege. This indeed was
pretty strong meat for me, however, I thought I would not say any thing to
bring myself into trouble: but being asked the question what my faith was in
relation to the matter, I dared not be otherwise than an honest man, so I
opened my faith honestly. I told him I believed that if any one who had lived
with us, and labored faithfully, and spent their strength with us for a number
of years, and finally, for some cause or other they chose to go away and leave
us, it was a righteous thing for us to give them something as a compensation
for their labor I told him if one who lived there with us that had a piece of
land which he had given in to the joint interest, and afterward saw fit to
take himself away, I could not in conscience feel any heart to improve that
land, unless it was purchased of him, and he received the value of it. As to
its being sacrilege I could not conceive the matter to be so that what was
given for Sacred Use and consecrated to God for that purpose, to take it away
might be called sacrelege: But this seemed to me to be a difficult thing: When
we came together we brought what we had, and put it into the common stock, for
the general benefit of all, not for others any more than for ourselves, to be
used equally, according to our daily needs, such as eating, drinking, etc. so
that I could not see the propriety of saying it was all given up for Sacred use
any more than our daily eating and drinking, or any others temporal duty is
sacred. It was signified to me that the wicked did not deserve any thing but
judgment, which included all that were not of that profession. It was told me
they who went away from the Church to the world had what they went after; they
had the flesh and that was enough for them.

In answer to what was said of the wicked's not deserving any thing, I said, if
a wicked man does me a day's work, it is as just and right for me to pay him,
as though he had been a righteous man: also, I told them I did not know but the
time might come when the people of God would have power to execute judgment,
but I did not believe that the time had come yet, therefore, I queried thus;
here is one of the brethren (mentioning his name) who has been here these 8 or
9 years, and has labored faithfully -- he has been a very strong laborious
young man and has done a great deal of good -- by and by he gets discouraged,
loses his faith, or for some other cause, he chooses to go away and leaves us.
Well, we say, he har gone to the unclean and left the only means of his
salvation and will have to suffer the judgment of God. Now, is not that enough
for him to bear -- do not we ought to feel sorry for him, and pity him, or
shall we try to make him as wretched and miserable as we possibly can in this
world, by depriving him of all the fruit of his labor which is necessary for
his subsistence in this world? can this be right, or can any one who has a
christian spirit have a heart to do it?

To repeat all the conversation we had upon this subject would be very lengthy
and needless; but it cost me a great deal of affliction before I got through
with it.

I shall only further observe, that we compromised the matter as well as we
could. I admitted they that went away had no right to make any demand according
to the covenant, and the matter seemed to be dropped as to its being sin to
give them any thing, and so we labored for union again. However, numbers not
long after went away and left the Church, I suppose, chiefly on that account;
but they were settled with, and something given to them for peace sake, so as
to get a final discharge from them, that would secure the Church from any
controversy in the law. This was a reserve that was made that it might be right
to sacrifice something, for peace sake, rather than to enter into a controversy
that might bring the Church into trouble.

Not far from this time (as I was continually exercised in tribulation which I
was unable to keep undiscovered, although the cause I labored to keep to
myself; but doubtless it was observed that I did not preach up faith so strong
as I had done in times past, but labored to maintain union and reconciliation
to the present gift and order that was for us,) being in company with the
Ministers one evening, I was questioned respecting my faith. I was asked
whether I had a living witness in me, that this was the second coming of
CHRIST? I said nay. I have not. My answer seemed to be very surprising and
unexpected: however, they undertook to labor with me -- I showed my reasons in
part; but the more they labored with me, the less says I sell, till I did not
see but I should loose all I had got. The labor continued a day or two, till my
tribulation was unutterable. I did not see but what I must give up my place as
an Elder, for I always had a mortal aversion to hypocrites, and I did not see
but what I had got to be one myself in some degree, although I was conscious to
myself that I had never done any intended wrong, not wilfully acted any thing
that I knew was sin, since the first of my profession; but as I had not faith,
without doubt, I was not able to preach faith to others; however, viewing the
consequences that would naturally follow, I desired to labor further, and
accordingly went to the Ministers and humbled myself, and begged their patience
with me till I had labored for a further increase of faith. They seemed to be
thankful for my resolution and labored to encourage me in it.

But to return again to the labor I was in, to wit, in searching the scriptures
to ascertain whether the day and time had come, according to the testimony, of
the second appearing of Christ. I have already shown that in some of the most
essential points of our faith we were grossly deceived, and there were many
other things which I found to my satisfaction, were equally absurd. One thing I
heard asserted not long since (by one who professed to be my teacher) in the
most positive terms that the Church was now in the new Jerusalem state. This
appeared to me to be a deception, for in that state it is plainly said that God
will wipe away all tears from their eyes, and there shall be no more death,
neither sorrow nor crying, neither shall there be any more pain, for the former
things are passed away. The present state of the Church seemed to me to be
quite the reverse from this, for there is both sorrow, pain and death, and that
to a greater degree than what there is among many other people; but this is
called suffering with Christ: however it appears to me without all doubt that
the sole cause for the greatest part of the sufferings and deaths that have
been among this people is intemperance. What propriety there is in saying that
the Lord Jesus Christ has come in his glory with all the holy Angels with him,
to reign as king upon Earth, and yet his Church be in a state of sufferings I
do not pretend to say, but shall leave it for every one to judge for
themselves: but as I shall not have time to be particular in showing my ideas
on every passage of scripture which I have quoted, and have perused to my
satisfaction. I shall only observe upon a few things which were spokon by the
Lord Jesus Christ, which I believe will be acknowledged to be the most sure
word of prophecy. In the 24th chapter of Matthew Christ gives a very particular
account of what should take place before his coming, and the manner of his
coming; and in the 25th chapter he tells what should be after his coming -- he
signifies that before his coming there would be a great many sounds and voices
about religion; false prophets and false Christ's should arise and show great
signs and wonders etc. Observe this was to be before his coming, not
afterward, "for (he says) as the lightning comes out of the East and shines
even unto the West, so shall the coming of the son of man be;" there will be
such light and evidence manifested as will put the matter beyond all
controversy, both with the just and unjust, for he says, "all the tribes of the
Earth shall see him, and shall mourn at hi^ appearing. "Now it is held by some
that the lightning here spoken of does not mean the electrical fire that
come^^ out of the clouds, but the sun that rises in the East, and
progressively increases till it enlightens the whole Earth. Admitting (...) be
the case, it is no less evident that the second coming of Christ will be with
such incontestible evidence, that all men will have to submit to his
government; for as the sun rises, the day appears, the darkness passes away,
and every object that scarcely discernable in the night now appears clearly to
be what it is; and as it is impossible for the sun to rise and not bring the
day along with it, so it appears to be impossible, according to what is
written, for the sun of righteousness to arise, and be arising more than f^^ty
years, and almost all the inhabitants of the Earth be entirely ignorant of it:
but perhaps it may be said it is possible for men to sleep in the day, when the
sun does shine, and not know whether it be day or night; but Christ says, he
shall send his Angels with a great sound of a trumpet. This no doubt, will
awaken every creature, for "all the tribes of the Earth shall mourn, and they
shall see the son of man coming in the clouds of heaven with power and great
glory." Perhaps it is needless for me to say that there never was more sects
and denominations of religion -- and lo here! and lo there! than there is at
this present time. This is a sign that the day of Christ is at hand; but not
that it has already come, and been come these fifty years.

Now after Christ had spoken a considerable time in relation to his coming, and
the manner of it, he tells us how it should be after he had come; beginning at
Matthew, 25th chapter and 31st verse, where he says, "when the son of man shall
come in his glory, and all the holy Angels with him, then shall he set upon the
throne of his glory, and before him shall be gathered all nations, and he shall
separate them one from another, as a shhepherd divides his sheep from the
goats, and he shall set sheep on the right, but the goats on the left; then,
shall the king say ^o them on his right hand, come ye blessed of my father
inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world, for I
was an hungered and ye gave me meat, etc."

This paragraph, or passage of scripture, came into my mind some days before I
left the people in Hancock. I was under exceeding tribulation in my mind with
respect to these things that I had been laboring in. I walked out into the
garden to amuse my mind some, with the natural creation; while I was walking in
the garden it seemed to break forth into my mind, as though it was sent by the
invisible power of him that spoke it first; the reason that was assigned for
pronouncing the blessing was the matter that operated more essentially in my
mind, "for I was a^^ hungered and ye gave me meat:" it was not because they were
Shakers, or Quakers, or any one particular sect or denomination; it was not
because they gave alms and sounded a trumpet so as to have the praise of men;
it was not because they attended to a great many orders and ceremonies, for
fear of punishment, expecting thereby to make themselves a righteousness. Nay,
it was not all this. But what was it? It was because they had received the
spirit of the Lord Jesus, which made them love to to good to their fellow
creatures; it was because they loved righteousness, for righteousness sake; it
was because they loved those that hated them, and blessed those that cursed
them; and when they had done all, they could feel themselves unprofitable
servants, as it seems was the tenor of their language. They were ready to cry
out, Lord where did we do such and such things? They felt as if they had done
nothing that was sufficient to make them worthy of any favor; but what they had
done they did out of love to God, and therefore had made no account of it.

These meditations and contemplations seemed to carry me quite beyond the
limits of my order. I forgot all my trouble, and almost forgot I was a Shaker;
however, recollecting where and what I was, my trouble soon come on again; and
as there was some things about that time that come forth as order, which I had
not much faith in, so that I could not speak it to the rest as a matter of my
own faith, which I was required to do, without wronging my conscience. I came
to a resolution to relign my office, and not be a hypocrite any longer, let the
event be as it would, though I was not determined to come away till I was
further satisfied: I accordingly carried my my resolution into effect and gave
up my place as the Elder Brother, June 30th, and desired no one to look to me
for any help or any counsel as they had done, but to labor for myself only, and
be esteemed as one of the least of all. This I spoke to the family, and told
them I felt myself quite come to an end. and unable to be any further help to
them; but did not tell the cause, in particular, for I was not allowed by any
means to open my weakness or unbelief to the reft, respecting the foundation of
our profession. But the circumstance of my religning my place seemed to be very
shocking, and caused great agitations and anxiety of mind throughout the
Church. My tribulation also was not at all less^ned; viewing things as they had
been in relation to me, and comparing them with my present state; it seemed as
though it was more than I should be able to endure, and continue in the body:
but as I had but one life to lose, and one soul to save, I was determined once
for all, to be an honest man, and abide the event.

However, as there was one appointed to supply the place which I had left,
there was immediately great labor and pains taken to separate the feelings of
the Church from me, both by the Ministers and Elders; and as this could not
easily be done without finding something against me, whereby it might be made
to appear that I had been wicked, and gone contrary to the order of the Church.
There was no pains spared in laboring and searching to find some iniquity, both
by examining me and many others, till finally it was thought they had found
some thing worthy of admonition. I was labored with and severely admonished,
even for that which they themselves would have justified. A few months before I
was told I had got to come to such and such things or go to the world, etc. I
received the communication without making much reply, and told them I should
consider of it I but notwithstanding, I had felt many times as though I could
go away and leave them with as much peace of conscience as ever I lay down to
sleep as to any faith I had that bound me there; yet, when I come to bring the
matter near and realize it, to forsake the people which I so loved, and had so
long maintained such a near relation and intimate union with, and with whom I
had a comfortable subsistence, with respect to temporal things, and seek me a
place among strangers, it seemed as though I had rather give up my life and go
into eternity; for my natural relations were as much strangers to me at the
rest of mankind, for from the first of my faith, there was no one to my
knowledge that labored more effectually to reject and shut out their natural
relations than myself: and having been very bold and presumptuous to testily
many things to them, which I had good reason to believe were dictated by the
spirit of error, and that which I should have to acknowledge was false and
absurd; and also in treating them with such unnatural contempt. that I felt as
though I should never have confidence to ask of them any favor.

In consideration of these things and feeling my heart and affections so bound
up in the family whore I lived, that I chose to submit to any thing that was
required of me, as far as I was able and not sin against my own conscience, not
seeing any thing but what I must soon leave this world, for my appetite to food
was all gone, so that I was able to take very out little for my nourishment;
and there was such a pain in my heart, almost continually, that it seemed some
times as though it would burst asunder; and all the remedy I could find was
weeping and crying to God -- and this was so troublesome to the Ministers and
Elders (it having such an effect upon those that had tender feelings) that I
was disallowed weeping before the family, or indeed, any where else; however I
was not able to refrrin all the time; but when my heart was in such pain that I
could endure it no longer. I would take myself alone and weep and pray to God
till I was in some measure refreshed; but my tribulation still continued as
constant as my breath, though the family was exceeding kind and tender to me,
and were willing to help me to every thing I needed as to temporal support, and
would often try to comfort me in my spirit, but it was all in vain -- also the
Ministers and Elders frequently labored with me, to help my faith; but that was
equally in vain; for the more they labored with me, the more I was satisfied we
were all upon a wrong foundation, and should at last be found false witnesses
before God. It appeared evident to me that my feelings to the people and family
where I lived was partial, and that which was acquired by a long habit of
intimacy, more than by the true love of God, which is universal to all that
believe in Christ. Viewing things to be so I was unwilling to stay there and
die, for death appeared to me not far distant, as my body was reduced almost to
a skeliton, and my natural strength almost exhausted; therefore I believed it
was my duty to change my condition by coming away and leaving them, and
renouncing that which I believed was error: but the cross I had to take up for
that purpose I believe was seven fold greater than it was to forsake my
father's house and join that people at first -- however I gathered up as much
resolution as I could, and accomplished my purpose the 24th of July, 1799, by
bidding them farewell, and leaving the place. As to my feelings since that
time, I shall only observe, that notwithstanding I was at a loss for some time
whether I should live or die, my health was so impaired. I have not seen one
moment that I was sorry I came away, let it be to my honor or dishonor; but I
am fully persuaded that I have been under the power of deception and was led by
he spirit of error, as to the main principles of faith that I set out upon: but
my present feeling and determination is to turn to the good and the right way,
which is the new and living way, pointed out by Christ and his Apostles, and
make it the rule of my lise and conduct.

Now I desire ^o address myself in a few words, to those who have or may
hereafter come away from the people called Shakers. There has been numbers who
have left that people, whose conduct, I am sorry to say, has been more wicked
and profane than the rest of mankind in general. This is made use of by the
Shakers (as some of you well know) as an evidence that they are the only people
of God; applying that scripture in Matthew 12th, 43d, etc. where it speaks of
the unclean spirit going out of a man, and afterward he takes seven other
spirits more wicked than himself, etc. This is applied to all that leave them.
They suppos^ that they are going to be seven times more wicked than ever they
were before; or, at least, all that leave them and deny any faith in them: but
for my part I do not feel under any obligation to be wicked, because they think
it must be so: neither do I feel any lack of the protection of God from the
power of evil any more than ever I did; but I feel as fully determined, by the
help of God, to do justice, love mercy, and walk humbly with God, as ever I did
in any part of my life -- and as there are numbers of you that have lived with
me, and have heard me speak a great deal against the flesh, etc. and likely
would be glad to hear from me now, in relation to the matter, I would just let
you know that I feel as much against the works of the flesh, which is forbidden
in the scriptures, as ever I did: but the ordinance and convenant of marriage,
between male and female, which was ordained of God, in the garden of Eden
before the fall; I believe it is the gift of God now as really as ever it was;
but as I have not time to be particular in this matter, I would refer you to a
book, written by my ingenious friend, DANIEL RATHBONE, which was published some
years ago, where the matter is fairly and ingeniously laid open. But there is
another thing which I desire to be a little particular in, respecting some that
have left the Shakers, and have dishonored themselves by bad behavior Although
wickedness is inexcusable whenover it is found, yet sometimes by knowing what
the cause is, we may be able to make some allowance for the effect. Now in the
beginning of our faith there was a great many young children among the
believers, which lived chiefly with their parents for a number of years, and
the chief part of the teaching they had was to sing and dance and labor for
mortification. Finally there was a great number gathered to the Church, where
they were put under the care of a Minister, appointed for that purpose They
were disallowed to have any books that was proper to instruct the mind into the
principles of humanity. Their teaching was such as might be expected from those
who rejected the scriptures, reason, and common sense, as being repugnant to
the Gospel. They were, doubtless, some of them very vicious in their natures,
and ungovernable, therefore it seemed necessary to use violent means to subject
them to obedience. This appeared barbarous and cruel, and only aggravated their
feelings to greater opposition. Finally they broke out of their bondage, and
went off to the world one after another. Now being taught from their infancy
that their was no other people that served God but the Shakers, and not having
any opportunity to learn any thing to the contrary, they did not know but it
was so; and not being able to endure the discipline in the Church, they
renounced that religion; together with all the rest upon Earth, determining to
take their own way, without fearing God or regarding man. Being bred up so
entirely ignorant of all the principles of morality, they become easy victims
to all manner of evil. -- Others there are, who had arrived to the years of
understanding before they joined the Shakers, and have since left them, and
made a sad figure in the world. Those I apprehend are such as never had any
principles of righteousness in them, but joined the people out of some selfish
motives; and not finding their purpose answered, return back to their old
course with an increase of evil. Now, my friends, as we have made a very
extraordinary profession, and exalted ourselves above the rest of mankind, and
have found ourselves deceived; do not let us be discouraged of trying to serve
God at all; but let us remember that the day will come when we shall all
receive a reward according to our works.

Now a few words to those whom I have called my brethren and sisters, to wit,
the Church in Hancock, called Shakers; although I do not expect you will be
allowed by your ministers to read what I have here written, yet it may be
possible that some of you may chance to see it, which if you do, you will find
the real cause of my coming away from you; for as I was not allowed to open my
mind to any one but those who labord with me, it was impossible for you to know
the cause of my affliction fully or the reason of my leaving you: but thanks be
to God, I am now where I have liberty to open my mind without fearing the
displeasure of mortals; but as I understand the common proceeding among you in
relation to those that come away from you, I shall not be disappointed to find
myself exceedingly hated b^ some of you, who, no doubt, believe it your duty to
hate ^e and execrate me as much as you ^re a^^^, lest you should lose your
union with your Ministers and Elders; I sap in this I shall not be
disappointed, but shall consider it to be just in relation to me to have the
same meat measured to me that I have measured to others, though I cannot say
that I have ever felt or allowed myself to feel such a spi^^ of revenge as I
have observed among some of you A few days before I came away from yon, I heard
a man say, (one that professed to be very forward among you) speaking of one
that had lately come off, that he wished a tree might fall upon him before he
got to the place where he was agoing: and there is some whom you esteem to be
some of the foremost among you, who have uttered such sentiments as these when
their cattle got into their neighbor's grain; they thought it was as well for
their cattle to eat it as it was for the world to have it, because their
neighbor, who was the owner of it, was not a Shaker, but of the world. Many
more such like things might be mentioned were (...) ^^^ssary; but I shall only
observe, that through a long co^^^ (...) experience, I have found, that there
has existed and still does exist a spirit among you which would put all the
race of Adam into the most exquisite torture, had they power sufficient, that
would not subject to your faith and profession. Now these things I speak not to
reproach you; but my desire is that you might see the spirit of error by which
you are led and renounce it, and embrace the simple doctrines which w^^^ taught
by Christ and the Apostles. But there is one thing which has come to my ears
that I understand came from some of you, to which, it appears to me, I cannot
do justice to myself without making some reply.

I have understood it has been intimated that while I lived in the Church and
professed to be strong in faith, that I lived in unlawful connection with a
certain woman, which is since my wife Now this appears to me to be mean and ill
usage, and beneath the Church of Christ, even if it was true. You may remember,
doubtless, some of you, what I spoke to you a few days before I come away -- I
told you if any of you had any thing against me, or knew any wickedness of me
to tell me of it before I came away, so that I might confess it and leave it
with you, and not serve me as you did the rest, as soon as they were gone, then
to try to rake up every thing you could against them. Now why was you not so
kind, if you knew these things, as to tell me of it while I was there, for I
presume you knew as much about it then as you do now. However I will tell you
the simple truth, as I expect to answer in to God my creator. From the time
that I first professed christianity (which was a year or two before I heard of
the people called Shakers) to this day, I never have had any unlawful connection
with any wom^n, nor never in the course of my life did I ever defile myself
with strange flesh; and from the time I first knew the Shakers to this time, I
never defiled myself with what is called among you effeminacy; neither did I
ever know by any certain knowledge, while I lived with you, that there was any
females in the Church or any where else, except it was at the time when there
was such a gift for men and women to strip naked and go into the water
together, etc. I was some times a spectator, and perhaps might observe the
difference; but as to the wom^n which is now my wife, I never knew whether she
was male or female till after I was legally married to her; and as to my making
any agreement with her to come away from the Church, I never did, first nor
last, for I never spoke a single word to her about one thing or another, after
I was determined to come away, till a few minutes before I came away; then I
spoke with her and gave her the offer of my friendship and protection, if God
spared my life, if it was her choice to follow me.

Now there are some things which I have hinted that many of you are ignorant
of, which I feel it my duty to open more plainly. It is well known to you that
the foundation of our hope was built upon our faith in the first Mother,
William Leas and James Whittaker, believing that they were redeemed from all
sin and were equal unto the Angels of God. I have hinted something about the
contention there was among them; now I will tell you what I saw with my own
eyes, I was at Niskauna with the Mother and the Elders. At length there was a
contention broke out, which seemed chiefly to be between the Mother and William
Leas; it kept increasing till there was nothing but clamor and confusion.
Finally the Mother fell to beating William Leas -- smiting of him in the face
-- he tried to defend off her blows, threatening to smite her if she did not
let him alone. There was a number of people present, who, most of them, seemed
to join with the Mother, and labored to keep William Leas from hurting her, for
there was awful threatening on both sides; however the mother would not let him
alone, but notwithstanding his activity in defending himself would very often
get a blow at him, till his face was in a gore of blood: at length, as he could
endure it no longer, he smote her with his fist, and being a very strong man I
understood that he hurt her very much, but she did not fall quite to the floor,
if I remember right, the people being so thick held her up. I stood the chief
part of time not more than five or six feet from them, and saw the whole of
what I have described, and I think I have not exaggerated it one mor^^l, but
have rather come short; for as I have had considerable opportunity in the
course of my life both in the army among soldiers and elsewhere, I never saw
any contention that appeared more contrary to the Gospel: notwithstanding, at
that time, my faith and imagination w^^ such, that I dared not judge there was
any thing in the Mother that was wrong: but since I have found by incontestible
evidence that I have been deceived, and have given myself liberty to exercise
the rational faculties that God has created in me, it appears to me that the
Mother, at that time, was very much overcome with strong liquor, and was under
the influence and power of Satan; and there is some among you now, or at least
was the last I heard from them, that can say, if they would be honest, that I
have spoke but a little part of what they see and heard from time to time, as
they had more opportunity than I There is one among you, or was when I came
away, that told me a few months ago that he was there at the time I was and
lived there some time after: he signified they were in contention almost
continually; sometimes between the Mother and William Leas, and sometime
between the Mother and James Whittaker -- he told as to their language, there
never was a sailor stepped on board a ship that exceeded them -- he told me the
Mother charged Whittaker with committing whoredom with a certain woman;
Whittaker declared his innocence, etc -- This man that told me this I suppose
is now among you and means to stay, for aught that I know; but you yourselves,
some of you, believe, or at least have believed, that there is some among you
who are in Authority, that are no more Shakers in heart and principle than the
rest of the world, but stay among you out of selfish motives.

There is many things I should be glad to say to you, but as I expect it is
unlikely many of you will ever see what I have wrote so long as you remain in
your bondage, I shall close my matter by just observing, that my experience
among the Shakers appears to me like a man that has been following an ignis
fatuus, which is something which he supposes to be light, and sets out to go to
it, but never gets any nearer to it, but follows it till he is led into a
disu^al wilderness of darkness, and then it disappears; so it seems has been
the case with me. It appears to me that I turned my eyes off from that light
which God had appointed for souls to look to, and thought I see a light some
where else, but in following after it I found it was always out vonder, till
finally it led me into a dismal swamp, and then disappeared, where I had to get
out as well as I could; but I am thankful to God that I have so far got out
that I hope I am able, in some measure, to discover things as they be; and may
God grant that you all may receive the same help and grace of God to bring you
out of your darkness into the true light of the glorious Gospel of the Son of
God, so that you may be happy in this world and that which is to come, which is
the sincere desire of

REUBEN RATHBONE.

FINIS.

