REPORT OF THE TRIAL OF RICHARD D. CROUCHER, ON AN INDICTMENT FOR A RAPE ON
MARGARET MILLER; ON TUESDAY, THE 8 th DAY OF JULY, 1800.

TAKEN IN SHORT HAND.

NEWYORK -- Printed by George Forman, No. 64, Water-Stre^^ and Sold by the
respective Booksellers in this city.

PREFACE.
THE following REPORT, although unsupported by a name, is given to the public
with an assurance that it is impartial, correct, and minute -- and what need a
preface say more?

NEW YORK, JULY 14, 1800.
COURT OF OYER AND TERMINER, etc. Began and held at the City-Hall of the City
of NEW YORK, on Tuesday, the eighth day of July, 1800.
PRESENT, Justices of Oyer and Terminer, etc.
His Hon. MR. JUSTICE BENSON, His Hon. RICHARD VARICK, ESQUIRE. Mayor, His Hon.
RICHARD HARRISON, ESQUIRE. Recorder, SELAH STRONG, ESQUIRE. Alderman,
The People, us. Richard D. Croucher.

CADWALLADER D. COLDEN, ESQUIRE. Attorney Genesis Council for Prisoner. BROCKHOLST
LIVINGSTON, Esquire. WASHINGTON MORTON, Esquire.

JURORS SWORN.
John Downing, William Maxwell, Stephen Ludlum, Isaac Hicks, John Saunders,
Peter Elting, Jun. Thomas Buckley, Aaron Judah, John Goodeve, James Davidson,
William Cunningham, Jacob Rickets.
INDICTMENT.
City and County of New York, ss.
THE Jurors of the people of the State of New York, in and for the body of the
City and County of New York, on their oaths present, That Richard D. Croucher,
late of the City of New York, in the County of New York laborer, not having the
fear of God before his eyes, but being moved and seduced by the instigation of
the devil, on the twenty-third day of April, in the year of our Lord, one
thousand eight hundred, with force and arms at the City of New York, at the
seventh ward of the said City, in the County of New York aforesaid, in and upon
one Margaret Miller, Spinster, in the peace of God, and of the said people,
then and there being, violently and feloniously did make an assault, and her
the said Margaret Miller, then and there feloniously did ravish and carnally
know, against the form of the statute in such case made and provided, and
against the peace of the said people and their dignity.

THE ATTORNEY GENERAL. Gentlemen of the Jury,

THE prisoner at the bar is charged as you may have heard read in the
indictment, with the crime of Rape. He who has carnal knowledge of a woman
against her consent, is guilty of a Rape. Gentlemen, it may be material to
remark to you, and that you should remember it, that if the act is committed
even with her consent, and such consent is extorted from her through fear, or
by duress, it is the same thing in the eye of law as if done against her will.

The circumstances of this case are too shocking to the ear of modesty, to be
repeated to you oftener or more minutely than is absolutely necessary. It will
be the painful task of the child upon whom the injury has been committed, a
young girl about thirteen years of age, to detail them to you. It will be
sufficient for me at present to mention to you generally, that etc. -- Here the
Attorney General gave the jury a history of the facts which he expected would
appear in the course of the trial, but as they will come best from the mouth of
the witnesses, we decline repeating them here.


Margaret Miller, sworn. The witness appearing to be below years of puberty,
the court enquired her age, which was said to be 13. After recovering a little
from her embarrassment, and wiping away the tears, which ran fast down her
cheeks for some time, she went on, and in answer to questions which were put to
her, she said;

Mr. Croucher came to my She had been accustomed to call Mrs. Stackhaver her
mother.
mothers, Mrs. Stackhavers, I don't know how long ago, to sell some stockings --
he used to come every day. One night he asked my mamma, if she would let me go
and scrub his room for him at Mr. Rings, where he lived, for he said there was
a lady and gentleman coming to look at some linens he had. She said at first,
she did not know whether I might or not, but at last she consented. He said he
wanted me to go that night, so that I might be there very early in the morning,
and that I might sleep with a servant girl in the house if I would go. So I
went with him to Mr. Rings house in Greenwich street, almost by Rhinelanders
brew house. He told me to go up stairs to a room in the third story, and he
would follow; it was about 9 o'clock -- I heard the clock strike 8 some time
before.

I went up and he followed and took me through a dark entry into a room in the
third story. He told me the servant girl would come and sleep with me, and then
he locked the door, and took out the key and went down. After a little time he
came back and locked the door inside; then he took me and undressed me and put
me on the bed; and then he undressed himself, and came to bed to me. (Here the
witness burst into tears, and was unable to proceed; but being told it was
absolutely necessary she should tell what followed) she said,

He used force -- he did what he would, and hurt me very much, so much that I
could hardly get home the next morning. After he had done, he fell asleep, and
I got up and sat upon some wood till I could see so as to find the door.

Quest. by the Attorney General. Did you not cry out and make a noise when he
hurt you?

Ans. At first I screamed, but he said if I did not hold my tongue, he would
put me out of the way. I cried all the time, but not loud, I was afraid to.

Quest. Did you ever tell Mrs. Stackhaver of this, or any body else?

Ans. I did not then, I was afraid. -- He used to visit our house every day.

Quest. How long did you feel the effects of the injury he did you?

Ans. About a fortnight.

Quest. When was it that Croucher and Mrs. Stackhaver were married? They were
married, were they not?

Ans. They were married the Sunday night before Weeks's trial.

Quest. How long is it since you mentioned this affair, and how came you to
mention it?

Ans. He told Mrs. Stackhaver himself of it.

Quest. How came he to do that?

Ans. He got angry with me one day, and he told Mrs. Stackhaver, that if she
would turn me away, he would tell her something about me -- this was when I was
at school.

Quest. Then you did not hear it?

Ans. When I came home he told her so again before me, and he told her he had
lain with me with my consent.

Quest. Did you consent in any manner, or at any time?

Ans. No sir, it was without my consent.

Quest. How came you at the Police Office, on what account did you go there?

Ans. I was sent for to give evidence about it; which Mrs. Stackhaver had told
of, and they sent for me, and I went down.

Quest. Did Croucher ever treat you ill after this affair?

Ans. After they were married he whipped me, and turned me out of doors. [
Crying very much.]

Quest. Was there not a great deal of quarrelling between Croucher and his wife?

Ans. Yes sir, soon after they were married.

Quest. How long have you lived with Mrs. Stackhaver?

Ans. Two years.

Quest. Has she always treated you kindly?

Ans. Yes sir, very kindly till he came.

Quest. Have you been accustomed to go out o'nights?

Ans. No sir, never, never.

Quest. You say she always treated you well till he came; did she not
afterward?

Ans. He wanted her to turn me out of doors, and she wanted to keep me.

Quest. Did he turn you out?

Ans. Yes sir, he turned me out three times.

Quest. How did you get out of the room that night after he had to do with you?

Ans. I sat on the wood till day light, and then I found the key on the mantle
piece, and unlocked the door and got out. I could hardly get home I was so hurt.

Quest. Did your mother perceive any thing ailed you?

Ans. Yes sir, she asked me what was the matter, but I was afraid to tell for
fear of Mr. Croucher, but he told of it himself and he said he had got a
disorder of me.

Here the Attorney General said he should rest, presuming the fact was
sufficiently proved if the jury believed the witness. The court however said
they conceived the evidence had not yet gone far enough, and that it was
absolutely necessary that the witness should be, as to the fact, explicit. He
then put the question to the witness in precise terms, whether she was certain
that the prisoner, when he had her on the bed, had committed the crime for
which he was now on trial? To which she answered in the affirmative.

Cross-Examined.

Quest. How long do you think you lay on the bed with the prisoner?

Ans. I don't know.

Quest. Did he go to sleep?

Ans. Yes sir.

Quest. Did you get up when you thought him asleep?

Ans. I got up and sat upon the wood, I could not get out.

Quest. Did you go to school next day?

Ans. No sir, I was so lame I could not go, I lay o'bed.

Quest. Did you make any excuse for not going?

Ans. I don't remember.

Quest. How old are you?

Ans. Fourteen the 7th day of next August.

Quest. Were you ever turned out of doors by Mrs. Stackhaver before this
happened?

Ans. No sir.

Quest. Do you remember carrying home a bag of clothes from Ring's the next
morning?

Ans. I do not know sir, I don't remember it.

Quest. Did he lock you in the first time he went down?

Ans. Yes sir.

Quest. Did you cry?

Ans. Yes sir; I thought he was a going to lock me up and leave me there.

Quest. How long did he remain below before he returned?

Ans. Not long.

Quest. Has not Mrs. Stackhaver threatened to turn you out of doors if you did
not complain of him?

Ans. No sir.

Quest. Did Croucher afterward often quarrel with you and treat you ill?

Ans. Yes sir.

Quest. by Attorney General. Was the injury repeated upon you more than once
that night?

Ans. Yes sir, three times.

Quest. by Prisoner's Counsel. Did he ever repeat it at any other time?

Ans. Once when Mrs. Stackhaver was sick, he wanted to, but I went out of doors
and, would not let him.

Quest. Do you remember ever carrying him any clothes from Ring's?

Ans. No sir, never; he sent me once there for wine after I got well.

Quest. Did not Mrs. Stackhaver turn you away in consequence of this affair?

Ans. Yes, she told me I must get some other place, and I went to Mr.
Houston's, after that Mrs. Thompson took care of me.

Abiel Brown, sworn. I hire a tenement of Croucher, the prisoner, joining where
he now lives since he was married. A little after I moved in, on the first of
May la^^, I perceived there was a disagreement between him and his wife, which
I was very sorry for, and I used frequently to mention it to them. I used to
see this little girl there, and I confess I supposed her in fault, and the
occasion, for I used to hear the wife speak to her in Dutch sometimes, and then
to him in English. I saw him turn her out of doors frequently. One day the old
lady desired me to step in and look at some marks of blows on her shoulder. One
morning he came into my shop and said there never was such a difficulty as he
had, and the girl was the cause, she was a bad girl and should not stay in the
house. He said she was a whore. I told him it seemed impossible for a child of
her age and size to be so. He said she was, and he could prove it. She had once
before he was married had the impudence to ask him one night to go home and
sleep with her. I asked him if he came to this house. He said no, she went with
him. He said she slept with him, but he did not effect his purpose because she
was so young.

Atty. Genesis Repeat that, sir.


Witness. He said he did not accomplish the business, she was so young, but
that she slept with him all night.


Att'y. Genesis Pray, sir, did he intimate in plain terms that he tried? See if
you cannot remember the words he made use of.


Witness. As near as I can remember he said, finding her so young he did not
accomplish the business, but she was a whore, and he could prove it by other
people. I have heard him tell the old woman that she was a whore, and she
should not stay in the house.


Quest. by Attorney General. Have you observed the behavior of this girl, sir,
and what was her character?


Witness. I have seen her about house, and seen her going to school and to
meeting, and I never saw any thing but what was very well in her -- I took her
to be a modest, inoffensive girl.


Quest. Have you not observed something like a constant terror in her at the
sight of Croucher?

Ans. She would endeavor to get out of his way into another part of the house,
and I have often seen her a crying. One night he called me in, and he drove her
up stairs. I have seen her in the gangway crying to herself for a considerable
time. I have always thought she appeared very much afraid of him. If she met
him when she was going into the house, she would turn and go in another way,
through my entry.

The Council for the prisoner declined any cross-examination.

Mrs. Brown. [Being asked if she had not frequently overheard conversation
between Croucher and his wife, concerning the girl, she said] I have -- quite
lately I heard Croucher say he did not like her, and she should not stay in the
house; she was a very bad girl, and he was not going to keep a bad girl in the
house; he was sure he said that she was a bad girl, he could prove it, he knew
it himself. Then he said she was a whore, and he could prove it, he had lain
with her one night himself. He said he had heard that she was a bad girl, and
he was determined to know if it was so, and therefore he had lain with her one
night, and was satisfied it was so.


Quest. Did you understand Ma'am from what he said that he had had a connection
with her?

Ans. Yes, I did.

Quest. That he had carnally known her?

Ans. Yes sir.

Here the Attorney General rested the prosecution.

Mr. Morton, council for the prisoner. Gentlemen of the Jury,

DELICATE and difficult of decision as issues of this kind ever must be, it is
a subject of congratulation to you gentlemen, that this, from the circumstances
already detailed in evidence, is susceptible of an easy and safe determination,
and of a determination favorable to the prisoner. I state this to be true, from
a comparison of the testimony actually given on the part of the people, with
what ought to have been produced to satisfy the caution with which the law
watches over the life of man (or what is the same thing, his liberty forever)
when put in jeopardy by accusations of this kind.

This caution indeed pervades the whole system of our jurisprudence in degrees
necessary to the exigencies of the case; and it seems, as if in cases of this
kind, the law has deemed no exertion of care and watchfulness too great, no
precision too accurate, no accuracy too nice, and unless all these ramparts
with which it hedges in the welfare of the citizen be broken down, it does not
permit one to fall a victim.

The prisoner, then gentlemen, will in his defense insist, first, That from the
case as it now stands before you from the evidence on the part of the
prosecutor, he ought to be acquitted. Secondly, he will strengthen this
obligation upon you to acquit, by evidence offered on his part. He will show
you the terms upon which the girl and himself were, shortly prior to the time
when this offense is said to have been committed. He will describe to you the
place (so material here) where this enormity is said to have been perpetrated,
and from circumstances attending it, will lead you to suspect the part of the
story told by the prosecutrix in relation to the outcries. He will lastly,
gentlemen, offer to you such law as shall be deemed applicable to his case,
which under the direction of the court will guide you in your decision. And
here my duty ends. To explain and enforce these different points requires the
experience and talents of the council, who will follow me, and with whom after
reading the law referred to, I shall leave the cause.


He then read several passages from Hales, P. C. and 4 Black. Com. and
concluded in the words of Hale, "I only mention these instances that we may be
the more cautious upon trials of offenses of this nature, wherein Court and
Jury may with so much ease be imposed upon, without great care and vigilance.
The seriousness of the offense many times transporting the judge and jury, with
so much indignation, that they are hastily carried to the conviction of the
person accused thereof, by the confident testimony sometimes of malicious and
false witnesses,"

The deposition of George Ricker, taken by consent, he being sick, was then
read to the court and jury, and is as follows:

City and county of New York, ss. -- George Ricker, of the city of New York,
grocer, being duly sworn, deposes and says, That Margaret Miller lived with
Mrs. Stackhaver, the present wife of Mr. Croucher, about three years prior to
their marriage, which took place the first Sunday in April last. That he
frequently heard Mrs. Stackhaver complain of the girl's sauciness; and about
three weeks before Mr. Croucher married Mrs. Stackhaver, this deponent went
accidentally to the house of Mrs. Stackhaver, where he found Mr. Croucher and
Margaret Miller, who was standing between the legs of Mr. Croucher, resting her
hands upon his thighs, as this wilness thinks, in an improper way, and the
moment this deponent entered the door, jumped back and went to the fire place.

(Signed) GEORG RICKER.
Sworn to before me, this 7 th day of July, 1800. JACOB DELA MONTAGNIE, Aldn.

Richard Van Alstine, sworn.

Quest. Did you not board in the house with Croucher when this affair happened?

Ans. I boarded in Mr. Rings house, from some time in January last, till the
30th of April. I lodged in the fourth story at first, and Croucher, the
prisoner in the third. I remember moving down into the third story sometime
before Week's trial, but I cant say exactly how long, where I always slept
during the whole time I staid afterward, without sleeping away one night.

Quest. by prisoner's council. Did you ever hear any noise in Croucher's room,
which you say was next to yours, during the time you slept there, such as
screams or cries of a woman?

Ans. I never did.

Quest. Could you not easily hear any little noise in his room?

Ans. I could hear him move chairs or any thing of the kind about the room.

Cross-Examined.

Quest. What is your usual hour of going to bed?

Ans. 10 o'clock or 11, from 10 to 11.

Quest. Did you make a practice of going to your room before your bed hour?

Ans. No, I did not.

Quest. Do you ever go to bed before 9 o'clock?

Ans. Not often I don't, I may have done so, I dare say I have sometimes.

The Attorney General read from Hawkins a passage that "Offenses of this nature
are no way mitigated by showing that the woman at last consented to the
violence, if such her consent was forced by fear of death or of duress. Nor is
it any excuse that she consented after the fact."

The testimony being closed, Mr. Livingston addressed the Jury in behalf of his
client.

Gentlemen of the Jury,

NO crime excites greater abhorrence or indignation, than the one with which
the prisoner stands charged. When a female who is entitled to our protection,
is seduced or violated, there is an universal disposition in our sex to avenge
the injury. And when an infant of tender age falls a sacrifice to the arts of a
man of the prisoner's appearance, that disposition becomes almost
incontroulable. But however unpromising appearances may be, the prisoner feels
a perfect assurance, that he will meet with no obstacle to a fair and impartial
trial, from improper prejudice or misplaced resentment.

Whatever, gentlemen, may have been the conduct of the prisoner to this young
girl, or however unjustifiable, yet it is difficult to believe that it could
have amounted to the crime for which he is now on trial. If any thing of an
improper nature has passed between them, I am inclined to believe it has been
with her consent. The passions may be as warm in a girl of her age as in one of
more advanced years, and with very little enticement she may have consented to
become his mistress. If so, the law acquits him, for when consent is given
after ten years of age, a rape cannot exist. The moment a charge of this kind
is made, every tongue is busy, and if the accused has an unlucky appearance or
an unfortunate countenance, especially too if the girl is young, every one is
ready to propagate the calumny, till at last what in contemplation of law may
be innocent, is magnified into a crime of the first enormity, and it is almost
impossible for the party to encounter with success the torrent of prejudice
which threatens to overwhelm him. Such however is the wisdom of our laws, and
such the care with which juries are selected, that a man is almost sure, if
innocent, of being acquitted by his peers.

I stand not here, gentlemen, to vindicate Croucher from the imputation of
improper conduct toward this girl; it is, I will readily admit, unjustifiable
and highly criminal; but the question and the only one now before you is,
whether he is guilty of the crime alleged against him. You perceive the
disadvantages under which the prisoner labors. The party injured, is herself
the principal witness against him, and such is the nature of the transaction,
that it cannot be expected he can prove the particulars of his intimacy with
her, or that it was with her consent. But her testimony is surely to be
received with great allowance. When once it is known that a girl has had a
criminal connection with a man, there is instantly a strong bias in her own
mind and in those of her relations, that it should be proved to have been done
by violence. So strong indeed is the temptation to give it this color, that it
is hardly possible for a girl so situated to tell the truth. If it had been
agreed on between Croucher and the girl that an intimacy of this kind should
take place, and as her own house was not convenient, that their meeting should
be at his chamber; and if it had been so arranged, that he should ask her
mother's permission for her going there under some pretense or other; and if in
pursuance of this plan every thing had taken place agreeable to their wishes,
do you believe she would have disclosed all those circumstances? If this was
not so, if this story be not contrived, would she not when smarting under the
wounds she received, have at least communicated it to her mother, and taken her
advice notwithstanding all the threats which it is now said were made use of?
It will be contended that she tells a consistent story; but after what had
happened, some story of the kind was necessary, and certainly not very
difficult to be fabricated at her leisure. To discredit her, there is the very
strong circumstance of her having concealed it for such a length of time. This
is attempted to be accounted for, but let it be remembered, it is accounted for
only by herself, and not by any other witness or any other circumstance. Indeed
the disclosure is never made by her at all; but extraordinary to relate, it
comes out first from Croucher himself. Now, gentlemen, a man who appears rather
shrewd and cunning than otherwise, and who cannot be so ignorant of law as not
to know what constitutes a Rape and its certain consequences, tells her mother
himself, in the presence of Mrs. Brown, that he had had this connection with
her! Again, you do not find that she made any outcry or called for assistance,
but she pretends she was deterred by fear and threats. I admit that if there
has been force, or if he told her when he lay her on the bed, that if she made
a noise he would blow her brains out, this would constitute such a degree of
violence as to justify her not making a noise. It is very easy to contrive a
story of this kind, but the truth is, every girl on these occasions will find
an excuse for not crying out. It is in evidence that after the fact he treated
her with great severity, and was ever quarrelling with her mother for not
turning her out of doors. What inference are we to draw from this? Being no
longer in his possession or power, she would be at liberty to make what
complaint she pleased, and after being once made to a magistrate it would be no
longer in his power to injure her. Is this conduct at all reconcilable with his
guilt and his wish to conceal it? Besides the cases read to you I will mention
one, which must be within the recollection of you all. I allude to the case of
Mr. Bedlow. He was brought to a trial in this very Hall on a similar charge;
the testimony there was far more satisfactory than it is here. The character of
the principal witness, the girl, was supported as irreproachable, and
circumstantial testimony was added in corroboration. The jury were upon the
point of conviction; he escaped with great difficulty; and because he did
escape, the City was in a tumult; the house where the crime was supposed to
have been perpetrated, was levelled to the ground; even the houses of the
counsel who defended him were surrounded and threatened with destruction, so
that the magistrates of the city were obliged to interfere. -- The evidence to
convict in that case was far stronger than here, and yet the girl herself has
since that time, by a voluntary affidavit, published to the world that Mr.
Bedlow was innocent, and that she was suborned. How shocking is it to remember
that he was on the point of being sacrificed, for it was then death, to a
plausible perjury? In the present case the character of the girl has not been
supported at all, nor I presume can it be. But it is said, her youth renders it
impossible she should have been a lewd girl. Who that is acquainted with the
dissolute morals of our city does not know that females are many of them to be
found living in a state of open prostitution at the early ages of 12 and 13
years? Such in truth is the little care which we take of our youth, and such
our ill-judged mode of educating the sexes together in our public schools, that
it would not cause much wonder to see young girls turned upon the town as young
as this witness. It is in evidence, that the girl was seen, about ten days
before the crime is alleged to have been committed, in a very improper and
indecent situation with Croucher. I am not defending the conduct of that man. I
will suppose he is guilty of having most shamefully seduced and ruined the
girl, but the moment seduction is put upon the same footing and confounded with
Rape, consequences the most dreadful are to be apprehended. What is more common
than for young men at a certain age to single out some female, to whom they pay
their temporary addresses, merely with a view of present gratification. Suppose
a case of this sort, and that after continuing upon an amicable footing for
some time, a quarrel ensues, a prosecution is set on foot, the girl swears that
all was done without her consent, her character is supported as formerly
virtuous, and although evidence may be offered of the terms of extreme intimacy
on which they have long been, yet confounding seduction with Rape, he is to be
found guilty of the latter crime and cut off from society for life.

In the present case there is reason to believe the prosecution originates in
motives of a very unjustifiable nature. The girl does not come forward at first
on her own account, but to oblige her mother. Her mother thought this a short
way of getting rid of a disagreeable husband. There are strong grounds to
believe this has been the case. A prosecution originating in such motives and
at so late a day, ought to be viewed with a very suspicious eye. The
transaction took place in March, and we hear nothing of it during that month,
during all April, during all May, nor till the middle of June. This delay is
not accounted for, and it cannot be to any one's satisfaction. If you once
admit of the excuse now given, that this concealment was owing to dread of the
prisoner, you put an excuse into the mouth of every witness who may choose to
appear and commence a similar prosecution from personal motives of revenge. No,
you are bound to make a resolute stand, and to say, the evidence is
unsatisfactory, we cannot hear it, it is your own fault if an injury has been
done you, that you did not make your complaint in season, we will not, we
cannot listen to it at this time.

I need hardly tell you, that attempts will be made to prejudice you against
the prisoner, as being a man of bad character. Gentlemen, it is not an
unfortunate physiognomy that ought to supply the place of evidence: I have a
right to demand the same evidence here as in every other case. The girl is
young and her appearance before you rather interesting. Your feelings no doubt
have been shocked at the tale she has told, but that shock once passed, you
ought to demand other evidence to justify you in convicting of a Rape. I hope
no one will be found guilty of so detestable a crime upon so feeble testimony:
I never knew of one, and it is to be hoped there never will be one.


THE ATTORNEY GENERAL. Gentlemen of the Jury,

I CANNOT deny, gentlemen, that this cause has excited much of the public
curiosity, and probably there may be reason to fear, that such prejudices are
abroad as the Counsel for the prisoner has suggested.

I hope, however, that you will be able to divest yourselves of every thing
which may influence your decision, that is foreign from the testimony that has
been offered to you. It is no wonder that the gentleman should be under the
dread of such prejudices, when he finds himself under the necessity of
admitting that his client has at least been guilty of the most criminal
seduction.

Two authorities have been read to show you that in the course of some
centuries, two cases have occurred in which the defendants were convicted, when
it afterward appeared that probably they were innocent. -- The authorities
apply no more to this case than they would to any other of the same nature; and
if the reasoning which you have heard is just, it amounts to this: That because
these cases have occurred, because two persons have been innocently convicted,
all who thenceforward are accused of this crime must be deemed innocent.

It is admitted, that if the child who is the principal witness is to be
believed, that then you must convict the prisoner. But the gentleman says that
she is unworthy of credit, because no witnesses are brought to support her
character. What does this require of us? That we should bring witnesses to
prove that this infant was not lustful in her cradle! -- We have relied upon
the natural presumption, that a child of her age could not have any wanton
desires. If there are extraordinary instances of so early a birth of the
passions, and this child is one of them, why has not the prisoner brought
forward witnesses to prove that she was so? -- He has long lived in the same
house with her; he is acquainted with her intimates and connections; why has be
not produced some of these to show you that nature had in this child so
extraordinarily departed from her common rules?

It appears that the prisoner and the woman he now calls his wife, almost from
the instant of their marriage, have lived in perpetual discord; and it is
suggested that this may be a scheme of the woman to rid herself of a man whom
she finds the destroyer of her happiness.

But if the wife has really intended to suborn the child for such a purpose,
her conduct has been very inconsistent with her design; for you find that the
moment she discovered that the prisoner had had connection with the girl, the
unfortunate child is abandoned, is turned out of doors, and ever since then has
lived, and is at this moment living with persons who are entire strangers to
all the parties.

But a more serious attack is made on the credit of the witness, from the
circumstances of which I apprized you at the opening of this cause. No cries of
resistance have been heard, and more than two months elapsed before she
complained to any one. Upon these points the gentlemen have read law to you,
and seem to insinuate that these circumstances are conclusive against her
testimony -- but this is not so. The books only caution you against convicting
when the testimony is liable to those objections. You are not to convict unless
they are satisfactorily accounted for.

The girl finding this man paying his addresses to her mother, already looks
upon him as her father. Without hesitation she agrees to go to his lodgings to
sleep with a girl in the house -- she is seduced into his room -- the moment he
leaves her and locks her in, she begins to cry, she knows not wherefore -- she
is afraid, she knows not of what. When he returns he undresses and begins to
treat her with violence -- she calls for help -- then he threatens to murder
her if she does not desist, or if she ever makes a discovery of his guilt. "
Loose, unbuttoned and ready for violation," with a diabolical countenance
rendered ghastly by infernal lust, he lays his merciless hands upon her. Is it
wonderful that such threats at such a time from such a person should have
suppressed her cries? Nay, must we not believe that they suspended her
faculties? For it is hardly possible to suppose that nature, whilst it retained
its ordinary powers, could silently endure her mere corporal sufferings. She
was almost torn asunder. For days she could not walk; -- for weeks she did not
recover the wounds she received.

But two months and more elapsed before she complained. -- In answer to this
objection let it first be recollected, that during all this time she was living
with the prisoner. Let his conduct to her be remembered; that he was forever
beating her -- turning her out of the house -- driving her from her bed --
always loading her with the most reproachful language. By such conduct he
excited her fears to that degree, that as the witness herself says, she could
not cast her eyes upon him without feeling terrified. -- Let it also be
remembered, that she could never forget his threats to murder her if she was
not silent. It is worth remarking, that a trial for murder which lately took
place in this City, made a strong impression on the mind of this child. She
does not even remember when any of the circumstances she has mentioned
occurred, otherwise than as it was previous or subsequent to that trial. She
knew that the accusation there was, that a woman had been cruelly murdered. She
had learned the particulars of that trial from the prisoner. It is natural to
believe, that while this dreadful story was fresh on her young mind, the
threats of the prisoner to put her out of the way, which as she says she
understood to be a threat to murder her if she was not silent, must have had a
greater influence than they would have had at any other time. Thus may we
account for her concealment, which can no longer be considered as a
circumstance against her credit. She probably never would have been prevailed
upon to make the disclosure, had not he himself forced it from her.

But the circumstances under which the guilt of the prisoner was first
developed, are inconsistent with his guilt, and strongly opposed to the credit
of the witness. Let us first call to our recollection what these circumstances
were. The quarrels between the prisoner and his wife were generally contests
about the girl -- the woman taking the child's part when she was abused -- the
prisoner always insisting that she should be turned away -- the woman
objecting, that she was an orphan whom she had adopted, who had long lived with
her, and that she should not be cast off -- to make her odious in the eyes of
her protectress, he says that she had prostituted herself to him -- the girl
hears this, and in order to vindicate herself exposes all the villainy of the
prisoner. In one of these quarrels the prisoner proceeds to beat his wife --
she goes to the police-office to make her complaint on that subject, and there,
as a mere incident, relates what has happened to the girl -- in consequence of
this the magistrates send for the girl -- and thus, gentlemen, this cause has
been brought before you.

It appears to the counsel for the prisoner that his making this declaration
himself renders his guilt incredible. Let us remark, though, to whom this
confession is made. Is it to any one that could bring him to punishment? No, it
is to his wife. He has been represented to you as a man of some legal
knowledge. We may then well suppose that he knew his wife could no^ and perhaps
he also thought that she dare not appear as a witness against him.

His conduct to the girl also seems to his advocates to be inconsistent with
the possibility of his guilt. Whilst she was living with them it is said he had
her in his power, and that he might even have murdered her without fear of
detection. -- But not so, gentlemen. Is it not at least as reasonable to say
that he could not have committed such a crime whilst she was under the eyes of
her protectress. It is in evidence, that he actually threatened to murder her,
and it may therefore be, that all his violence toward her was to drive her
from home, that he thus might have a better opportunity of executing with
security his threat of silencing her forever.

It has been said, that a jury cannot be justifiable in pronouncing a verdict
against the prisoner in such a case, unless the testimony of the party ravished
is corroborated by other witnesses. -- Let us take this to be the law, and
enquire how it applies to this case.

When you know that the prisoner has boasted that he made this child a whore.
-- When we have heard his confession that he has had her in his bed. -- When
you know that he has told of the difficulty with which he obtained his ^^fernal
gratification, can you say that you have no corroborative testimony? -- Is not
every allegation of the child against the prisoner proved to you by two
witnesses altogether credible, except indeed as to the consent? And as to this
point you are to be sure, as I believe in every case of the same sort a jury
must be, under the (...) of relying on the testimony of the girl -- but even
that is not uncorroborated. Her age -- her size -- her sufferings -- her
appearance before you -- her tears here* the very appearance of the prisoner,
(...) forbid you to believe that she could ever have consented to his embraces.

It is impossible, gentlemen, to manage a cause like this without having one's
feelings excited. Supposing myself the advocate of an unfortunate innocent
infant, I may have been betrayed into some warmth of expression; but I hope I
have said nothing that the testimony will not warrant, or that will have an
undue influence on your minds. -- I have no zeal for the conviction of the
prisoner. -- If you say he is not guilty, I am bound to believe him so; and if
he is innocent, I pray to GOD that you may not CONVICT HIM.


The Recorder then charged the Jury.

Gentlemen of the Jury,

THE prisoner at the bar stands indicted for the commission of a Rape upon
Margaret Miller. This crime, from the very nature of it, is apt to excite
indignation in every breast, and when perpetrated on an infant of this age,
that indignation becomes greater. It is, however, your duty to divest
yourselves of all warmth and all prejudice, and to exercise your judgment upon
this case in the most temperate manner. If it shall appear to you that the
girl, young and inexperienced as she may be, yielded her consent, it is no
Rape, and you must pronounce the prisoner not guilty, however criminal in the
eye of morality his conduct may be. The whole question will, I think, depend
upon the credit which is to be given to her; if she is to be believed there
cannot be a doubt as to the prisoner's guilt. [ Here the Recorder recapitulated
the substance of the testimony, and concluded with (...) serving:] It is
evident that there has been a conne^^^^^ between them, and the single question
that (...) whether it was against her consent. It is a (...) that deserves your
consideration, that a very long time elapsed after the commission of the fact
before she made any disclosure, and this, unless it can be satisfactorily
accounted for, must undoubtedly detract much from her credibility. She
attributes it to the terror which originally possessed her mind, and which she
says continued as long as he frequented the house of the person by whom she was
adopted. There is another circumstance too which, if believed, is greatly
against her credibility. It is the fact disclosed in George Ricker's affidavit,
as to the situation in which he says he saw her with the prisoner. Against
this, however, may be set her extreme youth, and the character given her by
another witness, "that she is a modest, virtuous, and inoffensive girl*"

The court cannot with propriety charge you, gentlemen, whether you ought or
ought not to give credit to the principal witness, that is certainly your
province.

If upon the whole you shall think her worthy of credibility, you must say the
prisoner at the bar is Guilty; if otherwise, you are bound to acquit him.


The Jury then withdrew, and returned in about four minutes with a verdict --
GUILTY.

FRIDAY MORNING, 10 O'CLOCK.
The prisoner being brought to the bar to receive his sentence, the Recorder,
in the presence of a large number of people, addressed him in the following
words:

RICHARD D. CROUCHER, you have been convicted, after a full (...) impartial
trial, of an offense of the most detestable nature. You have had able counsel
to assist you, and every advantage you could ask. It has appeared from your own
confessions, that you have had an improper connection with a young girl of
tender years, and that she remained a whole night in your room. This conduct in
you, viewed in the best possible light, must have been the result of the most
vicious practices. The jury had a right to give credit to the evidence, and by
their verdict they have declared themselves satisfied of your criminality. It
now only remains for the court to pass sentence. In several other countries a
conviction of this kind would be followed by an ignominious death, but the
humanity of the modern code, of this country, has instead thereof determined,
that you be confined in the State-Prison for life. The court think themselves
bound to add, that it be to hard labor. The punishment which now awaits you,
will be a warning to deter others from the commission of offenses, of so
aggravated and enormous a nature, and it is hoped, not without some salutary
effect on your own life. The prisoner said a few words: That he deserved severe
punishment for his conduct, and he had no complaint to make of the court or
jury; but as to the crime of which he had been convicted, he would now solemnly
declare, that he had never had any connection with the girl who had sworn
against him, he had never known her.

The Recorder. "It is now too late to make declarations of this sort. A jury of
the country have pronounced you guilty, and as to your present declaration, it
is contradicted by your own repeated confessions."


He was taken from the bar and conveyed to the STATE-PRISON.


