REV. MR. PORT^^^ SERMON*

A DISCOURSE ON THE DEATH OF GENERAL Geo: Washington, DELIVERED AT CONWAY,
January 16th, 1800.

By NATHANIEL PORTER, A. M. PASTOR OF THE CHURCH IN SAID TOWN.

"Man goes to his long home, and the mourners go about the streets." SOLOMON.
"How are the mighty fallen, tell it not in Gath, publish it not in the streets
of Askelon." DAVID. PORTSMOUTH, PRINTED BY JOHN MELCHER, 1800.

A SERMON, etc.
2d SAMUEL -- 3d CHAP. 38th VER. KNOW YE NOT THAT A PRINCE AND A GREAT MAN IS
FALLEN THIS DAY IN ISRAEL?
THESE are the words of a mourner, who lamented the death of one not allied to
him by the ties of blood; but a man of shining talents and distinguished
abilities, whose services were greatly needed at that time.

The mourner was David, King of (...). The person whose fall he lamented was
Abner an officer of the first rank.

This Abner was captain of the host, he had been general of Readiness army, was
near the pe^^^^ of the King and possessed a large share of the (...) confidence
and favor.

He was faithful to king Saul, during his reign, and zealously supported the
interest of his family after his decease.

This man was not only in high favor with the King; but with the people (...)*
he had a large share of their confidence.

Some may think, perhaps, that Abner's forsaking Ishbosheth, Readiness son, and
throwing his influence into the scale of his rival, is a blot in his character.
But Abner might find Ishbosheth to be a haughty, jealous, if not an effeminate
prince, and unfit to govern a kingdom, and for this reason, as also to save the
blood of his country by uniting the contending parties, use^ his influence to
establish the regal dignity in the hands of David.

But if this was any blemish in his character, the royal mourner did not take
notice of it, or view it in that light.

But this I shall leave, and attend to the eulogium in the text, a prince and a
great man.

His being called a prince seems to import that Abner was the chief, or head of
a family in the tribe. This was a title of honor given to the head of the
tribes of Israel: they were princes of the congregation.

It seems to have been an ancient as well as modern custom to give men in
public offices an honorary title; such as was attached to their office.

But titles of honor are not always connected with a true greatness of
character. King David seems to have been aware of this, and therefore mentions
Abner, not only as an honorable personage, but as a great man.

It was the greatness of this man's character, which made him to be so much
lamented. He was possessed of talents which were of importance to the State,
and such as were wanted at that time.

There was no man so well calculated to unite the tribes of Israel, at that
time divided, as was Abner. He was not only in high favor with David; but he
had such influence with the tribes of Israel, as to be able to incline them to
any party, and engage them to support any interest he might be disposed to
favor.

With great ease he drew the ten tribes into his views of supporting David whom
God had chosen, and anointed to be King over his people. His influence with the
people was so great, as to bow the hearts of all ranks to the house of David,
which happily terminated a contest for the regal dignity, that was dangerous to
the State. Thus the twelve tribes were united and became one band, invincible,
to their enemies.

Thus the hands of David were strengthened, and he was established in the
kingdom.

So much influence in a subject may be thought dangerous to the State: and
influence so extensive, employed against government, would throw all things
into confusion, and might ruin a nation. But when superior talents added to
influence so extensive as was Abner's, are directed by a generous, patriotism,
and employed for the support of government, the most pleasing and happy effects
are to be expected.

The active genius and (...) talents of Abner, were what made him appear great
in the eyes of David.

When we consider the character of David, that he was a man of virtue, of an
honest mind, yea, "a man after God's own heart," we are constrained to believe
he spoke what he thought was truth, when he announced Abner to have been a
great man.

David was a man of too nice a sense of honor, and had too great a regard to
truth, to ascribe a greatness of character to a man whom he did not think
worthy of it.

King David knew Abner: he had accompanied him in former wars -- had been an
eye witness of his conduct in the exalted rank of Captain of the host, or
General of the army -- he had seen that he behaved himself wisely -- that his
plans were formed with judgment and executed with dispatch, that he was
resolute and persevering in accomplishing whatever he undertook, and was equal
to the most important enterprises, he was therefore convinced that Abner
merited the eulogy in the text.

Abner having attached himself (...) the interest of David, the latter had no
doubt raised expectations from his abilities and influence. He had reason to
expect in that man a firm friend, and an able supporter of his government --
that by his exertion his (David's) interest, which might have appeared
doubtful, would be much strengthened.

The address and talents of Abner, were of signal advantage to the Kings. By
the prudent counsels, the engaging manners, and convincing argument of the
former, the tribes of Israel had been won over to the interest of the latter*
they had been made willing to acknowledge David to be their lawful King, and to
follow his fortune.

Although Abner did not live to finish his great design of establishing the
kingdom in the hands of David; yet, the foundation was laid so strong, that the
ever* took place after his decease. The impression made on their minds by this
influential man, continued to direct the conduct of Israel after his death; and
the happy effect of his exertions, were experienced by the King, when Abner was
no more.

These were no doubt among the considerations which gave rise to the mourning
recorded in the text and context.

Whatever services this man had rendered the King, and whatever he might ^^^ect
from his future exertions, his hopes were (...) off by his death.

The King wept at his grave, he lamented his fall, and, to do justice to his
memory, pronounced him "a great man."

Mourning is decent and proper, when not indulged to excess. It is no mark of a
weak mind, it betrays no want of religion. On the other hand, it discovers a
sense of the dignity of human nature, and the dishonor done to man in the grave.

Mourning is a tribute due to the memory of the deceased, especially to
illustrious characters.

It is proper to keep in mind their amiable virtues -- to call into view the
shining traits in their characters, and to make mention of their worthy deeds.
This is doing them justice, it is a tribute we owe them. This justice was done
to Abner, this tribute was paid to his memory in the words of the text, "a
great man is fallen."

That such honor is due to the memory of the dead, seems to be the sense of
mankind. It is impressed upon the minds of people of all ranks.

When David lamented the fall of his predecessor, and his son, he did it in
terms which expressed whatever was praiseworthy in them. "Saul and Jonathan
were lovely and pleasant in their lives, they were swifter than eagles, they
were stronger than lions." "Ye daughters of Israel, weep over Saul, who clothed
you in scarlet, with other delights, who put on ornaments of gold upon your
apparel."

When the good Hezekiah, King of Judah, kept with his fathers, it is said, that
"they buried him in the chiefest of the sepulchers of the sons of David; and
all Judah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem did him honor at his death." They
gave him an honorable burial, and lamented his fall with tokens of grief for
the loss of so good a King.

Death in any form, causes mourning. Whoever the victim may be, it spreads a
gloom upon the countenances of beholders.

We are not totally indifferent to the fall of any of our fellow creatures.
Though ^nconnected by the ties of blood or kindred, or the bonds of society,
their death makes a melancholy impression.

Death is a standing token of the divine displeasure at man's apostasy, and
every instance of it produces melancholy reflections in survivors.

This dreadful penalty, with which the divine law was sanctioned, is inflicted
upon every age and description of man; the innocent babe of a day old, not
excepted.

Death has laid his arrest upon the young and old, the prince and peasant, the
honorable and ignoble: judges and rulers of the earth have undistinguishingly
fallen a prey to the King of terrors. These are sad reflections. Instances of
this nature cannot fail to create a degree of sorrow in the thinking part of
mankind.

How natural it is to lament over a fallen fellow creature in a language
similar (...) that of the old prophet of Samaria. "Alas! my brother," friend,
fellow citizen or benefactor.

Not only do the common ties of humanity call us to mourn over the dead; but a
man's character, his exalted station in life, his distinguished abilities and
extensive benevolence, one consideration which make his death to be universally
lamented.

When a man in a public station dies, his abilities, however great, of whatever
utility and importance they were, are forever lost to his fellow citizens, to
his country and to the world. All expectations from his future exertions for
the good of his fellow men are cut off. His opportunities to serve his friends
and his country, are at an end.

When a great and good man in a station of eminence falls the victim of death,
his country feels the loss it sensibly effects the people at large, a whole
nation (the sons of Belial excepted) is troubled at his death, men of all ranks
and every station, feel the public loss, and mourn, alas! our brother, our
friend, our public father or illustrious chief.

When Abner died, he was not only lamented by the King; but all the servants of
David and the inhabitants of Judea wept: all felt the loss of so great a man.
It is moreover said, that all the Israelites were troubled at his death, which
is a circumstance showing, that he was a man greatly beloved.

The talents and virtues of great men are of almost infinite importance to
every State or Kingdom. Where th^se are not united in public leading
characters, government will grow corrupt and feeble, confusion and distress
will triumph. If distinguished abilities and extensive benevolence in public
characters are not essential to the being of a nation; yet are they necessary
to the well being of every community, great or small.

"Woe to thee O land, when thy King is a child" said Solomon. And woe to the
state or nation whose rulers and heads of departments are men of puerile
characters, destitute of those talents which form the able statesman. Confusion
and every evil may be expected.

On the other hand, happy is the nation whose leading characters possess that
assemblage of virtues and talents, which qualifies them for governing the
state, who have wisdom to discern what is for the good of their country, and
(...) to employ means for its welfare.

When men of distinguished abilities and virtuous integrity fill the
Departments of State, the people experience the happy effects of their wise
administration.

Such characters are among the greatest national blessings, whether they are
placed in the cabinet or the field. Such superior talents directed by a
virtuous patriotism, and the influence of such men exerted for the good of
their country, produce the most pleasing and happy effects. Therefore, when a
man of this description dies, the people mourn. The words of the text may be
applied, "a great man is fallen."

The death of great men (...) like a frown of Heaven upon a people. As (...)
^ai^ing up of able men to direct the civil or military affairs of a State is
the doing of the Lord, and indicates his favorable regard to a people; so,
their removal by death, seems to be a token of the divine displeasure, and
shows that he has a controversy with that people. It therefore behooves a nation
thus bereaved to mourn, and enquire with penitent hearts wherefore the Lord
contendeth with them.

One man, in whom a discerning mind, sound judgment, virtuous integrity,
extensive influence and a generous patriotism are united and attached to a
public station, is a great support to government, yea, he is one of the main
props and pillars of the State; the good produced by his exertions is
incalculable. Though the death of such a man may not be an irreparable loss,
yet, it is a very great one. By his fall, the nation is bereaved of an able
statesman, government is deprived of a great support: the people of a steady
friend and the state of a generous Benefactor. The cabinet is deprived of a
wise Counselor, or the Army of an able General, and the world of a valuable
Citizen. One man of superior talents and distinguished virtues in the chair of
State, is of more importance than many private persons. So thought the servants
of David, when they said to him as they were going out to battle against the
rebellious Absalom, "thou art worth ten thousand of us." And when "they swear
to him saying thou shall go no more out with us to battle, that thou quench not
the light of Israel." As if the name and memory of Israel must die with their
King.

Where (...) a rare assemblage of virtues and talents, (...) are happily united
in one man, his life is of inestimable worth to the nation: his death must
therefore be deeply regretted. Such my friends and fellow citizens, is the
regret we feel this day. Great were the talents, distinguishing the virtues of
the man whose death we bewail. By the late fall of a great and good man in
these United States, our country is bereaved of a father, a valuable friend, an
able statesman, and an accomplished general. Yea, mankind have lost a friend,
and the world a beloved citizen.

WASHINGTON, the father of his country, the zealous defender of its rights and
liberties is no more! the man of the people, "the delight of mankind" is dead!
the dignified patriot, the able statesman, the greatest general the world could
ever boast of, is fallen! the man whose character does honor to human nature is
gone from us to seek a repose in the grave, from the toils of this mortal life.
Could the words of the text ever be applied with more propriety than they are
to that illustrious personage? an honorable person and a great man is fallen in
our Israel.

All the manly and amiable virtues which beautify the character and exalt the
nature of man, seem to have united themselves in WASHINGTON, to make him the
greatest of men. He had a capacious mind; was a person of sound judgment, deep
penetration and quick discernment. He was decided in his measures and conduct,
indefatigable in accomplishing what he undertook, and was equal to the most
important enterprises, civil or military -- he was a man of superior abilities,
and extensive influence. His mann^^^ were gentle, his deportment amiable, and
his address engaging, steady and even in his temper, cool and collected in the
most trying scenes of difficulty and danger. In war he was terrible to the
invaders of his country's rights: but was generous to his foes; humane to those
whom the fortune of war threw into his hands, "the enemies themselves being
judges." In peace and war he was an unwavering friend to the rights of
hospitality: he held them to be sacred, he invaded them not, nor suffered them
to be infringed within the circle of his influence. He was the inflexible
patriot; he loved his country sincerely, and was the friend of mankind.

WASHINGTON the great, had a good heart, and was attached to revealed religion.
-- His name stands recorded among the professors of christianity. He was not
ashamed to confess Christ and own himself to be a disciple of the crucified
Jesus of Nazareth. As he professed, so he exemplified religion. He visited the
assemblies of God's professing people, and joined with the worshippers of
Jehovah in their religious devotions. This I view as the most distinguishing
trait in his character -- and that which reflects peculiar honor upon the man,
in whatever capacity we view him.

WASHINGTON was truly the great man in the circle of domestic life; he was
great in a political view, and great in a military capacity. His great and
amiable virtues were carried into every station where God and his country
placed him. His superior talents and great abilities were constantly employed
for the good of his fellow citizens in every public station he filled. His
almost unbounded influence was invariably directed by a sincere love to his
country -- pleasing and happy were the effects produced by his benevolent
exertions.

Designed by the Great Disposer of events to be an instrument of good to his
country, he was introduced to ^^sy active scenes, and even to the hardy deeds
of war, at an early stage of life. -- Employed in his youth against an enemy,
invading the frontiers of the ancient dominion of Virginia, he conducted the
enterprise with that (...) and dispatch, which have characterised the (...) in
every stage of his important life, to its close. -- His conduct in all that he
undertook, held him to view as a man of active genius, and promising talents.

When the drama of a revolutionary war, which gave liberty and independence to
more than three millions of people, was opened on the plains of Lexington:
WASHINGTON, as the most suitable person among the thousands of America, was
appointed commander in chief to direct the operations of war. With a diffidence
which argued the greatness of his mind, he accepted the important trust.
Refusing every pecuniary reward for his services as General of the American
Armies, he put on the harness, he grasped the sword and hastened to the seat of
war. The cordial benedictions and fervent prayers of thousands in our Israel
for his safety and success, followed him to the camp.

His conduct in the exalted rank of General of the army, through the fatigues,
difficulties, and dangers of an eight years war, was such as would have done
honor to the most experienced General in the world. When that great man
appeared at the head of our army, the eyes of America, and even of Europe were
upon him. Thousands were tortured with anxiety for the event -- the breast of
our country was big with expectation. He more than answered the hopes of the
most sanguine -- His conduct was viewed with applause and admiration -- He
acquired those honors in the field, which will never be obliterated from the
memory of his country -- He render^^ those important, essential services,
which, I hope* will be gratefully remembered by millions, now unborn.

Through the whole scene of that unhappy contest WASHINGTON remained the calm,
but inflexible Patriot; the intrepid, humane General.

The war was at length conducted to a close; long wished for peace returned to
bless our land.

WASHINGTON disbanded his army, resigned his command, and quietly retired to
the private walks of domestic life, to enjoy there the sweets of conscious
integrity, and the self approving reflections of an untainted mind.

When the Federal Constitution was to be organized, WASHINGTON was elected
President of the United States by the unanimous suffrages of his fellow
citizens. Eight years he filled the chair of state with peculiar dignity, and
administered the Constitution with a fidelity which gave satisfaction to every
enlightened virtuous patriot in the United States. His sublime virtues and
exalted talents, shone with equal luster in the cabinet as in the field.

By the firm, decided conduct of this great man, order was maintained through
the union. The efforts of a factious few, to mislead the public mind, create
disturbances in the State, and involve the nation in the horrors of an European
war, were happily counteracted.

A dangerous insurrection raised in the bowels of the State by the intrigues of
an insidious foreigner, was crushed in the beginning. The hostile natives of
the desert were compelled to an honorable peace, and some unhappy differences
existing between the American Republic, and the Kingdom of Great Britain, were
amicably adjusted.

Having piloted the national bark through every storm into safe port, he
resigned the Chair of State, and returned to those peaceful scenes of domestic
retirement, which he had reluctantly quitted in obedience to his country's call.

But his usefulness did not end here, one illustrious action more, remained to
be added to the long list which had characterised the man from early life. At
the call of God and his country, he consented to jeopard his life again in the
high places of the field. He accepted a military appointment to the command of
the army to be raised in the United States, for their defense against any
sudden invasion by the armies of France.

When France, instigated by a boundless ambition and insatiable avarice,
wantonly ravaged our coast, and gave American property to indiscriminate
plunder; WASHINGTON rose indignant at the unprovoked insults; he saw, he felt
the wrongs; wrongs done to his country by a treacherous foe, who had long been
concealed under the mask of friendship. He heard his country's call, and stood
ready to lead her chosen sons to the field of battle, (...) with his aged bosom
open to meet the tempest of war.

The appointment he accepted, was from his successor in the office of Chief
Magistrate! it was a demonstration of a great and noble mind! it reflects a
distinguishing luster upon the life of that great man.

The name of WASHINGTON, General of the Armies of the United States, inspired
the sons of freedom with a lively animation -- and the veteran soldier with an
impetuous ardor.

While government was making preparation for the defense of the country, by
raising and officering an army, to be arranged and commanded by the greatest
General in the world; every mind was filled with expectation, and all were
waiting the events which God and time would bring forth; -- Death, whose
ravages are indiscriminate, laid his arrests upon our beloved Hero; General
WASHINGTON died. His great abilities, sublime virtues and goodness of heart,
could not exempt him from death, the common lot of humanity. He died as a man!
as a common mortal! but he died as a good man; he left the world in peace. In
the full exercise of his reason, and under strong apprehensions of the time of
his departure being come, he was calm, and entered the valley of the shadow of
death, with a serenity of mind, which seems to be peculiar to those who have
Heaven and the joys of the divine presence in the prospect before them. We hope
he is now enjoying the rewards of a well spent life, that his death is infinite
gain to him. But our loss is very great.

Though "the weapons of war, I trust, are not perished," yet, true it is, "that
the mighty is fallen." A man is fallen the victim of death whose abilities,
influence and exertions were much wanted at this juncture.

What shall we say? that "the beauty of America is fallen? that the light of
our Israel is quenched?" Let us hope and pray that a double portion of the
spirit of WASHINGTON may rest on his successors.

Lament for him we must; he was "lovely and pleasant in his life," he was our
friend, he was the friend of our country and of mankind.

Weep over WASHINGTON, a man greatly beloved, he jeoparded his life in the high
places of the field, in defense of our invaded rights, and was an instrument in
the hand of providence of our deliverence from the barbarous claims of
despotism, and the mean of our enjoying the sweets of liberty.

Americans, lament for your deceased General, who was the scourge of your
country's foes. Be-wail the man, who, with the sword of magistracy, was a
terror to evil doers, and a praise to them who did well.

Let all lament for the man who successfully fought our battles, and under the
auspice of the God of armies gave to us the dear earned liberties we now enjoy.
Weep for the man who guided the helm of State with unrivalled dignity -- who
administered the Constitution of our country with undeviating justice and
integrity.

Daughters of America, "weep over WASHINGTON," who traversed the field of
danger in your defense -- who submitted to the fatigues of a military life, and
encountered the dubious storm of war to protect you, and the objects of your
affection from the rapacity of a merciless foe; and who was an instrument in
the hands of God, of preserving to you and your dearest connections all the
pleasant, delightful things in life.

Lament for him in the language of the Prophet, alas! our father, our friend,
the instrument of our political salvation.

But while we all lament with deep regret the unhappy fall of that great and
good man, let us offer united praises to the God of our fathers for his gift of
Washington to our country, and for his continuing a life of so much importance
to these States so long; and let us gratefully remember the many and signal
services rendered us by him.

We may say in the words of the Queen of Sheba to Solomon, "blessed be the Lord
our God, who delighted in that man to place him at the head of our armies, and
in the chair of State," because the Lord loved us, he gave us WASHINGTON to
preside in the field and in the cabinet.

General WASHINGTON was an exemplary man, let us copy his virtues and imitate
his example. May Magistrates possess a large share of the temper and spirit
conspicuous in him. May those in posts of military honor, and every soldier in
the States, catch the "falling mantle" of their ascending leader; imbibe his
spirit, and cultivate his virtues; be directed by the same spirit, intrepidity,
firmness, temperance and moderation, which embellished his character.

Above all, let persons of all ranks and (...) station, honor the divine
religion which he (...). May all live under the influence of that religion,
carry the virtues and graces of it into every station; then, like the deceased
father of our country, shall we have confidence at the hour of death -- like
him shall we feel tranquil, and enjoy serenity of mind, when we know that the
time of our dissolution is come.

FINIS.

