A FAREWELL SERMON, DELIVERED AT HAVERHILL, NEWHAMPSHIRE, SABBATH, JUNE 30,
1799.

By ETHAN SMITH, A. B. WHO HAD BEEN PASTOR OF THE CHURCH OF CHRIST IN SAID
TOWN; BUT WAS NOW DISMISSED FOR WANT OF SUPPORT.

PEACHAM, VERMONT, Printed by FARLEY and GOSS. 1800.

PREFACE.
THE following Sermon is not presented to the Public, from an idea that it
possesses any peculiar merit, on account of depth of thought; originality of
ideas; or beauty of arrangement. The Author, when he wrote it, had not the
least idea of its ever thus appearing abroad. But such was the occasion, upon
which it was delivered, that the Church of Haverhill unanimously desired, and
continued to desire a copy of it for the Press. And, after declining, for a
considerable time, the Author complied with their wishes, apprehending, that
the truths it contains, may be of service; especially to the Church and People,
whom he had left, and for whom he feels a tender concern.

A FAREWELL SERMON.
ACTS, xx.32. And now, brethren, I commend you to GOD, and to the word of his
grace, which is able to build you up, and to give you an inheritance among all
them, who are sanctified.


PAUL had preached the Gospel at Ephesus, and been the instrument of planting a
Church there. He had remained with them for several years, teaching and
admonishing them, till he probably viewed them to be rooted and grounded in the
truth. He then pursued his tour, to preach the glad tidings of salvation in the
regions round about them. After a while, he found it necessary to leave those
parts, and to return to Jerusalem. Upon this journey he touched at Miletus; and
from thence he sent and collected the Elders of the Church of Ephesus, to
address to them his last charge; his farewell discourse. This he introduces by
an appeal to their consciences, in which he recounts his own ministerial
faithfulness among them. " Ye know from the first day that I came into Asia,
after what manner I have been with you at all seasons, serving the Lord with
all humility of mind, and with many tears and temptations, which befell me by
the lying in wait of the Jews; and how I kept, back nothing, which was
profitable unto you; but have showed you, and taught you publicly, and from
house to house; testifying both to the Jews, and also to the Greeks, repentance
toward God, and faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ." He proceeds, and tells
them, that he was now going bound in spirit to Jerusalem; i. e. convinced in
conscience that God called him thither; that he knew not what trials were to
befall him there, except that in every city he was notified, by the Holy Spirit,
that bond and afflictions awaited him. But his courage was no^ ^^^^ired. " None
of these things move me; neither count I my life dear unto myself, so that I
might finish my course with joy, and the ministry, which I have received, to
testify the Gospel of the grace of God." Paul then suggests to them that this
was their last interview on earth; that they should see his face here no more.
He, therefore, calls on them to bear him witness, that he had faithfully
cleared himself from the blood of souls. For he had not concealed from them any
part of the revealed counsel of God; but had boldly declared it all. So that,
if any at Ephesus now perished, their blood must be upon their own heads! Paul,
then, solemnly enjoins on them faithfulness, both to themselves, and to their
churches. And to induce them to this, he warns them of approaching dangers. "
For I know, that after my departure, shall grievous wolves enter in among you,
not sparing the flock." q. d. The enemy will take an advantage from my absence,
and will introduce their favorite teachers; yea, the latter will be ready to
introduce themselves, and to improve every subtle argument and opportunity to
gain proselytes, without any regard to the good of souls. For, however these
teachers are adorned with sheep's clothing, ( i. e. with great pretenses, and
some appearances of benevolence and religion,) yet they are no better than
wolves among sheep; prowling from fold to fold; caring nothing for the flock;
but to gorge their own appetites; and, with good words, and fair speeches, to
deceive the hearts of the simple. Yea, he warns them that some of their own
members would become perverse schismatics; and that disciples, (probably from
their more loose and unstable characters,) would be drawn away after them. He
renewedly charges them, therefore, to watch and to recollect his warnings, and
his care, which for a number of years he had exhibited among them.

Paul then adds, as in our text; " And now, brethren, I commend you to God, and
to the word of his grace, which is able to build you up, and to give you an
inheritance among all them, who are sanctified." This he doubtless esteemed a
blessed privilege, that, inasmuch as he must bid them a final adieu on earth,
he might carry them to God, and leave them at his feet.

Upon the text, it may be suitable, at this time, to show,

I. What was implied in Paul's commending his Ephesian brethren to God, and to
the word of his grace. And,

II. What encouragement he had thus to do. " Which is able to build you up,
etc."

As to the first idea, It implied much. It implied his tender affection and
concern for them; that he bore them upon his heart; that they were dear to him.
It implied, that he was about to leave them. For though it be ^^^able for
christian friends ever, though present, to commend each other to God; yet this
is an expression more peculiarly adapted to a parting scene. The Apostle was to
have the immediate charge of them no more. He, therefore, by faith, commits
them to God; lays them at his feet, or places them near to him, as the word in
the original, Paratithemi, imports. It implies Paul's confidence in God; in the
glory and rectitude of his government; that God governs all events and things
in glorious wisdom and benevolence. Otherwise, Paul would have esteemed it no
privilege to commend his dear friends to God; for there would be no safety in
their lying at his feet. They might receive good or ill treatment; and there
would be no foundation for confidence. But Paul's commending them to God
implied his full belief, that, under the Divine Government, all things will
terminate well; that infinite Power, Wisdom and Benevolence sit at helm, and
will cause that light shall, eventually, spring out of darkness, and order out
of confusion, to the eternal joy and salvation of all the benevolent; that
there is, hence, a glorious foundation for unshaken confidence in God.

And his commending them to the word of God's grace, also implied much. It
implied, that he viewed this word as their guide, their polar star, their mean
of salvation. God could work without the means, of which he now makes use, if
he pleased. But it is not his will thus to do; but to work by means. Certain
means are appointed by God, and must be attended to by man, as God directs, in
order that certain ends may be obtained. God of old appointed the ark, as the
mean of Noah's safety from the deluge. He appointed the passover, and the
sprinkling of the blood, in Israel, as the mean of their safety from the sword
of the destroying angel. He appointed Moses' rod, as the mean of producing the
plagues upon Egypt; of dividing the Red Sea; and of bringing water from the
rock. He appointed the brazen serpent, as the mean of healing for the bitten,
dying Israelite. He appointed the blowing of rams' horns by the priests,
leading the congregation of Israel round the walls of Jericho, once a day, for
seven days; and on the seventh day, seven times, as the mean of the destruction
of those walls; and of the going in of the chosen tribes to possess the
promised land. He appointed the arming of three hundred men, under Gideon, with
trumpets, with pitchers, and lights in them; that they should blow their
trumpets, dash their pitchers, and cry, " The sword of the Lord and of Gideon,"
as the mean of routing the numerous hosts of Israel's enemies, who were
encamped against them.

And God has, in like manner, appointed his word, and the preaching of his
Gospel, as the mean of the salvation of souls. The two latter instances
mentioned were, doubtless, lively emblems of this appointment. To this mean of
grace, souls must attend in love and obedience to God; or they are not in way
to heaven. And to this mean of grace, it appears Paul commended his Ephesian
brethren. He was sensible that " Faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the
word of God." He had fully learned, that it was by the Gospel that souls were
begotten unto a lively hope; and, by the word, that they are washed or
sanctified; " Washed in water by the word." To this, therefore, Paul joyfully
commended his christian friends, when parting from them. I pass on now to show,

II. What encouragement he had thus to do. " Which is able to build you up, and
to give you an inheritance among all them, who are sanctified." The relative
which, here, may refer either to the antecedent God; or the word of his grace.
And both were able thus to build them up; i. e. God was infinitely able to do
it by his word; and his word was able to do it, when he made it so, and
rendered it a favor of life unto life. Paul was sensible, that the word of God
was mighty, through the Spirit, to the pulling down of strong holds; and to the
destroying of every thing, which stood in the way of their meetness for glory;
that it was, for this purpose, sharp and powerful, as a two edged sword. And
knowing this to be God's usual method, and his solemn engagement to his people;
he cheerfully commends them to him for this purpose.

Two ideas are contained in the clause of the text under consideration, viz.
Grace and Glory.

1. Grace. " Which is able to build you up." i. e. Which is able to keep you
from falling, until you shall be presented spotless before the throne of his
glory with exceeding joy. Which is able to preserve your whole soul and body
blameless unto the day of Christ, and which will do it. This clause in the text
seems to refer to the power and efficacy of God's Spirit, with the word, to
keep and prepare his children for heaven. But the divine efficiency in this
matter is exerted in a way, which is consistent with the agency of the creature
in the same thing. This is an idea of importance to be kept in view, that the
divine sovereignty, and creature agency, (with the necessity of means in order
to ends,) are perfectly consistent. If God work in his people to will, and to
do, of his own good pleasure, it is that they may work out their own salvation
with fear and trembling. Therefore, the clause of the text under consideration,
implies their own vigorous activity in being built up. According to Jude, ver.
20, 21. " But ye, beloved, building up yourselves in your most holy faith,
praying in the Holy Ghost, keep yourselves in the love of God." And many are
the divine precepts, which demand the same; such as, " Strive to enter in at
the strait gate;" "The kingdom of heaven suffers violence, and the violent
take it by force." It implies their persevering in religion. " He that endures
to the end, the same shall be saved." It implies their growth in grace. " The
path of the just is as the shining light, which shines more and more unto the
perfect day." The water of grace not only abides in them a well of water, but
is springing up unto everlasting life. It implies their benevolent cultivation
of harmony among themselves. " My dove, my undefiled is one." "That they all
may be one, as thou, Father, art in me, and I in thee; that they may be one
with us." It implies their faithful disposition to support, and to improve the
ordinances of the Gospel. " Walking in all the commandments and ordinances of
the Lord blameless." "Watching daily at my gates, and waiting at the posts of
my doors." It implies their remaining steadfast in the faith. " Rooted and
grounded in the truth." "Not carried about with every wind of doctrine by the
slight of men, and their cunning craftiness, whereby they lie in wait to
deceive." It accordingly implies their taking heed, and being aware of false
teachers; marking and avoiding those who make divisions contrary to the
doctrines of grace. Paul in our context had been warning the Ephesians against
such impostors; and then commends them to God, in hopes of their being built
up, as in the text. This circumstance forms an antithesis between their being
seduced by impostors; and their being built up. The latter, therefore, implies
their withstanding such characters. And Paul was sensible, not only that God
was able to build up his chosen, but that he had engaged to do it; that
Christ's sheep shall hear his voice, and follow him; that he will give unto
them eternal life; that they shall never perish; neither shall any pluck them
out of his hands; that a stranger they will not follow; for they know not the
voice of a stranger. Thus grace is comprised in the encouragement in the text.
And,

2. Glory in heaven is also comprised. " And to give you an inheritance, among
all them, who are sanctified." i. e. An inheritance in heaven, among the
general assembly and church of the first born; among the spirits of just men
made perfect. This is the blessed result of their being built up; of their
possessing and persevering in religion. This is the inheritance incorruptible,
undefiled, and that fades not away, reserved in heaven for all, who are kept
by the power of God through faith unto salvation. This inheritance of the
saints in light, comprises the most glorious excellencies; which are, entire
freedom from selfishness and sin; perfect conformity to God; being made perfect
in pure and holy love; holy and uninterrupted presence of God, and of the Lamb;
and the blessed and holy society of angels, and of the saints. It contains
nothing pleasing to carnal hearts; for it is a holy and benevolent happiness.
It affords to holy souls a perfect satisfaction in God's likeness; in beholding
his glory shining in the face of Jesus Christ; and reflected from all his
works. It is a glorious and eternal rest from all the labors and trials of time
and sense; and a free and uninterrupted participation of the river of God's
pleasures. And it probably will comprise an endless progression in knowledge;
in strength of benevolence; and consequently in happiness. This is but an hint
of the inheritance in the text. This was the prize, which Paul had in view;
this the crown of glory, which animated him in all his perils and dangers, and
which he desired that others likewise should see and secure. This world, he
viewed as nothing compared with it. To obtain this prize, he forgot the things,
which were behind; reached to them, which were before; and pressed through all
occurring difficulties. And, at the affecting moment of parting from christian
friends, he could think of nothing more comforting, than to commend them to
God, and to the word of his grace, confiding in God's ability and faithfulness
to meeten them for, and finally confer upon them this blessed inheritance.

Let us now attend to some

IMPROVEMENT.
AND now, my friends, how far may I be permitted to adopt the words of Paul, in
our text and context? You will excuse me, if I deviate from my usual method of
improvements; and attend to the ideas, which present circumstances naturally
suggest. God, in his holy Providence, has afforded me opportunity to labor in
the Gospel, in this place, for a number of years. But now it appears that I
have no further call to remain among you. The cause of this separation is well
known. And the day is coming, when it will appear, whether there be any thing
criminal in the conduct of those, who have occasioned it in withholding my
support. My judgment concurs with the result of the Rev. Council, that the
intimations of Providence, relative to my temporal support here, call me to
leave this place. Here I shall leave this part of the subject, after one
remark, viz. that I have no hard thoughts of my friends, in this place, for not
making greater exertions for my support and continuance among them. I apprehend
their exertions were as great, and as persevering, as duty demanded. The Lord
graciously reward them, in crowning similar exertions with better success in
some other, and better Pastor!

As to my faithfulness among you, I have nothing of which to boast. My
conscience, however, testifies that I have sought your best interest; and have
endeavored to declare to you all the counsel of God; that I have set before you
the way of life, and the way of death, as exhibited in God's word; and also the
motives there furnished to induce you to pursue the one, and avoid the other.
But with many imperfections I have, doubtless, been attended. I pray God to
forgive them; and request you to draw over them the veil of candor.

So far as I have explained to you the Sacred Oracles, and set before you the
truths of heaven, I entreat you that (from a sacred regard to the authority and
the grace of Jehovah, and from a regard to your own immortal interest,) you
solemnly attend to them. Forget not that we are probationers for eternity; that
we are here, but for a few days, to cultivate a temper, and form a character,
according to which we must receive our eternal destiny. You have heard, in the
former part of this day, how every one of us shall give an account of himself
to God; and, among other things, I of my ministry among you; and you how you
have improved it. And God only knows whether we shall ever meet again, till
that eventful period.

And now, seeing we must part, I leave with you my best wishes for your
happiness; my cordial desires for your salvation. But what you must be, in
order to obtain salvation, you have often been informed; nor will one soul
obtain it without this meetness. But what will be your prospects without the
Gospel? Paul, in our text, commends his brethen to God, and to the word of his
grace. He left them under the full enjoyment of the ordinances of grace. Happy,
indeed, could I leave you, (seeing I must leave you,) in the enjoyment of these
privileges! Alas, here lies the difference! You are become destitute of them.
What shall I say to you concerning this?

My Fellow Mortals of this vicinity, Is the Gospel of the grace of God nothing
to you? Is it nothing to enjoy it? Nothing to be deprived of it? And nothing to
despise and reject it? If you remain destitute of the Gospel, mark my words,
this place will become notorious for impiety and wickedness. Then what will
become of your children, and the rising generation here? How shall you be able
to meet their souls at the bar of God? And what will become of your own
immortal interest? O, if you have any regard for the good of society; and
especially for the good of your souls, and those of your children, then be
entreated speedily to unite with the Church in this place to obtain and support
a minister of Christ. Depend on it, it is your duty, and your weighty interest.
The gospel ministry is the institution of heaven. It is the mean of salvation.
And, if rejected, your salvation is lost! O interesting thought! Can you,
without trembling, read the language of Christ to his ambassadors, He, who
receives you, receives me; but he, who despises you, despises me; and he,
who despises me, despises him, who sent me? If any of you be found among
those, who reject this gracious institution of heaven, what have you to expect?
Will Christ wink at your impiety; dispense with his solemn institutions; and
state other and lower terms, with which you may be pleased to comply? Let
reason judge. If you mean to conduct with any degree of wisdom, then speedily
obtain and improve the privileges of the Gospel. Appropriate so much of your
interest, as is necessary for this purpose; and deprive not your souls of all
the blessings of the Gospel only to save a pittance of worldly gain. You will
now view me as disinterested upon this part of the subject; and will,
therefore, permit me to use plainness of speech. Can a handful of that, which
the Apostle styles filthy lucre, do that for you, which the Gospel of the grace
of God can do? Can the trifling sum, which you may save in refusing to support
the Gospel, procure you a safe retreat at death? Can it open for you the gates
of bliss beyond the grave? Or secure you a glorious immortality when the earth
is dissolving in flames? How much can it do for you in sickness; in death; in
the judgment day; and in hell? Will riches profit you in the day of wrath? Will
it not be a miserable saving, to save the cost of a preached gospel, at the
expense of your souls, of heaven, and of enduring eternal burnings? Say not
these inquiries are harsh. They are suggested by serious truths.

Consider on whom you are dependent for temporal interest; whether God cannot
bestow liberally upon you, if you improve it for him; whether being guilty of
the ingratitude and impiety of preferring a trifle of interest to all the
blessings procured by Christ; yea, whether robbing God in tithes and offerings
be the safest way to secure the bounties of Providence. At your leisure please
to turn to Haggai, i.4 -- 11. and to Malachi, iii.8, 9, 10, where you will find
something to the purpose upon this idea. Then read Paul's writings upon the
subject, in various of his Epistles; particularly 1 Cor. ix.1 -- 14. Gal. vi.6,
7, and 1 Timothy v.17, 18. In these scriptures you may learn your duty as to the
support of the Gospel; and may learn also the curse of God, which lies on
those, who rob him in this respect.

And with respect to the character of your minister, whom you may choose; will
you prefer a man, who will seek, not your souls, but to obtain your temporal
interest? And who will seek honor from men in the neglect of faithfulness? Will
you choose one, who will daub with untempered mortar; heal wounds slightly; and
cry peace, where God says there is no peace? Are not our natural hearts full
ready enough to deceive us, without the fatal assistance of smooth preaching?
Alas, how many among men have their hearts depicted in the following inspired
hint; " Who say to their seers, see not, and to their prophets, prophesy not
unto us right things; speak unto us smooth things, prophesy deceit. Cause the
Holy one of Israel to cease from before us." The false prophets in Israel of
old were very popular; for their smooth preaching soothed and pleased the
carnal heart. But the true prophets were, for their fathfulness, hated and put
to death. " I hate him," says Ahab of Micaiah, " for he never prophesies good
of me, but evil." Christ says, " The world hates me, because I testify of it,
that the works thereof are evil." And the truth of this they demonstrated in
putting him to death. How many viewed Paul as an enemy because he told them the
truth? And how many thousands, upon this principle, have been put to death? But
can it be your wisdom, or for your interest, to have the solemn truths of
heaven suppressed, because the view of them affords pain? How long will the
pain, in this way, be deferred? Will it not ere long, fall, with an hundred
fold weight, upon you? Can any wish to be confirmed in fatal deception? Will
not smooth and false teachers ingulf themselves and their votaries in ruin? Let
Christ decide it. " If the blind lead the blind, both shall fall into the
ditch." Which surgeon would you prefer? the one, who softly heals the surface
of your wound, and carelessly leaves your life in imminent danger? Or the one
who benevolently performs the painful operation of probing it to the bottom,
and saves your life, by effecting a thorough cure? Alas, " The children of this
world are wiser in their generation, than the children of light."

But, know that you are faithfully warned! I must rid myself of the blood of
your souls. Permit me, now to remind you, perhaps for the last time, that
unless you do, with humble and penitent hearts, commend yourselves to God, and
to the word of his grace, by prizing and improving the Gospel; you will fail of
heaven; you will be found, at last, on the left hand; you will be treated as
Gospel despisers; and will sink in endless woe. With this warning I must bid
you adieu.

My young Friends, who are in the morning of your days; What shall I address to
you, on this occasion? Will you not lay to heart the things, which have been
suggested, and which you have often heard? If parents, and those, who are
advanced in age, in too may instances, neglect them, yet will not you attend to
them, and set better examples? I did expect to spend my days with you. But
Providence forbids; and I must submit. I have esteemed you as an important
class of people. I think I have desired, and sought your best interest. And I
still wish your temporal, but especially your eternal prosperity. But permit
me, once more, as your friend, to remind you, that you are environed with
snares, which ruin thousands. Your danger, while out of Christ, is great beyond
description. And, probably, it is not lessened by your present prospects with
respect to the Gospel. God grant that you may escape the dangers which attend
you, and speedily secure a blessed immortality. In order to this, be sober
minded. Remember your Creator in the days of your youth. Cultivate true piety.
Follow not the multitude to do evil. Dare to break out from the fascinating
charms of popular vice; and to be singular for Christ. Do not go down to
endless misey for the sake of the multitude, who are goin^ (...). Escape the
vices of the times. Walk in the ^^ths of religion, of virtue and peace. Before
the fascinating cup of pleasures reaches your lip, pause; consider who beholds
you; what he demands; and what consequences will follow. And may you be wise to
avoid the evil, and to choose the good. My labors with you will not prove so
indifferent a matter, as some may have viewed them. If I have been unfaithful,
the consequence must fall with dreadful weight upon my own head; but if
faithful, as I hope, in some good degree, you will find my administration here,
(to your joy, or horror,) a savor of life, or of death. God grant it may be the
former; and that, though we must now part, and I must bid you adieu, we may be
prepared for an happy meeting in a better world.

And, now, my Brethren, and Beloved of the Church; it is devolved upon me to
address to you my Farewell. -- Is this possible? Is it a reality? Or, is it not
a dream? We cannot wake, and find it to be the latter. It is the former.
Painful is the scene, the dissolution of the interesting relation between us!

What can I now say, but in the words of our text, to commend you to God, and
to the word of his grace? For he is able, under all your discouragements, to
build you up, and to give you an inheritance among all them, who are
sanctified. I hope you are interested in that celestial treasure. God has
afforded us opportunity to form and cultivate an endearing acquaintance with
each other; to walk, hand in hand, for a course of years, even ever since you
have been a church. We have mutually waded through scenes of trials. And we
have been favored with many privileges and occasions of joy. And, though we
must now part, I trust we have a mutual friendship formed, which time will
never dissolve; which death will not obliterate; and which eternity will
strengthen and refine. If our friendship be built on the love of God, this is
indeed the case. And then, though we must be parted in this vale of tears; and
God only knows through what trials we may be called to pass in our different
ways; yet one thing we may know, for our mutual consolation, that " Neither
death, nor life, nor angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things
present, nor things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature,
shall be able to separate us from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus,
our Lord." We shall then meet in that better world, where there will be no more
painful separation; where the wicked shall cease from troubling; where the
weary shall be at rest in pure and holy love, in the likeness and blessed
presence of our Savior and Lord.

O, let us keep that blessed world in view. Wander not, my brethren, from the
path, which leads to it. Be not lost in this dangerous, intervening wilderness.
Turn not aside to the right hand, nor to the left, lest your feet stumble upon
the dark mountains, and your souls be utterly lost.

With respect to the means of grace, obtain the administration of them, if
possible. Pray to the Lord of the harvest for this blessing. But remember, that
an unfaithful shepherd, (possess he ever so popular talents,) is, by far, worse
than none. Take heed, then, and beware of false prophets. Your situation, will
be critical. I fear that sectaries and evil workers will be in among you.
Errors and damnable heresies are becoming prevalent and popular; and many are
their subtle advocates, who, if it were possible, would deceive the very elect.
Take heed, then, how and whom ye hear. Receive not schismatics into your
houses. " Go ye not after them." Bid them not God's speed. But mark and avoid
them. And let us watch and pray always, that we may be accounted worthy to
escape all the evils, which are coming upon the earth, and to stand before the
Son of Man.

I hope you are rooted and grounded in the truth. God forbid that I should
flatter you. But I cannot but feel comforted in the apprehension that this is
the case with you, as a church. May the merciful Savior afford you abundance of
grace, that you may feel, and exhibit much evidence that this is the fact. In
order for this, be blameless and harmless, the sons of God without rebuke, in
the midst of a crooked and perverse nation; among whom, see to it, that ye
shine, as lights in the world. Have your conversation honest among your fellow
men; that, if any speak evil of you, they may be ashamed when they behold your
good conversation of Christ. Be steadfast, and immovable; always abounding in
the work of the Lord. If it be possible, as much as in you lies, live
peaceably with all men. At the same time remember to contend earnestly for the
faith once delivered to the saints. By no means sacrifice your religion to
carnal peace, or to complaisance; for the wisdom which is from above, is first
pure, then peaceable.

Should the cause of Christ be ever so much neglected, or despised, yet favor
not this impiety. Be not ashamed of Christ. Remember Christ's moving
interrogation to his disciples, when numbers returned back, to walk 'no more
with him, " Will you also go away?" With melting hearts unite with them in the
reply, " Lord, whither shall we go, but unto thee?"

" Let brotherly love continue." Let brotherly watchfulness abound. Remember
your vows, and the laws of Christ concerning discipline. Exhort one another
daily, lest any be hardened through the deceitfulness of sin. Look diligently,
lest roots of bitterness, springing up, trouble and defile you. And, O,
remember to sanctify the sabbath! I fear this duty will be awfully neglected in
this place. If you have no preaching, I beseech you forsake not the assembling
of yourselves together. You have the promise of Christ's presence, if but two
or three meet in his name. Labor, by word, and example, to prevent all
profanation of the Lord's day.

And, will you not recollect, and comply with this request in the words of
Paul. " Brethren, pray for us." Pray for a poor earthen vessel, who is
entrusted with a commission, " to testify the gospel of the grace of God." Pray
for him, who has been your Pastor. He needs your prayers!

And now, finally, brethren, farewell; be perfect; be of good comfort; be of
one mind; live in love and peace; and the God of love and peace will be with
you.

AMEN.
PREFACE.
SOME may inquire, how Mr. Smith came to be dismissed from his People; seeing
such a cordiality subsisted between him and his Church? The answer is, merely
for want of support. The Church, and those other persons, who were disposed to
join with them, for the purpose of settling him, were unable to afford him a
comfortable maintenance. Those who first engaged to pay his salary, were but a
private society, their number very small, and the sum proposed for his support
very small. Mr. Smith, nevertheless, was advised by the Council, to accept the
invitation to settle; from a consideration, that no objection appeared against
his so doing, which would not lie, with equal force, against their having the
Gospel settled at all. After several years, there was a deficiency in the
payment of the salary, small as it was, by reason, that a number of those who
first engaged, refused to pay their proportion. The difficulty was soon
increased; by the refusal of some others, who were not pleased with the place
of worship; till at length, the situation of the society became such, that it
was judged expedient to discontinue their usual practice, of making an
assessment, for the collection of the salary. He then (having continued
hitherto with much difficulty,) proposed to call a Council, for advice relative
to the expediency of his continuing among them. The result of which was, that,
although a perfect harmony subsisted between Mr. Smith and his Church; and
although they had made great and laudable exertions for his support and
continuance among them; yet, inasmuch as no permanent foundation was laid for
his support, and so many important openings and calls for Ministers appeared,
these dispensations of Providence, in the opinion of the Council, evidently
called Mr. Smith from this part of the vineyard.

After several weeks' consideration, Mr. Smith and the Church unanimously
viewed it to be their duty to comply with the result of Council; which
compliance dissolved their connection.

The Church, then, unanimously voted to present the following Address to Mr.
Smith; which was delivered at the close of the Public Exercises, on the same
day on which the foregoing Sermon was delivered; and is here annexed, at the
request of a number of respectable characters.

AN ADDRESS TO THE Rev. ETHAN SMITH.
REV. AND DEAR SIR,
IT having pleased the All Wise Disposer of human events, in the course of his
providence, so to order the circumstances of your Ministry and the affairs
relative to your support, amongst this people, as evidently to point out the
expediency of a separation between you and this Church, and your pastoral
relation to this flock, being consequently dissolved by mutual consent, you
will permit the Church, in this public manner, to address you on the affecting
subject. Painful indeed, Sir, to us, is the separation that has lately taken
place; and it is with the deepest regret, that we now view ourselves deprived
of the benefit of your faithful administrations. But, consoling thought! we
believe that we shall ever have an interest in your prayers; and, although you
and the members of this Church may probably very soon be separated in person;
yet we trust, that we shall not be so in affection; but that the fraternal love
and christian affection, which has subsisted ever since your first coming among
us, and has been gradually increasing through a term of almost nine years, will
never cease; but be perfected in the realms of love. We hope, and believe, Sir,
that nothing short of a full conviction of duty, in the minds both of the
Pastor and Church, has, or could have, finally induced to an unanimous
compliance with the result of Council; but such a conviction, we are sensible,
ought ever to produce a quiet submission to the will of Providence; and,
however weighty the cross may be, it is no argument against our cheerfully
taking it up and following our Divine Leader. We trust, dear Sir, that we are
not altogether insensible to the many advantages, which this Church has reaped
from your residence and labors among us; and we would acknowledge, with
gratitude, the obligations which you (under God) have thereby conferred on us.
With this view, Sir, permit us to take a retrospect of past scenes. And in the
first place, your active and unwearied exertions, at the time of your first
entering in to us, in a time of general awakening in this place, more
particularly, your readiness and assiduity in instructing the ignorant,
alarming the secure, guiding inquirers, establishing the doubtful and
comforting the feeble minded; in connection with that easy, unaffected and
accommodating address, so peculiarly your own; your generous sacrifice of an
overture, in a distant place, larger than could be expected from our small
number; and your taking the charge of this flock, in the face of a powerful
opposition, evidence a love and attachment, on your part, which we would
gratefully notice. Since your settlement, your plain, powerful, and
demonstrative strain of preaching, your fervent prayers, your pathetic and
moving addresses, at the celebration of the Lord's Supper; your readiness, at
all times, to visit the sick among your people, and to attend on lectures and
conferences, whenever requested, thus being instant in preaching the word, in
season and out of season; your wisdom and faithfulness when presiding in the
Church, and leading them in measures designed and calculated to promote Gospel
order and discipline; together with your bold and faithful reproofs; these are
some of the most prominent features in your ministerial character, are gifts by
which we have been greatly edified, in the course of your ministry, and the
unanimity and love of discipline, so observable in this Church, we esteem as
some of the happy fruits thereof. Furthermore, Sir, we feel ourselves
comforted, in a view of the patience and fortitude, with which you have
sustained your peculiar trials and embarrassments; your deportment having been
so exemplary, through the whole course of your ministry, that not the least
impeachment of your moral conduct has been attempted, by any, the most
inveterate of your enemies. These things we ought to reflect upon, with
pleasure and joy, being unfeignedly thankful, that we have had so abundant
occasion (though for a much shorter season than we hoped) to rejoice in your
light. We assure you, dear Sir, that whenever you leave us, you have our
fervent prayers, for yourself, your consort and family; that an effectual door
may be opened, in Providence, for your stated and successful labors and
honorable support in the vineyard of the Lord; where you may prove a happy
instrument, in the hand of God's Spirit, of turning many to righteousness; and
(as your glory and reward) that you may shine, as a star of the first
magnitude, forever and ever. Finally, Sir, we ask your prayers for this Church
and people, in their bereaved situation; that we may have grace given us,
seriously to inquire into the grounds of God's controversy with us; that we may
remember how and what we have heard from you, hold fast, repent, be humbled,
and do our first works; and when God shall have answered the gracious designs
of this chastisement, with respect to us, that he will send us another Pastor,
after his own heart; under whose ministrations, may we be trained up for the
kingdom of glory; and at length, meet you, our beloved Pastor, therein, never
more to be separated.

Voted unanimously by the Church.

(Signed,) DANIEL STANIFORD, Scribe.
Haverhill, June 30 th, 1799.

