ST. HUBERT; OR, MISTAKEN FRIENDSHIP.

A TALE.

"EXEMPLO ALIORUM DISCITE." Profit by Example.

DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA: PRINTED FOR W. W. WOOD. 1800.

INTRODUCTION.
SINCE my residence in Virginia, it has frequently been my practice, to take a
solitary walk through the woods and beautiful groves with which the great
author of nature has so richly supplied this much favored state.

During one of these my evening excursions, I chanced into a train of thought
and reflection upon the rising generation, the many difficulties they have to
go through, the numerous temptations they have to encounter, and the more than
probability of their being led astray by corrupt practices and vicious habits.

My meditations upon this subject took various forms and shapes, and led me to
inquire within myself if there was no way to prevent these fatal effects, no
way of enforcing upon the minds of youth their true interest, no captivating
mode of recommending virtue in her simple and comely garb, and of exhibiting
vice in her native hideous colors, deprived of those blandishments, in which
this bewitching siren is so apt to present herself to our view.

The forbidding air of a preceptor or guardian did not appear calculated to
have much effect, if any, upon a young mind awake to every sensibility: nor
would the austere manners and jesuitical denunciations, which priestcraft has
too often invented to answer the purposes of fraud and deception, be ever
likely to win the ingenuous youth to the path of virtue; and fatal experience
and observation had too often shown, that the awful and solemn exhortations of
the pulpit, which are entitled to the attention and deserve the consideration
of the most refined mind and improved understanding, had not had the salutary
effect which they merited, inasmuch as they were too serious and had too gloomy
an appearance for the volatile and lively imaginations of the young; didactic
pieces do not suit their taste, their minds are not sufficiently stable to pay
them the necessary attention; the most likely way of gaining their notice and
of securing them in the interests of virtue, appeared to be to bring to their
view scenes of real life, to show them "The living manners as they rise,"
and thus persuade them to "profit by example." The difficulties they saw vice
hurl those into, who had been before innocent and amiable, the distress they
underwent, the heart-rending pangs they experienced in consequence of their
improper conduct, would cause every youth of sensibility to turn from her with
disgust and horror; while on the other hand, the agreeable and consolatory
effects of virtue, would excite the most pleasing sympathies, and insure the
service and obedience of every one who is not lost to all goodness, and callous
to every pleasing and tender impression.

These reflections naturally led my mind to think of some interesting
representation or view of real life, which might in the least degree have a
tendency to produce this happy and desirable effect. Having seated myself upon
the verdant green, under the shade of a venerable oak, whose widely extended
branches yielded a covering superior to the richest tapestry, I ruminated upon
the various accounts and views of life which I had been in the habit of
examining, and was at a loss to find such a narrative, which, combining brevity
with the most interesting events, might at once excite the sensibility and tend
to influence the life and conduct.

While thus anxious to find some interesting picture by which I might engage
the attention of the rising age; affected I suppose by the length of my walk
and the warmth of the season, and perhaps perplexed by the succession of ideas
that passed through my mind, I fell into a deep sleep; and as is often the case
when the attention is earnestly fixed upon some particular object, my
reflections when awake presented themselves during my slumbering moments, and
it immediately occurred to me that the example of poor St. Hubert, might have a
very happy effect to answer the purposes I had been contemplating; that nothing
would have so good a tendency to show the great danger of what is called "Good
natured ease,"
and the fatal effects of mistaken friendship. The joy occasioned by this
discovery soon awakened me out of my pleasing dream, and I walked home with the
determination of laying the whole before the public, hoping that it may not be
altogether in vain, and that the following little story, if it wont inform,
will at least amuse, and enable the reader to beguile some solitary moments
which might have been devoted to a worse purpose.

THE STORY OF ST. HUBERT.
MY name is St. Hubert; my family ancient and respectable, though its domains,
from various untoward events, had been contracted much within their former
extent. I lost my father before I knew the misfortune of losing him; and the
indulgence of my mother, who continued a widow, made up, in the estimation of a
young man, for any want of that protection or of guidance which another parent
might have afforded. After having passed with applause through the ordinary
studies which the capital of our province allowed an opportunity of acquiring,
my mother sent me to Paris, along with the son of a neighboring family, who,
though of less honorable descent, was much richer than ours. Young Delaserre,
that was my companion's name, was intended for the army; I, from particular
circumstances which promised success in that line, my mother and her friends
had destined for the long robe, and had agreed for the purchase of a charge for
me when I should be qualified for it. Delaserre had a sovereign contempt for
any profession but that of arms, and took every opportunity of inspiring me
with the same sentiments. In the capital I had this prejudice every day more
and more confirmed. The fierte of every man who had served, the insolent
superiority he claimed over his fellow-citizens, dazzled my ambition, and awed
my bashfulness. From nature I had the extreme sensibility of shame, which could
not stand against the ridicule even of much inferior men. Ignorance would often
confound me in matters of which I was perfectly well informed, from his
superior effrontery; and the best established principles of my mind would
sometimes yield to the impudence of assuming sophistry, or of unblushing vice.
To the profession which my relations had marked out for me, attention,
diligence, and sober manners were naturally attached; having once set down that
profession as humiliating, I concluded its attendant qualities to be equally
dishonorable. I was ashamed of virtues to which I was naturally inclined, a
bully in vices which I hated and despised. Delaserre enjoyed my apostasy from
innocence as a victory he had gained. At school he was much my inferior, and I
attained every rank of distinction to which he had aspired in vain. In Paris he
triumphed in his turn; his superior wealth enabled him to command the
appearance of superior dignity and show; the cockade in his hat inspired a
confidence which my situation did not allow; and bold as he was in dissipation
and debauchery, he led me as an inferior whom he taught the art of living, whom
he had first trained to independence and to manhood. My mother's ill-judged
kindness supplied me with the means of those pleasures which my companions
induced me to share, if pleasures they might be called, which I often partook
with uneasiness, and reflected on with remorse. Sometimes, though but too
seldom, I was much a hypocrite on the other side; I was self denied,
beneficent, and virtuous by stealth; while the time and money which I had so
employed, I boasted to my companions of having spent in debauchery, in riot,
and in vice.

The habits of life, however, into which I had been led, begun by degrees to
blunt my natural feelings of rectitude, and to take from vice the restraints of
conscience. But the dangerous connection I had formed was broken off by the
accident of Delaserre's receiving orders to join his regiment, then quartered
at Dunkirk. At his desire, I gave him the convoy as far as to a relation's
house, in Picardy, where he was to spend a day or two in his way. I will
introduce you, said he in a tone of pleasantry, because you will be a favorite;
my cousin Santonges is as sober and precise as you were when I first found you.
The good man whom he thus characterised possessed indeed all those virtues of
which the ridicule of Delaserre had sometimes made me ashamed, but which it had
never made me entirely cease to revere. In his family I regained the station
which, in our dissipated society at Paris, I had lost. His example encouraged
and his precepts fortified my natural disposition to goodness; but his
daughter, Emilia de Santonges, was a more interesting assistant to it. After my
experience of the few of her sex with whom we were acquainted in town, the
native beauty, the unaffected manners of Emilia, were infinitely attractive.
Delaserre, however, found them insipid and tiresome. He left his kinsman's the
third morning after his arrival, promising, as soon as his regiment should be
reviewed, to meet me in Paris. Except in Paris, said he, we exist merely, but
do not live. I found it very different. I lived but in the presence of Emilia
de Santonges. But why should I recall those days of purest felicity, or think
of what my Emilia was! For not long after she was mine. In the winter they came
to Pairs, on account of her father's health, which was then rapidly on the
decline. I tended him with that assiduity which was due to his friendship,
which the company of Emilia made more an indulgence than a duty. Our cares, and
the skill of his physicians, were fruitless. He died, and left his daughter to
my friendship. It was then that I first dared to hope for her love; that over
the grave of her father I mingled my tears with Emilia's, and tremblingly
ventured to ask, if she thought me worthy of comforting her sorrows? Emilia was
too innocent for disguise, too honest for affectation. She gave her hand to my
virtues, for I then was virtuous, to reward at the same time, and to confirm
them. We retired to Santonges, where we enjoyed as much felicity as perhaps the
lot of humanity will allow. My Emilia's merit was equal to her happiness; and I
may say without vanity, since it is now my shame, that the since wretched St.
Hubert was then thought to deserve the blessings he enjoyed.

In this state of peaceful felicity we had lived something more than a year,
when my Emilia found herself with child. On that occasion my anxiety was such
as a husband who dotes upon his wife may be supposed to feel. In consequence of
that anxiety, I proposed our removing for some weeks to Paris, where she might
have abler assistance than our province could afford in those moments of danger
which she soon expected. To this she objected with earnestness, from a variety
of motives; but most of my neighbors applauded my resolution; and one, who was
the nephew of a farmer-general, and had purchased the estate on which his
father had been a tenant, told me, the danger from their country accoucheurs
was such, that nobody who could afford to go to Paris would think of trusting
them. I was a little tender on the reproach of poverty, and absolutely
determined for the journey. To induce my wife's consent I had another pretext,
being left executor to a friend who had died in Paris, and had effects
remaining there. Emilia at last consented, and we removed to town accordingly.

For some time I scarce ever left our hotel: It was the same at which Emilia
and her father had lodged when he came to Paris to die, and leave her to my
love. The recollection of those scenes, tender and interesting as they were,
spread a sort of melancholy indulgence over our mutual society, by which the
company of any third person could scarcely be brooked. My wife had some of
those sad presages which women of her sensibility often feel in the condition
she was then in. All my attention and solicitude were excited to combat her
fears. "I shall not live," she would say, to revisit Santonges: but my Henry
will think of me there: In those woods in which we have so often walked, by
that brook, to the fall of which we have listened together, and felt in silence
what language, at least what mine, my love, could not speak.

The anxiety of my Emilia was at last dissipated by her safe delivery of a boy;
and on this object of a new kind of tenderness we gazed with inexpressible
delight. Emilia suckled the infant herself, as well from the idea of duty and
of pleasure in tending it, as from the difficulty of finding in Paris a nurse
to be trusted. We proposed returning to the country as soon as the
re-establishment of her strength would permit. Meantime, during her hours of
rest, I generally went to finish the business which the trust of my deceased
friend had devolved upon me.

In passing through the Thuilleries, in one of those walks, I met my old
companion Delaserre. He embraced me with a degree of warmth which I scarce
expected from my knowledge of his disposition, or the length of time for which
our correspondence had been broken off. He had heard, he said, accidentally of
my being in town, but had sought me for several days in vain. In truth, he was
of all men one whom I was the most afraid of meeting. I had heard in the
country of his unbounded dissipation and extravagance; and there were some
stories to his prejudice which were only not believed, from an unwillingness to
believe them in people whom the corruptions of the world had not familiarised
to baseness; yet I found he still possessed a kind of superiority over my mind,
which I was glad to excuse, by forcing myself to think him less unworthy than
he was reported. After a variety of inquiries, and expressing his cordial
satisfaction at the present happiness I enjoyed, he pressed me to spend that
evening with him so earnestly, that though I had made it a sort of rule to be
at home, I was ashamed to offer an apology, and agreed to meet him at the hour
he appointed.

Our company consisted only of Delaserre himself, and two other officers, one a
good deal older than any of us, who had the cross of St. Louis, and the rank of
colonel, whom I thought the most agreeable man I had ever met with. The
unwillingness with which I had left home, and the expectation of a very
different sort of party where I was going, made me feel the present one doubly
pleasant. My spirits, which were rather low when I went in, from that
constraint I was prepared for, rose in proportion to the pleasantry around me,
and the perfect ease in which I found myself with this old officer, who had
information, wit, sentiment, every thing I valued most, and every thing I least
expected in a society selected by Delaserre. It was late before we parted; and
at parting we received, not without pleasure, an invitation from the colonel to
sup with him the evening after.

The company at his house I found enlivened by his sister and a friend of hers,
a widow, who, though not a perfect beauty, had a countenance that impressed one
more in her favor than mere beauty could. When silent, there was a certain
softness in it infinitely bewitching; and when it was lightened up by the
expression which her conversation gave, it was equally attractive. We happened
to be placed next each other. Unused as I was to the little gallantries of
fashionable life, I rather wished than hoped to make myself agreeable to her.
She seemed, however, interested in my attentions and conversation, and in hers
I found myself flattered and delighted. We played, against the inclination of
this lady and me, and we won rather more than I wished. Had I been as rich as
Delaserre, I should have objected to the deepness of the stakes: but we were
the only persons of the company that seemed uneasy at our success, and we
parted with the most cordial good humor. Madame de Trenville, that was the
widow's name, smiling to the colonel, asked him to take his revenge at her
house, and said, with an air of equal modesty and frankness, that as I had been
the partner of her success, she hoped for the honor of my company, to take the
chance of sharing a less favorable fortune.

At first my wife had expressed her satisfaction at my finding amusement in
society, to relieve the duty of attending her. But when my absence grew very
frequent, as indeed I was almost every day at madame de Trenville's, though her
words continued the same, she could not help expressing by her countenance her
dissatisfaction at my absence. I perceived this at first with tenderness only,
and next evening excused myself from keeping my engagement. But I found my
wife's company not what it used to be: thoughtful, but afraid to trust one
another with our thoughts, Emilia showed her uneasiness in her looks, and I
covered mine but ill with assumed gaity of appearance.

The day following Delaserre called, and saw Emilia for the first time. He
rallied me gently for breaking my last night's appointment, and told me of
another which he had made for me, which my wife insisted on my keeping. Her
cousin applauded her conduct, and joked on the good government of wives. Before
I went out in the evening, I came to wish Emilia a good night. I thought I
perceived a tear on her cheek, and would have staid, but for the shame of not
going. The company perceived my want of gaity, and Delaserre was merry on the
occasion. Even my friend the colonel threw in a little raillery on the subject
of marriage. 'Twas the first time I felt somewhat awkward at being the only
married man of the party.

We played deeper and sat later than formerly; but I was to show myself not
afraid of my wife, and objected to neither. I lost considerably, and returned
home mortified and chagrined. I saw Emilia next morning, whose spirits were not
high. Methought her looks reproached my conduct, and I was enough in the wrong
to be angry that they did so. Delaserre came to take me to his house to dinner.
He observed as he went that Emilia looked ill. Going to the country will
re-establish her, said I -- Do you leave Paris? said he. -- In a few days. --
Had I such motives for remaining in it as you have. -- What motives? -- The
attachment of such friends; but friendship is a cold word: the attachment of
such a woman as de Trenville. I know not how I looked, but he pressed the
subject no farther; perhaps I was less offended than I ought to have been.

We went to that lady's house after dinner. She was dressed most elegantly, and
looked more beautiful than ever I had seen her. The party was more numerous
than usual, and there was more vivacity in it. The conversation turned upon my
intention of leaving Paris; the ridicule of country manners, of country
opinions, of the insipidity of country enjoyments, was kept up with infinite
spirit by Delaserre, and most of the younger members of the company. Madame de
Trenville did not join in their mirth, and sometimes looked at me as if the
subject was too serious for her to be merry on. I was half ashamed and half
sorry that I was going to the country; less uneasy than vain at the preference
that was shown me.

I was a coward, however, in the wrong as well as in the right, and fell upon
an expedient to screen myself from a discovery that might have saved me. I
contrived to deceive my wife, and to conceal my visits to madam de Trenville's,
under the pretense of some perplexing incidents that had arisen in the
management of those affairs with which I was entrusted. Her mind was too pure
for suspicion or for jealousy. It was easy even for a novice in falsehood, like
me, to deceive her. But I had an able assistant in Delaserre, who now resumed
the ascendency over me he had formerly possessed, but with an attraction more
powerful, from the infatuated attachment which my vanity and weakness, as much
as her art and beauty, had made me conceive for madame de Trenville.

It happened, that just at this time a young man arrived from our province, and
brought letters for Emilia from a female friend of hers in the neighborhood of
Santonges. He had been bred a miniature painter, and came to town for
improvement in his art. Emilia, who doted on her little boy, proposed to him to
draw his picture in the innocent attitude of his sleep. The young painter was
pleased with the idea, provided she would allow him to paint the child in her
arms. This was to be concealed from me, for the sake of surprising me with the
picture when it should be finished. That she might have a better opportunity of
effecting this little concealment, Emilia would often hear, with a sort of
satisfaction, my engagements abroad, and encourage me to keep them, that the
picture might advance in my absence.

She knew not what, during that absence, was my employment. The slave of vice
and of profusion, I was violating my faith to her, in the arms of the most
artful and worthless of women, and losing the fortune that should have
supported my child and hers, to a set of cheats and villains. Such was the
snare that Delaserre and his associates had drawn around me. It was covered
with the appearance of love and generosity. De Trenville had art enough to make
me believe, that she was every way the victim of her affection for me. My first
great losses at play she pretended to reimburse from her own private fortune,
and then threw herself upon my honor, for relief from those distresses into
which I had brought her. After having exhausted all the money I possessed, and
all my credit could command, I would have stopped short of ruin; but when I
thought of returning in disgrace and poverty to the place I had left respected
and happy, I had not resolution enough to retreat. I took refuge in
desperation, mortgaged the remains of my estate, and staked the produce to
recover what I had lost, or to lose myself. The event was such as might have
been expected.

After the dizzy horror of my situation had left me power to think, I hurried
to madame de Trenville's. She gave me such a reception as suited one who was no
longer worth the deceiving. Conviction of her falsehood, and of that ruin to
which she had been employed to lead me, flashed upon my mind. I left her with
execrations, which she received with the coolness of hardened vice, of
experienced seduction. I rushed from her house, I knew not whither. My steps
involuntarily led me home. At my own door I stopped, as if it had been death to
enter. When I had shrunk back some paces, I turned again; twice did I attempt
to knock, and could not; my heart throbbed with unspeakable horror, and my
knees smote each other. It was night, and the street was dark and silent around
me. I threw myself down before the door, and wished some ruffian's hand to ease
me of life and thought together. At last the recollection of Emilia, and of my
infant boy, crossed my disordered mind, and a gush of tenderness burst from my
eyes. I rose, and knocked at the door. When I was let in, I went up softly to
my wife's chamber. She was asleep, with a night-lamp burning by her, her child
sleeping on her bosom, and its little hand grasping her neck. Think what I felt
as I looked! She smiled through her sleep, and seemed to cream of happiness. My
brain began to madden again; and as the misery to which she must wake crossed
my imagination, the horrible idea rose within me, -- I shudder yet to tell it!
-- to murder them as they lay, and next myself! -- I stretched my hand toward
my wife's throat! -- The infant unclasped its little fingers, and laid hold of
one of mine. The gentle pressure wrung my heart; its softness returned; I burst
into tears; but I could not stay to tell her of our ruin. I rushed out of the
room, and, gaining an obscure hotel in a distant part of the town, wrote a few
distracted lines, acquainting her of my folly and of my crimes; that I meant
immediately to leave France, and not return till my penitence should wipe out
my offense, and my industry repair that ruin in which I had involved her. I
recommended her and my child to my mother's care, and to the protection of
heaven which she had never offended. Having sent this, I left Paris on the
instant, and had walked several miles from town before it was light. At
sunrise a stage-coach overtook me. 'Twas going on the road to Breast. I entered
it without arranging any future plan, and sat in sullen and gloomy silence, in
the corner of the carriage. That day and next night I went on mechanically,
with several other passengers, regardless of food, and incapable of rest. But
the second day I found my strength fail, and when we stopped in the evening, I
fell down in a faint in the passage of the inn. I was put to bed, it seems, and
lay for more than a week in the stupefaction of a low fever.

A charitable brother of that order to which I now belong, who happened to be
at the inn, attended me with the greatest care and humanity; and when I began
to recover, the good old man ministered to my soul, as he had done to my body,
that assistance and consolation he easily discovered it to need. By his tender
assiduities I was now so far recruited as to be able to breathe the fresh air
at the window of a little parlor. As I sat there one morning, the same
stage-coach in which I had arrived, stopped at the door of the inn, when I saw
alight out of it the young painter who had been recommended to us at Paris. The
sight overpowered my weakness, and I fell lifeless from my seat. The incident
brought several people into the room, and amongst others the young man himself.
When they had restored me to sense, I had recollection enough to desire him to
remain with me alone. It was some time before he recognized me; when he did,
with horror in his aspect, after much hesitation, and the most solemn entreaty
from me, he told me the dreadful sequel of my misfortunes. My wife and child
were no more. The shock which my letter gave, the state of weakness she was
then in, she had not strength to support. The effects were a fever, delirium,
and death. Her infant perished with her. In the interval of reason preceding
her death, she called him to her bedside; gave him the picture he had drawn;
and with her last breath charged him, if ever he could find me out, to deliver
that and her forgiveness to me. He put it into my hand. I know not how I
survived. Perhaps it was owing to the outworn state in which my disease had
left me. My heart was too weak to burst; and there was a sort of palsy on my
mind that seemed insensible to its calamities. By that holy man who had once
before saved me from death, I was placed here, where, except one melancholy
journey to that spot where they had laid my Emilia and her boy, I have ever
since remained. My story is unknown, and they wonder at the severity of that
life by which I endeavor to atone for my offenses. But it is not by suffering
alone that heaven is reconciled; I endeavor, by works of charity and
beneficence, to make my being not hateful in its sight. Blessed be God! I have
attained the consolation I wished. -- Already, on my wasting days, a beam of
mercy sheds its celestial light.

The visions of this flinty couch are changed to mildness. 'Twas but last night
my Emilia beckoned me in smiles; this little cherub was with her!

If the world allure thee, if vice ensnare with its pleasures, or abash with
its ridicule, think of father Nicholas -- be virtuous, and be happy.

THE END.

