THE MIDWIVES MONITOR, AND MOTHERS MIRROR: BEING THREE CONCLUDING LECTURES OF A
COURSE OF INSTRUCTION ON MIDWIFERY. CONTAINING DIRECTIONS for pregnant Women;
RULES for the Management of natural Births, and for early discovering when the
Aid of a Physician is necessary; AND CAUTIONS FOR NURSES, RESPECTING BOTH THE
MOTHER AND CHILD. TO WHICH IS PREFIXED, A Syllabus of Lectures on that Subject.

BY VALENTINE SEAMAN, M. D. One of the Surgeons of the New York Hospital, and
Physician Extraordinary to the Lying-in Ward in the Almshouse.

NEW YORK: Printed by ISAAC COLLINS, No. 189, Pearl-Street. 1800.

PREFACE.
HAVING frequently had to witness the accidents attendant upon mismanagement,
in the practice of Midwifery, and having, with pain, reflected upon the limited
knowledge of that business among most of the female practitioners, I have, for
a considerable time past, had a wish, that some means might be adopted for the
better information of those necessary, though too much neglected, members of
the community.

I consider midwives as necessary, and, not only necessary, but indispensably
so, notwithstanding the abundance of physicians, because some women, absolutely
refuse having a man to attend them in their labors, or at least not till they
are convinced of being in a critical or dangerous situation, and oftentimes not
until they are beyond the reach of the greatest skill. However indiscreet and
ill-sounded this prejudice may be considered, let it be called whim, a false
delicacy or what we will, it matters naught to me, existing distress, whether
it arises from reason or folly, equally demands our attention; and if we cannot
afford relief by one method, it behooves us to attempt it by another. If women
cannot be persuaded to submit themselves to the care of male practitioners, it
is our duty to instruct females how to give them the necessary aid. That this
prejudice does exist, and that some women will have none but their own sex to
assist them upon such occasions, every day's experience teaches us: and that
this disposition is firm and not to be overcome, the arbitrary decrees of the
government of Athens clearly demonstrate; for while with them midwives were
prohibited from practicing, the fatal sufferings of many of their women, fully
proved the futility of attempting to confine that business entirely in the
hands of the men.

However sufficient in itself this reason may be, it is by no means the only or
the greatest one for encouraging the study of Midwifery with women: for even
were there no objections in the mind of any to the employment of male
practitioners, still the nature of the practice of physic, in this country, is
such, that physicians cannot afford to give up so much of their time from their
other business, as would be necessarily employed upon such occasions, for the
small compensation, that the greater proportion of citizens are able, without
distressing their families, to make them. What then must be done? The only
means to relieve the major part of the community, both from oppression and from
danger, in such cases, is the judicious establishment of regularly instructed
midwives.

Besides these reasons, which are of a general application, there is an
additional one for their establishment in the country. In cities a physician
often may, in lingering cases, steal time enough from them to visit his other
patients; but, in more thinly settled places, the necessary distance of their
patients is such, as to render it impossible for a physician to practice
midwifery with prudence, and to do justice to his other practice: in this
respect, then, the assistance of midwives is not merely convenient, but
indispensably necessary.

So forcibly has the propriety of instructing females in the art of midwifery,
impressed the liberal minded in Europe, that their most celebrated physicians
have not failed to express an "ardent wish that schools might be erected in
their principal cities for that purpose." And the committee, in their proposals
for regulating and improving the practice of Medicine in France, have carefully
recommended measures to that effect: considering it as an object deserving
their particular attention.

Whatever may have been the desire, and whatever may have been done elsewhere,
no plan of the kind, as far as I can learn, has heretofore been established in
America: consequently the midwives, with a very few exceptions, are as ignorant
of their business as the women they deliver: and I much doubt whether one out
of twenty of them have ever seen the bones that support and protect the womb:
indeed I cannot but suspect whether some even know, that, in being born, a
child has to pass through a bony passage. The greater part of them, at least as
far as my enquiries have reached, having taken up the business by accident,
having first been catched, as they express it, with a woman in labor, they
were forced to receive the child. Attendant success inspiring confidence, they
without more ado, consider themselves competent, and become immediately
established in the profession. But the more diffident and considerate, those
who seek further information, have not generally been much better off: Books
were their only helps, and books, of themselves, are but dim lights indeed;
generally rendered still more gloomy by the cloud of technical obscurity in
which they are involved. To learn such a handicraft business by reading alone,
is like learning ship-building without touching timber. Can we expect, but that
such workers, in either occupation, must destroy more materials than their good
work will ever pay for?

How, it may be asked, in the primitive times, did they do? We have no account
of obstetrical schools, nor hear any complaint of ignorant midwives; children
were born then as well as now; why may not women, without so much study and
instruction, attend one another as well now as then? or, is childbirth a
disorder, that women must always have a skilful person to assist them? Probably
in the early ages, before the pampering stews of luxury had taken the place of
the salutary calls of nature in diet, and before the warping trammels of
fashion had taken the lead of comfort and convenience in dress, seldom, very
seldom, was there any disease in childbearing, or difficulty in travail.
Delivery is certainly a natural process, and so far am I from considering
assistance as always necessary, that I doubt whether the whole art of midwifery
will ever compensate for the mischief arising from the officious interference
of ignorance in its practice.

Under the impression of the foregoing considerations, in the fore part of the
last winter, I proposed to the female practitioners in this city, and such
other women as wished information in the art of midwifery, to deliver them a
course of instruction in that business, connected with the privilege of their
attending the practice of the lying-in ward in the Almshouse. And although it
must be regretted that a great proportion of them, either from an idea of
self-sufficiency, from not duly appreciating the importance of their
profession, from indolence, or, possibly, from a dread of the retrospect, that
opening their eyes might present to their senses, still chose to grope on in
their original darkness. Yet, to their credit be it said, a number, and those
also who appeared to be among the most considerate and better informed,
embraced the proposition with alacrity, and have since attended to the
establishment with a punctuality and attention, worthy the high object of their
pursuit.

The following sheets, besides a short syllabus of the lectures, contains the
substance of the three concluding ones, being a short recapitulation of the
parts most material to midwives; with directions and cautions respecting their
conduct in the practice of their profession; published by the particular
request of the class.

The author has consented to their publication, not from a pretension of the
new light that they may throw upon the art of widwifery, but with the hope of
their serving as a medium through which, as far as they go, to transmit its
present perfection to the attention of those to whom they are directed: should
be thereby promote a more general spirit of enquiry among the female
practitioners, his purposes will be fully answered; should he not, he rests
upon his intentions as a security from censure.

A SYLLABUS OF A COURSE OF LECTURES ON THE THEORY AND PRACTICE OF MIDWIFERY.
LECTURE I. INTRODUCTION.
A SHORT account of the origin and progressive improvement of the Art of
Midwifery. Its practice at first confined to women. Luxurious refinement of
society, with its concomitant dieases, probably the cause of its devolving so
much into the hands of physicians, midwives not having like advantages of
instruction. Midwives present neglect of the opportunities that do offer for
their improvement, renders their very name almost a disgrace. The advantages of
their being regularly instructed, as it relates to the welfare of those
entrusted to their care; as it respects their own reputation and emolument; and
as it secures that peace of mind resulting from the heartfelt conviction of
having done well.

LECTURE II. OBSERVATIONS UPON THE ANIMAL ECONOMY.
On the Mind, and five auxiliary senses, viz. Seeing, Hearing, Smelling,
Tasting and Feeling, with their organs.

THE necessity in those who operate upon the human body of being well
acquainted with its make and functions, since misteps are often so dangerous in
their consequences. The brain and head. Spinal marrow and backbone. The Eyes;
their secure situation in a bony cavity, composed of three humors, which are
contained in three coverings. Their muscles, nerves and appendages, eyelids,
etc. The Ears. Their external and internal parts: the drum and internal
communication with the mouth. The Nose, lined by the expansion of a nervous
coat, the organ of smelling, moistened by the tears, etc. Mouth, comprehending
lips, cheeks, teeth, roof, palate, pap of the palate, tongue, glands, etc.
Skin, divided into scarf and true skin, with an intervening jelly-like
coloring matter: composition, nerves, and appendages.

LECTURE. III.
On the nerves, muscles, circulation of the blood, secretion, digestion, and
absorption, and on the nature of the animal fluids.

NERVES, their appearance, nature, and distribution, convey sensation to the
mind, and carry her will to the muscles. Muscles or flesh, are the instruments
by whose contraction every motion is produced. Generally under the command of
the will, excepting those particularly essential to life, viz. those
subservient to the circulation, secretion, and to breathing. Circulation
through the heart, arteries and veins. The formation and functions of the
Heart, etc. The nature and composition of the Blood. Glands, their composition
and use: manner in which they perform secretion. Of the Gall, Urine, Spittle,
etc. The Stomach, situation, juice, nerves, etc. Digestion how performed. The
Bowels. Absorbents divided into milk vessels, or lacteals and lymphatics; their
action and communication with the heart.

LECTURE IV.
On Respiration and the Organs subservient thereto.

THE Chest formed by the ribs, breast and back bones; it is separated from the
belly by the midriff: contains the heart and lungs and their appendages, etc
The motions of the ribs and midriff dilating the chest, causes an inspiration
of air; their relaxation, diminishing its cavity, affects the discharge of air
or expiration: these alternate motions constitute breathing or respiration. The
blood, as it passes through the lungs, receives life from the air: the air at
the same time undergoing a change in its nature, in the same manner as it is
changed by the burning of combustible bodies, thence producing animal heat, etc.

Of the superiority of animal bodies over the most complete artificial machine.
Their power within themselves of repairing injuries: Casting out what is
superfluous or hurtful; accommodating themselves to losses, as of blood, etc.
calling for supplies, by appetite; accommodating themselves to different
degrees of heat, keeping an equal temperature in a burning or freezing
atmosphere: and to crown all, they are endowed with power to make other
machines like themselves, which again possess the like power of propagating
their species to the end of time.

LECTURE V.
The Bones forming the Pelvis or Basin.

IMPORTANT organs securely lodged in boney cavities, as brain in the head,
heart and lungs in the chest, etc. so also the womb and its appendages, are
supported and protected by the pelvis or basin. Pelvis rests upon the thigh
bones and supports the back: it is composed of the sacred and rump bones
behind, and the nameless bones on the sides and before; their particular
description: nameless bones divided into haunch, seat and share bones.
Peculiarities of the female basin. Brim of the basin is of an oval shape, about
five and a quarter inches from side to side, and four and a quarter across from
sacred to share bones: in its lower opening this proportion reversed, being
longest from fore to hind part, and shortest from side to side. Depth six
inches behind, four at the sides, and two before. Dimensions of the child's
head and shoulders, and the turns they take in delivery. Distortion or
crookedness of the bones of the basin, and the manner in which they affect
delivery: how discovered: causes. Motions of the bones in labor, and whether
the share bones separate or not.

LECTURE. VI.
Female organs of generation.

THE mons veneris. External labiae. Clitoris, Nymphae. Opening of the urethra,
method of introducing a catheter. The perineum. Vagina or passage to the womb.
Hymen. Of the womb, lying between the urinary bladder and straight gut, divided
into body, neck and mouth: supported by the round and flat ligaments, which
last contain in their double the fallopian tubes, which originate from the
bottom of the womb on each side, and terminating in loose jagged ends. They
also contain the ovariae.

LECTURE VII.
Diseases of the aforementioned organs. Their causes, prevention and cure.

REASONS why midwives should have a knowledge of the diseases of the sex,
notwithstanding a physician should in most cases be called upon for their
relief. Watery swellings, abcesses and adhesions of the external parts. Stones
in the bladder and urinary canal. Excrescences about the orifice of the canal.
Imperforated hymen, contraction and adhesions of the vagina. Polypusses in the
passage. Whites. Falling down and falling out of the womb. Hydatids or
collections of bladders of water in the womb. Dropsy of the womb. Wind in the
womb. Moles, their different kinds. Dropsy of the ovariae. Retroversion or
falling backward of the womb.

LECTURE VIII.
Of the Menses, and their irregularities.

PERIODICAL discharge from the womb necessary to every woman, who is not
pregnant, or does not nurse. Exceptions. Time of appearance differs from
climates, with us from the thirteenth to the eighteenth year. General change in
the system at that time. Quantity discharged various from clime and
constitution. With us generally ceases between the fortyfifth and fiftieth
year. Final cause, necessary to generation. Obstruction and suppression, their
various causes, symtoms, effects and cure. Profusion; causes, cure. Painful
menstruation, and remedy. Treatment to follow about the time of their final
cessation.

LECTURE IX.
On Conception.

THEORIES of different authors. Anatomy proves the course of conception from
the ovariae through the fallopian tubes to the womb. Nutrition and growth of
the child in the womb. Peculiarities of the child, its connection by the cord
to the placenta or cake: of the size, composition and circulation in the
placenta. Of the membranes that include the child. The Waters, their nature and
use. Position of the child; head generally first presents to the birth, and
reasons why. Changes of the womb; at the third month rises above the brim of
the basin. State of the womb at the different periods, reasons for its
continuing of nearly an equal thickness, during the whole time of pregnancy. Of
the size of the child at different periods.

LECTURE X.
Of the signs of Conception, and consequent diseases.

WOMEN do not conceive before their menses appear, nor after their final
cessation; their obstruction or profusion impedes impregnation. Causes of
barrenness may be imperforations of the vagina, orifice of the womb, or
fallopian tubes and diseases of the ovariae. First signs of conception
obstruction of the periodical discharge, hardness of the breasts and coloring
of the rings around the nipple; nausea, drowsiness, lividness under the eyes,
toothache, headache, etc. these however not certain. About the third month,
the womb may be felt above the share bones. Motion of the child between the
fourth and fifth months, the most undoubted sign: caution against deception on
this head. Nausea and vomiting in the morning. Suppression of Urine.
Costiveness, Piles. Swelled legs and enlargement of their veins. Difficulty of
breathing and vomiting in the last stages. Frequent desires to void urine.
Irregular discharges of the menses in the first months. The particular causes
of the foregoing diseases explained, and the means for relieving them. Of
gravel, dropsy and hernia, and their treatment.

LECTURE XI.
Directions for preventing the many disorders incident to the pregnant state.

THIS particularly to be attended to by midwives. These diseases generally,
though very erroneously, attributed to too much blood. The whole weight of what
would otherwise have been discharged by the periodical evacuations, not nearly
equal to that of the child and its appendages. Of miscarriages, their causes
and means of prevention: of exercise, elixer of vitriol, cold bath, bleeding,
dress, diet, etc. Of the imagination and peculiar unnatural cravings.

LECTURE XII.
On Labor.

THIS takes place at or about the thirty-ninth week from conception. Signs.
False pains, how distinguished; cause and remedy. True pains, how known. Shows,
what. Of the touch: its use, in determining a state of pregnancy or not, in
ascertaining the approach of real labor, and in discovering the presentation.
Labors divided into natural, difficult, preternatural and complicated. Proper
position of the woman. Of standing on her knees, sitting in the lap of another,
resting on their backs on a Pallet, and lying on their side in bed: change
sometimes necessary. Management as it relates to dress, the state of the
bowels, and the bed. Progress of labor; waters gathering; head presenting, its
turns; distention of the perineum: the necessary care. Turns of the shoulders
and final expulsion; how to be managed. When to cut the cord. Of the expulsion
of the afterbirth, when necessary to assist it and how. Of the irregular
contraction of the womb. Floodings. Inversion of the womb.

LECTURE XIII.
RECAPITULATION of the foregoing, with a full exemplification of every
circumstance, upon the Machine.

LECTURE XIV.
Of difficult Labors.

IN these the head presents, but is not delivered within twentyfour hours, or
requires aid. They may arise from too great distention of the womb, its
irregular contraction, from firmness of the membranes containing the waters,
much oftener from their too early rupture, shortness of the cord, or its being
entangled; from fever, inflammation of the parts, want of irritability,
debilitation passions, difficulty of breathing; from its being a first child,
particularly with women advanced in years, rigidity of the orifice of the womb,
of the external parts, smallness of the basin or its crookedness, largeness of
the child's head, or the growing together of its bones, or its enlargement by
disease; improper presentation as face to share bones, face to the birth, head
with the arms; difficulties may also arise from suppression of urine, stone in
the bladder, scars or adhesions in the sides of the vagina and rupture of the
womb. Of the aid necessary to be given in all these cases of difficulty.
Instruments seldom required. The assistance of a physician always advisable.

LECTURE XV.
Further attention to difficult births.

THEIR various causes, and the means generally sufficient for relieving them,
exhibited upon the Machine.

LECTURE XVI.
On the use and abuse of instruments.

INSTRUMENTS sometimes not to be dispensed with. Fillets justly discarded. Of
the forceps and vectis: cannot be used till the second stage of labor, and
when the ear of the child can be felt. Only to be used when the woman is
unequal to the expulsion of the child, and one or other of them are in danger.
How to apply them in the different presentations, and of the necessary
positions of the woman. The scissars and crotchet: in what cases only they can
be admitted. Of the symptoms of a dead child; of the method of using these
dreadful instruments.

LECTURE XVII.
Practical recapitulation.

BY performing on the machine every operation with the instruments, in the
various cases that may require them.

LECTURE XVIII.
Preternatural labors.

THESE are when any other part than the head, first presents. They vary in
regard to the presenting part. Difficult in proportion to the time elapsed,
since the breaking of the waters, and the degree of contraction of the womb.
How to discover the presenting part. Head round, hard, and hairy: Breech soft,
with a division of the buttocks: Back by the back bone, ribs and
shoulderblades: Loins by the back bone without ribs: Breast by the breast bone
and ribs: Belly by its softness and navel string: Hand by being thinner than
the foot, fingers longer than the toes and the thumb standing out: Foot by the
heel. When Breech or inferior extremities present, help seldom necessary till
the hips are born: when necessary and how to be given. Child always to be
brought with its face to the back of the mother. When the circulation in the
cord is obstructed by the pressure of the upper part of the child's body or its
head, in passing the bones, if delivery is not soon effected by nature, we must
assist. In cross cases support the body; seek for and deliver by the feet. When
the Arm presents with the head and the head is right, slip the arm up over it
and deliver naturally, otherwise turn it and deliver by the feet. When head and
arm are wedged immovably in the pelvis and cannot otherwise be delivered,
instruments become necessary. In cases of distorted or crooked basin, never
turn the child.

LECTURE XIX.
RECAPITULATION of the foregoing, with a practical illustration upon the
machine, of the various preternatural presentations and modes of managing them.

LECTURE XX.
Complicated labors, floodings, miscarriages, convulsions, and twins.

INSTANCES of menses having continued in small quantity for a few months after
conception. Floodings with pain and weight in the lower part of the body,
especially if attended with a discharge of the waters, generally followed by
miscarriage. Predisposition by previous miscarriages, by full habit, by the use
of spirits, by strong purges, great exertion, passions of the mind,
costiveness, heat, cold, external injuries, etc. Danger, in proportion to the
advanced stage of pregnancy, unless it be near full time. Remedies: of
bleeding, opiates, rest, cold air, and drinks, astringents, cold vinegar and
water to the back, etc. elixir of vitriol: in what instances wine. After fifth
or sixth month, sometimes necessary to promote delivery; how done. Convulsions
caused, by habit, suppression of urine, passions, etc. remedied by bleeding,
opiates, delivery, etc. Cautions to be observed during the fits. Twins
discovered by swelling continuing after the birth of the first child, in which
case tie the navel string. Nature generally sufficient: where otherwise, be
governed as in other cases.

LECTURE XXI.
Treatment of the woman during the month.

To be put in dry linen and bed, in an airy temperate apartment. Caution
respecting heat, either from fires, confined air, accumulated clothing, or hot
drinks. Belly not to be bound over tight. No unnecessary disturbance by early
visitors, etc. Drinks to be cooling, and diet mild, as gruel, panado, sago,
tapioca, chocolate, ripe fruits, etc. afterward white meats, etc. Do not
induce sweating; change linen often, get out of bed soon and frequently. Bowels
to be regulated by mild injections, or castor oil, manna, rochelle salts or
rheubarb. Child to breast in a few hours. Breasts to be drawn four or five
times a day. Short or depressed nipples, how drawn out. Means of preventing
their becoming sore: of wax rings, etc. When the mother does not intend to
nurse, live sparingly and seldom draw the breasts. Caution against sudden
exposure to cold, after having been imprudently heated.

LECTURE XXII.
Of the Diseases in the month.

AFTER-PAINS, their causes and remedies, when any necessary. Inflammation of
the parts, causes, consequences and treatment. Falling down, of the vagina, of
the womb, and of the end of the bowels; their causes and method of reducing
them. Inversion of the womb or the turning of it inside out, the consequence of
rashness in delivering the afterbirth. Laceration of the perineum, means of
prevention. Immoderate after-discharges; causes, treatment as in other cases of
flooding; their obstruction, how reestablished. Milk fever. Hardness of the
breasts, relieved by mild warm oily applications or lead water, cooling purges.
Sore nipples, mucilaginous and unctuous applications, leaden caps, etc.

LECTURE XXIII.
Of the management of Infants, and of their diseases and remedies.

WASHING of the child, management of the cord. Observations on cleanliness,
dress, air, exercise and diet. Of the swellings of their heads from the
circumstances of the birth. Bruises of the face. Injuries of their genitals in
breech presentations. Fractures of their extremities. Of apparently still born
children. Of the swelling of their breasts. Obstruction of the natural
passages. Tied tongue. Ruptures. Gum. Costiveness. Yellow gum. Sprue.
Excoriations. Cholic. Observations respecting the medicines, recommended in the
course of the foregoing Lectures.

LECTURE XXIV XXV and XXVI.
A SHORT Recapitulation of such parts of the foregoing Lectures, as are
considered more especially deserving the attention of Midwives, together with
cautions and rules for their conduct in practice.

CONCLUDING LECTURES ON A COURSE OF INSTRUCTION TO MIDWIVES, etc.
LECTURE XXIV.
Of the peculiarities of the sex, and of newborn children. Of conception.

RECAPITULATION.
IN the course of instruction, that we are now about closing, I have
endeavored, in the most simple manner, to make the art of Midwifery, which,
unfortunately, like the other branches of our profession, has till of late been
too much cloaked by the mystic rubbish of technical phraseology, familiar to
your comprehensions. I must now further beg your attention to a short
recapitulation of the subject, wherein the most essential parts will be
particularly attended to, accompanied with such cautions as in my opinion
should be attended to by every Midwife who would wish to practice with safety
and satisfaction to their patients, or reputation to themselves.

The four first Lessons, as you may recollect, and will find by adverting to
the Syllabus, were chiefly confined to observations on the system at large, and
the animal economy in general; and this subject, I again repeat it, you cannot
too much attend to, as no workman can be too well acquainted with the machine
whereon and wherewith he operates. Then we attended to the peculiarities of the
female system, of whom in general we observed that they were of a smaller size,
and more delicate and sensible habit than men. After which we noticed the
particular peculiarities of the sex, viz. their breasts and uterine system,
consisting of the womb and its appendages.

The Breasts were observed to be large globular bodies of glands, intermingled
with fat; formed of a great number of blood vessels, which send off many little
tubes to carry the milk that is strained into them; these uniting as they pass
along, at length end in six or eight tubes, which, by an irregular, convoluted
course, finally terminate in about as many openings on the point of the nipple.
The nipple is of a spungy nature, subject to be distended or relaxed, sometimes
prominent and pointed, at other times flattened and even dented inwards. It is
covered only by a thin skin, and is furnished with numerous little glands,
which secret an oily glutinous matter to defend it from being fretted by the
child's sucking, and also to close up the mouths of the milk ducks, thus aiding
their crimpled form, in preventing the milk from constantly draining off.

In regard to the system of the womb, in the first place we observed of the
bones, upon which the body rests, and which form its lower part, and constitute
what is called the pelvis or basin, were composed of the nameless bones, the
sacred bone, and the rump bone. The nameless bones were again subdivided into
the wings or haunch, seat or hip, and fore part or share bones, the fore part
of which last are joined together by an intervening gristly substance.

The sacred bone forms the back part of this compages of bones, and seems to be
a continuation of the back bone. It is of an irregular triangular shape, with
its point downwards, hollowed, and comparatively smooth on its inner surface,
but rough and rounding on its outside. Upon its upper part the back bone rests,
and from its point is continued the little movable rump bone.

The sacred bone joined to the hinder edge of the nameless bones, forms the
basin, a just knowledge of which we esteemed as highly interesting to every one
concerned in the practice of Midwifery. The ridge at the upper broad part of
the sacred bone, where it joins the nameless bones, is met by a ridge at the
base of the wings or flaring parts of the haunch bones, this ridge is continued
to the anterior part or junction of the share bones, where they meet and form a
regular oval margin called the brim of the basin. The longest diameter of this
oval brim is from side to side, the shortest from fore to back part, the former
being about five inches and a quarter, the latter an inch less. The bones below
this ridge all combine in forming the hollow cavity in which the womb and its
appendages, the bladder and lower end of the intestines, are lodged. This is
called the basin. Observation of the dry bones gives but a very inadequate idea
of the regularity of this cavity, but when we see the ligaments stretched from
the extremities and corners of the sacred and rump bones to the seat bones, and
its whole inner surface lined by its proper membrane, we cannot but admire its
smoothness and regularity, so well adapted to the important purposes it is
intended to answer. This one circumstance of it is highly worthy of our
attention, that, as was just observed, the longest diameter of this cavity at
its brim was from side to side, and the shortest from fore to hind part; in the
lower aperture we find these proportions reversed, here the longest diameter
being from fore to hind part, and the shortest from side to side, or from seat
bone to seat bone.

Of the basin it was further observed, that its depth was also irregular, being
about six inches behind, four at the sides, and two at its anterior part.

Having fixed the size of the basin, as it most generally exists in females,
subject however to some little variation; we proceeded to examine the size and
shape of the child's head and shoulders, and found the greatest diameter to be
from the hind to the forehead, the shortest from side to side, while the
greatest diameter of the body was across the shoulders. Hence, then, we should
suppose, what indeed happens in natural labors, that the child's head, at its
first presentation, would lie with its forehead and hind head to the haunch
bones, while the ears lie to the sacred and share bones. But as the labor
advances, the head, favoring the passage it has to pass through, naturally
turns so, that, as it gets to the inferior opening of the bones, its forehead
is sunk into the hollow of the sacred bone, while its hind head is presented to
the junction of the share bones. And further, as the depth of the basin is by
far the least at its anterior part, the hind head naturally rises from under
these bones as it comes into the world. By the time the head is born, the
shoulders being the widest part of the body, are fixed across the longest
diameter of the basin, till a succeeding pain propelling it forward, it takes
the turn and the child is born on its side.

We then considered the question, whether the share bones ever separate from
each other in time of labor? And concluded that, from their firm adhesion to
each other by their cementing gristle, rendered doubly strong by the
surrounding ligaments, the whole power of the womb, with the aid of the muscles
of the belly, did not appear adequate to that effect; and that if we should
admit that they possessed strength sufficient, the child's head was so
composed, of various unconnected bones, as by no means to be able to overcome
the powerful resistance that their firm connection would make; we might almost
as well conceive of a knurly log's being split by a wedge of cork: -- We
finally concluded that, except in cases of disease, none of the bones of the
basin had any motion upon one another, during labor, excepting the rump bone,
which is generally straightened out, nearly upon a line with the back, by the
pressure of the child's head.

The bones of the basin we mentioned were sometimes deformed and crooked,
diminishing in some way or other the natural size of this cavity; we observed
that this happened by the upper part of the sacred bone being pressed inwards,
thereby lessening the shortest diameter of the brim of the basin; but that in
some instances the fault laid in the share bones being pressed inwards, in
other cases in the seat bones or lower part of the sacred bone being projected
upwards and inwards. These deformities were said sometimes to be owing to
rheumatic affections, and that even in women who may have previously borne
children through a capacious basin; but that generally the cause of them were
laid in early years, and was owing to rickety complaints: the bones thereby
becoming softened, there appeared no difficulty in accounting for the variety
of crookedness, from the various pressure of the superincumbent body upon them
in the states of standing, of sitting, and of lying. It was further remarked
that this deformity was often accompanied by like affections in the other
bones, so that when, with a curved back bone, the legs and thighs were also
crooked, there was great reason to suspect this complaint; and if delivery
should go on laboriously, it should be particularly attended to.

After having fully attended to the bones of the basin, both in their separate
and in their connected state, and after having viewed the difference between
the aperture of a natural and of a deformed basin, and observed the great
difficulty that consequently must take place in labor from that circumstance,
we proceeded to examine the parts of generation in women, which, to be enabled
more perfectly to describe, we divided into external and internal parts.

The EXTERNAL PARTS were discoverable without the aid of dissection, and
consisted of the mons veneris, which is a fatty substance lying upon the
junction of the share bones covered with the common integuments, skin, etc.
Continued down from this on each side were the labiae pudendi, formed of fat
covered by a doubling of the skin, which externally were like the surface of
the mons, but internally were smooth and red; these joining together again
below, entirely surrounded the entrance of the passage to the womb.

Between the two labiae pudendi, about an inch below their separation at the
mons, is situated the Clitoris, which resembles, in some degree, the end of a
finger; it is said to have been very much enlarged in some instances, whence
originated the idea of hermaphrodites. From this, on each side, are continued
down, doublings of the skin which are called the Nymphae; they lie in the
direction of the labiae, and are generally concealed by them, though sometimes
they are very inconveniently elongated; they serve to direct the course of the
urine, and to favor the dilatation of these parts in time of delivery.

A little below the clitoris, and between the nymphae, we observed a small
projecting opening evident to the touch, which is the orifice of the Urethra,
or termination of the canal which leads the urine from the bladder.

The orifice of the vagina, or the opening of the passage to the womb, is
situated immediately below the orifice of the urethra; this opening in girls is
surrounded and nearly closed by a membrane called the Hymen, which in some
instances has been found entirely to close the passage, and to produce complete
obstruction to the discharge of the menses.

The part which lies between the junction of the labiae pudendi below, and the
opening of the bowels, is called Perinaeum, which is naturally small, but is
greatly stretched and enlarged during delivery. To prevent this being torn, we
observed, was the chief aid necessary in a natural labor.

Of the INTERNAL PARTS, we first noticed the Vagina or passage to the womb,
leading from its opening just described, about six or seven inches up to the
womb; it is of a muscular nature, capable of great dilatation in time of
labor, and of contracting again after delivery; this, as well as the inner
surfaces of all the other parts just described, is furnished with little glands
for excreting a mucus substance for lubricating them.

The Womb resembles a bell-pear, but is flattened; it is situated between the
bladder of urine and the lower part of the intestines. It is supported and
joined to the sides of the basin by two broad and two round ligaments; in the
doublings of the former the blood vessels and nerves run; the round ligaments
also run in the duplicature of the broad ones, and pass over the brim of the
basin, to be inserted into the groin.

The womb we divided into orifice, neck, and body. Its orifice, we observed,
hung in the vagina looking rather toward its back part: neck half the length
of the womb. Around the neck the vagina is attached, but much nearer its
orifice on its fore than on its back part, giving rise to its position as just
mentioned. The cavity of the neck of the womb is very small at both ends; it is
furnished with glands for excreting a matter to close the womb immediately
after conception.

The body of the womb is somewhat triangular; its cavity is hardly as large as
to contain an almond; its inner surface, to the eye, appears perfectly smooth,
with no observable opening of the vessels that discharge the periodical
evacuation. The blood vessels of the womb greatly enlarge after impregnation,
so that at their openings, where the Placenta or cake adheres, they equal the
size of a quill.

The substance of the womb we found to be of a firm, compact nature; formed, as
we observed, of muscular fibers running in every direction, of blood vessels,
nerves and lymphatics.

From the upper corners of the womb arise the Fallopian tubes, which are
continued, in the double and along the upper part of the flat ligaments for
about three inches, when they terminate in ragged ends, which hang loose in the
cavity of the belly. The cavities of these tubes are somewhat trumpet-shaped,
being very small at their origin in the womb, but enlarge considerably toward
their termination.

About an inch from the womb, on each side, a little below and behind the
fallopian tubes, are two small, flatish, oval bodies called ovariae. They are
also suspended in the broad ligaments.

Having particularly examined and described these parts, we afterward attended
to the Diseases to which they were subject, but as it always will be most
prudent to refer these things to the attention of a physician, it may not,
perhaps, be any way profitable now, to repeat any thing then said, in regard
either to their symptoms, causes or cure.

It was observed to you, that every healthy woman, who was not pregnant and did
not suckle, had a regular discharge from her womb, called, from the term of its
period, Menses, from the latin word signifying month. This discharge makes its
first appearance at different ages in different countries; for, like their
fruits, it appears early in proportion to the heat of their climates: thus in
southern latitudes it often appears as early as the eighth or ninth year,
whereas in the northern ones it is deferred to a much later period: with us it
generally appears between the thirteenth and eighteenth years. Not only the
time of its first appearance is affected by the climate, but the frequency of
its return, the quantity discharged, and the time of its final cessation, are
also all influenced thereby, it being more frequent, more profuse, and sooner
ceasing in proportion to the warmth of the country: with us the discharge is,
generally, about six ounces, continues from three to six days, returns monthly,
and finally ceases between the forty-fifth and fiftieth year.

The use of this discharge appears to be for keeping the womb in a proper state
for conception, since that cannot take place either before its appearance,
during its obstruction, nor after its cessation. Another use is to afford by
its suspension, during pregnancy, a necessary supply of nourishment for the
child.

The Diseases attending their irregularity, as well as those occuring at the
time of their final cessation, I shall wave the re-consideration of here; for
notwithstanding the particular attention we paid to that subject, still I would
never advise you to venture to prescribe for them, when a physician can be
procured.

OF CONCEPTION.
THE peculiar manner in which conception takes place, being a matter more of
curiosity than of real utility, we shall omit at present any attempt to
investigate: thus far, however, it may not be improper to remark, that the
child receives some essential original principles from both parents; else why
should it in some instances bear so strong a resemblance to the father, and in
others to the mother? And that the woman by no means stands in that secondary
order, in this wonderful transaction, as she is stated to do by some; for did
she only furnish a safe receptacle for the protection, and proper nourishment
for the growth of the child, why should it carry the traits of her features in
its countenance, or the color of her skin upon its surface? Might we not as
well expect horns to sprout out on the forehead of an infant that has been
brought up upon the milk of a cow, or a woolly skin upon him who had always
been wrapped in flannel?

In whatever way conception is performed, anatomy assures us, That it first
takes place in the ovaria, from whence it is taken up by the loose open ends of
the fallopian tubes, and conveyed through them to the womb. That it takes this
route is proved, first, by conception never being effected after the ovariae
have been taken out, as has frequently been done by farmers on some of their
animals: secondly, by certain marks discoverable in these bodies corresponding
to the number of conceptions the person has had; and lastly, by the rudiments
of children having actually been found enclosed in them, which, from some
obstruction, had never got into their proper place. That from the ovariae it
passes into the open end of the fallopian tubes, and thence conveyed into the
womb, we conclude, firstly, from not having discovered any other communication
between them; secondly, from children having been found in the tube itself,
which never had reached their destined place; and, finally, from children
having been found in the cavity of the belly, which must have been dropped
between the ovariae and the mouths of the tubes. Generally the conception
passes into and adheres to a part of the womb, where it is nourished and grows,
so as in about ten weeks to be as large as a hen's egg. Within the cavity of
this substance, the child is discoverable, suspended in water by a small thread
inserted into its navel.

As the conception enlarges, the part adhering particularly to the womb becomes
of a spongy nature, seemingly well calculated to draw blood from it. This cake
(placenta) becomes, at full time, from six to eight inches in diameter,
composed of a great number of blood vessels; these uniting together on one
side, form the navel string, which is in fact nothing but three blood vessels
twisted together, serving to convey nourishment to the child, and to keep up a
circulation between it and the mother.

With the growth of the child, the womb also enlarges; the membranes containing
the waters, stretch more and more; the waters themselves accumulating, protect
the child from injuries, favor its regular growth and formation, at the same
time that they guard the mother from the pain its movements would otherwise
occasion.

The child thus confined in the womb, differs in several respects from children
somewhat advanced in age, but in none more particularly than in the circulation
of their blood, the state of the lungs, and structure of the head.

In persons who have breathed, the whole mass of blood passes regularly through
the lungs and then through the body, but in an unborn child, the heart and
blood vessels are so modified, as not to send more blood to the lungs than is
just sufficient for their nourishment: hence they are much firmer than the
lungs of those who have once breathed, and will generally sink in water: after
birth, the lungs being expanded by respiration, the blood is freely transmitted
through them, and all these peculiarities of the circulation are soon
obliterated, with a cessation of the passage of the blood, through the navel
string.

The bones of the head not being joined together, and indeed not being fully
formed, admit of a degree of motion, and are frequently lapped over each other,
and molded in a surprising manner in laborious deliveries.

As the womb increases during the time of pregnancy, it first enlarges at its
body, and, from its increased weight, sinks down into the cavity of the basin:
hence, if a woman is examined during this period, the mouth of the womb will be
discovered lower than natural, and will feel heavier to the touch: at or about
the third month, the womb becoming too large to be confined within the cavity
of the basin, rises up above its brim, and then its orifice being higher is
more difficultly felt: this difficulty increases as the woman advances till
labor comes on. During this enlargement of the womb, its neck becomes entirely
obliterated, it being all stretched out into the general distention. A
remarkable circumstance of the womb is, that notwithstanding its great
distention, it suffers no diminution in its thickness, it being no thinner at
the time of delivery than before impregnation: this is owing to its becoming
much more spongy, by the general enlargement of its vessels. The sudden
contraction of the womb makes its sides considerably thicker soon after
delivery, the vessels not having yet returned to their original size; in a
little time, however, it returns to its natural thickness.

LECTURE XXV.
Of the symptoms of conception. Directions for avoiding many diseases during
pregnancy; and the method of conducting natural births.

A Married woman, who is otherwise healthy, being affected with an obstruction
of her menses, has good reason to suppose herself pregnant.

From the great sympathy subsisting between the womb and different parts of the
body, any material change taking place therein, will often be felt elsewhere:
hence swelling and shooting pains through the breasts, as well as sickness at
stomach, longings and unnatural appetites, have been considered, and frequently
are signs of pregnancy: all these, however, with head-achs, tooth-achs,
lividness under the eyes, etc. frequently fail, as they may all be induced by
an obstruction of the periodical discharges from disease: nevertheless, when
their obstruction and these symptoms arise from pregnancy, the person generally
enjoys better health, in other respects, (...) when they originate from other
causes.

These smpathetic affections generally subside, or at least considerably abate,
about the third month, when the womb may be distinctly felt rising above the
share bones: this also, as well as the before mentioned symptoms, is by no
means a sure test of pregnancy, and indeed there appears to be no unequivocal
sign, whereby that state can with certainty be determined, till between the
fourth and fifth months, when the child quickens, that is, when its motions are
distinctly felt.

For the Diseases of pregnancy, it certainly would be very improper for
midwives to be too free in prescribing: that belongs to the province of the
physician, nevertheless the means of preventing the many disorders incident to
that state cannot be too fully understood by you; for, by your friendly
interference, many vulgar errors may be timely counteracted, and much comfort
enjoyed by the sex during their nine months journey. No error has perhaps more
generally crept in with the sex, than the belief of all their disorders in that
state, being owing to too great a quantity of blood, from the obstruction of
its usual evacuation; hence blood-letting has been so uniformly advised for
their relief, and by many thought necessary even when no complaint existed:
nothing however can be more absurd; for the loss of appetite, so common in the
early stages, very little favors the redundance of blood; besides, when we
calculate the whole quantity of the menses that would have been discharged for
nine months, (which cannot be estimated above sixty or seventy ounces) and
compare it with the weight of the child and its appendages, (which is, at
least, to three times that amount) we should rather suppose that women wanted
more, instead of less, blood than they have. It was a maxim with old
Hippocrates, that "Bleeding produces miscarriages." I do not pretend to say
that bleeding is never necessary during pregnancy: its indiscriminate use is
what I wish to be discountenanced, and that it never should be performed but by
the particular advice of a skilful physician.

The Bowels of pregnant women should always be kept regular; and if they are
costive, which is very apt to be the case, from the pressure of the womb upon
the lower part of the intestines, it generally may be remedied or prevented, by
the free use of vegetables and ripe fruits, and occasionally, if necessary, by
administering a mild injection.

Instead of tight lacing, which has been done by some, with an expectation
that, by pressing the child down, they would ensure to themselves a more easy
delivery, women should be advised to wear jumps or straps to their petticoats,
going over their shoulders, to prevent them from hanging too heavily upon the
womb: they serve not only to afford a present comfort, but to prevent the womb
from being pressed down over the share bones, causing what is called a
pendulous belly, which always tends to induce difficulty in delivery. When the
belly does become pendulous, it ought to have a swathe secured around its lower
part, and be supported by straps going over the shoulders.

Women with child should live upon a light diet, but eat frequently; they do
not, however, appear to be hurt by satisfying even their absurd and extravagant
appetites; still we need not apprehend any bad consequences from crossing them.
In the advanced stages, they ought to lie down to rest themselves frequently in
the course of the day.

Whether the Imagination of a woman can have any effect upon the child, or not,
is still a question. Whether it has or not, it becomes our duty to discourage
the idea; for in not fearing its effects, we deprive it of its greatest
influence, (if it has any) and at least save women from many an anxious
thought, and many an hour of distress.

In the early months, before the womb has arisen above the brim of the basin,
its pressure, not uncommonly, produces a suppression of urine; this also
sometimes arises from the urine being too long retained, whence the bladder,
being overstretched, looses its power of contracting: in either case, if a
change of posture does not remove the difficulty, the water should be drawn off
by the catheter; and I see no reason why this instrument may not as well be
introduced by a woman, when there is no other disease attending, as by a
physician: the operation is very simple; the patient being either seated, or
laid on her side, with the knees separated, the instrument made blood warm and
dipped in ^^eet oil, is to be carefully insinuated into the orifice of the
canal, and gently pressed forward in the course of it till it reaches the
bladder, when the urine immediately follows without any more trouble; but
should any impediment to the easy entrance of the instrument occur, immediately
desist and call in the aid of a physician.

At the end of the thirty-ninth week, the womb, from some unaccountable law of
nature, exerts itself to get rid of its contents, not only by its own
contraction, but also by the assisting power of the whole of the surrounding
muscles of the belly, etc.

When women come near to the time when they expect to lie in, they are apt to
consider every little uneasiness in the bowels, or pains in the back, as
approaching labor: hence you often will be sent for when there is no real
occasion for you. There are some false pains so nearly resembling the true
pangs of labor, as to require some judgment to distinguish them. In real pains
the belly generally flattens, and there is a sense of weight and bearing down
upon the neck of the womb, accompanied with the shows, a glutinous, slimy
discharge from the parts, sometimes streaked with blood: these circumstances
seldom or never attend the false pains. False pains are, very often, almost
continual, or at least very irregular, and seldom have intervals of complete
ease between them; whereas true pains, which generally begin in the back, and
afterward seem to surround the whole of the lower part of the body, and
frequently shoot down the thighs, have regular intermissions, and come on
harder and stronger as the labor advances: and, if the patient is examined,
the mouth of the womb will be found settling down and gradually dilating, the
membranes containing the waters, bulging forwards, etc.

When false pains originate from costiveness, that must be obviated by mild
injections, and afterward, in case they should continue, they should be
allayed by twenty or thirty drops of laudanum, as the case may require: if they
arise from gripings in the bowels, the anodine alone will be sufficient.

LABORS may be divided into four classes; first, natural, where the head
presents first to the birth and is delivered without any artificial assistance,
within twenty-four hours: second, laborious, when the head presents, but the
delivery is protracted beyond twenty-four hours, or assistance becomes
necessary: third, preternatural, when any other part except the head presents
to the birth; and fourth, complicated, when attended with floodings,
convulsions, etc.

Before we proceed to the management of Labor, we should attend to the dress
of our patient. Her hair should be put up snug and tight; her clothes so fixed,
that the part exposed to get wet may be removed soon after delivery without
much exertion or fatigue; and she should have on stockings, that she may
sometimes walk about between her pains. Her bowels ought also to be attended
to: if she has not lately had any thing pass them, she should have an injection
immediately given to her; this will not only favor the relaxing of the parts,
but prevent unpleasant occurrences that might otherwise happen during the
progress of delivery.

Women have been delivered in a variety of positions, such as standing, lying
on their backs, sitting, and standing on their knees: the most common position,
however, is, either that between sitting and lying on their backs, or lying on
their side: when they are in the former posture, the only movable bone of the
whole basin, the rump bone, is so much pressed upon by the weight of the
woman's body, as must certainly tend to retard delivery. The most easy
situation, and that which is also most convenient for the operator, appears to
be for her to lie on her left side, with her back near the edge of the bed, and
her knees drawn up and separated by a pillow. It would be advisable to have
her delivered on a separate bed from the one she is to lay in, so that she may
be removed, immediately after, into a dry, comfortable situation: for this
purpose, then, a little cot ought always to be procured, if possible.

In the beginning of labor, the contraction of the womb, which accompanies
every pain, pressing generally upon its contents, naturally bears hardest upon
the least resisting parts; hence the mouth of the womb is gradually dilated: as
this dilatation is increased by a repetition of pains, part of the bag,
containing the fluid in which the child floats, is pressed, in form of a
bladder of water, into the opening, stretching it in the manner of a wedge,
acted upon by the superincumbent power of the pains; preparing the way (in a
natural case) for the bulky and more resisting head of the child.

As the labor advances, the waters gather more and more, and usually, by the
time the mouth of the womb is fully dilated, the membranous bag breaks by the
force of the pains, and the waters are discharged by a sudden gush. This
terminates what is called the first stage of labor.

Frequently a remission of the pains follows the discharge of the waters, but
this is of but short duration. The pains soon return, but often somewhat
different from what they were at the commencement; for now, in place of general
distressing pain in the lower part of the body, seemingly unfixed as to any
end, they assume a more encouraging and determinate nature, bearing down and
attended with a sense of a disposition in the womb to get rid of its contents.

The membranes being broken, and the waters evacuated, the head now falls down
into the cavity of the basin, and by the continuation of the pains, is forced
forward, taking its natural turns, till at length it passes through the bones,
and presses hard upon the external soft parts, which, gradually dilating,
permit its passage through them; when, usually, after a short respite, another
pain expells the shoulders, and the body and hips soon follow.

The course of a natural labor, as here described, you will not find to hold
good in every case, but diversified in a variety of particulars: thus instead
of the waters being preserved till the full dilation of the orifice of the
womb, you will often find them spontaneously discharged long before that
period: and at other times, (though very seldom) you will find the membranes,
with the waters, not ruptured even after the head has passed through the mouth
of the womb. Instead of a temporary suspension of pain upon the discharge of
the waters, you sometimes will find the child expelled by the continuation and
force of the same pain whereby they were broken: in other cases when the child
does not immediately follow the flow of the waters, yet the body will be born
by the power of the same pain whereby the head is freed from the external
parts; and in other cases again, where there has been some little respite after
the birth of the head, it not unfrequently happens, that the shoulders and body
are discharged at once.

The womb having now got rid of so great a proportion of its contents,
generally is free from pain for a little while, but in contracting itself to
its former size, it meets at length with a still further impediment to its
reinstatement; its powers again are called into action; pains return which soon
effect an expulsion of the afterbirth: this ending the third stage, terminates
the labor.

Here a question naturally arises, What are we to do all this while? How are we
to conduct ourselves, what attention must we pay our patient, and what
assistance can we afford her?

Having prepared the bed, etc. as directed, our patient's pains becoming
considerably hard; she naturally will be led to lie down while they are upon
her, at which time it will be proper for us, when the pain is going off, to
ascertain, by a careful examination, the state of the labor, how far the
orifice of the womb is dilated, the forwardness of the waters, and whether the
head of the child (known by its roundness, hardness, and firm resistance to the
touch, discoverable even before the waters are pressed forward or the womb
opened) is the presenting part: if it is, every encouragement should be given,
that all things appear to be doing well: but we should be very cautious how we
give encouragement of a speedy delivery, lest thereby we wear out the woman's
patience before the process has gotten through with: indeed our greatest care
must here be directed toward keeping up our patient's spirits and preventing
her from looking out too soon for an end of her distresses; and we may assure
her, as in truth it is the case, that generally, the longest labors have the
shortest gettings-up, and that short labors give long afterpains. Upon these
principles, we ought not to hurry the woman into bed, but as long as she finds
herself able to be about, let her keep up.

The pains continuing, after some little time, more or less, according as they
may be, it will be prudent to examine again, to find how matters are going on;
but we should be careful not to examine, at least not very critically, during
the continuance of a pain, for fear of rupturing the membranes, whereby the
opening of the womb would have to be dilated by the pressure of the child's
head, which, from its bulk, pressing upon the orifice, would not answer the
purpose so easily and quickly as the bag with the waters that are insinuated
into it, and enlarging during every pain. A premature breaking of the waters
always portends a more tardy delivery.

The first stage of the labor having considerably advanced, and the pains
becoming more severe, it will be prudent for the woman to be fixed in a proper
position for delivery, viz. lying on her left side, with her back near the edge
of the bed, and her knees drawn up and separated as before directed. She should
be properly supported by some of her female friends, a few of whom are always
welcome companions upon such occasions, not only on account of the assistance
they afford in enabling her to bear her pains to more advantage, but also as
their cheerful conversation supports her spirits, and inspires her with
confidence. There is nothing, however, for us to do, but like dutiful handmaids
of nature, to wait with patience till the breaking of the waters, announcing
the end of the first stage, calls upon us for further attentions.

But not always upon the breaking of the waters, is our immediate interference
necessary: it will, however, be advisable for us then to attend to the progress
of the head, and when we find it has passed through the bones and presses hard
upon the external soft parts, putting the perinaeum upon the stretch; then, and
not till then, is our assistance required, and here the only aid that we can
give is, gently to support the perinaeum with the palm of the hand, or the two
thumbs, left the head should be pushed forward so fast as to endanger its
tearing. When the pains are very strong, and the head appears to be rapidly
advancing, we should make a considerably firm resistance to its progress, and
instead of urging the woman to make use of extraordinary exertions to forward
the birth, as is too often the case, we should rather dissuade her from it, by
warning her of the consequences that may follow: nor even where the business
goes on more slowly, should our attention to this part be neglected; since a
laceration of it is one of the most unfortunate accidents that could happen,
particularly as a reunion thereof can never after be effected.

A few pains, at most, now will clear the head from these parts; when after,
perhaps, a little abatement, they are renewed and soon force out the shoulders,
during which also, we must not neglect the perinaeum, which still will be much
upon the stretch and in some danger of being injured. After the shoulders are
born, we are not (as some are too apt to do) to lay hold of the child and
extract it, but with becoming patience still wait till nature shall deliver it
into our hands: we may, and indeed it will be proper for us, to support the
body of the child, so as, when it is naturally expelled, to be ready to take
it, and directly to turn its face from toward the mother, to prevent its being
suffocated, by having its little mouth filled with the discharges that
sometimes follow immediately upon its birth.

The child being wrapped in a warmed flannel, and a flannel cap put on (to
protect its head from the too sudden impression of the cold air, which
otherwise is very apt to give it the snuffles) it should be permitted to lay,
without being separated from the mother, till we have a full evidence of the
change in the circulation of the blood being completely made; not merely by the
child's crying, but by the pulsation in the navel string entirely ceasing: then
the cord may be firmly tied with a waxed thread in two places; one, about three
fingers breadth from the navel, the other an inch further up: the child may
then be separated by cutting between the ligatures; the first of these secures
the child from the loss of blood in case the circulation should return in the
cord; the other is to prevent its bleeding to the detriment of a second child
in case of twins, whose afterbirths are sometimes united.

Some advise tying the cord and separating the child immediately after it is
born, particularly if it cries heartily; but surely these must have but a very
limited idea of the great change that takes place in the body of their little
charge, when it first begins to breathe, or they cannot believe but that it
must require some little time for its establishment: indeed the gradual
cessation of the circulation in the cord after a few minutes, proves nature to
be as fully adequate to the accomplishment of this as of the other part of her
work; nor ought we more to presume upon regulating her movements. It is very
true that children generally survive such treatment. This indeed proves the
powers of nature in bearing up against injuries, but to me affords no arguments
for our inflicting them. If many lives are not lost, it is highly probable that
the foundation of many diseases is laid by such premature conduct.

The child being separated, we must apply our hand upon the woman's belly, to
ascertain whether there is not another child, if there is not, the womb will be
felt low down in the body, contracted in the form of a hard, round ball; but if
there is, the swelling will not be much less than before the birth of the first
child.

In case of twins, after the delivery of the first, the head of the other
child, generally, soon falls down into the basin, and follows the same course
as the first, and should be managed in the same way.

After the division of the navel string, our next attention is to be turned
toward the expulsion of the afterbirth, (this is considered as the third stage
of labor) and often, by this time, we will find it either discharged, or
separated and laying loose in the vagina; if not, we may leave it entirely to
nature, or at most to pull but very gently upon the cord in time of a pain.
When it appears to lie in the passage and not to come forward easily, we may
introduce a finger, and bring its edge down, whereby it may be extracted
without any difficulty. It should be drawn away with the greatest caution, to
prevent part of the membranes being left behind, and also to bring away the
clots of blood, which otherwise might be the cause of troublesome afterpains.

Nothing can be more hazardous than attempting to hurry away the afterbirth, by
pulling hard upon the cord, for we thereby not only risk breaking the cord,
thence losing a proper conductor, in case manual aid should afterward become
necessary to bring it away, but we may produce a partial separation of the
cake, with a rupture of the vessels, inducing a dangerous flooding, or else, as
has sometimes happened, we may pull the womb down through the external parts,
turning it inside outward.

The woman having got through with her labor, is to have her wet clothes
removed, and to be put in to a dry bed, have a warm cloth applied to her to
absorb the discharges that follow, and have a napkin bound around her; but
great care should be taken that it be not drawn too tight; a slight pressure,
to support the now relaxed muscles, is all that is needful.

LECTURE XXVI.
Of laborious, preternatural, and complicated labors. Of the treatment of the
woman and child during the month, and of still-born children.

THE observations upon labor, made at our last meeting, apply strictly to what
are called natural cases, those where the head presents, and delivery is
accomplished within twenty-four hours, without artificial aid. Instances now
and then occur, in head presentations, where it is protracted beyond that
period: this may be owing to a variety of circumstances, all which, and the
means of relieving them, have been particularly pointed out to you, but as it
would be advisable, in all such cases, to call in the aid of a physician, I
shall omit repeating them here. You may startle at the ideal loss of reputation
that you may sustain by thus calling for assistance, when perhaps nothing but
time is required for the accomplishment of the business: but you may rely upon
its being to your advantage in the end. You should remember, that prudence is
the groundwork or a midwife's reputation. If you do not now request
assistance, and any unfavourable circumstances occur, you are sure to meet with
blame; but even should all go well without help, you may be reputed for your
hardiness, you will not be commended for your care.

When upon your early examination, in the commencement of labor, instead of
the head, known by the marks beforementioned, you find some other part
presenting to the birth, you should immediately refer the case to the care of a
physician. Notwithstanding, when on that subject, I was particular in directing
the manner of conducting every preternatural case, and you performed on the
machine every variety of operation; still you may recollect, I considered this
as a part of the business, well for you to know but not politic for you to
practice; I shall therefore wave any re-consideration of it at this time.

Preternatural adhesions of the afterbirth, floodings, miscarriages, and
convulsions, are all to be considered as diseases, and out of your province;
therefore, notwithstanding what may have been said and what you may know about
them, you are by no means to prescribe for. I cannot however omit again
enforcing it upon you, to aid physicians (when occasion may require) to
overcome the prejudices of women against cold applications in certain cases of
flooding, the whole principle of their opposition to this remedy being founded
merely upon its efficacy. They are fearful of its suddenly checking the
discharge, when that is the very object aimed at. Did my limits admit, I could
repeat a number of cases, in support of what the general experience of others
have proved, that they may be used with as much safety, and oftentimes with
much more success, than any others means. If women have a dread of water, there
can be no great objection to a small proportion of spirits or of vinegar being
added; but by all means let it be cold.

I cannot conclude without repeating, in short, a few remarks upon the
management of women during the month, so as to avoid many of the diseases
incident to that period.

In the first place, the women, ought, if possible, to lye-in, in a lofty, airy
apartment, remote from the noise of the street. She should (after having been
put into a dry bed as before directed) be permitted to have a few hours quiet
repose, unmolested by the visits of either friends or formal acquaintances.
After a few hours, the child should be applied to the breasts, to draw off the
milk if they have any in them, or to solicit its gradual secretion, if it has
not yet come, thereby preventing the many inconveniences arising from the
sudden flood of a great quantity at once into the breasts. The mother should
always set up in bed while suckling, and whenever she eats: by this means she
will favor the natural discharges from the womb, which when permitted to
stagnate, are often the cause of the most distressing diseases. With the same
intentions, she should also get out of bed, within twenty-four hours, or at
furthest two days after delivery; (if nothing in particular should render it
improper) at which time her bed is to be made up and sheets changed. Her cloths
should be frequently changed, and every care taken to remove all the offensive
matters which seems so disposed to accumulate about lying-in women. Her drinks
should be of the mildest, cooling kind, such as gruel, toast-water,
barley-water, tea, etc. her diet chiefly of vegetables, as panado, sago,
tapioca, chocolate, etc. with ripe fruits, but with very little if any wine or
spices: -- After some few days, she may indulge in boiled meats, and so
gradually resume her former diet. Her bowels should be kept regular; something
should pass them every day, which, if it does not take place naturally, must be
promoted by mild injections, as of warm water with a little sweet-oil or
hogs-lard and molasses; or if injections are objected to, she may take a little
castor-oil, manna, or rochelle salts. The room should be kept temperate, and by
no means over-warm. All heating drinks, or an accumulation of bed-cloaths, and
indeed every thing that would heat her or promote a sweating should be
carefully avoided: upon the same account, the curtains should be drawn up, so
as to let her have every advantage of fresh, free air. By these means she will
go clear from many of the inconveniences common within the month. The manner in
which many women are cooped on these occasions, leaves no difficulty in
accounting for the many diseases, childbed fevers, agues in the breast, etc.
with which they are so often afflicted.

When women, by a kind of false tenderness, are carefully pent up within
close-drawn curtains, and kept in a constant perspiration, who can be
surprised, that they should often be taking cold? for even turning in bed then
must be dangerous; the necessary exposures from sitting up, in attending to the
calls of nature, or for suckling their child, must always be a great risk; the
getting out of bed, the height of imprudence; and the least breath of cold air
will almost certainly disorder them.

When the woman's after-discharges are moderate, or even very scanty, no
disorder attending, no means should be used to increase them, excepting the
getting up often, and continuing longer and longer out of bed each time; this
will favor their evacuation when accumulated in the womb; their stagnation
there, and not their suppression, being the source of danger. When they are
copious, the woman continuing well, they need no remedy; but when they are in
excess and appear to induce weakness, and do not moderate by keeping in a
horizontal position; apply immediately for medical aid.

The milk ought not to be permitted to stagnate in the breasts, but should be
drawn off as often as four or five times a day. In case the breasts should
become hard or knotted, they may be rubbed with warm olive oil or goose grease,
and afterward covered with a plaster composed of oil and beeswax; or, those
failing, they may have a cool poultice, made with bread and lead-water, or
cloths wetted with lead-water, constantly applied to the part till the
complaint is removed.

The nipples are sometimes so pressed in, as not to be taken hold of by the
child. They may be drawn out by cupping-glasses, or, what generally answers the
purpose equally well is, to take a common black bottle, with a smooth mouth,
fill it with warm water, then empty it, and immediately apply the mouth of the
bottle over the nipple; as it cools, the nipple will gradually be drawn out, so
as to be laid hold of without any more difficulty. Women's nipples being drawn
out by sucking, at the same time losing, in a degree, the matters wherewith
they are naturally covered and protected, and being afterward, again pressed
down by the women's clothes, are very apt to crack open in different places:
this is often avoidable, and frequently cured by carefully wiping them dry,
after the child has done sucking, and wearing a wax ring, or leaden cap These
rings are made by having a piece of beeswax as large as half a dollar and near
half an inch thick, perfectly smooth, through which is to be made a hole
sufficiently large to take in the nipple. The leaden caps might, perhaps, with
more propriety, be called hats, as they exactly resemble them in shape, the rim
being half an inch wide and the bowl large enough to receive the nipple,
perforated with several little holes, to permit what milk may be discharged to
run freely out.
upon them, so as to permit them to retain their shape; having them at the same
time, either covered with a solution of the cooling emollient seeds,
particularly of quinces, or anointed with a little beef's marrow, or an
ointment made by melting equal parts of white wax and spermaceti with as much
sweet oil as to make it of a proper consistence.

Having thus followed the woman through the month, let us return to the child.
We left it wrapped up in warm flannel till the woman could be first
accommodated: now our little prize must be attended to; it must be washed with
warm water and soap, have its navel string wrapped up in a piece of dry linen
rag and laid upon its belly, where it must be secured by a flannel belly-band,
bound only moderately tight around the body of the child. The child must, in
other respects, be warmly and comfortably dressed.

In regard to the dress of children, this one principle should always be had in
view, that the looser and easier it is, the better; and that every binding that
tends to cramp their motions or oppress their bodies, equally tends to injure
their health. There cannot, however, be any great objection to securing their
little hands from rubbing their eyes; and trick that many of them are very much
given to. In fixing on their clothes, as few pins should be employed as
possible; and indeed in no case should they be used where strings can as well
be substituted in their place.

The first washing, it was observed, should be with warm water. In the
after-washings, which should be at least once every day, the heat of the water
should be gradually diminished, so as by the third week at furthest to make it
evidently cooler than the child's body; and, after a little while, if we would
secure it against the vicissitudes of weather in our variable climate, we
should have it dipped in cold water every morning. By this treatment, two great
points in preserving the health of children are obtained at once, viz.
cleanliness and hardiness. Man may truly be said to be the creature of habit;
by use he may be brought to take even poisons with impunity; so, by a careful
gradation, may infants be rendered, in a great degree, proof against the usual
hurtful effects of cold.

This inestimable preservative, however, requires some caution in its
application, to obtain its best effects. Children should be merely dipped in
the water, but not continued in it for any length of time, (and if they are
very weak, the water should have a proportion of common salt, as three or four
ounces to a gallon, dissolved in it) and upon their coming out, they should be
wrapped in a flannel, and have their bodies well rubbed before they are dressed.

Besides the general bath, the folds in the skin, as of the neck, the armpits,
the groins, behind the ears, etc. should be washed out several times in the
course of the day, with cold water, to prevent their chafing, particularly in
fat children. If, notwithstanding, these parts should chafe, instead of simple
water, they may be washed frequently with cold hyson tea, or a weak solution of
sugar of lead, or of white vitriol, (in the proportion of fifteen or twenty
grains to half a pint of rain water) and have them dusted with a little dry
flour or calamine powder.

Another main article in preserving the health of children, is, the early
habituating them to exercise and free air. If grown persons can hardly support
themselves without exercise and fresh air, how can it be supposed that tender
infants (whose growth is to be expanded, and circulation extended, by the sole
power of their own strength) can possibly prosper without them? Their constant
uneasiness when kept still, and the agreeable satisfaction they express upon
being dandled about, fully prove the utility of that measure; while the great
and partial mortality among them in crowded places, clearly shows their
necessity of the purest atmosphere.

In respect to the diet of children, there is nothing equal to their mother's
milk, and where any substitute or addition thereto is wanted, that which
approaches the nearest to it, is the best: none, perhaps, is better than cows
milk, diluted with water and sweetened, or a little salted when it appears to
curdle much upon the stomach. Bread and every other more substantial food in
any form, requires a degree of digestion which the stomachs of infants, in
their early days, are no ways calculated to perform; hence, when they are
stowed with pap or panado, etc. they are so often afflicted with a train of
complaints in their little bowels.

It is a common thing with nurses, almost immediately upon the birth of the
child, to give it some purgative to carry off the black matter contained in its
bowels, and if its mother's first milk does not answer that purpose, or if she
has not yet got any, or the child sucks an older milk of a nurse, this
certainly is a very proper step. With this intention, a little manna and water,
molasses or syrup of roses, may be repeatedly given till it has its effect, or
the babe may take a teaspoonful of a weak infusion of rheubarb in water every
hour till it purges. Costiveness, that may occur afterward, will be best
relieved by suppositories or mild glysters.

The treatment of the diseases of infants being the proper business of
physicians, I shall pass by noticing here. But, as in cases of apparently
still-born children, the necessary means of their recovery would often come in
too late, were you to wait till a physician could be procured, I cannot omit
again calling your attention to them.

It not unfrequently happens, that children do not, for some little time after
they are born, show any signs of life by crying or even breathing. Upon such
occasions, I have often set their respiratory organs in motion, by blowing a
sudden blast of air into their mouths. Should this not succeed, the child
should be immersed in a bowl of warm water, and have its body rubbed over with
the hand, while the circulation in the cord should be supported or promoted (if
it should have stopped) by wrapping it in a warm flannel. These means being
continued for a few minutes, without any appearance of life, and the pulsation
in the navel string appearing to be entirely and irrecoverably stopped, it may
be tied and cut. The child still continuing in the warm bath, is, by your
blowing through a quill fixed into one of its nostrils, while the other and its
mouth are kept perfectly closed, to have its little lungs dilated; then by
pressing on its belly and breast, the air must be driven out again, when, in
like manner, they may be filled and discharged repeatedly, imitating natural
breathing as near as you can; this should be continued for a long time, unless
the child should sooner show some signs of life, by gaping etc. after which
signs, if it should not still breathe freely, it may be excited by a little
spirits or snuff applied to its nostrils, or by slapping it on its buttocks.

It sometimes happens with stillborn children, that their countenances are of a
dark livid color, from a stagnation of blood; in these cases it is necessary
to divide the navel string immediately, and let it bleed a little before tying
it; if this does not revive it, its lungs must then be inflated as above
directed; by a perseverance in which, many children have been recovered, to the
no less astonishment of despairing friends than enjoyment of their disconsolate
mothers.

Before we part, let me caution you against that scandalous disposition to
defamation, so prevalent among persons of the same profession. Whatever may be
your opinion of those, who have not had like advantages with yourselves, still
they are entitled to your compassion and tenderness; your mild carriage will
ensure their affections, your instructive conversations may improve their
practice, and excite in them a laudable spirit of further enquiry. In regard to
yourselves, would you be respected by others, show a deserving claim thereto,
by your respect one toward another; if you speak lightly one of another,
wherefore can ye expect the world to speak well of you.

Permit me to recommend to your particular attention, the calls of the poor, He
that hides his face (from them) shall have many a curse. It was a saying of a
celebrated physician, that the poor were his best patients, because God was
their paymaster. They are said to be the footsteps whereby to ascend to the
apartments of the rich; but let not this sordid motive be the predominating
principle of your actions; let that be fixed upon a more noble, a more solid
basis, the desire of doing good, and you will have abundant cause to
acknowledge that He that gives unto the poor shall not lack.

FINIS.

