A NARRATIVE OF SOME SUFFERINGS, FOR HIS CHRISTIAN PEACEABLE TESTIMONY, BY John
Smith, LATE OF CHESTER COUNTY, DECEASED. To which is annexed, AN ACCOUNT OF THE
SUFFERINGS OF RICHARD SELLER, Of KEINSEY, GREAT BRITAIN.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED BY BENJAMIN and JACOB JOHNSON, NO. 147, HIGH STREET.
1800.

INTRODUCTION.
As the writer of the following narrative (being personally known to and well
esteemed by a number among us,) was enabled to bear a faithful and upright
testimony to the peaceable government of Christ, and against the spirit of war,
we think the Publication of it may afford strength and encouragement to others
to follow his worthy example; we therefore recommend its perusal to the members
of our religious society and others, hoping it may have a tendency to advance
our peaceable testimony.

A NARRATIVE, etc.
THE FOLLOWING NARRATIVE WAS TAKEN FROM A MANUSCRIPT LEFT BY OUR FRIEND JOHN
SMITH, WHICH APPEARS TO HAVE BEEN WRITTEN IN THE EARLY PART OF HIS LIFE, IN
ORDER TO PRESERVE SOME ACCOUNT OF HIS EXPERIENCES, TRIALS, etc.
I JOHN SMITH of Marlborough in Chester County Pennsylvania, was born in the
township of Dartmouth and county of Bristol in New England, on the 22d. of the
4th. month 1681; my parents professed the truth in their latter years; and as I
grew to years of understanding the Lord was pleased to favor me with the
knowledge of his blessed truth, and the work and operation thereof in my own
heart, that by the virtue of it I came to be very much weaned from the vanities
and delights of the world, and perishing pastimes that are therein, and those
things that I was inclined to by nature. And as I came to be acquainted with
the discipline of the cross, and the divine light shining in my heart, about
the 22d. year of my age, I was called to bear my testimony against wars and
fightings, as being contrary to the doctrine of Christ, and the nature of his
kingdom, and could not join with those that were for bearing arms for the
defense of the country, against the French and Indian enemy; and accordingly,
on the 15th. of the 6th. month 1703, I was notified by one William Heart, called
a corporal, to appear at the town house in Dartmouth, in order to engage in the
service proposed, under Benjamin Church, called captain, but refusing for
conscience sake to comply, I was summoned on the 14th. of the 1st. month 1704,
to appear before Nathaniel Byfield and Ebenezer Brenton, two magistrates of
said county of Bristol, and examined concerning my said refusal, in which I
still persisting for the reasons above said, I was fined in the sum of five
pounds, and one pound three shillings charges. But having a months time to
consider whether to pay said fine or not, I found most peace in refusing, for
which I was sentenced to prison till payment thereof, where I remained till the
general sessions in the second month following, and was then required to pay
said fine and charges: but still refusing for the reason aforesaid,
proclamation was made in court that I should be hired out to work to any that
wanted a hand, for any time not exceeding four years, in order to satisfy said
fine etc. but none offering to accept my service as above, I was sent to prison
again, there to remain till an order was procured from the governor to remove
me to Boston castle, there to work as a prisoner till said fine was satisfied.
Here I continued in great peace of mind about two weeks, often being made
sensible of Divine kindness in this my confined condition: at the end of two
weeks, the above said Benjamin Church came and commanded me out of prison,
which I refused to comply with, without the governors order agreeable to the
judgment of Court, which order he never produced, but forcibly took me out of
prison, and I was ordered on board a vessel to be sent to Boston castle; and on
our way through the town we met two of our friends, who in a friendly manner
asked the person who commanded me, what art thou going to do with our friend?
he answered he was going to take him to Boston castle: the friends remarked to
him, how some people in such cases had been disappointed in their expectation
and their vessels in danger of being lost: but notwithstanding this precaution,
he persisted in his resolution till it had like to have been our case, for
being put on board a vessel which had but little ballast in her, and sailing on
our way to Boston, being about twenty leagues by water, there came a squall of
wind and laid our vessel on one side, on which I ran and loosed the sails, so
that she got righted before any of the hands came to my assistance, which the
hands on board seeing were glad of my company, and I was thankful to our great
preserver for this merciful deliverance. Being got to Boston we met said
colonel Church, for he was both colonel and captain; I was allowed the liberty
of the town, only to meet at a certain inn about the sixth hour every evening
(which liberty I thought was a trial to me, whether I would get away from them
or not, but I was their true prisoner, truths testimony being more precious to
me at that time than my outward liberty,) which order I punctually obeyed, so
that I had time to see my friends in the town, who showed great kindness and
respect to me. Thus I continued a prisoner at large in the town of Boston about
a week, for the master of the vessel that brought me there, being sensible of
the danger he was in at that time, could not be prevailed with to take me to
the castle, nor be concerned further with me as a prisoner, but afterward on
the fifth of the third month, I was conveyed to the castle where I remained a
prisoner four months and four days, being a prisoner from my first confinement
seven months and two days. And notwithstanding some pains were taken to obtain
my liberty, particularly by our friend Thomas Story who was traveling in New
England at that time, in truth's service, yet it had not the desired effect;
during which time the people behaved civilly toward me, as believing I acted
from a religious principle, but finding they could not make me submit to them
they set me at liberty. On my mother's application to the governor, and making
my case known to him, he ordered his clerk to write to the captain of the
castle, an order for me to be released, which was done accordingly. During the
time of my confinement in the castle, there came a kinsman of mine to see me,
he was of some considerable note in the worlds account, and therefore came in
disguise, not desiring his being there should be known, but as in a friendly
visit: calling me aside, he said, cousin, since you have begun, I would have
you hold to your principles, adding I have nothing to discourage you, but
believe if you are faithful the Lord will prosper you in your undertaking,
which he spoke in much love and affection, and at parting prayed the Lord to
bless me; which kind visit from one who did not profess the truth, was
comfortable and strengthening to me in this my suffering state.

So being at liberty as above, I returned home to my fathers family, in much
peace of mind, with praises to the Almighty for my deliverance thus far, where
I followed my lawful calling, till near the spring following, when I shipped
myself on board the brigantine, -- Matthew Eastow commander, bound for London.
It proved a very stormy voyage, so that diverse times we expected to be cast
away, but the merciful hand was our preserver. I had many times with true
thankfulness of heart to bless and magnify his great and holy name, in a sweet
sense of his mercy and goodness to me.

In about eight weeks sailing, we made Kingsale harbor in the west of Ireland,
where we tarried about eight days, and then weighed anchor and sailed for
London. We came to the landsend of England on the 13th. of the 4th. month 1705,
and next day near Plymouth, a man of war met us, and took me and two more of
our hands; but the captain sent us on board our own vessel again that night.
There lay seventeen sail of men of war in Plymouth harbor at that time, one of
which sent their boat with some hands, and took my companion Thomas Anthony,
who came with me from New England and myself on board their ship, leaving but
three hands in the vessel with our master, although he was very weak, and not
capable of any business. The ship we were taken on board of lay about five
leagues off, and the next day went out a cruising: the lieutenant was very
envious, and swore diverse times that he would run us through with his sword;
the captain seemed more moderate, although not inclined to set us at liberty.
The day after we sailed, the ship we were in took a French prize with fifty
English prisoners on board: when they were going to engage, they placed us to a
gun, and commanded us to fight, but we told them we could not, for Christ and
his apostles spoke to the contrary; but they not regarding what we said, hauled
us about the deck to make us work, but we signified we could not on any such
account: now expecting our trials likely to increase, we thought it necessary
to be constantly upon our watch both inwardly and outwardly, with strong cries
to the Lord that he would be near to support us under our exercises; also we
thought it not safe that both of us should lie down together, so it happened on
the 18th. of the month that Thomas Anthony being gone to lay down, I being
uneasy in my mind had a concern to go upon deck, for what reason I knew not at
that time, but being faithful I went upon deck, and therein I found peace; upon
which I went between decks again, but growing uneasy in my mind, a concern
arose to go upon deck the second time, and when there, seemed quite easy; then
fearing lest I was out of my place I went down a third time, and growing very
uneasy, it was said in the secret of my heart, thou know where to get
relief; upon which I went the third time upon deck, and being there some time,
the lieutenant who was walking on the quarter deck, said to the boatswain who
was on the main deck, have you made the Quaker work yet? he answered no. The
lieutenant asked why? was answered, it is for want of your order; on which the
lieutenant threw him his cane, saying, there is my order, then the boatswain
took the cane and laid on my head with such violence, that he beat my hat to
pieces, on which the lieutenant said, take him to the geers, and bring the cat
and nine tails, at which time I was freely given up to suffer what they might
be permitted to inflict on me; and being at the geers on my knees, it arose in
my mind to pray for my persecutors, for they knew not what they did; and if it
pleased the Lord, to take me to himself from amongst them, for their wicked
conversation was a burden to my life; and indeed my life was not dear to me at
that time, to lay down for truths testimony if required; but through the Lord's
mercy they were not suffered to strike me any more. Soon after the captain sent
for me and Thomas Anthony into the cabin, where being come he talked much with
us, and on seeing my hat he asked how it came torn so, was answered it was done
at the boatswains pleasure. There was the captain of another man of war with
him, who swore he would kill us, as soon as he would kill a Frenchman, with
many such expressions. The boatswains mate seeing how I was used, took me by
the shoulder, and asked why I did not stay below decks as he would have me,
adding you have been beat enough to kill an ox; which expressions of his showed
some respect he had to me, though otherwise bad enough in his conversation; but
the sweet peace and satisfaction of mind, that I enjoyed in this time of my
suffering, is scarce to be expressed in words, and far exceeded their show of
kindness.

Now there being upwards of twenty sail of the English together at that time,
in a few days they sailed to Breast, a place in France, to fight the French
fleet, but they not coming out, and our fleet meeting with a storm that several
ships lost their top masts, we sailed for England, and went into Torbay, and
lay there three days, in which time I desired the captain to set us at liberty;
but he said if we would work, we should have our liberty, purposely as we
thought to ensnare us; but through the Lord's mercy and goodness to us, we were
preserved from their snares, and found his pure peace and presence, to be with
us in a large manner, that in the greatest of our sufferings and trials, he was
near, and in his comfortable presence we did rejoice, that we were counted
worthy to suffer for truth's testimony. The Sd. of the 5th. month we sailed for
Plymouth, but came not to an anchor: the captain went on shore, and we sent a
letter to a friend of ours at Plymouth, but received no answer. The next day we
sailed for Breast again, being more than forty sail in company, and the ship we
were in, and another, went to the mouth of the harbor, and took a ship going
in loaded with salt, and lay off from Ushant waiting for the French fleet,
until our hopes of getting clear from them was almost spent. At another time
they sent for me to make points for reefing the fails, which I refusing to do,
some mocked and scoffed, while others filled with envy and malice, could scarce
keep their hands from me: and thus we passed through many deep exercises,
looking every day when we should receive stripes, and sometimes could see
nothing but death before us, but the Lord wrought deliverance for us in his own
way and time, beyond our expectation, and has been near for our preservation,
blessed be his great name therefore.

The 14th. of this month we sailed to Breast to spy what shipping there was in
the harbor, and we went so near in, that the French fired many guns at us from
the castle. I and my companion Thomas Anthony sat then between decks, not
knowing how soon it might be our lots to be shot; my companion not being well
at that time nor for several days before, the doctor sent his mate in kindness
to enquire if he wanted any thing he had that he should have it, but he refused
taking any thing from him, although he acknowledged his kindness. The 20th. of
this month we sailed for Breast again, and being becalmed, we thought we must
come to an anchor, which if we had it might have gone hard with us; but after
some time there sprang up a breeze of wind, and we got away from the French,
and a few days after we sailed for England again, and got into Plymouth harbor.

So on the 27th. of this month as soon as we came to an anchor, the captain
sent for us into the cabin, and being before him, he said he would let us go
on shore, to see our friends, and refresh ourselves, which he did: so being on
shore, and it being meeting day we went to the meeting, although in a poor
dirty condition by reason of our lying on board so long, and no clothes to
shift us, having been on board about six weeks. Friends were glad to see us on
shore, and kindly received us into their houses. The first friends house we
went to was Henry Cane or Crane who was very kind to us, and provided things
necessary for us. And Daniel Zachary the owner of the vessel we were pressed
out of, had wrote to a friend of Plymoth to take care of us when we came on
shore, also a friend of London that was appointed by their mornings meeting,
sent a letter to a friend of his at Plymoth, to help us to what necessaries we
stood in need of, and he would pay him again, which he did; also said friend
spoke to the captain twice about setting us at liberty. Since we were not men
for his purpose, the captain said he gave us leave to go on shore, but said
nothing of our coming on board again, saying he could not answer discharging
us, because he was under the command of the flag.

So having well refreshed ourselves, and were provided with necessaries we
traveled through several towns, as Exeter, Bristol, Bath, and diverse others,
till we came to London, when there we lodged at our friend Thomas Lurtings, and
having tarried near four weeks in London, also attended meetings as they came
in course pretty constantly. We got a passage to Philadelphia in a vessel
commanded by one Joshua Guy, there were diverse friends going in her, as John
Salkeld and wife, with other passengers. About the 9th. of the 7th. month 1705,
we left London, and the vessel fell down to Deal, where my companion Thomas
Anthony being taken sick of the small pox, he was put on shore at Deal.

AN ACCOUNT OF THE SUFFERINGS OF Richard Seller, OF KEINSEY, A FISHERMAN, Who
was pressed in SCARBOROUGH-PIERS, in the time of the two last Engagements
between the Dutch and English, in the Year 1665.

PHILADELPHIA: Printed by B. and J. JOHNSON, No. 147 High Street.

AN ACCOUNT OF THE SUFFERINGS OF RICHARD SELLER.
Abstracted from "A Collection of the Sufferings of the People called Quakers."
Vol. 2. pa. 112, compiled by Joseph Besse, printed in London Anno. 1753 with
this remark, -- viz.

The following narrative we have thought proper to insert in the very words of
the Sufferer, as taken from his own mouth. The candid reader will easily excuse
the simplicity of its style, and the plainness of its expressions: being the
more like the man and carrying the greater Evidence of the honesty and
integrity of the Relator. These are (says the writer) the very words that
proceeded from him, who sat before me weeping, -- viz.

I WAS pressed in Scarborough-Piers, and refusing to go on board the ketch,
they beat me very sore on the sand, and I refusing to go on board, they hoisted
me in with a tackle, on board of the ketch that pressed for the ship called the
Royal-Prince, and they bunched me with their feet, that I fell into a tub, and
was so maimed, that they were forced to swaddle me up with cloths: from thence
we sailed into Bridlington-Bay, where Thomas Swailes and Mary Stranger hearing
of me sent me victuals on board the ketch; then we sailed to the Buoy and Nore,
where they haul'd me in at a gun-port, on board of the ship called the
Royal-Prince. The (...) day of the third month they commanded me to go to work
at the capstane; I refused, and told them, that as I was not free to do the
king's work, I would not live at his charge for victuals; then the boatswain's
mate beat me sore, and thrusting me about with the capstane till he was weary.
Then the Captain sent for me upon the quarter deck, and asked me, why I refused
to fight for the king, and why I refused to eat of his victuals? I told him, I
was afraid to offend God, for my warfare was spiritual, therefore I durst not
fight with carnal weapons. Then he fell upon me and beat me with his small
cane, then called for his great cane, and beat me sore, and felled me down to
the deck three or four times, and beat me as long as his strength continued.
Then came one Thomas Horner, (who was brought up at Easington) and said, I pray
you, noble captain, be merciful, for I know him to be an honest man, and a good
man. Then said the captain, he is a Quaker, I will beat his brains out; then
falling on me again, he beat me till he was weary; then called some to help
him, for, said he, I am not able to beat him enough to make him willing to do
the king's service. Then came out the commander's jester, and told the captain,
he would lay a guinea with him that he would make me work, and haul the king's
ropes, and told the captain he was a fool; so two guineas were thrown down upon
the deck, then the jester called for two seamen, and made them make two-ropes
fast to the wrists of my arms, and reeved the ropes through two blocks in the
mizenshrouds, on the starboard-side, and hoisted me up aloft, and made the
ropes fast to the gunnel of the ship, and I hung some time; then the jester
called the ships company to behold, and bear him witness, that he made the
Quaker haul the king's ropes; so veering the ropes, they lowered me half way
down, then made me fast again: now, said the jester, noble captain, you and the
company see that the Quaker hauleth the king's ropes, and with that he
commanded them to let fly the ropes loose, where I fell upon the deck: now said
the jester, noble captain the wager is won, he haul'd the ropes to the deck,
and you can haul them no farther, nor any man else. Then the captain called the
boatswain's mate, and bid him take the Quakerly-dog away, and put him to the
capstane, and make him work, and beat him and spare him not. So the boatswain's
mate had me down to the geercapstane, and thrust me about with the men at the
capstane, and beat me withal, when he could get time; then he went and sat him
down upon a chest-lid, and I went and sat down upon another chest-lid beside
him, then he fell on me and beat me again, then called his boy to bring his two
seizings, and he seized my arms to the capstane's bars, and caused the men to
heave the capstane about, and in three or four times passing about, the
seizings were loosed, no man knew how, nor when, nor could they ever be found,
although they sought them with lighted candles; then the boatswain's mate,
seeing what was done, caused all the men to come from the capstane, and took a
bible, and commanded them all to swear, that they neither loosed me, nor knew
how I came loose, (they all being willing to swear) he then searched their
pockets for the seizings, but could find none, so he let them go; then he
called them all again to him, and said, hear what I shall say to you; you see
this is a wonderful thing, which is done by an invisible hand, which loosed
him, for none of you could see his hands loosed, that were so near him: I
suppose this man, said he, is called a Quaker, and for conscience sake refuses
to act, therefore I am afflicted, and do promise before God and man, that I
will never beat, nor cause to be beaten, either Quaker, or any other man that
does refuse for conscience sake to act for the king; if I do, I wish I may lose
my right hand.

Then on the third day came the admiral, Sir Edward Spragg, on board of his own
ship, called the Royal-Prince, and hearing of a man that was pressed on board,
that was called a Quaker; also hearing that the boatswain's mate had beaten me
much, and had given me over, and had denied to beat me any more, he was
therefore called to come before the admiral, to answer for himself, why he
would not beat the Quaker? he said, I have beat him very sore, and I seized his
arms to the capstane's bars, and forced them to heave him about, and beat him,
and then sat down, and in three or four times of the capstanes going about, the
seizings were loosed, and he came and sat down by me; then I called the men
from the capstane, and took them sworn, whether they had loosed him or no, but
they all denied that they either loosed him, or knew by what means he was
loosed, neither could the seizings ever be found; therefore I did, and do
believe that it was an invisible power that set him at liberty, and I did
promise before God and the company, that I would never beat a Quaker again, nor
any man else for conscience sake. The admiral told him, he must lose his cane:
he willingly yielded it, and told him, he must also lose his place: he was
willing. He also told him, he must lose his right hand: he held it out and
said, take it from me if you please. So they took his cane from him, and
displaced him. So the commander gave order to the seven yeomen, to beat me
where ever they met me, for seven days and nights, and make me work: they being
called to an account, what they had made me do? told the commander that they
were weary, and could not make me work, so they desired to be excused. Then the
eighth yeoman was called, who promised he would beat me, and make me work; and
he did beat me for a day and a night, when he met with me, and he being weary,
he desired to be excused. Then the commander sent for me upon the quarter deck
before him, and caused my clothes to be stripped off, shirt and all, from my
waist downward, then he took a view of my body to see what wounds and bruises I
had, but he could find none, no not so much as a blue spot on my skin. Then the
commander was angry with them for not beating me enough: then captain Fowler
answered him and said, I have beat him myself as much as would have killed an
ox. The jester said, he had me hung a great while by my arms up aloft in the
shrouds. The men said, they had also beat me very fore, and they might as well
beat the mainmast. Then said the commander, I will cause irons to be laid upon
him during the king's pleasure and mine. Then the boatswain was called, and
commanded to call the ship's company together, and make ready the irons: the
commander Sir Edward Spragg, said, you gentlemen sailors and soldiers,
whosoever serves here under me for the king, on board his Majesty's ship called
the Royal-Prince, the admiral of the blue, you are to take notice, that there
is a man on board called a quaker, he is to be laid in irons during the king's
pleasure and mine, for refusing to fight and eat the king's victuals, therefore
I charge you all and every man, that none of you give or sell him any victuals,
meat, drink, or water, for if you do, you shall have the same punishment that
he has. So this being called three times over, he commanded the boatswain to
take me away and put me in irons. So I being kept in irons six days and nights,
and falling sick of a fever, I grew very weak, insomuch that when I was set out
to case myself, (which was but once in twenty four hours) I could neither stand
nor go: so the officers that let me out, called some of my countrymen to carry
me into the ship's head to ease myself, and bring me back again to the irons.
Then the officer took pity of me, and bid me lay down upon the bilboes that
night, and he would hap me with a coverlid, so I lay there that night, and next
day till evening; then the officer desired me to go by the way a little, seeing
all was quiet, and see if I could get a little rest: so I being lame of a leg
with the irons, was creeping over the larboard side of the ship, the lieutenant
coming down, said, thou damned rogue, (and many other wicked words) have thou
broken the irons? and with that drew his rapier, and swore he would stab me,
and so drove me back again to the irons, and called the yeomen, and would have
known who let me out, and he should be punished, and I would not tell him; but
the same yeoman came in the crowd, and I put my hand out to him, and he locked
it, and none knew how: I then being the king's prisoner, I bid them begone,
they had nothing to do with me: so I remained in irons six days more, and
recovered very well of my weakness: then on the seventh day at night, several,
all seamen, fell to drinking of brandy, and playing at cards, and became very
loud, the boatswain's mate hearing of them, came down, and desired them to
leave off; they being full of drink, would not, so a quarrel arose, and the
boatswain's mate cried out murder, and immediately there came assistance to
him, but the men ran away and hid themselves, only two were taken, and put in
irons with me.

"Now I shall speak a little of the carpenter's mate's Lindness to me; when I
had been in irons some days, and my food being taken from me, which was three
day's victuals, that I had left of that which Thomas Swales and Mary Stranger
sent me in Bridlington bay, he came in the crowd, and joined himself so near
me, that he gave me some meat etc. so privately as not to be known to any
others; and told me he would supply me daily; for, said he, I have meat of my
own, which is not at the king's charge; and said further, that he had a strict
charge given him by his wife and his mother, before he came on board, that if
any Quaker came on board with him, he should be kind to him; and that he had
lately received a letter from them, wherein they charged him to remember his
promise, and be kind to the Quakers, if any were on board: but there being some
occasion more than ordinary, he was taken off on board, and I had nothing for
three days and three nights, and the two men before spoken of, that where in
irons with me, while the commander was with us, the men would lie no where but
upon me, and as soon as he was gone, they laid off me, and gave me brandy to
drink, and promised they would not hurt me: then the lieutenant came at the
middle of the night, and found them lying upon me, he asked why they did lie
upon me? they said, you would have him killed, so now we will kill him for you;
then he came down the third time in the morning, and found them lying upon me,
for they set one to watch his coming, and he found them lying very close upon
me, so that he could see nothing but my feet, I being so pressed and weak, that
he could scarce hear my voice.

Then the lieutenant went to Sir Edward's cabin door, and knocked; the boy
answered, who was there? he told him, it was the lieutenant who would speak to
Sir Edward, for there had been a mutiny in the ship by some men playing at
cards, and they had beat the boatwain's mate: he told him, he should have laid
them in irons, and not called on him. He said, they are already in the bilboes.
He also said, if it please your highness Sir Edward, to remember, that there is
a poor Quaker in yet, that was laid in two weeks since, and they will lie no
where but upon him, and they will kill him for us. He bid him go to the yeomen
that had the keys, and take him out of the bilboes, and put up a flag at the
mizenmast's head and call a council of war; which was done: then the captains
of the other ships all came on board to answer the council of war, before eight
o'clock in the morning, (it being the first day of the week) so I being brought
before the council of war, the commander asked me, if I would go on board of an
hoy that was a tender, and had six guns? I refused, and desired to stay on
board, and bear the punishment that I had to abide. Then he bid the council of
war go on with their business; so they did proceed, and I being set on a bulk
head, being so lame with the irons that I could not stand, and hearing them
pass sentence of condemnation upon me. The judge was a Papist, being governor
of Dover castle, and went to sea on pleasure. So they could not tell at present
what death to put me to; the judge said, I should be put into a barrel or cask
driven full of nails with their points inwards, and so rolled to death. But the
council of war taking it into consideration, thought it too terrible a death,
and too much unchristian-like, so they agreed to hang me: and I hearing them
speak several things against me, which I was clear of, had a desire to arise
from my knees where I was set to answer for myself, but I had not any power to
arise or open my mouth, but was condemned within myself, insomuch that I had
not power to breathe unto God; proffering to rise again the second time, there
came a motion within me, and bid me be still, be still, be still, three times,
which I obeyed and was comforted; then I believed God would arise: and when
they had done speaking, then God did arise, and I was filled with the power of
God, and my spirit lifted up above all earthly things, and wonderful strength
was given me to my limbs, and my heart full of the power and wisdom of God, and
with glad tidings my mouth was opened to declare to the people the things which
God had made manifest to me: with sweat running down, and tears trickling from
my eyes, I told them, "the hearts of kings were in the hand of the Lord, and so
are both yours and mine, and I do not value what you can do to this body, for I
am at peace with God and all men, and you my adversaries; for if I might have
an hundred and thirty years longer, I can never die in a better condition, for
the Lord has satisfied me, that he has forgiven me all things in this world,
and I am glad through his mercy, that he has made me willing to suffer for his
name's sake; and not only so, but I am heartily glad, and do really rejoice,
and with a seal in my heart to the same." Then there came a man and laid his
hand upon my shoulder, and said, where are all thy accusers? then my eyes were
opened, and I looked about me, and they were all gone; and one said there goes
thy chief friend, the judge: then it arose in my heart, that I had news for him
from the power of God, and I said, man come back, I have news for thee better
than ever thou heardest in any coffee-house, or elsewhere; and answer for what
thou have done. Then came a lieutenant, and said, Sir. Edward, this is an
hypocrite Quaker. I said, commander, I entreat thee to look upon me a little,
so I loosed my knee-string and put down my stockings, and let him see how the
blood and rotten stuff ran down my leg round about; he said, put up thy
stocking, there is enough. Then presently came an ancient soldier, and loosed
down his knee-strings, and put down his stockings, put his cap under his knees,
and begged his pardon three times: then said he, arise up soldier, and speak,
and he entreated him and said, "noble Sir Edward, you know that I have served
his majesty under you many years, both in this nation and other nations by the
sea, and you were always a merciful man; therefore I do entreat you in all
kindness, to be merciful to this poor man, who is condemned to die tomorrow,
and only for denying your order, for fear of offending God, and for conscience
sake; and we have but one man on board out of nine hundred and fifty, but one
which does refuse for conscience sake, and shall we take his life away? nay,
God forbid: for he has already declared, that if we take his life away, there
shall a judgment appear upon some on board within eight and forty hours, and to
me it has appeared, therefore I am forced to come upon the quarter deck before
you, and my spirit is one with his; and therefore I desire you in all kindness,
when you take his life away, to give me the liberty to go off on board, for I
shall not be willing to serve his majesty longer on board of ship: so I do
entreat you once more, to be merciful to this poor man: so God bless you, Sir
Edward, I have no more to say to you."

Then came the chief gunner, that had been a captain, and loosed down his
kneestrings, and did beg his pardon three times, being upon his bare knees
before Sir Edward: then he said, arise up gunner and speak. So he said. "if it
please your worship, Sir Edward, we know you are a merciful man, and therefore
I entreat you in all kindness, to be merciful to this poor man, in whom there
remains something more than flesh and blood, therefore I entreat you, let us
not destroy that which is alive, neither endeavor to do it: and so God bless
you Sir Edward, I have no more to say to you." Then he went away. Then the
commander desired me to go down and take my leave of my friends (this day) that
were on board; so he gave orders, that any that had a mind to give me victuals
might, and that I might eat and drink with whom I pleased, and that none should
molest me that day. Then came the lieutenant, and sat down by me while they
were at their worship, and he would have given me brandy, but I refused: then
the dinner came up to be served, and several gave me victuals to eat, and I did
eat freely, and was kindly entertained that day; then the night being come, a
man kindly proffered me his hammock to lie in that night, because I had lain
long in irons, and I accepted of his kindness, and laid me down, and slept well
that night. The next morning being come, it being the second day of the week,
on which I was to be executed, about eight of the clock in the morning, the
rope being reeved upon the mizen-yard's arm, and the boy ready to turn me off,
and boats having come on board with captains of other ships that were of the
council of war, who came on purpose to see me executed; I was thereupon called
to come to be executed, then I coming to the execution place, the commander
asked the council, how their judgment did stand? so most of them did consent,
and some of them were silent. Then he desired me freely to speak my mind, if I
had any thing to say before I was executed: I told him, I had little at present
to speak. So there came a man and bid me go forward to be executed, so I
stepped upon the gunnel to go toward the rope; the commander bid me stop there
if I had any thing to say. Then spoke the judge, and said, Sir Edward is a
merciful man, that puts that heretic to no worse death than hanging. Sir
Edward turned him about to the judge, and said, what said thou? I say,
replied he, you are a merciful man, that puts him to no worse death than
hanging. But, said he, what is the other word that thou said, that heretic:
I say, said the commander, he is more a christian than thyself; for I do
believe thou would hang me, if it were in thy power. Then said the commander
unto me, "come down again, I will not hurt an hair of thine head, for I cannot
make one hair grow." Then he cried, silence all men, and proclaimed it three
times over, that "if any man or men on board of the ship would come and give
evidence, that I had done any thing that I had deserved death for, I should
have it, provided they were credible persons." But no body came, neither opened
a mouth against me then. So he cried again, silence all men, and hear me speak:
then he proclaimed, that the Quaker was as free a man as any on board the ship
was. So the men heaved up their hats, and with a loud voice cried, God bless
Sir Edward, he is a merciful man: the shrouds, the tops, and decks being full
of men, several of their hats flew over board and were lost.

Then I had great kindness shown me by all men on board, but the great kindness
of the Lord exceeded all, for the day I was condemned to die on, was the most
joyful day that ever I had in my lifetime, and so remained exceeding joyful,
until the very time that I was proclaimed a free man. But soon after troubles
came upon me again, for I being laid upon the deck one night, as it was my
usual lodging-place, there was something appeared to me, and struck me as it
were dead, and I being in great dread and fear, believed our ship was to engage
such a day of the month, with the wind at south east, then appeared also a
small cloud to me about as big as an hat; after being engaged, the same cloud
spread and became a great one, insomuch that it darkened part of the ship, then
I stepped over on the starboardside of the ship, into the shrouds, and looked
aft, and I saw a thick water arising in the wake of the rudder, then I feared
the ship was near ground. This appeared to me three times that night, and I
would gladly have put it from me, but I could not: then I did believe, and was
satisfied of the truth of it, then I was at peace and quiet in my own mind, but
then I was to make it known to the pilot, and I did believe it was death by law
to discourage them: so I thought, then I should give them an occasion that they
should take away my life; but I could not rest, eat, drink, or sleep, until I
had declared it; so I breathed unto God, and desired that he would find me a
way to reveal it, so it remaining with me two days and two nights, and being
walking upon the deck, and taking notice of the chief gunner of the ship, I was
ordered to go to him, and walk with him; very solitary were both of us, and he
perceived I had something to say to him, of some weighty matter, so he desired
me to speak my mind to him, and I told him, I had such a weighty matter to
declare, that it was death by the law to declare it, I desired that he would
stand true to me in that respect, and he promised me fidelity in the presence
of God, before whom we were: that he would be true to me in all respects, and
if one suffered, both should suffer. Then we espied the mate of the ship
walking, he being a sober man, we drew near to him, and he perceived we were
both afflicted, and desired to know what was the matter? so we told him, we had
a weighty matter, and if he would be as faithful to us, as we were one to
another, we would declare it to him: so he promised to be faithful to us, for
he did believe it did concern him: then we told him the matter, and he was
fully satisfied of the truth of it; but said he, it does belong most of all to
the pilot; so we must speak to him, and he being such a brittle, high-spirited
man, we scarce knew how to speak to him, but calling him to us, and walking
with him, he took notice of our heaviness, and asked our business with him; we
told him, we had a matter to declare to him of great concern, therefore we
desired him to be faithful to us, and we would declare the matter to him, and
he promised to be as faithful to us, as he supposed we were to one another: so
they told him the matter, then he asked, who saw it? I told him, I saw it. Then
he fell into a rage, and seemed to fly from his promise, and said, he would go
and tell the commander, so away he went, and said, he would have me executed
speedily: I said, let him go, better I die, than the whole company perish; but
they said if thou die, we will all die. Then he came to us again near weeping,
and told us that when he came before the commander, his mouth was stopped, that
he could not speak a word good or bad: he was very tender, and praised God that
he had such a messenger. Then he took me by the hand, and desired me to tell
him the name of the sand, I told him I did not know, I never came there, but at
that time I looked up with my eyes, and told him where-abouts the sand laid; so
he desired me to go to the compass, and he asked me, if I knew the compass; I
told him, very well; so I showed him upon what point of the compass the said
sand laid, and he took a book out of his pocket, and found the sand, and the
name of it. Some days after we were engaged on that very point with the
Hollanders, and as soon as we were engaged; the cloud appeared to me, and came
and darkened the ship, then I stepped into the main-shrouds, and I saw the thick
water, then I showed the pilot it, and he called two of the best men to the
lead, they cried five fathom and a quarter; then the pilot cried, starboard
your helm; then the commander cried, larboard your helm, and bring her too: the
pilot said, he would bring the king's ship no nearer, he would give over his
charge: the commander cried, bring her too. The pilot cried to the leadmen,
sing aloud that Sir Edward may hear, (for the outcry was very great amongst the
officers and seamen, because the ship was so near a-ground, and the enemies
upon them) so they cried a quarter less five: the commander cried, we shall
have our Royal Prince on ground, take up your charge pilot. Then he cried hard,
starboard your helm, and see how our ship will veer; so she did bear round up:
the men at the lead cried, five fathom and a better depth; then the commander
cried, God preserve the Royal Prince: then the pilot cried, be of good cheer,
commander: they cried six fathom, then nine fathom, then fifteen fathom, then
sixteen fathom. The Hollanders then shouted, and cried, Sir Edward runs. Then
he cried, bring her too again, and the fight continued till the middle of the
day was over, and it fell calm: and the ships being engaged on head of us, we
could see nothing but fire and smoke; so out of that smoke I espied a fire-ship
designed to lay us on board of the larboard-bow: then I cried to the chief
gunner to come to me quickly, and I showed him the fire-ship coming to board us
on the larboard-bow: then he fired a chase gun with a ball in her, and as soon
as the smoke was gone from the gun, we espied the fire-ship all on a fire,
blown up, and what remained of her sallied on board of the cambridge, and only
burned her ensign. The fight continued, and my employ was to carry down the
wounded men, and look out for fireships, and the commander was mightily
pleased with my service, and said, it would have been a great pity that my life
should have been taken away before the engagement, and the chief gunner said, I
was instrumental, through mercy, not only for giving notice of the ship coming
on ground upon the sand, but also for preventing of the fireship that was near
to board us, who gave me the first notice, whereof I am witness. And the
lieutenant said to the commander, that there was not a more undaunted man on
board except his highness.

Eight days after, we were engaged again with the Hollanders, and the officers
sent for me upon the quarter deck, and asked me what I would do that day? I
told them I was willing to do as I had done before: they desired I would do
that service, and take that care upon me, only to look out for fireships
coming on board; I told them, I was free to do it, likewise to carry down the
wounded men if there were occasion; so presently we engaged, but not one
fire-ship troubled us that day, but we lost about two hundred men. The
lieutenant meeting me, he asked me, if I had received any wounds? I told him, I
had received none, but was well. He asked me, how came I to be so bloody? then
I told him, it was with carrying down wounded men. So he took me in his arms,
and kissed me, and that was the same lieutenant that persecuted me so with
irons at the first. Then we came to the Buoy and Nore again, and then went up
near Chatham, and the king coming on board, the lieutenant desired me to go and
walk upon the deck, with him in sight of the king, that happily some might give
him notice of me, hoping I might be brought to a trial, and have my liberty;
but I did not understand that he had any intelligence of me. The next day the
same lieutenant came to me, and desired me to walk along with him upon the
quarter deck: I being somewhat unwilling, told him, I did not use to go upon
the quarter deck, unless I was called by the officers: he said, my uncle has
much business, and does forget you, so walk along with me, I desire you: and I
did as he desired me, and he being with me, walked away and left me alone; the
commander being there, and several captains with him, he came from his company
to me, and laid his hand upon my head and said, "thou last done well, and very
well too:" so he w^^ked by me and I blushed; then he asked me, why I blushed? I
told him I desired to know wherein I had done so well: he said, by encouraging
them which should have encouraged both thee and me. Then said he, thou shall
have thy liberty to go on shore. I asked him, if I might go on shore to
recruit, or go to my own being? he said, I should choose whether I would. I told
him I had rather go to my own Being: he said I should do so. Then I told him,
there was one thing that I requested of him yet, that he would be pleased to
give me a certificate under his hand, to certify that I am not run away: he
said, thou shall have one to keep thee clear at home, and also in thy fishing;
for he knew I was a fisherman. So he called the captain, and ordered him to
write me a certificate, and bring it to him; which he did with speed, but he
did not like it, but slung it him again, and ordered him to make him one more
legible; then he brought another, and he signed it and gave it me, and wished
me well, and said, he desired to hear from me if I got well home, and I told
him. I would send him a letter, and so I did: but soon after I got into London,
two presscrews came to me, and said, this is Sir Edwards Quaker; you are
welcome to shore, will you please to go to the tavern with us? I told them I
would not go, nor drink anything; then they wished me well home.

Also they proffered me my pay, before I came off on board, and said, I
deserved it as well as any man on board; but I refused, and told them, I had of
my own, that I hoped would serve me home. And the lieutenant was troubled
because I would take nothing; he would have given me twenty shillings, but I
would not take it.

Thus ends the remarkable narrative of the sufferings of this faithful sailor,
who rather than violate his conscience by being instrumental to destroy other
men's lives, endured with much patience many and sore trials, persevering
faithful in his testimony against war and fighting, even near to death; to
which he was wholly resigned, and from which he was preserved by a singular
providence attending him, in those moments of time which he thought would have
been his last. But the virulence of the Popish judge against him as an Heretic,
gave the commander, Sir Edward Spragg, who professed himself a Protestant, such
disgust, that scorning to be made a tool to execute the vengeance of a Papist
in this case, he delivered the innocent man from the death he was condenmed to:
Being thus preserved alive, he was made instrumental to the saving of the ship,
and the lives of many therein: and by the exercise of an undaunted Christian
courage and constancy, triumphed over the malice of his adversaries, who,
conscious of his innocence, at length became his friends and favorers.

FINIS.

