THE ORIENTAL PHILANTHROPIST, OR TRUE REPUBLICAN.

Bright rays of truth illume the studied page,
Point out the faults of each preceding age:
The good here pleased -- the rash become more wise,
And the dissembler learns to hate disguise.
Philanthropy in native glory shines;
Whole nations in her sacred cause combines;
Instructive fable, aiding, marks the way
That leads to brighter and still brighter day.
By HENRY SHERBURNE, A. B.

PUBLISHED ACCORDING TO ACT OF CONGRESS.

Printed for WM. TREADWELL and Co. Portsmouth, N. H. and sold by them at the
Portsmouth Book-Store, and by the principal Booksellers in the United-States.

1800.

THE AUTHOR'S PREFACE.
THE most celebrated writers of former ages have happily illustrated and
recommended interesting and important truths by allegory, or fable; and by
their agreeable manner in the figurative style, have ever been highly
acceptable. Through those silvery channels, essential truths have been
propitiously conveyed, which were very unlikely to have been otherwise so
cordially entertained. As such a method of writing has always proved both
pleasing and instructive, it is highly probable it will be continued in
practice through succeeding ages. The introduction of imaginary beings has,
perhaps some degree of propriety in the scenes presented in the following
memoirs, which are laid in those regions where the most stupendous fabulous
legends originated. If fable has been hitherto so successfully employed (as
both sacred and profane history appear to evince) for the instruction and
entertainment of mankind; -- if trees have been summoned to speak; the floods
to lift up their voice; and the various orders of inferior existences, in
language intelligible, to rebuke and reform; -- if a prophet's madness has
been corrected by a moral lesson from his insulted beast; the vicious and cruel
reprehended and reclaimed by talking birds and singing trees; why may not
adolesence, or even riper years, be still in like manner disciplined? Does the
mighty Hercules come forward, in ancient story, with his trementous club, to
arrest the progress of those baleful monsters which disturbed the peace of
society; why shall not a Prince of China, in a later age, advance upon the
theater of the world, though with less formidable weapons than was that of the
redoubtable hero; -- with victorious eloquence and alluring manners to correct
and reform the rash* and untutored, and restore the hapless wanderer to the
paths of true virtue and honor, and consequent felicity; and, having achieved
the most illustrious exploits, establish a grand society cemented by love? As
then, the design of fable is agreeably to convey the most salutary truths that
they may be effectually impressed upon the minds of those readers who are apt
to be disgusted with dry treatises of morality; let it still be permitted to
lend its benevolent aid for our entertainment and instruction, till the
expected era fully arrives when genuine unmixed truth shall shine forth with
charms superceding the necessity of the fascinating blandishments of fictitious
tales. However, the works of imagination, when subservient to reason and
virtue, will never fail to be admired.

The Author of the subsequent Memoirs looks for no other commendation than that
which is merited by an honest attempt to advance, to the utmost of his slender
abilities, the real felicity of his country and mankind. He thinks of his
talent at composition as far below those of the worthy and excellent writers of
an age highly improved, and advancing in perfection before unknown; an age
pregnant with great, and he hopes, happy events. His country may well boast the
literary productions of eminent essayists of both sexes: and, to the rising
generation, it is indeed a most interesting circumstance, that female literary
merit has presented so brilliant an addition to our national glory. -- Happy
talents, Constantia, are confessedly thine! How sweetly pleads thy pen in
virtue's sacred cause! with sentiments ennobling, pathetic and sublime, winning
each selfish heart to charity and love! Columbia's sons and daughters, whose
virtues are her glory, shall never cease to bless thee! future ages shall
grateful own thy worth; and say, Angels would write like thee! Had mines of
gold been thine; and had thou, with the generous patriotism thou have so
eloquently commended, dispensed them for the public weal; they had been but
trifles, when compared with the rich, invaluable presents The GLEANER, in three
volumes, whose uncommon merits, the numerous and respectable subscribers of all
ranks, most expressively proclaim.
thou have made to thy country! Who can refrain from noblest deeds of charity,
when Constantia solicits with softest moving accents; -- when, with eloquence
inimitably charming, angelic, she entreats! when, with richest and most
expressive coloring, she presents the lovely portrait of philanthropy divine;
or, with the resistless magic power of her feathery wand, she calls forth every
tender, every generous emotion of the soul! ever memorable will be the
conquests of thy powerful rhetoric! The most obdurate has it melted to
compassion. Even the heart of the churlish niggard has learned of thee to feel
the sympathetic glow! The self-destroying children of intemperance have thy
persuasive pages awakened to sobriety and frugality! Painful were their efforts
against vicious habits long indulged. But it is thou who have taught them to
realise the momentous consequence of speedy reform. It Is thou who inspiredst
them with augmented fortitude, from the full conviction, that the more painful
their virtuous struggles, the more glorious their victory would prove, and the
more exquisitely relished the ensuing bliss! It is thou, too, who have
dignified thy sex. To thee is it highly indebted for thy excellent vindication
of its rights, ascertaining its importance, and celebrating its shining
virtues. If thou art still an inhabitant of the earth, long may thou, live
illustrious amid thy worthy competitors for Heaven -- approving fame, who with
thee adorn and enrich our country and mankind! Happy American States! so richly
adorned with sons and daughters of refined genius and exalted virtue! happy in
thy illustrious chiefs, statesmen and legislators, whose fame resounds through
every region of the globe! in thy civil and religious liberties, and the means
of every valuable improvement! happy in thy rich and powerful resources! firm
and unshaken be thy union, and impervious to every violence! and by thy growing
exemplary virtues, accelerate the destined day of universal harmony and love.
Be thine the glory of exhibiting to nations the value of freedom; and of all
those graces and virtues which constitute the true dignity and happiness of man!

The Author has attempted under the guise of amusement, to instill those
active principles of piety, virtue and benevolence, which never fail of
insuring, to all who are influenced by them, the real and the most exquisite
enjoyment of life; -- those principles which are the only and sure foundation
of civil, social and domestic felicity. It is his hearty wish that thousands of
pens, and every tongue of eoquence may be incessantly employed (cooperating
with the brightest examples) in accelerating the expected era of universal
happiness, when the sigh of misery shall forever cease from the habitations of
men. -- A just atention to the Deity, and a general conviction, among all
ranks, of our miserable ignorance and incapacity, as to the true enjoyment of
existence; and application to Heaven, with unreserved confidence in his power
and goodness, love and tender compassion, precedes and introduces the happy
period which every heart desires, when darkness and fears, terrors and distress
shall be no more. I said unreserved confidence in Heaven. For the want of this
-- so unbecoming and shameful to a rational being, is the source of every evil.
Destitute of this confidence, what a wretched existence is man's! O happy
country! where, even among the most influential, sentiments, so momentous, are
realised!

THE ORIENTAL PHILANTHROPIST. BOOK I.
Sweet shades of Soft repose! Propitious prove
To SCIENCE, VIRTUE, FRIENDSHIP, and to LOVE!

IN that charming season of the year, when smiling nature dressed in all its
loveliness, presents the most enchanting scenes; -- the philosophic and
contemplative Nytan, Prince of China, had retired with several select friends,
whose minds were congenial with his own, that they might enjoy the luxuries of
spring, in a delightful retreat he had formed a few miles from the metropolis.
It was a recess romantically situated, almost encompassed by rocky precipices
and woods, and a very high wall extending to the sea shore. His building was
constructed in the most elegant rural taste, containing a variety of beautiful
and well furnished apartments. It was situated on a gradually rising ground,
presenting from its windows the most delightful and picturesque scenes; not in
the least, incommoded by a number of trees nearly adjoining, which towered gay
and majestic, and whose wide spreading branches, tempering the sun's meridian
rays, waved over the lofty roofs. Among those select friends were his amiable
sisters, with each a friend of their own sex, beautiful and highly
accomplished, possessed of congenial minds, exalted by nature, and refined by
education. Here they enjoyed alternately the sublime pleasure of social
converse, study, and contemplation -- sometimes in delicious walks; at others,
reclined in some chosen spot on the soft and verdant turf; or viewing the
diversified scenes from an elevated rock amid the sportive lambs. All the
pleasing variety of feathered songsters seemed to be here. collected on purpose
to regale them with their sprightly and animated notes. Philosophic and
elevated minds, like theirs, could not fail of enjoying the pleasures of so
romantic and charming a recess with the most exquisite relish.

The Emperor and Empress sometimes graced this lovely retreat with their
presence; which failed not to yield an highly augmented addition to its
pleasures. Here their beloved and affectionate daughters were happy indeed. In
the company of their fond brother, and two worthy Mandarins, his most endeared
friends, and who had gained the hearts of the two sisters by the most tenderest
assiduities. They were nearly arrived to that age when every charm expands.
Their minds formed with native genius and worth were greatly improved by study
and reflection, and every parental and fraternal attention. Happy lovers!
sanctioned as such by the parents and relatives of each party, to enjoy, in
this undisturbed seclusion from the cares of life, and the hurry of business,
the soothing, the enrapturing converse of the fair mistresses of their
affections, to aid their studies in the various branches of literature they
were delightfully exploring! Sweetly glided on the golden hours; and every
succeeding sun arose to present them with new pleasures! What matter of deep
regret that such felicity should be interrupted by any adverse occurrence! yet
such was the appointed destiny. The Prince was summoned, one day, from this
delicious retirement, to attend his father at court. He took leave of the
little enchanting assembly, with the promise of a speedy return. But it was a
promise which Heaven had decreed should never be fulfilled. A long, an
afflicting separation that moment commenced from the dearest friends of his
tender and affectionate heart. He had but lately returned from an important
tour through the Empire; and had flattered himself with the sublimest
enjoyments of the vernal season with those friends, in a temporary seclusion
from the rest of the world. The iniquitous cause of his being curtailed of
those enjoyments, and the surprising succeeding events, I proceed to unfold.

RENIEN had reigned till this eventful period, one of the happiest sovereigns
that ever adorned the illustrious throne of the vast empire of China. Blessed
in the love and esteem of his subjects, possessed of consummate wisdom and
prudence, a tender and generous heart, his virtues diffused serenity and
felicity every where around him. Through nations, far and near, his fame was
celebrated for innumerable great and good actions. The miseries of poverty and
oppression were scarcely known, in China, in his propitious days: -- Propitious
tranquil and serene, -- till now -- toward the close of his life (for no
earthly bliss is alloted unexceptionably perfect;) when the secret ambitious
and too successful machinations of Sanden one of his chief minsisters, began to
disturb his repose, threatening the convulsion and disorganization of the
Empire. The character and growing virtues of his only son, Prince Nytan, were
too much for the envious heart of that minister to endure? who, however
specious his appearances, was an inveterate enemy to the good, and, it was by
the profoundest dissimulation only, that he had maintained his place at court,
or any degree of respect among mankind. He therefore employed every wicked art
to fix an indelible stain of the deepest hue upon the reputation of the Prince,
-- to blast the fairest character for loyalty, virtue and probity; and to
effect a period to those wise and benevolent schemes for the public weal, in
the forming and prosecution of which, the son acted in concert with his royal
parent. "If, said the plotting Sanden to himself, I can accomplish the disgrace
of the Prince and his adherents -- if I can procure them to be exiled, if not
destroyed; as the Emperor is now in the decline of life, and numbers are
opposed to his virtues and political views, who will unite with me in the
perfecting my designs; I shall soon be in a fair way of obtaining the sovereign
power, and enjoying pleasures uncontrouled." To accomplish his black scheme of
villainy, whilst the prince was absent on his tour, (which was near fourteen
months) he had secretly promoted an insurrection in a distant part of the
empire, and had laid his plans so successfully, as to render it, an indubitable
fact to millions, that the Prince was its chief promoter; -- that he had
persuaded many of great influence to disaffect the minds of the people toward
the Emperor, as imposed on by intriguing courtiers, who were aiming under the
mask of friendship, at a (...) revolution, This scheme so far succeeded that
the Emperor issued orders to apprehend his son: and his being sent for to court
was only a trick of Sanden's, to effect his confinement without alarming his
faithful and powerful friends in the recess; who there waited, indeed, a long
time, with the utmost impatience, for his promised return! Before he had
reached Pekin, he was seized by Sanden's soldiers, and hurried away to an old
castle on the sea coasts, amidst craggy rocks, and gloomy woods; a place wholly
at the disposal and command of that wicked minister, as were its gloomy
inhabitants of fiends and murderers. Such were the effects of the caitiff's
calumnious lies. -- Vile slanderer! Inhuman perpetrator of the foulest
mischief! Ungrateful murderer of the purest fame, and betrayer of innocence the
most spotless and perfect! What dreadful punishment can atone for thy
unparralelled outrage to virtue and friendship, loyalty and patriotism! A
slanderer -- an incendiary -- a traitor and betrayer. -- What character can be
deemed more infamous, more pernicious than thine; the slanderer is indeed the
worst of murderers. He over whelms the universe with mischiefs and deaths! He
is an assasssin who stabs in the dark; who destroys his neighbor's peace and
felicity by depriving him of his good name, of his affectionate friends, far
dearer to him than life: and yet vile and pernicious as is the character of a
slanderer, how many thousands are there, in regions called civilized, to whom
it may be too justly imputed; and in which the defamer is every where heard,
and the tongues of mischief are perpetually fomenting discord in every family,
in every society. Are they the sons of reason, are they reflecting beings, who,
professing the greatest of virtues, are guilty of the worst of vices, and* like
Sanden, with specious pretentions to real goodness, are undermining the friends
of virtue, and the saviors of mankind, that vice, anarchy and ruin may reign
triumphant! Ah! barbarous destroyer of the peace and felicity of thy
unsuspecting friends! Such offenses as thine are indeed of the blackest hue!
but vengeance, just vengeance pursues thee! dread darkness and dire despair are
on the way to arrest thee, and thy enormous crimes shall affright and torture
thy guilty soul!

Too often does it happen that the wise are fatally deceived -- the wise the
generous and the good -- by the specious the insidious friend. It is a lesson
of momentous instruction! It should rouse us to be more effectually on our
guard; and it should likewise instruct us to be more constantly dependent on
the heavenly power. It is not in vain that we are suffered to feel the cruel
effects of deception, of fallacious friendship. They are designed to render us
more invariably sensible where our safety lies, to attach us more firmly to the
celestial, the all-powerful the unchangeable FRIEND. -- O happy expected age of
perfection! when the great and the wise shall confide, unreservedly, in the
source of wisdom, and nations rest on the Almighty arm!

The solitary situation, of the Castle in which the Prince was confined, was
well adapted to the traitor's infamous design. No habitations were adjacent to
it, only a few miserable huts of miserable inhabitants; and the frightful
reports of its being occupied by evil spirits, deterred the poor wretches,
oppressed as they were by Sanden (on whose lands they but barely existed) as
well as many others, from invading its precincts, or advancing under its
mouldering walls. In this dreary building was the Prince immured, in a small
paltry detached chamber, with a boy only to attend him. An oath was imposed on
him not to stir from his chamber but by special leave from the Emperor, and not
to attempt an escape from his prison. For his enemies were sensible that their
strongest guards, and wisest precautions might possibly be defeated. The boy,
who was devoted to Sanden, and bribed very high, was to sleep with him for
greater security. A guard, likewise, was stationed, and strongly interested to
prevent the prisoner's rescue, though his oath was sufficient security, with
whom it was truly sacred and inviolable, though imposed against reason and
humanity. Yet all these precautions failed to compose the fearful and guilty
mind of Sanden A wicked magician had taught the minister his enchantments; by
the power of which he imagined he had rendered the castle inaccessible to all
but his depraved minions, and the Prince's confinement most effectual against
any art or stratagems of his own. The Prince however, was far superior to him
in magic skill; though he disdained the use of it to dishonorable purposes. --
But thus it ever is with the wicked, guilty mind. Fearful and mistrustful, it
calls in every aid, to impose on itself; adding guilt to guilt, crime to crime,
outrage to outrage; it enlarges the structure of its villainies; till the
pondrous load, unable to support itself on its iniquitous basis falls, and
crushes the builder in its ruin! --

[The historians of Xuntien, who wrote Memoirs of Ravenzer, (the nation
celebrated in the following books;) do indeed give a different account of the
Prince's misfortune, and of the great events that followed it: One asserting
that he was immediately banished to a desolate island; where, finding a few men
who had been shipwrecked, he united with them and a great number of his
countrymen who followed his fortune, in forming a government for themselves. By
this historian a variety of matters are related respecting the island and its
inhabitants, and events there in the course of a hundred and ninety years, when
the inhabitants were increased to three hundred thousand. Nothing is said of
the wonderful magical operations, or of the Prince's intercourse with a
superior order of beings. It is only remarked, that the Prince, in his earlier
years, was fascinated by the charms of occult science, and the conversation of
magicians; but that he, afterward, thought very differently of these men, and
their art, which may be indeed a state of the matter nearest to probability.
Zerrinn asserts that the Prince held converse with, and was directed by Angels;
and places the epoch of his existence many ages back from that in which he is
said to have lived by the Historian of China, Reshang, whom in the sequel, I
chiefly follow; as he is more particular on interesting events, more
entertaining, moral and sentimental: and his Genuis and Fairies (which we
denominate Angels,) were incessantly employed in the works of benevolence; and,
on that account, must be pleasing to every benevolent mind. With Reshang, then
I shall proceed in composing the subsequent Memoirs; though not without
sometimes regarding the other writers; especially Long shang, who asserts, that
the guardian Fairies and Genies, (or rather Angels,) of the Prince, indulged
him awhile in his fancied magical advantages; as though he thereby accomplished
his enlargement from the castle, and many great things, which were in reality
effected by them for benevolent purposes to mankind: But they afterward
undeceived him, confirming him in dependence on the Deity, for every aid and
valuable gift. If Reshang, through the incredible mavelous, introduces us to
a grand society of the truly virtuous, to a flourishing nation, influenced by
the most liberal and divine sentiments; our entertainment will be sublime and
interesting, our philanthropy instructed, and our devotion rightly directed.
From the fable we shall derive truth; and from the illustrious examples, an
heavenly ambition to excel in every thing worthy of praise, and productive of
felicity the most refined, exalted and permanent.

Since the tales of fiction are so greatly multiplied, so entertaining, and
with such avidity perused; I would render them as harmless and useful as
possible; and by presenting, in the most engaging view, the moral of every one,
guard the mind of the reader, while he is traveling through the regions of
fancy, into the world of realities. In this manner escorted, he will attend me
through the ensuing pages.


But to resume the story of the Prince's confinement.]

-- Thus he seemed to be effectually secured in his little chamber; where, too,
he was liable to suffer on account of his health through the failure of proper
exercise. Yet such was the wisdom and sagacity of this young man, (for he had
scarcely seen his nineteenth year) that he found means, without violating his
oath, both to preserve his health, and to free himself from the power of his
enemy. The learning and science he had acquired, were immense for one of his
years. As he grew up from infancy he discovered a surprising genius. An
indulgent parent had afforded him every advantage for the most finished
education, that could be derived from the best instructors; and he soon
outstripped his competitors in study, making the most rapid advances in all the
branches of polite learning, and every accomplishment that might render him
amiable, respectable and useful. Nature had formed him perfectly beautiful and
graceful in his person. With an unaffected goodness of heart, he united the
most engaging and winning address, which, with his benevolent actions, had
endeared him to all ranks of men. It can therefore be no matter of wonder, that
the news of his imprisonment, and the pretended occasion of it, awakened
astonishment and the sincerest grief in every heart excepting that of the
infamous author, and those of the few assimilated to his vile character. His
most powerful friends, among which where those who had, at length, returned to
town from the recess, vehemently remonstrated to the Emperor against such harsh
treatment of his son, but in vain. He answered them, that he had obtained some
of his incendiary letters; (which were indeed the forgeries of Sanden,) and
that he could at present act no otherwise than he had done. He however felt the
most poignant grief, (as well may be conceived on the account of a son so
greatly beloved and admired by both his royal parents, as well as by every good
citizen. The Empress his mother, his sisters, and his dearest friends were
inconsolable; but could prevail nothing in the Prince's favor. The affliction
of the Empress was almost too much for her to sustain. A violent fever seized
her; and her life was soon deemed to be in eminent danger. The friends of the
Prince used every means, in their power, to detect the conspiracies formed
against him, and to disperse the storm gathering over the Empire. But matters
were so managed by Sanden, and the powers he had engaged on his side, that they
could accomplish but little. Ereng and Yerrie the disconsolate sisters, were
ever urging them to exertions in behalf of their beloved brother; so that they
were at length, constrained to amuse them with flattering hopes but ill founded.

In the mean time Prince Nytan was patiently enduring his confinement and
improving himself with a few rare and invaluable books, without which he never
traveled far from his father's palace. They instructed him in secrets of
nature but little known in the world; and so vast was his genius, that he had
already made improvements in the arts by which wonders are performed, beyond
the knowledge of the authors of those books; the happy effects of which
improvements will be evidenced from the sequel; from which it will appear how
this wonderful man could appear abroad in distant countries, and accomplish
great and glorious things, and yet remain all the while in his little prison,
doing almost every thing he pleased except embracing his beloved parents,
sisters and friends. Before he could enjoy that happiness, he had great things
to effect for the good of mankind; and still greater were to succeed them.

He had purchased, in his tour several little pictures, which he had fixed on
the walls of his chamber, on each side his couch. One, nearest his view, (which
he had picked up from a miry place in the road,) he was very frequently looking
at; studying certain figures of writing at the bottom of it, intelligible only
to himself and their author. We shall see presently the extraordinary services
this picture rendered him, of which he became exceeding fond, not without
reason.

His chamber had but one large window, which afforded him, as he reclined on
his couch a very extensive and delightful prospect; and from which he beheld
the reflected splendors of a magnificent tower, and a number of beautiful
buildings that appeared above the distant hills and groves. This prospect
entertained him in his momentary relaxations from his studies. Literary
pursuits were ever his chief pleasure, as thereby he became more capable of
serving mankind. To these his retirement was adapted, and he knew how to answer
the calls of health for the exercises of walking, riding, and the charms of
conversation, by a diet adapted to his sedentary circumstances. He conversed
with books, he studied and contemplated the glorious works of nature; but he
did not forget the Great Source of Being, and the underived origin of all
intellectual light. He conversed with the God of nature, and his great
knowledge in the occult science, and the deep mysteries he had learned, were by
him improved for the good of mankind. -- Unhappy fate! that a Prince so worthy
should be excluded from the world, after having been falsely and slanderously
accused of seditious practices against his country, against his Sovereign, and
a parent too for whom he would have freely laid down his life! But such are
often the events of this imperfect state of existence. The good suffer by the
wicked. Yet let not the wisdom and goodness of the Almighty be arraigned. For
wise and good purposes are the virtuous defamed and prosecuted, virtue is
tried, and fortitude, under trials, made illustrious. Thus the good are refined
for the enjoyment of higher pleasures, and more exalted bliss. Of these
important truths, Nytan was far from being insensible; who possessed a great
soul, formed to receive every sacred impression, and salutary instruction. Now
Gesseng said he to his boy, (who was sitting pensive on a low soffa by the side
of his bed,) I shall have a proof of my patience under trying circumstances,
and of the sincerity of my professed submission to the decrees of Heaven. -- O
sage instructor of man! let thy preceps and example be ever presented to my
thoughts! Thy great soul divinely illuminated, labored for perfection. I
aspire to be like thee. Thy bright examples will incessantly strive to imitate,
and whilst I patiently and submissively endure, I will exert myself to improve
in every thing by which I may, in future, serve and bless mankind, for whose
service only would I wish to live. All are my brethren, of one benevolent,
glorious, Almighty Father. I love them as such. I weep over their miseries, I
am humbled for their errors, and my own. Without the power of doing them good,
to me life would be insipid, worthless and intolerable. May kind heaven protect
my sovereign parents, my sisters my friends and fellow citizens; and in its own
time, bring to light the dark plots of our enemies, and effectually defeat
their malicious designs. Then will my integrity shine forth with a brighter
luster. I wish no evil to Sanden or his adherents; but their contrition,
reformation and happiness.' -- Here he could not refrain tears at the
recollection of his cruel banishment from his family and friends, and at the
thoughts of their being induced to entertain opinions of him injurious to his
honor and his love.

Perceiving the boy was affected, he asked him whether he could, by any means,
convey a letter to his sisters, without injury to the trust imposed in him. For
Nytan would not, for the world. solicit of him a favor contrary to the
injunctions he had received from his master, and the dictates of his
conscience. 'No, my lord, replied Gesseng, I am under oath. I dare not attempt
it.' 'Nor dare I, returned the Prince, to pursuade you to betray a trust
reposed in you. To break an oath is to tempt the vengeance of Heaven. The
vilest that ever dishonored our country and its laws, never yet could be so
foolhardy. Swear to me that you have no orders that touch my life. -- Why
Gesseng are you silent? Then I perceive you have such orders.' -- ' I dare not,
my lord, to make you any reply on this subject,' answered Gesseng. -- 'Enough
-- poor deluded boy! exclaimed the Prince; I well know that you, of yourself,
can have nothing against me. You are bribed high. The temptations of gold and
diamonds have prevailed against humanity, and rendered you, perhaps, in design
a murderer. -- But O! Gesseng; can you be proof against the tremendous
vengeance of the Almighty, which must inevitably fall upon a murderer? sooner
or later you must feel it. What then will avail the riches heaped upon you, by
your vile emyloyer? -- But do you not already perceive he must be a villain? --
Nay do you not discern that he must be your greatest enemy who could instigate
you to the perpetration of so black a crime? Are you not, by this time,
convinced, that such a man must be the traitor and enemy to his country, and
indeed to all the world; and not the persecuted Nytan? I see you are convinced.
I see you stagger from your horrid purpose, and that I have no further cause of
fear.'

The boy fell upon his knees; and with clasped hands, and tears gushing out. --
'Never, never, cried he, will I be guilty of so black a deed. If die I must --
I will rather die. Forgive me, dear Prince, and I solemnly swear, in the sacred
presence of the avenger of wrongs, that I will, henceforth, be careful of your
life, though at the expense of my own.

'It is well, replied Prince Nytann, and happy for you, my boy, -- and Heaven
be praised on your own account, as well as for myself. But let us retire to
rest. I will love you, and consult my pillow for our mutual safety. Upon which,
-- trust me, my dear boy, the happiness and safety of many thousands depend.
Tomorrow I will show you jewels of immense value; and you shall very soon find
whose friendship and confidence is most valuable, -- Nytan's or that wicked
lord's.' They then retired to bed. But Nytan slept but little. He revolved a
thousand important things in his mind. He had been now three weeks shut up in
his chamber, with no other company than Gesseng. For, not one of the guards of
the castle appeared before him. He bore his misfortune with a philosophic
tranquillity becoming the greatness of his mind, and one who foresaw great
consequences that would arise from it, important to himself, his family and
minkind.

There were a set of enthusiasts in different provinces of China, who were
wholly devoted to their hypocritical priests. They had never the countenance of
the Emperor, though tolerated under certain wise restrictions. Renien, the
Emperor, who was very learned and a great writer, had, in some of his published
works, (which were of great reputation throughout all China, and other
countries,) exposed the absurdities of those religious sects; so that their
priests were daily losing their consequence. The greatest body of them was in
the province where the insurrection began. Hence Nytan was led to conclude, not
without good reason, that his enemy had made use of those priests and their
disciples to promote rebellion in the empire, and he was preparing a letter to
his father, representing his suspicions, and urging various weighty reasons
that induced him to conclude they were well founded. How to convey his letter
he had not been able to determine. He had only enclosed it in one to his
sisters, who, he was confident would be the very last to believe any thing
derogatory to his character, hitherto unimpeached.

A religion that contains in its bosom the seeds of vice and oppression, and
which tends to inflame instead of destroying vicious inclinations, ought to be
exposed by every friend of virtue and the interests of mankind. Through the
influence of false religions, that which inculcates real piety and humanity,
has but little influenced men inclined to imbibe errors -- to pervert truth --
to be religiously as well as philosophically deceived.
Such was the sentiments which prevailed in the court of Renien. The sects of
enthusiasts, and the promoters of fanaticism, were therefore inimical to the
reigning power of China, and might well be supposed to exert themselves when
they could act with apparent safety against it. 'Those base priests, then, said
the imprisoned Mandarin, were the props on which the plotting minister built
his revolutionary fabric. The discernment and wisdom of my father and his
council, will not be long in finding them out; and then they will more
effectually expose their detestable principles to all the world. Their
mischievous maneuvers will effect to open a new window of light and
intelligence on the minds of my countrymen, and serve more rapidly to
accelerate the annihilation of superstition and fanaticism that still have an
existence in so many provinces of the empire. Their total destruction will be
the happiest and most glorious era of which the world ever boasted. How
fortunate will it prove to me; Gesseng, if my letter finds access to my father
and sovereign.' This was the general tenor of the Prince's conversation with
his boy in the morning while he was showing him his jewels and diamonds, which
were of such high value that either of them was sufficient to purchase several
large provinces. One he presented to Gesseng, as an earnest of what he might
expect in future. 'Now my dear boy, said he let us wash and dress for the day
-- and eat our breakfasts with merry hearts. I have a strong pre-sentiment of
some favorable event today or before we shall see the sun rise again above the
horison. See you that portrait, continued Nytan, looking at his favorite
picture.? Those characters you see at the bottom of it, inform me of things
that excite in me the most sanguine hopes. When you go out to the guard,
remember the necessary cautions I have given you: be discreet: punctually
observe what I may have occasion to say to you. The time will come, when (if
you are now faithful to me) you will have the best reasons to consider your
present attendance, on me, as the most fortunate of events. I shall be your
faithful friend and instructor, and shall, one day, present you to your
sovereign as one whom he will have cause to love and promote.

IT was on the very day of this seasonable commencement of friendship between
Prince Nytan and his boy, that the vile minister of mischief had given the
latter a potion of poison for the prisoner, which was to be slow in its fatal
operation, that his death might be considered as the effect of sickness owing
to his close confinement, to chagrin, and being deprived of those exercises to
which he had been before daily accustomed. The boy had delivered up the poison
to his newly acquired friend; at the same time showing him a large sum of gold
and several valuable diamonds which he had received from Sanden, with the
promise of ten times as much, when the work of death was done. 'Reserve all
said Nytan, for the miserable laborers who live about this castle, and others.
You will never want it. As soon, therefore, as you have opportunity distribute
it in alms. Remember what our great law giver has said; -- Be blessed, and
render thyself fortunate by deeds of charity; thus resembling according to thy
measure, the giver of all things.' 'My dear Prince, cried the boy, (now
softened with contrition, gratitude and love,) how blessed am I already in your
friendship and salutary counsels! I shall most certainly do as you say, in
this, and in every thing. Indeed, my dear and most respected sir, I feel
myself, as it were, another kind of being than what I formerly was, before I
revealed the black design. I was far from being happy. I had fears and
tremblings, with painful reluctance; and suspected my employer of a design upon
my own life, to prevent his being discovered after the poison should have
destroyed you. But now -- O how happy! How grateful! Freed from the
disheartened rebukes of conscience, and a slavish dependence upon a base,
wicked man!' 'It is highly probable, answered Nytan, that, to prevent all
possible means of discovery, he would have taken your life. Let us now act with
prudence and caution; and rely upon the Supreme disposer of events. Perhaps,
one day more may free us from any further danger.

While the boy was gone down into the castle to prepare dinner, Nytan sat down
before his window, consulting one of his books; and comparing what he found in
it, with the intelligence he had obtained from the characters at the bottom of
his favorite picture, which hung on the wall by the side of his bed. He had
just attainted to what he was in search of all the forenoon, when the boy
entered with their dinner. He made no communications to Gesseng; and appeared,
all the time of dinner, in a deep study. Gesseng eat with him in silence: when
the little dining table was removed, he was dismissed till sunset to take the
air, and prepare supper. The door being shut, locked and barred on the outside,
as had been usual; Nytan laid himself on his couch, the window being open,
contemplating the gay and beautiful prospects before him, and the perfections
of the Great Creator and Upholder of the universe. At the head of his couch, on
his right hand, stood a little cabinet, containing his books, and among other
things, a small spying-glass. He took the spying-glass in his hand and looking
through it clearly discerned several large bodies of armed troops, both horse and
foot, passing over the hills, which greatly surprised him. An army marching
through the country so near the capital was a sight never seen but once before
in his father's reign; which was the only time he had ever beheld such an
appearance of war as was now before his eyes. He viewed them attentively a
considerable while, as they descended one hill, marched along the valley
beneath, and ascended over another, till at lengh they passed out of sight.
Inflamed as he was with the desire of knowing what was going forward, and the
desire of being present where his eyes now could no more reach; -- he had but
one resource. Folding his hands together, and fixing his eyes upon his
favorite picture, -- 'Go, cried he pretty picture! fly quickly, and bring me
intelligence what business those troops are upon, and who employs them. You can
do no less for one that loves you, and saved you from near perishing in the
mire. Suffer me not to die here with terror.' The picture flew directly out of
the window, and was gone out of sight in a moment. Now, shall soon be
satisfied, said the Prince to himself, my sweet little picture, I see, is
grateful for the service I have done it. It will be here again presently with
the tidings I now am most anxious to hear. I shall learn how my father is
employed, and what my mortal enemy is doing. I shall reap the fruits of my deep
researches and unwearied studies. I will therefore compose myself to sleep,
till Gesseng arrives with supper. -- And soundly he slept, till the boy's key
rattling in the lock rouzed him. He arose quickly, and sat over against the
window to take his supper. The sun was now setting and it was time for the
picture to return. Nytan eat his supper in eager expectation; but the picture
came not. He grew impatient, and ordered a chaffing-dish of coals, into which
he cast a perfume. Then saying over a few mysterious words -- the picture
obeyed not the summons. Nytan was greatly shocked at this. It was a summons, he
imagined, ever to be obeyed. But now it failed. 'Let us lie down without
undressing, said the Prince; and, as it is very warm, leave the window open and
watch -- whatever be the matter I have done my duty. I shall certainly,
therefore, know before day, whence this unexpected delay arises, if I sleep
not, and I feel not well enough to sit up. Should I sleep, Gesseng, I shall be
nearly undone.' 'Heaven forbid it, my dearest Prince, cried Gessing, I will
most certainly keep you awake. I will sing to you, and talk all the time.'
'Singing, answered the Prince, would alarm the guard; and I would not, on any
account, it should interrupt me, to night. But reach me that vial and a glass.
This, added he, will keep me awake, (drinking a glass from the vial) I had like
to have forgot. Give me a glass every two hours. You see the vial is again
replenished, and do you take two little wafers, which you will find in the
lowest draw of my cabinet. They will serve to keep you wakeful. But they have
no effect upon those who have passed their eighteenth year: neither does the
liquor in the vial answer any purpose to those who are under that age.'

The boy having eat the wafers, and placed a lamp at the bed's head, they both
lay down and fell to reading. They read for several hours. Gesseng had risen to
give the Prince his third glass, -- when, on a sudden, a great light shone into
the window. The boy startled, let fall the vial, which was broken in pieces.
Hark! exclaimed the Prince, what sweet music is that I hear? It draws nearer to
the window. They listened till the music advanced directly under their window.
The light was like midday. They distinguished a female voice, and heard
distinctly these words, Maidens, give place. Let me come under the window, and
ask leave of the beautiful and accomplished Prince Nytan, to present myself
before him, and give him his beloved picture; and let him know what delayed its
return.' Nytan sprang from his bed to the window in a moment, and cried, 'You
are heartily welcome; but whoever you are, you must tell me by what means you
can be with safety, conveyed to a place so very high from the ground. Besides,
my chamber is so small, that it can by no means contain half the gay company
you must have with you, and which, likewise, were it in my power I should be
very glad to entertain. For I assure you I am nearly tired out with this
solitary life.' -- He was about to add further, -- When a beautiful little
yellow-bird flew into the window by the side of him, and perched on the corner
of the cabinet. Nytan turned about from the windows, to see what a pretty bird
he had in his chamber; and the boy advancing to take it in his hands. 'Touch me
not, pretty youth, said the yellow-bird. You see, Prince, I have made bold, on
the welcome you have just given me, and it is to put an end to your concern. I
have brought you your faithful picture; and there it hangs in its place. As it
is a little ashamed on account of its keeping you so long in a painful
suspense. I have undertaken to speak for it, and to acquaint you with what you
want to know. But, first, I must inform you who I am, and of the interest I
take in your future fortunes. Know, then, that I am the merry and good natured
Fairy Leingreing, whose palace is at the bottom of the sea that rolls its waves
against the walls of this castle. I was journeying through the air, from
Persia, when I met your picture flying in such a prodigious hurry, that one
could not get a single word out of it. I was almost affronted to see it pass by
without deigning to give an answer of two words to my kind salutation. So I
even turned my course after it to know the cause of such a piece of rudeness.
By a talisman in the golden chain, which you see about my neck, I found the
course the picture had taken* though it was gone out of sight; and quickening
my speed, I soon came up with it. For I could fly as swiftly as the fleetest of
all the choice pictures that adorn my grandmother's palace in the island of
pictures. I found it fluttering about among the rebellious troops; till, at
length it darted into the general's pocket, and instantly flew out again, into
the air, with his written directions. Away it darted through the clouds, giving
me a side glance, with a forbidding air. But I flew after it, with velocity
enough to overtake it. You, Prince, are too wise and knowing, young as you are,
not to discern, that like a good natured fairy, I had but little difficulty in
being reconciled to a picture, a relation of my grandmother's, and to detain it
till we had done something else besides getting news. For indeed no time was to
be lost. The rebel troops were marching, as we found by the orders, to take
possession of one of the strongest citadels, for your enemy and false accuser.
Another army, under the command of a wicked Genie, was advanced, (as we
likewise found by those same orders) near the capital City. And your father was
in eminent danger of loosing both his empire and his life. For rebellion had
made a rapid progress, through the influence of the mad fanatics, whom the
false minister had found means to engage on his side. But you shall hear in a
few words how matters are at the present moment. The chief commander, having no
orders to produce, must wait till he gets them renewed; and as to the
commanding Genie, I have ordered him to his old confinement. His army, finding
their leader to be run away, will quarrel among themselves, and be dispersed.
The Priests and their silly dupes I am about to handle pretty severely. But you
Prince must remain no longer here.' 'Ah sweet bird replied Nytan, that I very
well know, yet an oath confines me to this chamber, and you are sensible it is
impossible that I should violate it. To regard it, therefore, as it becomes me;
and at the same time to absent myself from this castle and my country. I have
accomplished the means of separating my chamber from the castle, and
transporting it, with myself and my companion, to Mount Caucasus, where I have
some business.' Very well, replied the yellow-bird; but let us have something
to eat first. For I am very hungry, and stand in need of a good supper,
considering the work I have to do before to morrow night. -- Yet, after a
second thought, we can sup after your chamber has begun its aerial journey;
(for I mean to go with you, it being nothing out of my way,) and, our repast
being already prepared by my girls below; as we mount in the air, they shall
hand it into your chamber door.' 'Thank you with all my heart, for your
company, sweet bird and accomplished Fairy, rejoined Nytan, we shall soon be in
motion from hence." Then pronouncing some mystical words well understood, and
instantly obeyed by the invisible fairies and genies, the chamber flew off,
with a terrible noise, and launched into the air. Then, fixing a spear of gold
and several other metals, in a hole on the outside of the window, pointed
toward the mount, the chamber pursued its destined course. In the meantime,
the Fairy's girls handed into the door, two large bowls covered, one of gold,
the other of burnt china, and a flaggon of wine; taking their leave with the
following complimentary song --

Lovely Prince, in safety fly
Far from thy envious foes;
And enjoy sweet liberty;
And pluck the fairest rose!
May the maid that sighs for thee,
Possess an angel's form,
And mind; they both will make thee see
The power they have to charm!
The guards were frightened out of their wits. For the castle shook and
trembled as though it was falling in pieces. Some of them rushing forward, and
thinking to enter the little chamber, fell headlong through the aperture which
used to be closed at the chamber door. Others ran out into the courtyard to
hear the fine music in the air. See the musicians they could not. For both they
and the chamber were rendered invisible. The happy travelers now uncovered
their bowls, and fixing their table near the open window, began their midnight
repast. Gesseng handed them wine in cups of gold; asking the little yellow
bird's blessing, as he placed the cup before it. 'That you have with all my
heart, replied the yellow bird. Regard the councils of this amiable friend of
yours, and mine: Be faith in his service, and my blessing will ever follow you.
It will not be long before your fidelity and attachment, to this lovely, worthy
young man, will be more effectually tried; and I agreeably flatter myself,
that, in the trial, you will come off with approbation and honor. You serve the
son of a great and renouned Emperor, and a son, worthy of a father so great, so
wise, and so good; -- a son, whom I sincerely love and respect; and whose
interests I shall ever regard and advance, to the utmost of my power: and
likewise those of all his faithful adherents: In doing which, I am well
satisfied that I shall be serving the best interests of mankind.

BOTH Gesseng and the Prince were greatly affected with those generous
commendations: and the little bird, or fairy, addressing herself particularly
to Nytan, thus continued her discourse. 'I shall leave you presently, said she,
and, as your stay will be but short where you are now going, take this ring,
and wear it constantly. If at any time, you shall have occasion for my
presence, rub it, and I shall immediately appear before you. If you only want
to hear from me, send the picture, which will be proud of flying on your
errants as long as her destined hour permits her. I am now going to the island
of pictures to see its relations; with whom I have some affairs of consequence.
Concerning which I may be, hereafter, permitted to acquaint you.' They then
conversed together on a variety of entertaining and improving subjects* till
day was almost ready to appear, and the chamber rested on the summit of mount
Caucasus. The Fairy, as she perceived it, bid them farewell, and bent her
course to the island of pictures. -- The palace of libraries was one of the
greatest wonders in the world, for its prodigious dimensions, and the infinite
number of valuable books it contained. The good Genies who loved learning, had
been for several thousands of years collecting them for their own use, and for
the use of their particular favorites. By his art, Prince Nytan could command
one of those Genies, who dwelt at certain sseasons in a magnificent grotto on
one side of a vast rock. His business, then, was with the Genie, to procure
from him the keys of the palace, and to obtain directions about the way to it,
and the admission of his little chamber in the grand apartment of libraries,
which was spacious enough to admit fifty such chambers, and without his chamber
being admitted into that apartment, which contained the books he was desirous
of perusing, he had no means of enjoying that pleasure and advantage. Having,
therefore, dismissed his boy in search of the Genie, he next commissioned the
picture to the yellow-bird with his letters to his father and sisters, which he
had forgot to deliver to it; requesting the good bird to fly into the palace
window, whilst they were at breakfast, and drop them into their tea-cups. Soon
after the picture was gone on this errand, he beheld from his window, Gesseng
leading toward it a little frightful looking old man, whose head was ten times
larger than the rest of his whole body, and with only one large eye, which was
fixed in the middle of his forehead. He wore a monstrous cap. He wore a
monstrous Cap, resembling female headdresses in the reign of oddities.
He held in his right hand, a scimetar three yards in length; and advanced with
a low and solemn pace. The boy would have been frightened almost out of his
wits, had not the old man encouraged him, by telling him he was as harmless as
a fly. -- Keep your eyes off from me, said he, laughing, if you don't like my
looks. Nytan himself was, at first, a little startled at the sight of so
hideous an object. For he had never seen him before, nor indeed, any thing half
so ugly and disgusting. When the old man was arrived to the door of the
chamber, he lay down his scimitar on one side of it. Nytan and his boy helped
him in, and seated him on a low soffa. 'I am giddy-headed, and weak with old
age, said he, as he dropped on the soffa. Nothing could have tempted me to so
long a walk before eating my breakfast, but you must me obeyed. Let me then
know your further commands; and when you have given me something to eat, I
shall go about them with more cheerfulness.' 'I want the keys of the palace of
libraries, replied the Prince. I am going thither to study awhile in my
chamber.' 'How can that be? returned the old man; or rather the Genie Esdren.
But why, continued Esdren, would you go so vast a journey over the ocean, since
it is in my power, on certain conditions, to procure you, in less than two
hours, as many books, as you want.' 'What are the conditions, asked Prince
Nytan?' 'They are only, replied the old man, that you use your endeavors to
render me a strong and handsome youth like yourself.' As Nytan was about to
return an answer to the Genie; with a smile, his picture re-entered the window
and took its place on the wall. 'Picture, cried the Prince, here is a deformed
Genie, above a thousand years old, who has made me the unreasonable request to
restore to him youth, strength and beauty.' 'As deformed as I am, returned the
Genie, I would not change conditions with you; since the state I am in is best,
for the time it is to last, which is but very short. What the Creator causes us
to be, is always the best condition for us, and we ought always to be resigned
and thankful. And yet, Prince, your pleasantry being set aside, such are the
conditions; and I would have you exert yourself in my behalf. Perhaps you are
destined to be instrumental in that change of my circumstances which it is
appointed should soon take place.' 'The request of Esdren is not so
unreasonable neither, said the picture, and I believe you can do for him with
my assistance. I long to see him in a less hideous form. And he shall fetch you
twenty of the best volumes in the palace of libraries, which you may study in
your chamber, while you are traveling over seas and lands: but first let me
give you some little account of the man. From being one of the handsomest of
Genies, who have the privilege of immortality, and the perpetual bloom of youth
with all its vigor and activity, the accidental indulgence of a single thought
contrary to rectitude, required the transformation into this ugly figure, for a
certain term of time. We, good Genies, and Fairies, are apt to err once in a
while, and dearly do we smart for it. Such is our destined lot, till the hour
of confirmation in the highest abodes of perfection, to which we eagerly soar.
But, the moment for his re-assuming his proper form and vigor is arrived.
Catch the drops, you perceive distilling from me, in the palm of your hand, and
pour them on his head.' Prince Nytan did as he was commanded. The old man rose
up, threw his cap out of the window, and stood ready for his approaching
renovation.

No sooner had the son of Renien, poured the drops on the head of Esdren, than
he saw before him, instead of a deformed old man, a youth as gay and handsome
as himself. He threw his arms round his neck, and kissed him again and again.
Gesseng leaped for joy. -- The chamber shook and trembled. -- The picture
congratulated Esdren, and, -- O wonderful to relate! -- leaving its station on
the wall, stood before them, a lady of a most beautiful and majestic form! --
It was Puria, the wife of Esdren! she flew into his open arms! rapture
succeeded rapture, and congratulations succeeded congratulations.

All this happened within twelve minutes after the Genie had entered the
Prince's chamber. Nytan thought proper to remind him how weak and hungry he
was, not long since; and asked him whether he had lost his appetite, or
intended to live only upon love? If it be so, continued he, it were ill to
interrupt your caresses. The admonition was graciously received, and they were
about to sit down to eat, when, Esdren recollecting himself, proposed
breakfasting in his garden, on a terrace, from which they would enjoy a fine
prospect. This being readily agreed to; and Nytan fixing the spear in its hole
they found themselves, instantly on the terrass. There is no occasion, said he,
of leaving my chamber, to which, you know, I am indispensably confined to since
we are now in your garden, and have every advantage of the prospect from the
window. Here then, let Gesseng spread the table, and set on our breakfast. But
O! fair lady! say, how am I to return the surprising obligations you have laid
upon me? 'By not thinking of them at all, replied she. It is but just nothing
as to what I hope to serve you in. When you picked me up, from the miry canal,
only as a fine picture to hang in your chamber, you did me a great kindness, of
which, in some future day you may be better informed. As soon as we have done
eating, we must hasten after your books, and having brought them to you, our
family calls us away immediately, to look after its affairs. In the mean time,
you may remain in our garden as long as you please, and make use of the grotto
in our absence, after we have served your present occasions.' 'But dear lady,
returned Prince Nytan, you have not informed me about my letters.' 'I was about
to tell you, answered she, that your father, sisters and friends are well; the
Empress, your mother, slowly recovering from the disordered state of health
into which your cruel usage had thrown her. You will at a proper season, have
further communications from the Emperor's Court.' 'Alas! cried the Prince, I
fear I have been too bold and forward in troubling that worthy lady, the fairy
of the sea, with my letters.' 'Far from so, replied the wife of Esdren, you
only oblige her, in laying your commands upon her; and, therefore, make
yourself perfectly easy and happy on her account. We are all interested, highly
interested in your welfare. You can do us no greater pleasure than to command
our services. We shall never be weary of doing you kind offices.' Nytan was
about to express his grateful acknowledgments, but silence was enjoined him,
and Esdren bid him observe the maidens on the green below, who were preparing
to dance for the entertainment of the company. The Prince was all attention,
whilst the maidens performed several dances, after the manner of the Chinese,
and, likewise of the several countries in which Esdren alternately resided.
They concluded with the following song, addressed to spring, it being that
season of the year; and a farewell compliment to their guests, the Prince and
Gesseng, whose uncommon beauty and loveliness had excited their affection, and
inspired their cheerfulness and vivacity.

Welcome, lovely, blooming spring!
Whole genial powers the world renew,
Come, with thy blissful smiling train,
In all thy native beauties reign!
Thy warbling songsters with thee bring,
With chirping notes, that sweetly sing!
Refreshing rain and pearly dew,
Each fragrant shrub and sweet perfume,
Long buried in a wintry tomb:
Come spread the soil with verdant green,
And in thy gayest dress be seen!
With splendid beams the rising sun
His glorious journey has begun;
Nature replenishing with heat:
Plants, flowers and herbs, spring up to meet
His welcome rays; the woods and groves
With leaves adorn their spreading boughs;
Herds show their joy, in wanton play;
And hail the monarch of the day.
Go; lovely Prince! In safety roam!
Exiled from thy native home!
Nor to see in, till you find
A maiden tender, fair, and kind.
Thy faithful Gesseng, too, will be
Every day improved by thee;
And all who thy bright virtues see!
Sure none can see thee but to love thee,
In the wide earth or heaven above thee!
Go, lovely strangers! safely roam;
And bring ten thousand blessing home!
The maidens, one after another, ascended the terrace, and advanced to the
window; which being low, the Prince reached out, and kissed them, presenting
each with a diamond ring to wear for his sake. Gesseng went out, and made them
a low bow, as they were retreating from the window. Esdren, and his fair
partner then retired in order to proceed to the palace of libraries; fixing but
two hours for their journey and return. Prince Nytan was now in good spirits,
having received so many marks of regard and affection. He sat down at his
window, waiting the return of his respectable and kind friends. Gesseng in the
mean time, was going in and out from the grotto for his amusement, and
preparing, from the Genie's garden and kitchen, a recruit of provisions, as he
had been ordered, for the next adventure his lord was determined to make over
the immense ocean.

Thus time past very agreeably, till Esdren and his consort returned, which
they did in little more than an hour, though their journey was above two
thousand miles. The twenty volumes being handed into the chamber, and the
friends parting with reluctance, and many caresses and affectionate embraces;
the two adventurers being seated, and the door shut, the chamber mounted in the
air, and passing over the ocean, was soon out of sight. Their course was
directed to an island in the Indies. Nytan had now nothing to do but examine
his new books, whilst Gesseng was preparing dinner in a little stove in a
corner of the chamber. They observed, in their aerial course, several ships
traversing the ocean, and the men busy on the decks, themselves and their
wonderful traveling vehicle being visible to none; which circumstance was
occasioned by a great magical operation equal to any ever performed, and which
often was of notable service to the fortunate adventurers. However, on proper
occasions, hereafter, they were rendered visible, in their majestic ascent or
descent from the (...) the air.

THE ORIENTAL PHILANTHROPIST. BOOK II.
Not bars, nor walls, nor guards, nor golden key,
The oppressed confine, whom Heaven wills to free.

A MIND possessed of conscious rectitude, Heaven's choicest gift to the
Denizens of earth; as it voluntarily rests its whole destiny with the faithful
protecting power whence it originated; it calmly beholds the vicissitudes of
life, convinced, beyond a doubt fortune that visits or awaits it, is wisely and
benevolently appointed; and that the result of all will prove its highest good,
its perfect felicity. Ah! how happy is the allotment of the being thus
fortified against the ills of life! That such ought to be the mind of every
human being, the character the Deity has exhibited of himself, as the never
failing friend of all the intelligent creation, sufficiently evinces to the
wise and discerning. They are certain of a kind support under, and a complete
relief from every affliction in the most seasonable moment; for which, in the
severest and darkest trials, they patiently wait, and with a lively
resignation. Such was the mind of the persecuted Prince Nytan, when he
experienced so wonderful an interposition in his behalf; when powers superior
to humanity, rose, indignant, for the protection of virtue, and the defeat of
its malicious foes. Under such mighty protection he soars aloft, and traverses
the vast ocean to distant lands, bending his course to his destined island.
Yet, though virtuous, great, and wise, some events must needs occur, in the
course of so well directed a life, to remind him of his dependence; and that he
is still to improve in prudence and circumspection.

Gesseng, inadvertantly leaned against the chamber door; which being carelessly
fastened by a string, the string gave way, the door flew open, and he fell
backwards into the ocean. The door, indeed had a lock, but it had been rendered
useless by the shock the chamber had received on its separation from the
castle. Prince Nytan turned his head to the door, on hearing the cry of Gesseng
as he fell, and perceiving he was gone, immediately caused his chamber to
descend to the surface of the water. But, as he was reaching out his hand to
him, a monstrous fish swallowed him down his throat. Nytan was obliged
instantly to retreat, with his chamber, from the monster, and the convulsions
he made in the Water. But suddenly recollecting himself, and glancing an eye at
the tapestry on the wall at some mysterious characters and drawings, he took up
his magic glass, and reconnoitred the fish. The fish, observing him, called out
to him with a loud voice, 'O! gracious mandarin, Prince of lords! cried he, I
have preserved the boy from perishing. In return for this piece of service,
save an unfortunate Genie from the malice of the wicked Gendor, who having thus
transformed me* as you see, confined me below the depths of the seas. You have
only to throw your magic spear at me, and I shall appear in my proper shape,
enter with the lad into your chamber, and place the spear in your hand.' 'Thou
lie vile miscreant! replied Nytan, thou art that very Gendor, whom thou
taxest with malice. Instantly deliver up my boy; or the vengeance of Esdren,
and the son of Renien, shall inflict upon thee a more dreadful punishment.'

The affrighted trembling Gendor, immediately vomited out Gesseng, and bid
himself in the bottom of the ocean. Gesseng swam toward the chamber, and soon
found himself in safety with his beloved lord, who helping him to strip,
rubbing him with cloths till his skin was dry, bade him repose himself on the
bed; where covering him with the sheet and counterpane, and giving him a glass
of cordial, he sat down by him congratulating him on his fortuate escape, and
at the same time vehemently accusing himself for his neglect of the door and
lock, which he soon after, rendered properly secure. Gesseng took all the blame
to himself; as said he, 'To look after such things was my business.' Prince
Nytan assured him he intended him not an indirect reproof, and that if one was
to blame, so was the other. 'I surely, continued the Prince, ought to have
looked about me a little better. But, you only, my dear boy have been the
sufferer.' Then kissing him, he advised him to endeavor to get a little sleep,
which would be of service to him after the violence and purturbation he had
undergone.

The next morning the Island appeared in view, and, before the sun had well
risen, they were landed on the summit of a hill, not far from its center. The
Prince, now having his spying-glass improved to his mind, (through which he
could now see almost every thing above a thousand miles round him, with as much
perspicuity as though he was upon the very spot to which he directed the
glass;) now looked through it round the island, which appeared to be very
large, and as he afterward found, above three hundred leagues in length, and
two hundred in breadth. It likewise appeared to be very fruitful and pleasant.
He next directed the glass to his father's palace. The windows of the palace,
and of his father's closet being open he distinctly saw him at his table,
indicting a letter, which he perceived to be to himself; having read the whole
of it, he beheld his father sign his name, with joy too, he saw him fold the
letter, superscribe, and seal it; then deliver it to the messenger in waiting;
who went away with it. The contents of it were congratulatory, and
affectionate. They likewise gave him his liberty, which was the greatest joy to
Nytan; who now looked upon himself as free from his oath, and to go in and out
as he pleased. He therefore gave a shout of rapturous joy, embraced his beloved
Gesseng, and taking him by the hand 'Now said he, my lovely friend, we will
walk and reconnoiter the island with the greatest pleasure.' They went out
together, and descended the hill into an agreeable vale encompassed with woods,
except several openings which afforded a delightful prospect. -- This island
was inhabited by thirty men who had escaped from shipwreck, and was unknown to
any others but Genies and Fairies, one of whom, whose name was Ravenzar, owned
a palace under ground, in the heart of the island, and possessed vast riches.
Those men had lived on the island about eight years, subsisting on what the
island afforded, having several pieces of ground enclosed for wheat, sheep and
cattle, and little huts. Ravenzar who himself, unseen found means to convey
them into the island, could easily afford them better accommodations in a place
from whence it was impossible for them to free themselves; but he thought best
for them to remain as they were, till they had acquired fixed habits of virtue,
and a contempt for the vices and luxuries of the country from whence they
originated. To this purpose the good Genie constantly assisted them. Prince
Nytan knew all this, and fell in with the noble designs of Ravenzar. Besides,
he had been informed, by some characters on his tapestry, than the hour was not
far off, when he should obtain from the Genie, an immense treasure for
benevolent and charitable purposes. It was on the knowledge of these, and other
things respecting the island, that he had set out, and arrived to it.

Gesseng had greatly improved, under the tuition of so wise and generous a
Prince, considering the short time he had been with him. As it would therefore,
be now of great advantage to them both, Nytan began to acquaint the youth with
some of his great and benevolent designs. All his purposes were nobly
disinterested, and effectually tending to the good of others; especially of the
lowest classes of mankind, the poor, and the oppresssed. Such a life as was
that of this Prince was indeed invaluable. He formed, in himself the truly
great character and no man can with propriety be called great, any further than
he is benevolent and virtuous, a promoter of the happiness of his fellow
creatures; in doing which this accomplished Prince and chief mandarin was ever
busy. The greater part of the nights he was instructing young Gesseng;
improving and invigorating his mind with the most useful learning, and virtuous
precepts. Gesseng, too, was employed, the best part of each day, in the study
of suitable books.

Prince Nytan now communicated to this well instructed youth, his business on
the island (which he denominated the island of Ravenzar) and his design
likewise of visiting nations and kingdoms; and, if possible, to kindle the
sacred flame of philanthropy in foreign courts, where, it appeared from what he
had learned, to be almost, if not altogether extinguished by vice, luxury, and
intemperance. 'Those, said he, who are in exalted stations, should not desire
to live but to bless mankind, and render them still happier. The longed-for
period I hope is not far distant, when true knowledge and virtue will diffuse
their salutary influence through every region of the habitable world. Let us do
all in our power to bring forward the happy era. But, it is now time for us to
return and prepare breakfast. I expect Ravenzar will be with us, in a few
minutes. How pleasant and refreshing is a walk after so long a confinement. I
hope to have a more pleasant one presently, when we shall visit the Genie's
palace, and the few not altogether unhappy inhabitants of the island.'

'Ah! Prince, thou will for once be disappointed! for this is the only walk
thou art to enjoy for several years yet to come. Power superior to thine, and
to mine, has otherwise decreed for thee! thou must be again circumscribed
within the limits of thy little prison; Heaven disappoints man his favorite,
but for his good. Humility, resignation, dependence on, and unreserved
confidence in our Maker and changeless Friend, constitute our happiness in
every situation and circumstance of life.
in which, indeed, thou will enjoy the pleasure of riding triumphant over sea
and land, and doing those services to thy fellow creatures, which must precede
thy benevolent intentions here. Make haste therefore, continued the voice of
one unseen, to traverse the ocean, and visit far distant countries; pursuing
the different courses, as the inspiring and protecting power shall direct thee.
Be wary, and omit nothing. Remember the neglected lock. I am not permitted to
render myself visible, nor again to address thee till sometime after thou shall
return to this island. Ravenzar bids thee farewell, and prosper. Thou will find
in thy chamber, a deed of gift of my palace and of the treasures there, as well
as of the island. They are all your own property.' --

'Well then, cried the Prince, farewell Ravenzar! to the will of Heaven I am
all resignation. Come Gesseng, let us hasten to fulfill its wise and righteous
decrees. This is our course of virtue, glory and felicity.' Then securing
themselves in their chamber, they steered their destined course over the
boundless waves!

THE ORIENTAL PHILANTHROPIST. BOOK III.
O! 'twas a happy thought! to build a world
So wondrous fair! where Angel forms
Possess celestial worth! court our embraces;
Entrance us with each smile of undissembled love!

THE fortunate son of Renien found his tapestry had not deceived him, when he
perused the deed of gift from Ravenzar, which was written on a marble slab in
letters of gold, and witnessed by four other Genies, his friends who lived in
the interior of Africa, and who had just called to carry him thither, on
affairs of highest moment. The marble slab, on which the deed was written, was
framed with gold and diamonds, and bordered with beautiful paintings of
romantic scenes. It was hung up on the wall, in the Prince's chamber, by the
side of his couch, in the place of his favorite picture. It was indeed a noble
ornament there. His liberal benefactor could well spare the palace, and
treasures, as likewise the island, as he owned several other palaces in
different parts of the world, equally enriched with gold and diamonds, and vast
tracts of land, equal to any in the most fertile country. But rich, profusely
rich as Prince Nytan was now become, he valued not his treasures, but as they
served to promote the happiness of others. The hour when he should again visit
this island was wrote on the slab; and was distanced three years and an half
from that of his leaving it.

Whilst the chamber progressed with an unprecedented velocity, the Prince and
Gesseng, were pursuing their studies; till they found themselves on the
continent of Africa. Nytan clothed himself magnificently, and put on his head a
crown of gold, a present from Ravenzar, as was likewise a golden scepter. He
then sent out Gesseng to assemble before him, the king of the country, and his
nobles on business of high import to their future grandeur and felicity;
ordering Gesseng to represent in becoming terms, the impracticability of his
leaving his habitation, or passing over the threshold of his door, till he had
visited other nations, and fulfilled his high commissions.

To contract the relation of Reshang, let it suffice to say, the Prince was
cordially received by king Zanger and his nobility who entered into his
benevolent views, and eagerly imbibed his instructions; gratefully accepting
the useful books presented to them in their own tongue. Here the Prince, having
been stationary five weeks, took leave of the king, the nobility and gentlemen,
and with Gesseng, bent his course to other regions, promising them to visit
them again in some future period, when he hoped the king and himself should be
able to congratulate each other on the success of their endeavors for the good
of that kingdom, and when he likewise hoped to find their salutary influence
extended to the neighboring petty kingdoms. They likewise settled the means of
their correspondence while absent from each other.

After Prince Nytan had spent near three years and an half, (as was determined)
instructing kings and their subjects, in a great number of barbarous nations,
and laid the foundation of future happy revolutions; he at length, bent his
course to the island of Ravenzar, and hastened to accomplish those great and
noble designs he had so much at heart. He therefore, with eagerness, exercised
his skill to accelerate his progress. Perhaps, wise and good as he was, he was
rather too impatient; and Heaven might see fit a little to check the rapidity
of his thoughts and the incredible velocity (...) flying vehicle. -- On a
sudden, the air was (...) darkened! -- When Nytan, lifting up his eyes, beheld
a formidable body of gigantic monsters, blazing with fire, and rolling vast
mountains down the skies upon his chamber! Astonishment seized him! come hither
Gesseng, cried he, and see what fatal mischief is ready to crush us! -- The
youth beheld -- trembled and turned pale! he sunk to the floor and embraced the
knees of his lord, in speechless terror! the Prince, however, had the presence
of mind to recollect what he had long since learned from celestial science,
that, in the moment of greatest distress, deliverance was at hand. He knew that
something must occur to relieve a mind in such a situation as was his, or he
must suddenly perish; suspended as he was in the air, in so slender a vehicle,
which was now arrested in its progress; -- the bottomless ocean beneath him,
and tremendous ruin rushing down from above, urged on by the vengeance of
malicious spirits, of superior power! Reposing in the Almighty, he accidentally
cast his eyes upon the ring on his finger, and rubbing it hard, at the same
time flinging open his chamber door, the fairy Leingreing instantly entered.
The Prince embraced her with joy! Gesseng kissed her hand in rapture!
immediately a most dreadful hurricane arose! loud thunders roared, and awful
lightnings glared! the universe seemed to be one mass of fire! and all nature
convulsed and dissolving! the Fairy suddenly locking the door, commanded the
chamber to the bottom of the ocean. It instantly descended, at the moment
Prince Nytan closed the window; but almost as instantaneously again immerged
from the waves, and ascended into the air; when all was calm! The mountains
were melted, rent and scattered; the bodies of those wicked Genies, (for such
they were) were annihilated; and those mischievous spirits, seized with panic
terror, never afterward dared to appear assembled.

Thus the fortunate son of Renien experienced a third deliverance from the
efforts of his malicious and vengeful enemies. The second was from the suddenly
conceived stratagem of the huge Leviathan, who swallowed up Gesseng, and whose
further intention was, when the Prince should have thrown his spear, as he
requested of him, to vanish with that talisman to the bottom of the sea; well
knowing that the Prince being deprived of it, must inevitably perish. This
stratagem of the wicked Genie, transformed into a monstrous fish, was as
suddenly defeated, as conceived and attempted. Was not such an event designed
to admonish the young adventurer of the importance of the most careful
attention to the minutest affairs? That it was so, was fully ascertained to him
by the memento from Ravenzar -- remember the neglected lock: and should not
this last terrible event effectually serve to solemnize his mind, inspire
weighty reflections, show him his dependence, and restrain his vivacity and
over-eagerness in his pursuits? The instructions, deducible from both, were
indeed of the last consequence to his conduct and success through life. Neither
were they lost upon the Prince any more than were the good counsels of the
Fairy. He renewed his confidence in the arbiter and disposer of worlds, and
conductor of the destinies of their inhabitants, who, he well knew, could
remove mountains, should they obstruct his progress in accomplishing the good
of mankind: (...) effect which was all he desired. For, to be himself happy
without beholding the happiness of his fellow creatures, was the furthest of
all things from the wish of his noble and generous heart. He could by no means
be blessed in himself, but in sure prospect of the felicity of every existence in
the creation. The fairy Leingreing continued with Prince Nytan till his arrival
at the island of Ravenzar. She informed him what she had done with the
rebellious priests, and of the fate of the arch rebel Sanden. The priests were
confined to the mines for a certain time; which being expired, they were to
exist separately, and at the greatest distance from each other, in a state of
trial, and with a scanty allowance. The treacherous and manoeuvering minister
was secluded in a grove on the very island to which Nytan was now hastening,
and surrounded with perpetual darkness; in which condition he was to remain
till the Fairy's designs upon him, should be accomplished by Nytan himself; to
which purpose she gave him suitable instructions. Being now safely landed on
the island, Leingreing bid him and Gesseng an affectionate adieu; acquainting
them that Ravenzar was still in the interior of Africa, and would be some time
detained from visiting them; and on that account it was he had made over to the
Prince, his island, palace and treasures. She likewise informed them, that the
entrance into the Genie's palace would be rendered visible to them as they were
walking.

The fairy Leingreing being gone, the Prince and Gesseng went to a fountain and
bathed. The sun was setting, when they returned to the chamber; where after
taking some refreshment, and securing the door and window, they retired to bed,
leaving two wax candles burning on a marble table, which stood at the bed's
head. There was nothing to disturb their repose. Nytan's was the more sweetened
by renewed liberty. 'Though I long to be with my parents, my sisters, and other
friends, said the Prince, as he was dressing in the morning, yet so are the
duties of my life circumstanced, that it will not be in my power to enjoy so
great a pleasure, till I have been through Europe, and effected some very
important things for myself and this island. However it affords me a great
satisfaction that my dear Fairy has informed me they were in good health; that
the monster rebellion, was crushed, and fanatacism breathing its last.
Agreeable tidings these, my Gesseng! they will animate our zeal in the cause of
liberty, of truth and virtue. Let us hasten, then, to the little community of
this island, which we have been so long prevented from visiting. Afterward we
will descend into the palace of our benefactor.' --

The enterprizing son of Renien, had already performed exploits of benevolence,
which no confinement found means to baffle, or schemes and enterprises of
malevolence to defeat -- enterprises conducted by great, but wicked spirits;
beings endowed with an immortal strength and activity. It is true, indeed, he
was not unaided. But, who was the son of mortality, or, who among the most
exalted and most potent intelligences, that could, ever effect the
accomplishment of great designs without the assistance of others? Yet all --
all, throughout the boundless regions of creation, are animated, guided, and
rendered happily successful, by its omnipotent Lord, in every glorious work of
benevolence and love! Of these truths our enterprising philanthropist was fully
sensible. Nor could he undertake, or hope for success in any kind of adventure,
without an unreserved confidence in, and secret application to the great
creator of worlds, and conductor of all their operations.

The Prince and his companion having breakfasted, walked out on the banks of
the river, shaded by the finest trees, of various kinds, besides fruit trees,
which where on either side their way. Following the course of the river, they
soon reach the huts of the inhabitants, who were not a little surprised at the
sight of two strangers. The Prince assembling them under the shades of a
venerable oak, acquainted them with his designs, and gained their concurrence.
Most of those men had been very infirm, the chief of the time of their
inhabiting the island. The spot on which they resided, was exceeding pleasant.
The mountains and woods formed a magnificent amphitheatre around them, situated
as they were in an extensive valley, interspersed with a variety of groves and
fruit trees of all kinds, and flowers, which perfumed the air, whilst the
feathered songsters entertained them with their charming melody. They were
gradually regaining health, and were indeed greatly pleased and animated with
the behavior and designs of their new friend and benefactor, who next bent his
course toward the lofty ridge of mountains that divided the island into two
equal parts. Through a vast rock among these mountains, he entered the Genie's
(or rather his palace, with Gesseng. Striking the rock with his foot, it
opened, and discovered to them a staircase of white marble, which they
descended, the rock closing upon them. There was a glimmering light, which
increased as they descended, till all was bright refulgent day. As they walked
on, a vast hall appeared before them, at the end of a spacious court paved with
black marble. The gate of the hall, at their approach, unfolded its two golden
leaves. On entering, they were struck with the beauty, grandeur and
magnificence of every thing that saluted their eyes. In the middle of the hall
was a large table spread and loaded with provisions of the most exquisite kind.
Above the table, on raised alcoves, stood forty maidens, and the same number of
young men, who all bid the Prince welcome to his palace, adding that they were
his servants, and ready to obey his commands. 'My benevolent friend, answered
Prince Nytan, increases my obligations, in commissioning you to serve me. I
have business for you, which I doubt not the servants of so great and good a
lord, as Ravenzar, will perform with pleasure. But you are still to consider
yourselves as belonging to him, and only graciously lent to me. After we have
eaten and viewed the palace and gardens, we shall find some agreeable
employment for you. Come then, Gesseng, let us partake of the bounties of our
common friend and benefactor.' Whilst they sat eating, the ladies entertained
them with a concert of music, which was performed in that charming perfection
of which fairies were so capable. When they were risen from the table, the
Prince desired two of the young men to attend him, and show him the buildings
and apartments of the palace. Leaving the hall, they walked through a spacious
gallery, viewed a number of magnificent chambers, and the immense riches in the
treasury apartments. They went, next, into the gardens; which were large, and
beyond description beautiful. But that which gave an inexpressible addition to
those enchanting scenes, was the appearance of above thirty of the most
charming female forms, just risen from the crystal fountain, in which they had
been bathing, and covering themselves with their milk white robes! The Prince
and his attendants, being unobserved by them turned into another alley of the
gardens. Still the lovely females were in view through the grove of trees,
where they made a stand till they advanced from the fountain. Prince Nytan then
moved toward them, and addressed them in the politest terms. After which they
all walked together, and seated themselves in a superb saloon: when one of the
ladies, who appeared to be the eldest, knowing the Prince by the description
that had been previously given of his person, made him the following sensible
address. 'We are commanded, noble and generous youth, by our kind protector, to
acquaint you with our little history, as one who will become interested in the
felicity of our future lives. Though you see us among beings of a superior
order, we are of the race of mortals. Snatched from destruction, when in
swaddling clothes, deserted as we were by unnatural parents of the different
countries in which we were born, by the benevolent and compassionate Ravenzar;
under his fatherly care we have been nourished and brought up in this palace,
now your property. The all accomplished and paternal Ravenzar has spared no
pains in our education, that might render us fit to appear in the world, and
useful in whatever sphere of life it is allotted for us to move. By him we are
now committed to your care and direction. What improvements we have made you
are to be the judge, and assign us to such departments as to you shall appear
most elegible. To you, therefore, we cheerfully resign ourselves, reposing in
you an unreserved confidence as our friend and future guide.' When the lady
uttered this last sentence, they all rose from their seats, and paid Nytan the
respect he so justly merited, who conversed with them with that modesty and
superior sense so natural to him. After which they went together into the hall.
The waiting maidens and young men, paid the ladies that deference in which they
had always been instructed. Prince Nytan then acquainted them, that he should
be absent from them a day or two in the issland; and, if longer, he should send
them word. Then ordering the two young men who attended him into the garden, to
follow him and Gesseng, he returned into the island. 'I am about to show you,
said he to the two young men, as they followed him toward the huts, our little
society, and to set you and your felllow servants to work for us.' -- 'Which we
shall do with the greatest pleasure, replied the young men. Every command of
yours, most respected Prince, will be to us an indispensable obligation. Our
service, time, and abilities are ever yours.' 'Well then, my friends, returned
Nytan, (for such I shall ever call you) you now see before you, the diminutive
dwellings of the inhabitants of the island. You are this day to provide them
with better ones. Before morning let me have thirty new houses completed on
this spot of ground over which we are walking. Let them be, likewise, furnished
with every thing necessary and convenient. Besides there must be out houses,
wells and gardens, with all things needful to each. I must have likewise a
large palace, with a spacious and magnificent garden for myself with every
necessary building and furniture. All the buildings must be of gray polished
marble The hall, which must be erected in the middle of my palace, must be
sufficiently large to entertain a thousand guests, without being in the least
embarrassed for want of room. In the hall, too, a table must be spread with the
most suitable provisions, by the middle of next day, with twenty waiters to
attend. Before this last is done, one half of the gold and diamonds in the
palace under ground must be deposited in the treasury in my palace. Several
servants, male and female are also to attend, in future, on each inhabitant of
the island, who are to dine in my hall on the morrow. When all is completed
give me notice.

The two young men bowed, signifying their cheerful obedience, and retired.
Prince Nytan, then having dismissed Gesseng to look after his chamber, and to
wait there for him, directed his course to the wood where his once dangerous
and inveterate enemy was confined. The darkness in which he had (...) involved,
was now dispersed, and he found (...) employed in reading, reclined on a soffa
under a magnificent canopy surrounded by fragrant trees and flowers, with a
carpet of green, before him of nature's forming.

'Ah! worthy and amiable son of the illustrious Renien, exclaimed Sanden, as
soon as he perceived the Prince advancing toward him, how rejoiced am I to see
you, now no longer your enemy, but henceforward your most sincere and zealous
friend! I am confident, you will rejoice in the new formation of a heart very
early seduced and perverted by evil spirits. I was apprized by the fairy, your
friend, and mine, of your coming hither, and have been impatiently expecting
you. O then, much injured Prince! let this meeting correspond with the wishes
and requests of so charming a fairy as Leingreing, the sovereign lady of the
sea; and make what trial you think proper of the sincerity of my professions. I
am wholly devoted to you.'

'Add no more, replied the generous son of Renien, from henceforward, we are
friends. As such, let me embrace Sanden, and now, lay upon me your commands,
and they shall be punctually fulfilled.' After many tears, Sanden resumed his
discourse.

Though, my dear Prince, I have the most ardent (...) to visit my family, and
to throw myself at my sovereign's feet, yet I am ready, with the greatest
pleasure, to attend you, wherever you are going, that I may be perpetually
convincing you of the sincerity of my friendship and love.'

'It is most reasonable, answered Prince Nytan, that you should first return
home, and besides, in so doing, you will, at this juncture, best serve our
common cause, at the same time that you gratify your own wishes, which are
highly commendable, and which, I perceive, correspond with the sentiments of
the Fairy, our common friend. -- Observe yonder exhibition, stationary in the
air.' Sanden lift up his eyes, and beheld, in the air, a representation of a
large vessel, and an Island to which the vessel was arrived, and casting
anchor. As they both viewed the vessel, the island disappeared, and the vessel
moved forward, descending to the sea shore, to which a tall figure, on its deck
pointed. 'Then we must even follow it, said Nytan. This calls you immediately
home. As we are walking, I will consider, and afterward propose to you what
advantages I would derive from this unexpected savor.'

When the two friends had walked in sight of the sea, they espied the vessel.
The island was on all sides surrounded with rocks of that prodigious height,
that no mortal could penetrate into it without the aid of superior power.
Before they espied the vessel, they had ascended a mountain which overlooked
the rocks. The fairy Leingreing now descended in a chariot, drawn by winged
horses, and saluting the Prince and Sanden -- 'Come, mount into the chariot,
said she, and let us away. They were no sooner seated with the fairy, in the
chariot, than the horses expanded their sable wings, and coursed their way*
between the earth and heavens, down to the sea shore, where the vessel lay at
anchor. In a few minutes the travelers, with the Fairy their conductor, were
on board, and the vessel set sail. The son of Renien then proposed, that after
the vessel was arrived at Pekin, and Sanden restored to his friends and his
sovereign, he should request of the Emperor, in his name, to send the ship back
loaded with goods, and families of the poorest sort, to settle in his island;
acquainting the Emperor with the condition of the island, and the progress he
was making in its settlement. This being agreed to, and a letter wrote and
delivered to Sanden, for the Emperor, they separated with affectionate
embraces; the ship pursued its course, and the fairy conveyed Prince Nytan, in
her aerial chariot, to his chamber; where Gesseng was waiting his coming, and
had made ready his supper. The sun had now but one hour to finish his diurnal
course, when the Fairy and Prince entered the chamber, and sat down to supper;
enjoying the delightful prospects from the window and conversing on the most
useful and entertaining subjects. Supper being ended, they walked out, and
seated themselves on a mossy couch, where the woods afforded them an agreeable
shade. They had a fine prospect of the river before them, of the lawns and
groves on the opposite side, and a ridge of mountains covered with hanging
rocks and woods. The birds charmed them with their harmonious notes. The whole
scene around them was enchantingly romantic and picturesque; and led them into
an affecting conversation on the glorious and magnificent scenes of creation,
till their minds were elevated, and enraptured! and in the warm effusions of
their grateful and admiring hearts they poured forth in the following ode: --

High over the Heavens, in robes of glory dressed,
The great Creator sits enthroned!
His works in noblest songs expressed
By Angels bright attending round!
His countenance Celestial day!
Through, worlds unnumber'd, spreads the light abroad!
And, where (...) each brighter ray,
Fixed were the suns to praise their maker God!
From thee, the source -- great intellectual light!
Reason's vast system spread her rays divine;
Lit up those burning seraphs round thy throne;
Then through unbounded nature took her slight!
Before the Heavens thou wast -- when space was found;
Or worlds from the dread chaos rose:
'Twas then at thy Almighty voice,
Through the vast firmament, in pride of height they rolled;
And ligh's unbounded ocean floated all around!
Life next thy mighty summons heard;
And with seraphic ardor glowed!
When, first, in grateful hymns, the sacred numbers flowed!
Beings of every degree,
Endless in number, and variety,
Through the wide Universe their God adored!
Though Angels, with celestial skill,
Thy mighty wonders tell,
In notes too high for mortal tongue:
Yet, to their melody, divine,
Our lesser voices too we join;
And thy great name the glory of the song! The Author, some years ago, composed
the above ode, which was inserted in a Boston Magazine.

The harmonious sound of the voices of this respectable company, well
corresponded with the exalted sentiments they conveyed perhaps to the listening
ears of invisible superior beings. After a few minutes of silent contemplation,
Gesseng, no longer able to restrain the sacred impulse, broke out in the
following grateful strain; O! happy evening! which blesses me with company so
exalted in sentiment and virtue, with conversation so instructing; inspiring me
with great and elevating ideas, and every virtuous resolution! and may I not
call it a most fortunate event which fixed me in the service of so kind and
indulgent a Prince; and which, at length introduced me to the presence, and,
with the profoundest gratitude and respect I utter it, to the friendship of so
amiable, so condescending a Fairy! O! illustrious friends! every moment of my
life shall be employed in unremitted exertions to render myself worthy of your
countenance and protection!'

The Fairy Leingreing was so well pleated with this behavior of the enraptured
youth, that she renewed her former blessing, and made him a present of a most
beautiful diamond ring, as a further testimony of her friendship and esteem.
They then rose up, and walked, conversing together, till late in the evening,
when the Fairy departed, and left her beloved friends to their necessary repose.

'How vigilant is our amiable benefactor for our good, exclaimed Prince Nytan,
as they fastened the chamber door, and prepared for bed. -- What illustrious
deeds of benevolence has she already performed for our security and happiness,
and still is she exercising her great power and talents to the same generous
purposes. -- Then our other great and powerful friends -- those too we shall
ever remember with the profoundest resspect, the most servent gratitude and
love! will it not be happy, Gesseng, to see them all together, before we are
again called to leave our island? I shall use all the influence I have to
effect such a meeting. But let us take our needful rest. Tomorrow will be a day
of more than ordinary business.'

The Prince had acquainted Gesseng with the surprising change effected on the
minister, Sanden, and the business he was gone to transact with the Emperor,
his father. 'It will probably, said he, as he entered his bed, require a month
or longer, to collect the families, agreeably to my request. The Emperor will
be very particular in his choice of them. I intend, however, by the time they
are here, to have their houses ready, and every thing completed for them that
will be necessary and convenient, and, likewise, the men we have with us
settled according to my wishes.' 'May benignant Heaven, replied Gesseng, grant
you every wish, and my felicity will be complete.' 'To that benignant Heaven,
returned Nytan, let us commit ourselves, our friends, and all mankind, till we
awake in the morning, to bless the kind, protecting power.' -- Sleep soon
closed their eyes, and commissioned guardian angels watched around their
pillows! -- The morning found them refreshed and invigorated for the business
of the day. They arose and bathed in the fountain. Nytan walked with a book in
his hand, enjoying the delicious pleasures which so fine a country afforded:
whilst Gesseng, equally happy and delighted, prepared their morning repast.
Having breakfasted, they walked together in the groves, waiting the arrival of
the two young men, who were to notify the accomplishment of their orders. They
soon made their appearance, requesting the two friends to visit and examine
their works. Verres, the historian of Xuntien, has not reared the buildings,
and peopled the island, with the expedition of Reshang. He, however, relates
all as accomplished in grandeur unprecedented, and with dispatch unparalled,
the efforts of mightiest genius and industry, which effect the greatest wonders.
Prince Nytan with Gesseng, hastening with the young men, found every thing
done to his mind. 'Now said he go and fetch hither the beautiful company of
orphans, and their respectable attendants. We shall be waiting for them in the
hall.' His servants obeyed, he walked on, with Gesseng, to the men who
inhabited the huts, to congratulate, and introduce them to their new buildings,
which the intervening groves prevented them from observing. But, when Nytan
brought them forth, and in view of the buildings and gardens, great indeed was
their astonishment and admiration. Every thing, indeed, they beheld, was
beautiful, grand, and elegant. Their houses which were of gray polished marble,
stood in a circular form, at proper distances from each other and made a noble
and magnificent appearance. Nytan's palace, being at a considerable distance
from them, was scarcely perceivable, for the intervening groves. The men having
viewed and examined their gardens and buildings, and expressed their admiration
and gratitude to their benefactors, followed him to his palace, which was
encompassed with a wall of gray marble. They entered a magnificent gate, and
crossing a spacious court, ascended by four and twenty steps, into the hall. It
was a vast apartment, furnished with the utmost magnificence. The soffas were
of cloth of gold, the carpets of green velvet, and every thing was answerable.
A large table stood in the middle of the hall, sumptuously furnished, and the
beaufat dazzled the eyes with a profusion of vessels and flaggons, cups and
dishes of gold and diamonds. Here, being all seated, they were furnished, by
the Prince and Gesseng, with delicious wines and fruits, as a refreshment after
walking. Next, he led them into his garden, which was answerable to the beauty
and grandeur of the palace. it was of vast extent; and contained every thing in
it that the Indies produce, a number of hills, and lesser eminences, adorned
with groves, and all sorts of trees, rising here and there to the view, gave an
inexpressible addition to the loveliness of the scene. Here they wandered, in
separate companies, through allies, lawns, and groves, till a messenger
arrived, and acquainted Prince Nytan, the company, sent for, were in the
palace. He, therefore, gathered his friends about him, and returned with them
to the hall: where, all being assembled, they sat down to dinner. The young men
and maidens, the servants appointed, by Ravenzar, to attend on Nytan, retired
by his order, on some important business. Their services were never for mere
ostentation. Prince Nytan, with Gesseng, waited on their guests; while
cheerfulness and good humor enlivened the conversation. Here was an assembly
worthy the contemplation of those superior beings, who, unseen, watch over
mankind. They were the first inhabitants of a once solitary island; the
founders of a community most illustrious and respectable. The men had learned
virtue and wisdom in the school of adversity. They were hardly passed the
meridian of life; and through temperance and proper exercise, were fast
recovering their former strength, alertness and activity. Their minds were well
informed, and capable of greater improvements under the advantages they were
now to obtain, with respect to which, Prince Nytan had as yet but executed a
small part of his generous designs. Their persons were agreeable and commanded
a great share of respect. The female part of this assembly, (whose number
exceeded that of the men by one only, if we except Gesseng and the Prince,)
might with strict justice be called perfect beauties. For, it seemed impossible
that nature herself, with all her art and power, could add a greater luster to
her charms, or education to their accomplishments. It could, therefore, be no
manner of wonder, if the men became fascinated with such an assemblage of
female beauty, luster and dignity. After they had dined, and separated to
different apartments, one of the men, who used the greatest freedom with Prince
Nytan, requested of him to be informed from what part of the creation he had
drawn together such amazing prodigies of beauty and loveliness; and where they
intended in future to dispose of themselves. 'Alas! exclaimed he, if they are
to leave us, I know not what will become of us. For all my friends appear to be
enamored beyond the possibility of recovery. When they left the hall and bid us
adieu* every man of us was seized with despair.' -- 'Oh! replied the prince,
you talk indeed like a romantic lover! and if all your friends are in your
situation, we shall hear of nothing but flames and darts, deadly wounds from
cupid's fatal bow and quiver! sure nothing can be done for you, continued the
Prince, laughing, in such desperate circumstances; -- lost to every thing but
love! but, if my friend, it be really as you say, -- perhaps I have but one
remedy for this sudden and violent storgee, and that is to hurry away those
dangerous beauties as fast as possible.'

Prince Nytan had commissioned all the servants of Ravenzar to the subterranean
palace, for several things he should have occasion for among which the
principal article was a large collection of books; the maiden servants were
employed in household affairs. He now retired to his chamber in the palace;
where he found the books ranged in good order on the shelves round his closet.
Examining them he found they were a most valuable collection on every art and
science, and the best histories, many of them in the several languages he
understood. He sat down at his closet window which looked into the spacious and
magnificent garden, limited only by the mountains that divided the island in
two equal parts. The prospect before him was sublimely grand and beautiful, and
adapted to excite, in a mind like his, the most noble and generous ideas. While
he sat at the window in delightful contemplation, one of the servants entered
to know his further commands. 'To-morrow said the Prince, you are to make a
wide passage through the vast mountainous rocks that environ this island, and
form a convenient and safe harbor for my ship. This done, you must complete a
hundred more dwelling houses, with every thing needful about them. They are for
my expected countrymen. Acquaint me when all is finished.'

The inhabitants of the new-rising city spent the afternoon in removing from
their huts to the new buildings. The ladies, having apartments allotted them in
the palace spent part of the time, after dinner, in viewing them, and the rest
in roving in parties, through the delicious garden. Gesseng, for his part, paid
a visit to the solitary chamber, were he sat alone, meditating on the
unrivalled charms of the youngest of the female orphans. She was about his own
age, that is to say, nearly eighteen, and had made at first sight, the
tenderest impressions upon his heart. In short, every man excepting the Prince,
had placed his affections on a lady. So that the one and thirty orphans were
all suddenly furnished with lovers, whom they likewise regarded with equal
affection: and the result as will appear in the following book, was exceeding
happy for both parties.

THE ORIENTAL PHILANTHROPIST. BOOK IV.
Love gave creation birth: -- preserves the whole,
And pours the purest bliss over all the soul.
All things in Heaven, or Earth, or air, or sea;
Hearts the most obdurate, too, must yield to thee,
All conquering love! and own thy Deity!

THE happy company, at Nytan's palace, already noticed, walked in parties, in
the garden. Sometimes they reclined on the green banks, shaded by lofty pines
and elms; at others, in delightful alcoves. On one side of the garden was a
large and beautiful pavilion, situated on one of the highest hills, and the
windows of which afforded the most enchanting prospects of woods and lawns,
hills and valleys, fields and grazing cattle, of the river, and the new
buildings. A stream of water ran winding by it, widening to the other side of
the garden, partly shaded with groupes of trees and was most pleasant to view,
from the palace windows. Nytan took with him to the pavilion, several of the
men whom he chanced to meet, as he walked out; and who were converting with an
equal number of ladies. Here the maidens brought them tea, wine, bread and
fruit, with which likewise, the other parties were served, in the alcoves, and
under the shades, where they were found reclining. In this manner they passed
great par of several days successively. At night they were all assembled in the
hall to supper. In the mean time love ever active and enterprizing, was
perpetually exerting itself, in all its various and refined arts of persuasion
and endearment, upon the hearts of the two sexes, whether in companies
separate, in one assembly, or alone, in the recesses of the chamber, or the
groves. Those with Nytan in the pavilion, were discerned by him to have made
great progress in the tender, mutual affection which should ever precede the
intimate and indissoluble tie of Hymen's bands. The conversation turned upon
the refined and exalted pleasures of domestic life. The men, who had been well
educated, discovered excellent minds, and just sentiments, in discoursing upon
that subject. The ladies appeared to be exceedingly gratified by every thing
they advanced. Nytan sung them a fine song, in praise of a domestic life, and
the marriage state; and the company applauded him with the highest
commendations. Several instruments of music were on one of the tables. The
ladies, at the request of the Prince, took them in their fair hands, and having
tuned them, played several fine airs, accompanied with their charming voices.
The men were in raptures! and prevailed upon them to gratify them over and over
again with their inimitable performances. This continued, till night brought
all the company together in the hall. Gesseng was likewise returned to them. He
had an unusual air of gaiety that night, and made swift advances in the
affections of the fair mistress of his heart. Supper being over, the remainder
of the evening was spent in music and dancing and sprightly conversation, till
the seasonable hour, of repose admonished them to retire to their several
apartments. At parting the men signified, their intentions of lodging, in
future, in their new habitations. Nytan gave to each man two servants to attend
upon him till they should hereafter be better provided for, on that score, as
he told them with a great deal of gaiety. The men, however, continued their
daily visits to the palace, to enjoy the charms of female conversation.

The six hundred houses, which Prince Nytan had ordered to be built, being
completely finished, he took several of his workmen to his little chamber,
which still remained where it first landed; and ordered them to erect a female
statue on its roof, with a globe in one hand, and an olive branch in the other;
and the emblematical dove on its head. The whole to be ornamented with gold and
diamonds. This was done in half an hour, and made a grand and beautiful
appearance. Nytan looked on the workmen with admiration, to see with what
astonishing rapidity, and consummate skill and ingenuity they worked off, and
erected the statue; which being completely finished, seemed to be a real living
existence, and to represent the Prince's sweet and amiable disposition, and
peace and felicity to the world: He, being perfectly satisied with the
workmanship, immediately set all the workman to building houses, and laying out
roads. Two, on each side his palace, were cut out through the mountains. And
the river, which had many branches winding about the island, and which ran
under the rocks into the ocean, was rendered navigable, from the harbor two
hundred miles, and within twenty of its source. Whilst these vast works were
going on, our diligent philanthropist retired to his little chamber for the
rest of the day, where he passed the time in reading till the sun was sitting.
When, rising, and about to return to the palace, a splendid and beautiful
picture came fluttering into the window, with a little cage of gold wire
hanging to it, enclosing a fine blue-bird. The picture fixing itself on the
wall of the chamber. over against the Prince, cried, 'O most excellent Prince
and chief mandarin of China! behold what a lovely bird I have brought you! I
was commissioned, with it to you, from my good aunt, the fairy Perieng. The
bird is to accompany you in your travels, and you will find it a very diverting
company. You must hang the cage close to your window, that it may enjoy the
sweet refreshing breezes, and the fine prospects. But, Prince, though it is now
sunset, you must take a trip with us to the island of pictures, and see how we
live. There is no night there. However, you may easily get back to your palace
before bed time.' 'Thank you, gracious, lovely picture! replied Nytan, for your
sweet bird, as likewise for your kind invitation, of which I shall avail
myself, and set out this moment.' So saying he set his chamber in motion
through the air; and half an hour conveyed them to the island of pictures. But
how greatly was the Prince astonished, to see there, a vast and magnificent
palace, of an amazing height, and almost boundless dimensions! and illumined by
four suns at each corner of the lofty open roof! which darted a spendor beyond
mortal suffrance! but Prince Nytan was, for a while, rendered capable of
enduring it. They descended into the court, and walked up to the grand porch.
This is not unlike some mysterious descriptions of the affairs of the superior
order of beings. Men, in all ages, have effected or pretended to know much of
those magnalia. The more pure their hearts, and the more men live to God, the
more likely will they be to attain some consistent ideas of the affairs of
superior intelligences and their happier society.


This island was famous for nothing besides the palace, and its inhabitants, in
a vast wood, the mistress of which was the fairy Perieng, who was several
thousand years old. The pictures of the palace were wives of Genies, who though
good genies, were, for some little inadvertences, sentenced to a state of
gentle discipline, and banishment from their consorts, who were stationary in
the vast hall of the palace, in a state of contemplative confinement, till
their husbands should be restored to them. Sometimes indeed they were allowed
to make excursions abroad, or were sent on important errants, at which times
they were to take special care not to fall asleep, lest some disagreeable
accident should befall them; as was the case with the one Nytan picked up from
a miry canal, somewhat disfigured, but still retaining its internal luster. The
fairy Perieng was her aunt, and all the others were her relations. Hence it was
that she took care of them, and was always attentive to their fortunes, and
happy in their rational improvements, and progress in virtue and wisdom. She
gave them the form of pictures, likewise, in compliment to her sex as the
fairest part of the creation. Some of them, in their excursions, went through a
variety of adventures before they could get back again to the palace, and their
happier stations in the hall.

After they had gone through the grand porch, they beheld before them an old
lady, of very diminutive size, (for such was her destined figure for two
hundred years,) standing at the foot of her throne, waiting their approach. It
was the fairy Perieng. 'I wanted much to see you young man, said she to Prince
Nytan. Follow me into my closet. Then sending away the picture, on some new
errand, she ushered the Prince into her closet, where the continued with him in
conversation for the space of three hours and an half, giving him many sage
counsels for the direction of his future conduct. She then carried him into the
great hall, where every thing he saw, was amazing, and past adequate
description. The walls were looking-glass mixed with flames of fire. In these
were the pictures fixed, in frames of fire, gold and diamonds; appearing every
moment, of the pictures, the living originals, and that, with a splendour too
dazzling for the eyes of mortals. They sang several charming songs,
complimenting the Prince, and his blue-bird. The hall being wholly open above,
the splendors of the palace overpowered the Prince, and he fainted. The fairy
Perieng therefore ordered her servants to convey him to his chamber, where
coming to himself, he heard the voice of the Fairy -- 'Return quickly, beloved
Prince, and prosperity attend thee.

The Prince found his blue-bird very merry company on the way home. 'But what
am I to do? sweet bird, cried he, as the chamber rested on the ground in its
former station, will you suffer me to take you with me to my palace?' 'O by no
means, replied the bird. But I will tell you how to please me. Transport the
chamber into your garden, in some obscure grove, there to remain invisible to
every one but yourself: and come and see me every day, and as often, each day
as possible. I shall then be very well contented, with the window and door of
the chamber left open, and something to eat and drink.' 'I will do every thing
you shall desire,' returned Nytan, -- 'Then love me excessively, rejoined the
blue-bird, and I will sing you the most charming and diverting songs in the
world, and tell you the finest stories, when you shall be inclined to hear me.'
'Which will be as often as possible, added Nytan, for you talk, and look so
enchantingly, that nothing can please me like your sweet company.' 'Ah!
returned the blue-bird. I wish with all my heart you may never be weary of me.'
'Heaven forbid exclaimed the Prince, such excellence should perish! and now my
charming prattler! we are in the place of your choice. See what a lovely grove
of trees and fragrant flowers surround us, except the little opening before
your window, which commands some of the finest views of the garden. What
further orders have you for your devoted friend?' 'Go, answered the bird, to
your company in the hall, bid them good night, and go to bed, and dream of your
little lovely blue-bird till morning.' 'I will obey you to the utmost of my
power, replied the Prince and so sweet lovely bird, good night.' Good night,
good night, cried the blue-bird: adieu charming young man, adieu!

Dream all the night, and only dream of me,
And, if I sleep, I Am sure to dream of thee.'
Prince Nytan was shown, by the fairy Perieng, several most valuable
curiosities, among which was a most ancient Chinese manuscript, tracing that
empire to its original, and relating many great and wonderful things of which
the world is ignorant. She promised him, the manuscript should be put into his
possession, after a cerrtain number of years. 'Be very careful and tender of
the little blue-bird I sent you, added the Fairy; and you may one day, find
your account in it, and know further than you can at present, how much your
powerful friends are interested in your happiness and prosperity. Tomorrow,
you must go to the palace of libraries, and load your chamber with the best
books composed by Genies and Fairies, and likewise, by men of the greatest
learning and experience. There, also, you will find many finely wrote books by
learned and ingenious women. Those you have divide among the men and women you
have with you. You will find no difficulty in gaining admission into the
palace: here are the keys.

The next morning, the Prince furnished his men with a further supply of books
from his own collection, and set out with his chamber and blue-bird, for the
palace of libraries. He spent several hours there, examining the books. Each
distinct library was composed by one author only. Having loaded his chamber,
leaving scarcely room for himself and the blue-bird, (which entertained and
charmed him all the while, with its sweet melody and conversation,) they
returned before sunset. The morning following he supplied his friends with
books. Then taking his spying-glass, he went up to the roof of his palace, and
looked out for his expected ship; though the time was far from being elapsed
which he had allowed for the voyage, yet he knew not with what expedition the
Emperor might transact his affairs. Besides, he had a mind to see his father
and the family. He viewed the palace -- the grand metropolis and all the great
cities, as far as the glass could afford the prospect. At length, he saw the
spacious windows of his father's breakfasting apartment open, the Emperor,
Empress, his sisters, and several other ladies enter and seat themselves at the
breakfast table. They all appeared to be very merry and in good health; which
gave the sincerest pleasure to so affectionate and dutiful son. After viewing
them again and again, he was obliged to deny himself of so delightful a
gratification, and descend to look after his important affairs. He often made
use of his glass, and never failed of seeing his friends in good health,
rendering thanks to Heaven for so desirable a privilege, when so far separated
from his paternal home. The Prince frequently took Gesseng with him to his
closet, for several hours, and like wife the men, three or four at a time, that
they might consult together on affairs of consequence to their future
prosperity. And they were all daily employed, besides, in the most useful
studies.

In the mean time his little blue bird was not neglected. There was an
enchanting sweetness in its tongue, which often drew him to the cage. In honor
to his lovely bird, which was perpetually talking and singing of love, he
erected, on the roof of the little chamber, at the four corners, cupids of
gold, whose spread-out wings were studded with diamonds, as were the architives
of the door and window. So that the whole outside of the chamber being gold and
diamonds, made a most splended and glorious appearance; especially when open to
the sun. Whereas, to gratify the favorite bird, it was now concealed in a
retired grove. The Prince took his bird out to view those ornaments. He was
anxious to know whether, (as she examined them with apparent eagerness and
surprise,) they afforded an additional pleasure to his sweet companion. 'My
dear Prince, said the blue-bird, you have highly honored me, and convinced me
more than ever of your friendship. Ah Prince! let us make us friends to the
utmost, whilst in this state of existence; for, if we gain no friends here, we
can by no means expect to find them on our appearance in the future world. You
have many and valuable friends. Go, Prince, hasten and make us as many as you
can. We can never possess too many worthy heorts. Gain them in every region.
Your talents, your accomplishments, your engaging person and manners, your
divine philanthropy; these will every where commend you to the great and good.'

At length, the expected ship arrived. From the lofty roof of his palace, Nytan
with joy beheld her safe moored in the harbor. He beheld and recognized the
countenances of his beloved countrymen, and hastened in his chariot to the
shore; leaving orders for twenty chariots to follow him. His friends were
quickly advertised of this arrival, and wanted no other summons to follow their
beloved benefactor. What a glorious scene was it to see this noble son of
Renien embracing and congratulating his countrymen, though the poorest in all
his fathers extensive empire! They were men, women and children; and though
poor, yet wisely selected. Not a few among them, possessed knowledge and
virtue, in a very eminent degree, though hitherto unfortunate, through various
causes. They were conducted, some to the palace, others to the houses of the
inhabitants; besides large tents were immediately erected, that every
individual might be agreeably accommodated. Feasts and entertainments now
succeeded each other every day. The merchandise of the ship was conveyed from
the harbor, and divided among the new settlers, who now became rich. At length
they were conducted to their new-prepared habitations, with their possessions
in chariots, and other convenient carriages, attended by Prince Nytan, Gesseng,
and a few of their friends; the new roads being completely laid out and
finished for easy traveling. This was indeed a pleasant journey to them all,
through a fine country, abounding with every thing, and which might well be
called the garden of the world. The Prince and his friends continued with them
several days, when all being settled to their wishes and far beyond their most
sanguine expectations; -- the Prince returned to be witness to a new and
unexpected scene of wonder and joy. As he came within view of his palace, and
the thirty new buildings, he was surprised to see the spacious openings crowded
with men, women and children, who, by their dress appeared to be of foreign
countries. He knew too much to fear an invasion, nor was he long in determining
by what means so vast a multitude of people had found their way into an island
guarded by powers that no human wit or force could successfully oppose. He,
therefore justly concluded his friendly fairies and Genies had brought some
worthy settlers to replenish it. This was indeed the case. A messenger on
horseback, rode up to the prince, and acquainted him that Ravenzar waited for
him in the hall of his palace. As he was hastening thither with the utmost
expedition, he soon distinguished his friend the Genie, by the dignity and
benevolence of his countenance, advancing from the outer court of the palace to
meet him. Nytan alighted from his chariot. They were instantly in each other's
arms. After many endearing caresses, the Prince presented to him Gesseng, and
his other friends, whom the Genie cordially embraced. Shouts arose from the
chariots -- ' For ever live the great Ravenzar, and the all accomplished Nytan!
Hail! happy friends and inhabitants of this highly favored island! in true
glory and splendour forever flourish! -- The two friends, and those about them,
bowed to the people, and then went up into the hall, where the orphan ladies,
and their attendants, received them with joyful congratulations. An
entertainment was soon prepared, at which they all sat down, and every
countenance expressed the most heartfelt pleasure. The conversation at table,
was gay and lively, and becoming guests so worthy, so all-accomplished. After
eating and conversing awhile, the company retired to the garden to walk; all
but the two illustrious friends, who remained, conversing in the hall till
toward evening, when Ravenzar went down into the subterranean palace. The new
settlers, who were no less than eighteen thousand, were accommodated with
magnificent tents, served with every thing for which they had occasion, besides
the best provisions the island afforded. This multitude, of all ages and sexes,
had been long training up, by good fairies and genies, in rural recesses, and
subterranean palaces, for this favored island; this happy asylum from a world
of vice, luxury and oppression. A fleet, of twelve vast ships, wafted them to
the abodes of peace, freedom and virtue. -- The genie Ravenzar retired not
merely to rest, but to provide for the new inhabitants. He, therefore, who
could easily perform the greatest things, caused his immense palace, with its
buildings and gardens, to immerge from the bowels of the earth, and form
themselves into four spacious streets, of elegant buildings. His gardens were
divided into a great many, and one to each dwellinghouse. Besides, a great
number of houses were built, gardens laid out, and all completely finished that
very night. So that, in the morning, the families had nothing to hinder them
from taking possession of their new habitations, and preparing to enter upon
their several occupations. Ravenzar having very early given them notice, and
ordered eight hundred servants to assist them in conveying to their houses,
their wives, children, and goods; before sunset they were all happily settled.
The Genie then repaired to the palace, and requested Prince Nytan to assemble,
in the hall, the thirty original inhabitants, with the one and thirty orphan
ladies. He then seated himself at the upper end of the hall, waiting their
attendance. When they were all assembled, together with Gesseng and the Prince,
Ravenzar addressed them in the following speech:

'Respectable and beloved friends! as I am under the necessity of leaving you
in a few hours, I have called you together, that I may fulfill the remaining
offices of friendship and love, which are to conduce to the perfection of your
future felicity. Myself and my worthy friend and fellow labourer, Nytan, have
been constantly attentive to every thing that might effectually conduce to your
happiness and glory. You will, from henceforward, be left a long time to
yourselves, to form agreeably to your wishes, a perfect happy nation, which
will increase, in strength and efficacy, through every succeeding age. Our
beloved Nytan, must visit other countries. Yet, still, though absent from you,
we shall be attentive to your interest. The great power and abilities, with
which I am invested, must be in perpetual exertion: it is my happiness that
they should be so; -- whilst I soar on high, invisible to mortals, or visit
every region of the habitable world; promoting as much as possible, its
welfare, and defeating the nefarious plots of its enemies. I boast not of my
powers. Having nothing but what I derive from the benificence of Heaven. --
Should the Supreme withhold his benign influence, I must soon be bereft of all
my worth and abilities; even become unworthy the attention of the lovely,
amiable children I snatched from ruin, and nurtured; whose minds I have formed
to virtue, and adorned with every valuable accomplishment. Let our eyes be ever
directed to the author of our existence, and from whom we derive every
blessing. Let unfeigned virtue, and true glory be our invariable practice and
pursuit. True glory is founded only in the works of benificence and love; in
these it will be impossible for us to continue, without the sacred energy of
the glorious Almighty Being, whose we are. In him, therefore, let us place the
most unreserved confidence. His power will support, his wisdom will direct, his
love will render us completely blessed. -- You, the first inhabitants of this
fertile and delightful island.; you only, of all the happy thousands that have
arrived here to live with you as brethren; you, I say, are the only persons
destitute of female partners for life, and, of consequence, your happiness is
far from being complete. But this must be no longer. Take, then, the partners
your eyes have already selected. They stand before you. Take, each of you, the
fair ones hand you have chosen; their hearts I know, are yours.' -- He ceased
speaking. -- Each man then advanced to the fair orphans, and took the hand he
had chosen; -- Nothing loath. -- Ravenzar then proceeded: -- 'One is yet left
solitary. My admired, and loved Gesseng, she is yours. I know her to be the
choice of your heart.' -- Take then the fair one's hand. -- Gesseng was not
long in obeying. -- The attendants were witnesses to their mutual vows of
constancy and love, and the Genie pronounced each couple married in the sight
of Heaven. Each saluted his bride. The two friends congratulated them, and gave
them their blessing. Their attendants followed their example: and mirth and
festivity concluded the day, and the evening. The day following, too, was a day
of general feasting and congratulation; and perfect felicity reigned throughout
the whole island; if we except the poor solitary blue-bird, concealed in the
grove. All the rest of the birds were happy. -- O Prince! could you not have
found a place, at least, in one of the hall windows, for so lovely and
beautiful a bird, whose sweet notes out-rivalled all the songsters of the
grove! Hasten Prince! you can do no less than carry the merry tidings to your
lovely traveling companion. She will welcome you with a thousand caresses! --
The truth is, the little blue-bird chose rather to remain in its retirement;
and was sufficiently content with visits from the Prince, two or three times a
day, with something for it to eat, and the sight of his engaging person.

These marriages being happily consummated, the Genie Ravenzar departed; and the
newly arrived families being most advantageously settled in different parts of
the island, most of them applied themselves to agriculture and manufactures.
Instructors, of both sexes, were appointed for the children. A magnificent hall
was erected, for public business. Legislators were chosen; a council of Elders,
and a President. Laws and regulations established. A book of records was kept
in the hall chamber. In a word, every thing necessary, and advantageous, was
established with the most consummate wisdom. The leading men were of the thirty
first inhabitants; (who had made large additions to the knowledge and
discernment they bro't with them into the island,) and likewise, of those who
were from the Empire of China. The best instructors were chosen for the youth,
from fifteen years of age to twenty -- who were educated in the principles of
virtue and liberty, and every art and science. The grand metropolis was called
Xuntien, Xuntien, alias Pekin. The former name was adopted.
after that of China. To the houses of the first inhabitants, (who now took
their wives home) were added, by the servants of the Genie, two thousand, as
yet unimproved, being reserved for the Chinese whom Gesseng, (now ambassador to
China) was commissioned to bring in the fleet, which was to sail immediately
for that kingdom of splendour. A modern name for China, is said to be Tamin, i.
e. the Kingdom of Brightness.
Those houses, with the thirty belonging to the first inhabitants and the great
number erected by Ravenzar, now composed the first city and grand metropolis of
the island, containing, at this period, twenty thousand buildings all
inhabited, except those reserved for the Chinese expected.

Gesseng having sailed with the fleet, Prince Nytan took a solemn and
affectionate leave of his numerous friends, assembled in the public hall, in a
valedictory address, which he concluded with the following solemn and truly
interesting words: --

'We who are so highly favored -- we, who are so eminently enlightened, can
never fail in the resolves we have formed, to seek those pleasures to indulge
those gratificatioas, to pursue those schemes of life only which Heaven
approves. Every indulgence contrary to this, we well know to be irrational, and
must tend to the subverssion of the unparalleled tranquillity, health and
happiness we enjoy. Heaven's high will is our felicity. Its will therefore must
be ours, so long as conscious rectitude of heart is known to insure our bliss.
Yes: rectitude will ever distinguish and ennoble our actions; the will of the
Supreme will be ever our guide.

'Many of us, (in preceding years, in the countries which gave us birth,) have
been sated to contest with men who would have deprived us of freedom and
enslaved our minds. But we have been divinely taught to think and act as
becomes the freeborn children of the Highest; and our liberties and privileges
are here perfectly secure from invasion. Let all our actions unchangeably
evince our grateful hearts.

Heaven is guide, our guardian friend,
Whose richest favors know no end:
So let our love forever prove;
And all in sweetest concert move!
'Let us be ever pointing out to each other, in every sublime view, the
unrivalled beauties of pure virtue, the transporting pleasures of undissembled
love and benevolence, while a strict uniform, invariable temperance, insures to
us all the bliss of which our natures are capable.

'We are now become a nation; -- a nation collected indeed, by Divine
Providence, from many others; -- a nation trained and disciplined to real
virtue. Such we shall continue, if we cease not to reverence ourselves. For we
shall think with aversion and abhorrence of every vice. No more shall any of us
glory in infamy and court destruction, as in other countries which celestial
interposition alone can save. Alas! to what a plight are some of them reduced!
to what inexplicable miseries are they swiftly hastening! they are struggling
in fires that will shortly consume them, unless prevented by the kind
interference of the gracious power. But I go, citizens to plead with them. I
shall remind them of the dignity of their origin; and show them how beautiful
they will look, when adorned with real goodness. To many I shall say, (and many
I shall convince) the truly happy, worthy and illustrious, are the virtuous,
the generous and the benevolent. It is such the Creator loves, approves and
blesses; -- the tender, sympathizing hearts in sacred unison with his own, by
virtue sweetly formed. Many, (I shall say) have harangued finely on religion,
benevolence, humanity, who in the practice of them were errant cowards. And who
are more mean and dastardly than those, that, with all their fine speeches,
pious and benevolent pretensions, behold unmoved their fellow creatures
suffering around and in the midst of them; yea, add to their miseries by their
oppressive measures! what kind of religion is that, without bowels of
compassion? ye vile pretenders to goodness! shrink and hide your heads forever;
or, yet become worthy the human forms ye wear! Whence, (I shall add) whence
arise the greatest distresses among mankind, but from the selfish contemptible
tempers of the powerful and rich among you? when we can bravely deny ourselves
to serve the indigent and reclaim the vicious; when we can give up our ardent
pursuits of ambition and sensuality, and persevere, aagainst all
embarrassments, in promoting the good of every individual, however low and
debased: -- when we can thus nobly live to the creation, we shall wear, with
real honor, the name of men, of a specious gloriously formed, by omnipotence
and love, for the true enjoyment of existence. But your ignoble ideas, your
churlish disposition, your detestable pride and vanity, your vices, of every
kind, place you below the brutal creation. Nay; the most noisome and loathsome
of the inferior tribes of existence are far more excellent than you. If there
be a spark of goodness buried among you, let it emerge from the darkness and
ruin in which it has been so long involved. Awake to real honor and glory!
and become brilliant constellations in the unsullied galaxy of the virtuous
sons and daughters of freedom and truth, whose splendors illuminate the world,
and are as unfading as the day of Heaven! Experience the exalted pleasures of
undissembled virtue and benevolence, and henceforward labor to do good, to
render others happy. The generous labors of love, while they exalt and refine
you for the high and grand enjoyments of immortals, will likewise add the
greatest strength and glory to your national interests, and evince, in the most
illustrious point of view, how dear they are to Heaven.'

'In this manner, citizens, shall I inculcate sacred interesting truths in the
Countries to which I am called. As for us, confirmed as we are in the enjoyment
of virtue, freedom and truth, we shall act like those who rightly estimate
their value: and, respecting, adoring and loving the benificent author of our
being we shall love and respect each other as the wonderful and glorious
workmanship of his hands, reared into existence, and clothed with his
comeliness, to be ever glorious and amiable in his eyes and in the eyes of each
other. And let the ennobling disposition, which we have embibed, be uniformly
cherished; -- of preferring one another in both mental and civil eminences; --
in wealth, in honor: -- a disposition so opposite to the low, mean, selfish
tempers that are so prevalent in other nations; -- well knowing it to be our
chief business, and highest good, to promote every one's happiness, that not a
single sigh of infelicity be heard. This truly philanthropic dispossition
builds us up in real grandeur, advancing us nearer to the perfection of that
Heaven from whence it originates. Let, therefore, this sweet harmony and love
increase which perfects our enjoyment of life, enhancing all its variety of
genuine pleasures -- ensuring to us still greater.

Our intercourse with other nations will be prescribed by that divine power on
which we feel ourselves continually dependant, whilst we, at the same time,
glory in such dependence; that power which we always consult with a filial
confidence; and are happy indeed -- Dear citizens -- in every application the
gracious being who ever takes delight in doing us good. No nation, or hostile
power can harm us. But we can do the nations much good, and are perpetually
employed in serving their best interests: and, one day hence, will they all
unite to bless us, and to follow those divine examples we are singled out to
exhibit to the world: singled out, not because more deserving, but because it
was the will of Him, whose ways are unsearchable!

'As indulgent Heaven, then, has felicitated us with genuine truth, with real
knowledge and high seize, to us, I trust, they will be always invaluable;
while from hence science shall, with increasing luster, spread over the face of
the globe. -- From us, who are ever, with superior aids, employed in diffusing
her benign rays; and in which employment our enemies do in vain oppose us.
Still will she advance in her glorious and majestic progress; rending in sunder
the chains that enslave the mind, and breaking in pieces the fetters fabricated
by the proud politician, and the aspiring priest. -- Celestial traveller! we
triumph in thy conquests, and cordially do we congratulate' each society and
happy individual irradiated by thy splendors, and participating of the rich and
liberal munificence thou art from Heaven commissioned every where to dispense!
In vain, with malignant purpose, do thy adversaries set themselves in array
against thee, in a distant region, where thousands have highly experienced by
generous influence, and where thousands of thousands wait thy salutary
instructions. Such is the regard bestowed on man, by the source of goodness! --
Man -- Heaven's fairest image! too precious, in its estimation, to lie for ever
in the chains of ignorance -- to remain forever insensible of worth richly
bestowed! -- Man! how ennobled does he appear! how august! when beheld adorned
in his Creator's comeliness! how exquisitely divine his formation! ten thousand
glories beam from his irradiated countenanance, and gracefully display
themselves in his every gesture -- his every movement! -- Let deserved infamy
pursue those sacriligious aspersers that have dared the impious attempt to
divest him of his celestial privileges, to villify his nature, to profane his
sacred rights, and precipitate him to the debasing form of a wretch subjected
to the caprice of an unprincipled being swelled with pride and self importance!
-- I go cheerfully my dearest friends and fellow citizens, in your service --
in the service of mankind; and oppose myself against all that is inimical to
human felicity!

THE ORIENTAL PHILANTHROPIST. BOOK V.
Resistless Leveller! -- both high and low,
Simple and wise, to thee must bow.
Victorious heroes, however great,
Must lay their laurels at thy feet!

THE king of Persia at his decease, having no other child than a daughter, left
her the heir of his dominions. She was possessed of a superior understanding
and incomparable beauty. Her engaging manners and shining accomplishments had
attracted universal love and respect. It was, therefore, with universal
satisfaction the people saw her ascend the throne of Persia. Every day she gave
fresh proofs of her superior talents, wisdom and prudence, and though scarce
two and twenty, her illustrious actions raised her a fame beyond any of her
predecessors; and drew to her court, princes of the neighboring kingdoms, who
solicited her hand; but in vain. Her affections being engaged, she had neither
a hand nor a heart to yield them. Those princes, therefore, gave over their
solicitations, and returned home with disappointment and chagrin. One of them
carried his resentment so far, as to enter the Queen's dominions with a great
army, which spread ruin and devastation wherever it advanced. The Queen opposed
this destroying power with all the force she could raise in an emergency so
sudden and unexpected. But victory was deciding in favor of her enemy, when
Prince Nytan arrived on the confines of her dominions, where he soon became
informed of those unjust and cruel depredations. 'I must go, said he to his
blue-bird, and chastise this invader, if Heaven condescends, to aid my arm.'
'Go, replied the blue-bird, and when you have succeeded, marry the Queen of
Persia, and bring her hither, that I may see a Princess of whom I heard so much
talk. I shall wait impatiently for you, and may prosperity attend you.' 'Ah!
fair and beautiful bird! (if such thou really art) I shall have no fancy to
marry any Queens, whilst I can enjoy thy sweet company. What bird ever sang,
ever talked like thee? I was never half so well entertained and charmed!' Such
was the Prince's return to the blue-bird; which he had long before conjectured
to be more than a mere bird; though who, or what, he was still at a loss.
'Well, rejoined the blue-bird, dear flattering Prince! hasten away to the
succor of the oppressed, and return quickly to the bird who best loves you.'
'If so, returned he, I have the highest reason to be satisfied. But, tell me
most accomplished lady! (for such I have long esteemed thee,) wherefore this
transformation, and this reserve of some important secret to your loving and
faithful friend, whom you say, too, you love? Why was you sent to me? was it
that fate had decreed I should be instrumental to your resuming your proper
person? or, are you cruelly banished, in this shape, from all you hold dear?
forgive me, if I have, in any respect, acted unbecoming your merits; and no
longer conceal from me your true name, and the mystery of this transformation.
I have been purchasing some lands here, with an elegant house, in which I have
furnished you an apartment for the night; selecting another for myself in a
distant part of the house; that I may not be wanting in showing you the
difference and respect you justly merit. I am now ready to convey you to your
apartment. In my absence, (which I hope will be but a few hours) three young
women will attend you, whom I have bribed largely to be faithful to the trust I
have reposed in them.' -- What is all this fine speech to a poor little
blue-bird? exclaimed the bird. However take me, if you please to the apartment
you have provided for me.' 'Alas! resumed Prince Nytan, think not to deceive
me, I know too well what for a bird thou art; yet lovely in whatever shape you
are pleased to assume.' 'As to my name, returned the blue-bird which you desire
to know, as, likewise who, or what I am, I am not permitted, dear Prince, to
inform you till your return with victory' -- 'And to lay my laurels at your
feet, interrupted the Prince. 'Shew me, resumed the bird, the house; O! is not
that it yonder, and my apartment with the windows open? Make no reply, noble
mandarin! but hasten quickly, to fight the battle of God and mankind. You have
not a moment to delay. Thus saying she flew out of her window, and the Prince
saw her enter that of her new apartment.' Therefore, fixing his magic spear in
its place, directed toward the field of war, which he had reconnoitred with
his glass, his chamber mounted aloft in the air, and its splendors glittered to
the sun.

When Prince Nytan was arrived to the martial field, he found the Persians
almost vanquished and surrounded by the enemy. With sword in hand he soon
fought his way through the thickest of his opposers; joined and rallied the
Persian army, and in less than an hour, obtained a complete victory; taking the
Prince, and twenty thousand prisoners. -- 'Go, said the victorious son of
Renien to the captive Prince, and by afflictions, learn humanity and virtue. To
you, humiliation and sufferings are necessary; while, at the same time, they
are rendered glorious to me, only as an instrument in the hand of the
uncontrouled Sovereign of the Universe, to bring good out of evil. Sooner or
later, O haughty and impetuous Prince! we must all learn justice and mercy. It
is impossible it should be otherwise. When you have been taught to think with
me, we shall perhaps, meet again.' Having said thus, agreeable to Ravenzar's
counsel, he ordered the royal prisoner to be chained in a dark room, and,
treated as a madman, till the public affairs of Persia were settled. Then he
was to be banished human society, and conveyed into a vast forest, far distant
from the kingdom, which, by his manners, he had disgraced and forfeited. 'We
take no lives, added the hero; nor has one been lost. We seek the reformation,
not the annihilation of our brethren of mankind; whom God has taught us to
respect and love, and to live but for their good.

Having ordered the numerous prisoners, to be confined, and guarded, till it
should be determined in council, in what manner they were to be disposed of;
Prince Nytan hastened to seek the Queen. -- But no queen was to be found. This
caused a great alarm, and excited the deepest concern. For the queen Selina,
was loved by all, almost to adoration. She had gone abroad on pretense of
hunting and retured not. Her attendants, suddenly missing her, searched every
where in vain; -- returned to the palace with the melancholy tidings; -- with
great numbers they went back to the forest renewing their search after their
Queen; in which they were continally employed. The astonished hero dispatched a
still greater number on the same important errand; and taking leave of the
officers of the army, only for the night, hastened to his expecting bird.
'Welcome, brave Nytan! I see victory triumphs in your countenance: and yet
something appears to disturb you. How is the Queen of Persia?' 'Alas replied
he, I know not. The Queen is missing, and no where to be found. Early must I go
in quest of her.' -- 'Hardly so, answered the voice of one entering the
apartment. The Prince turned and beheld the Fairy of the island of pictures
advancing to the blue-bird which descended from the corner of a soffa, (where
it was sitting) to meet her. Before that Prince Nytan had time to speak, the
fairy Perieng, touched the bird gently with her wand. She had no sooner spoken,
when, instead of a little blue-bird, a most charming lady, and of a majestic
countenance, appeared before them, arrayed in a robe of sky-blue satin, and her
head adorned with a crown of gold and diamonds! -- 'There cried the Fairy
Perieng, is the Queen you would go in quest of. Carry home to her palace and
marry her. But stay, on second thought, I will go with you. Fetch hither thy
chamber. For this purpose, am I come to give you Queen Selina in marriage, and
to make merry with you on so happy on occasion. Let us hasten, then to put and
end to the grief of the most loyal subjects, who deplore their beloved Queen as
lost.' Nytan soon brought his chamber to the Fairy and Queen; who entering with
him, they were in a minute, at the gate of the Queen's palace. When the Queen
appeared before her household and those of the nobility and ladies, who were at
the palace, their joy was unbounded! The glad tidings soon circulated far and
wide, and thousands flocked to the palace to bless their eyes with a sight of
their beloved Queen whose absence they had so deeply regretted, and whom they
had almost given over as irrecoverably lost! The Queen conducted her victorious
hero and lover, with the fairy Perieng, to her great hall, and placed them on
her throne. The hall was immediately crowded with the nobility and ladies, and
vast numbers of others, congratulating their Queen, and bestowing a thousand
blessings on Prince Nytan, who sat by her side. The dignity, majesty, and
benevolence that shone forth in the countenance of the fairy Perieng excited
their profoundest respect and esteem. They bowed to the ground before her;
when, rising from her seat, she thus addressed the numerous and joyful
assembly. -- 'My worthy and respected friends! In the hero before you, I
present you the son of Renien, sovereign of the vast Empire of China; the
illustrious son, of an illustrious father, who has been, so many years, every
where celebrated for wisdom, virtue, brilliant accomplishments an dinnumerable
great and benevolent actions. The son is worthy to share, with your Queen; the
throne of Persia; your Queen, an inestimable gift of Heaven to you, and the man
who found worthy of her hand. That man is the valorous Prince before you, --
Prince Nytan, who in one happy moment, has turned away destruction from your
kindom, and restored to you your beloved Queen. They have sometime loved,
though unknown to each other; however mysterious my words may appear to you.
Superior powers directed their destiny. Since, then, it is the will of the
Supreme, let their hands be united, whose hearts are already one. And, long may
they live, under the guidance of Heaven, to diffuse blessings through Persia;
and far and wide wherever their influence is, in future times, to extend.' The
speech of the fairy Perieng was received with universal approbation, and
acclamations of joy. The marriage was, that day, solemnized; and great
rejoicings were made throughout the kingdom, with feastings, which lasted a
whole month. Prince Nytan's wonderful chamber was placed on a pleasant hill in
the Queen's garden, in a grove, till his further occasions should call for it.
But, that which was very surprising to the Prince, was, to find the Queen's
palace and garden exactly like those at Ravenzar. The apartments of the palace,
the courts, the avenues; -- in a word, he could find nothing about the palace
and gardens, within or without but what, was as much like those in Ravenzar, as
if the one was copied from the other. So that when the Queen introduced him to
the chamber for his private retirement, he imagined himself suddenly and
insensibly transported to his own in the island. Likewise, when he entered the
closet, and looked out of the window, and viewed the lovely prospect, he coudl
not refrain crying out to the Queen, 'Why, Selina, can you explain to me these
phenomena. Am I in my own palace, or am I not? if not, never was there, in
every thing, so perfect a resemblance. The chamber, its furniture, the closet,
books, garden, hills, groves, and the whole prospect, have the most perfect
likeness! How can all this possibly be? 'I can account for these wonderful
things, (answered the fairy Perieng, entering the closet) much better, I
believe, than your Queen. It is the work of Ravenzar, who foreseeing every
thing, ordered his servants to build, and finish off your palace and gardens
exactly like those of your Selina; that you who so greatly resemble her in
person and accomplishments, might resemble her in every thing else.' 'How much
replied the Prince, am I in all things obliged to that great and good Genie!
one might be almost ready to think, continued the Prince, that Ravenzar was as
much in love with Selina -- 'As who? interrupted the fairy, I hope you are not
going to be jealous. Howevery, it is easy to see, that one who has been in
love, and who takes such infinite pleasure in obliging his friends, must well
know the delight lovers take in forming every thing to each other's fancy. And,
as the Queen's palace, and garden's were unrivalled in beauty and perfection,
how could he better oblige you both than by taking care, that those of yours
should want in nothing of the original from which they are copied?' 'Dear
fairy, returned Prince Nytan, you inflame my love and gratitude, to my worthy
benefactor to the highest pitch.' 'Well, rejoined the fairy Perieng, I foresee,
it will not be a great many months, before Queen Selina's curiosity will
conduct her to Ravenzar, that she may examine with her own eyes so perfect a
copy of her own taste in building and laying out magnificent gardens. For, I
can assure you, that all you find here, was built and completed by her own
directions. Her father's buildings being old and decayed, all was renewed, and
the gardens enlarged and laid out as you see them. Besides, the more you shall
examine, the greater will be your conviction of the perfect likeness.'

They sat down at the closet window, and conversed a great while, on the
beauties of the prospect and the grand and magnificent appearance of the
distant mountains. Here they examined four caskets, whose contents were of
immense value in jewels and interesting papers. They were presents from the
fairy, containing memoirs, delightful, entertaining and instructive.

The fairy Perieng, having spent above a month with the new married pair, and
seen Prince Nytan established, with Queen Selina, in the throne of Persia; bid
them and the court adieu, and returned to her island; promising to visit them
often, wherever their happy destiny should station them.

The generous attention, of this royal pair, to the interest and happiness of
the kingdom of Persia, was soon manifested in numberless acts of generosity and
humanity, and the effects of the wisest policy were felt and enjoyed by every
individual throughout the kingdom. The poorest of their subjects were
considered, and treated by them as their own children. This conduct lays the
only sure foundation for the happiness of kingdoms, states, or commonwealths;
when that attention to the lowest classes in society, and to the wants and
morals of the poorest, is paid, which unfeigned humanity dictates, in
opposition to the covetous disposition, which false ideas and false tastes have
rendered so universally prevalent. Such an attention, so becoming men of
genius, wealth or power, meet with the approbation of Heaven, and ensure true
glory and felicity. Such an attention is the never failing fruit of real virtue
and benevolence: and without it, no nation shall long flourish. The want of it
has ever been 'followed, and ever will be by the decline and ruin of the best
states or kingdoms. -- Such were the sentiments entertained by Nytan and
Selina, the sovereigns of Persia; and to which all their actions constantly
agreed. To render every class, and every individual of society industrious,
virtuous and happy, their efforts were unremitted. And as to so benevolent and
noble a purpose, they spared no pains, so likewise, they withheld no cost or
expense. They journeyed through their dominions, enquired into the
circumstances of every one, and supplied every want. They appointed weekly
feasts and alms for the poor and helpless; and persons, worthy of sacred trust,
to look after them, and afford them every assistance, every convenience, every
instruction. Such instances of celestial humanity and love to mankind were
never before exhibited with half the sincerity, and persevering attention.
Persia scarce ever knew what felicity and prosperity were, before this happy
era! or saw, as now, crowned heads feasting with the poorest and meanest of
their subjects! this was a glory reserved for Nytan and Selina! every heart
loved them; Every tongue blessed them, and cried, O celestial king and Queen!
Live forever! Here all the public affairs were transacted with the most
consummate skill and wisdom. All officers were diligent and faithful. For true
and able men were appointed to every office, in every department. All
instructors were as sincere as learned, and as faithful as wise; selected from
the most accomplished and most bevolent. But as the royal philanthropists were
of too great value and too much wanted in the world, to remain always in one
kingdom; and as the time drew nigh when they were to visit other regions, and
instruct the citizens of other nations in true wisdom and happiness, they
became indefatigable in making provision for the future peace and security of
Persia. Seminaries were founded; and the king had procured a number of Genies
to preside over them. Nothing was omitted, by the royal pair, that could
conduce to the happiness of the kingdom in their successors in the sovereignty.
The finest pieces were wrote, both in prose and verse, embellished and enforced
with all the beauties, elegancies, and pathos of the most persuasive eloquence,
in praise and commendation of every virtue, and of the study of the works of
the glorious and benificent creator, and in commendation of arts and sciences,
agriculture, industry, social and domestic happiness. These were published, and
distributed gratis, in every family, besides thousands of copies being for
sale, in every great town or city. A great many noble examples enforced every
precept and instruction, and with a charming authority, every argument. The
adorers of fire were no where to be found, in those happy days; but the true
knowledge of, and respect to the Deity, (...) admirably influential throughout
all Persia. The ladies of highest rank, and the nobility were virtuous,
generous, and exemplary. See, ye great! what happiness ye may diffuse! and
learn what it is to be truly great and illustrious; to be worthy of life and
all its rich variety of blessings! the amiable Queen had done wonders in
training up her subjects to virtue and happiness, so that the work of
reformation became the easier, especially when two such great minds, as her own
and her royal husband's, acted in concert, seconded, too, with the cheerful and
unremitted cooperation of great numbers of the highest order.

As for the royal prisoner, he was committed to the hands of a genie, who took
pleasure in fulfilling the commands of Nytan, ever tending to accomplish both
public and private good. The prisoner, then, was borne away by invisible hands
to a far distant wilderness, and there left a solitary and deserted heing; yet
still under the eye of the invisible genie, whose name was Pharenon, and who
took care, with several occasional assistants, like himself invisible and
unperceived, to preserve him from the fury of the wild beasts of the desert.
After he had worn out his clothes, he wondered about naked, his intellects for
the most part being deranged, so that he scarce knew what he did, living upon
any thing he chanced to find except that now and then, something better than
the desert afforded was thrown in his way, by means of Pharenon. One day
toward its close, as he was wandering, perfectly naked, a company of Banditti
came upon him; who, after diverting themselves with him awhile, tied him up by
his hands to the limb of a tree, beat him cruelly, and left him hanging. Night
came on He was near expiring. Two hungry lions rushed from the thickets, and
made the wilderness resound with their tremendous roaring. They were just upon
tearing in pieces the naked and helpless prey, when the Genie Pharenon appeared
in a flame of fire! The lions instantly fled. The benevolent and compassionate
Genie, assuming the form of a young man, untied the naked sufferer, laid him on
the ground, and forced down his throat a cordial, at which he revived from a
fit of fainting. He then anointed him all over with an healing specific
ointment, wrapped him in sheets which he had ordered to be brought, and
conveyed him, from the woods to a house, where he was put in bed, and served
with things necessary and comfortable. The Genie could not refrain weeping over
him, and exclaiming -- 'It is enough ill-fated Prince! thy sufferings and
disgrace are at an end! thy mind has been sufficiently exercised, and will
presently appear refined, like gold from the furnace. Be comforted, happy days
are before thee! here you will want for nothing, and when capable of easy
traveling, you will be conducted to a more agreeable mansion.' The Prince
expressed his gratitude to Heaven, and to Pharenon for his kindness. 'I am now
instructed, said the Prince, to be humane; and I hope the instruction will not
be lost upon me and that I shall live to be grateful.' Pharenon was as good as
his word to the Prince. As soon as he was capable of traveling, he removed him
by easy stages, to a palace he owned in that country; nor failed of any kind
office. In his hands he remained till he was perfectly recovered.

When the royal and illustrious pair were acquainted, by Pharenon, of the
miseries to which the unfortunate Prince had been subjected, (though their
source was his ungovernable passions) they neither could refrain from weeping,
notwithstanding they were acquainted with his happier situation. Such were
their sympathising feelings for the human race. All indeed were grieved for his
sufferings, and rejoiced to find they were ended; that he was in such good
hands, and that there was reason to hope he would now render himself worthy,
who was once so despicable, and become, in future, a blessing and ornament to
his country. Their hopes were not disappointed. After continuing a year with
Pharenon, he was restored to his family and kingdom. the twenty thousand
prisoners were sent home, full of the praises of Nytan and Selina, and of the
unprecedented kind and generous usage they had experienced. Their Prince now
became the father and benefactor of his people, reformed, to the utmost, every
thing amiss. In a few months after his restoration, he visited the Persian
court, where he was cordially received, and entertained with that respect and
magnificence which none but such as Nytan and Selina knew how to exhibit.

Nytan had paid several visits to the confines of Persia, where he had
purchased himself an house, and some lands, with the design of settling upon
the lands a greater number of poor people, that could scarcely get bread to
eat. This design he accomplished, and left the poor people, in a fair way of
improvement in virtuous industry; intending many of them for Ravenzar. To
people that island with valuable citizens, and to sow the seeds of virtue in
the hearts of men. He now set out for Europe, bidding adieu to his Queen, and
the court. They were much affected at the thought of parting. For the king soon
but an end to their grief by telling his lovely queen and all present that they
had no cause for parting with him so reluctantly; that he was going on Heaven's
errands; and knew his own safety and theirs; likewise, that by means of his
expeditious mode of traveling, he should be oftener with them than they were
imagining. Thus all tears were dried up, and they parted in good spirits!

King Nytan had been now about 13 months almost wholly in the court and kingdom
of Persia. By means of Pharenon, he had heard from the Emperor his father, and
the court of Pekin. His sisters were married to the worthy mandarins; who, with
the Emperor and Empress, were in good health. Under the influence of a wise and
good sovereign, virtue and industry generally prevailed; which was the more
extraordinary considering of what an immnese body of people the Chinese empire
is composed. There being no less than three hundred millions under the
government of one man. They allow of no embassies but from Ravenzar. As
ambassador Gesseng had been there; from whom, on his return, Nytan had received
letters informing him of his arrival with two thousand families, of the health
of every one, and that all things were prosperous; nothing being capable of
adding to their felicity, but his presence. The king having answered Gesseng,
and sent away his letters, set out for Europe, where his chamber soon rested,
on the borders of a vast forest; not far from which was a flourishing city.
Leaving his chamber, rendered invisible and inaccessable, he traveled on foot,
to the city, and entered one of the best inns, which was crowded with company.
He introduced himself as a foreigner, making the tour of Europe. Ingratiating
himself with the company, he soon learned all he wanted to know. In the
morning, hiring horses, and a servant, he rode on to the next city, and put up
at the inn most frequented by the citizens, and by travelers. He walked alone,
and pondered on what adventures might await him in this new scene. 'Have I said
he to himself, exchanged my happy situation for these cities, where parties
strive and rage, and every dire form of wickedness stalks at noon day.
Destitute of acquaintance and friend to advise and assist. But I correct
myself. A friend I have; and one of infinitely more value than the wisest, the
best, the loveliest the most powerful and most faithful of all I have left
behind. -- A friend, though invisible, yet ever present and ever ready to aid.
O how dared I to indulge a single desponding thought, since the bestower of
friends is mine. O let me never again a moment forget my friend omnipotent and
omnipresent, in whose service too, I am engaged. I will walk, and see what
adventure will greet me.' He was soon informed a war just commenced between
that and the neighboring kingdom. He enquired into the merits of their
controversy, introduced himself to the principal men; entered a volunteer in
the service; and equipping himself as a soldier, was received at head quarters.
The occasion of the war appeared to be just and necessary. He was soon
promoted; discovering such wisdom, prudence and valor, as endeared him to the
whole army in that country. In a word, he became chiefly instrumental in
gaining a speedy and decisive victory, and peace on the most just and honorable
terms. While in the army, he was successful in correcting and reforming many
errors in discipline, (for he had studied war as well as peace) and reforming
several vicious officers. His presence every where excited, in the minds of
men, the justest notions of the dignity of human nature. He commanded universal
respect, esteem and love. With several he formed an agreeable friendship. In
the metropolis, he was received with the honors he merited. The monarch
embraced him, and closeted him for several days. He found the king to be highly
accomplished, and attentive to the interesting subjects on which Nytan
conversed: that on which he most insisted was of the necessity of a greater
attention's being paid to the lowest classes in society. He reasoned with such
justness and energy, that the monarch's eyes were opened to scenes of national
happiness, which he had before imagined could never be realised. He resolved,
therefore, upon new schemes for the prosperity and happiness of his kingdom.

Having performed these important services he returned to his chamber, where he
passed two days and nights in contemplation, and rest from his incessant
exertions for the good of his fellow creatures. Solitary as the hermit, he
prepared his own meals; and walked in the daytime, with a book, under the
shades of the forest. He feared no banditti, or savage invaders, having it in
his power, by his art, to preserve both himself and his chamber from the
ravages of wild beasts, or the sons of violence. There he servently implored
Heaven's guidance in his future actions.
On the third day, he caused his chamber to ascend, and in a few minutes, was
in his garden in Persia. The Queen was just risen, and opening her window,
beheld her beloved lord advancing from the grove. She quickly descended the
stair case, and ran into his arms! words fall to express the joy of the loving
pair! -- I have but just called, said King Nytan, to see how you do, and then I
must away again to Europe, where I have scarcely done half my allotted work.'
'One day, at least, my dear lord!' replied the Queen.' 'No my Selina, it cannot
be, returned the king: at noon I must leave you. Let us retire unnoticed, to
your apartment, or rather to my closet; where you must assist me in choosing
some books I mean to carry with me. Let breakfast be ordered there. I shall be
with you, a few hours; and I would be unnoticed by more than one or two
servants, that I may not be too long hindered from my return. I shall order
matters so that this will be my last journey to Europe, at least for some
years. Then my lovely Selina, I hope to give myself up to you at Ravenzar, for
several months.' Before noon, Pharenon brought a packet of letters from the
African monarch, which gave them a vast deal of pleasure. That monarch had
greatly improved his subjects, and expressed his gratitude to Nytan in the
warmest terms; who had but just time enough to return his answer, by the Genie.
He embraced Selina, who attended him to his flying chamber. She left not the
hill, till the chamber, ascending the skies, and traversing the airy regions,
was out of sight. The Queen excused to her household and the court, so secret
and hasty a visit from her lord, on account of the necessity he was under of
dispatching his affairs in Europe, that he might return to them the sooner, to
lay before them matters of great moment, which concerned their future welfare.
Nytan now spent near eight weeks in traveling through other parts of Europe
than those he had visited. -- His time was wholly employed with the poorest
peasants, at the greatest distance from cities and large towns. Among them he
distributed the books, with which he had loaded his chamber. They were in the
language of the country in which they lived. The king was perpetually giving
them good advice and instruction. He settled them on good farms, which he
purchased. He selected such persons as he sound most capable of receiving good
councils, and profiting by them in a more comfortable situation of life. Of
these, he had under his tuition, about twelve thousand, in different parts of
Europe. Among them were a number of instructors, to whom the royal
philanthropist was very much attached, on account of their virtues and good
understandings. He supplied them with books, as likewise a number of females,
who merited his attention, as capable of the greatest improvements.

These great things being so far happily accomplished, the king bade his
societies farewell. A thousand blessings followed him to his traveling
chamber; which he now saw fit to render visible. The peasants, with wondering
eyes, beheld it ascend in the air, and convey their benefactor to distant
regions.

It was night when he arrived at his palace in Persia. He went directly to his
apartment and solaced himself in the arms of his lovely Queen.

In the morning the king presented himself to his people, and appointed a
number of the nobility, and plebians to attend him, and the Queen, on a tour
through the kingdom. The pleasure and joy of their loving subjects, wherever
they appeared, can scarely be described, on the one hand; and on the other,
their grief, when they acquainted them of their proposed departure, from
Persia. The latter was only mitigated by their promise of visiting them as
often as possible, and providing successors in the throne who would in every
thing, follow their examples. The last was fulfilled without delay, on their
return from the tour. Ravesco and Fatima, were crowned and proclaimed king and
queen of Persia. Their known virtues and accomplishments rendered them highly
acceptable, and their whole conduct ever gave universal satisfation. Nytan and
Selina now prepared for their departure. The Queen would carry nothing away,
excepting a few things necessary and convenient: and would allow of but one
maid and one man servant to attend them Relations she had none, though numbers
of dear friends, with whom she know not how to part. Nytan however adjusted
that affecting circumstance to her satisfaction, by proposing that those to
whom she was most attached, should, after a while, be transported to Ravenzar.

On the morning of their departure, the palace, courts, and gardens were
crowded with weeping spectators. Nytan and Selina, from the hill lifted up
their hands and blessed them; and, entering the aerial vehicle, soon lost sight
of Persia, and their disconsolate friends! such indeed were the whole kingdom!
men, women, and children, every where, with sighs and tears, bewailed the loss
they had sustained, in a king and queen, who loved them as they were beloved!
but such alas! are the changes and vicissitudes of human life! in which we are
only relieved by the lively expectation of a state of higher, of consummate
perfections where no changes can effect even a momentary grief! -- So rapid was
their voyage to the island of Ravenzar; so sudden their exchange of one country
of friends for another; that whilst the Persians were lamenting their loss, and
returning with tears and sighs to their respective abodes, the citizens of
Ravenzar were rejoicing and congratulating them on their arrival there! Nytan
and Selina had now disrobed and divested themselves of the ensigns and honors
of royalty, and were become only members of the community of Ravenzar. But,
their great accomplishments, their shining virtues, their unparalleled modesty
and sweetness of behavior, procured them a veneration and love, an esteem and
honor, which few crowned heads, in any age or country, were ever capable of
commanding; and which daily increased as they progressed in life; -- like
rivers, enlarging as they flow on from their source, enriching their banks on
either side, till they mingle with the vast expanse of waters!

But, left it should be imagined, that Selina's virtues possessed not that
degree of refinement essential to the rendering her fame as pure and unfullied
as it has been exhibited; in that she was unjustifiable in retiring from her
invaded country, to confine herself with a Prince with whom she had become
enamoured merely from the description and representations given of him by the
fairy Perieng; it should be related, that the queen was governed by that wise
and good fairy, who knew what was to happen; and who saw no harm in
transforming a fair lady for awhile, into a beautiful blue-bird.

Gesseng was sitting with his lovely partner, at one of the palace windows,
which looked into the garden, when the chamber descended to its wonted station
in the retired grove. They soon beheld its dazzling splendors; and sat not
gazing till it became stationary on its flowery lawn, and visible only to the
songsters of the wood. Instantly they left their seats, and Olivia her pencil
and drawings. They observed two unknown persons, (as they glanced their eyes
through the staircase window, in their descent) emerge from the grove. But, as
they always appeared in a becoming dress for company, they had no new
arrangements to make, on the score of dress. They therefore immediately ran out
in quest of their friend and benefactor, whom they had no doubt of finding
returned. How great was their surprise to see him leading up the alley a
beautiful lady, attended by a man and maid servant; as they now discerned them
to be, whom they glanced at from the stair case window! As Nytan and Selina
approached, they soon perceived how matters were; -- the intimate union of the
happy pair was visible in their countenances! -- Joy! cried Gesseng, and ran
into the welcome arms of his friend. -- 'All hail! lovely pair,' exclaimed
gayly, the equally lovely partner of Gesseng, and embraced Selina. Their
embraces were renewed with sweetest congratulations! The domestics gathered
round them, and followed them into the hall. Selina thought she was in that in
Persia! The news of their arrival made a rapid progress through the city, and
the palace was soon crowded. Meanwhile, Nytan led his Selina through the
palace, and up to his chamber and closet. She was filled with surprise,
admiration and delight, in observing the perfect resemblance of every thing to
the palace and gardens she left in Persia. 'Why, cried she, have I been
traveling, in a few minutes all over the world, and now find myself on a
sudden, in my own palace, when I imagined myself to be distanced from it
thousands of miles? What wonders are these?' -- 'What wonders? replied Nytan,
you are indeed in your own palace; and you beheld from the window your own
gardens. Is all this so strange? -- 'If I am in possession of such happiness, I
owe it to the kindest of men! returned Selina.' -- 'O my incomparable Selina!
exclaimed the enraptured husband, what infinite obligations am I under to be
ever kind, tender and affectionate to the first of women! all I am all I ever
shall be are thine -- forever thine! May Heaven daily and hourly increase the
power of Nytan to render himself worthy of its inestimable gift! as the happy
years roll on, the charms of Selina shall receive new luster, and every day add
to the felicities of her life! Every succeeding hour shall increase the
tenderness and affection of the happiest of men! may that of his Selina be ever
equal to her worth! it will then be complete and permanent.' He would perhaps,
have exhausted himself in the effusions of love and gratitude, had not the
appearance of Gesseng, and the shouts of the people arrested his attention. He
went down into the hall, and mingled embraces with his congratulating friends.
Joy and gladness circulated throughout the island of Ravenzar. None could be
greater. None could be more sincere. Nytan proposed, to his numerous friends,
an entertainment, the next day at his own expense, in the city hall.
Accordingly, there a grand festival was celebrated; when the wonders of
Ravenzar were commemorated. The succeeding week, Nytan and Gesseng, with their
conjugal partners, went through a course of visits in the city. Gesseng
surprised his lord with a relation of the great things Ravenzar had been doing
in his absence. Through the vast ridge of mountains, he had made eight more
roads, with gradual ascents, on each side the roads, to the mountains heights;
on which he had built houses and furnished them with inhabitants. He had
likewise, built a number of towns and cities, and settled a family in every
house. So that the whole number of citizens, men, women and children, that
composed the community, were an hundred thousand. An amazing populating
rapidity! but, what cannot fairies and genies perform? and there were many of
them assisting in this glorious and benevolent work. 'I must soon further
contribute my share toward increasing the number of our citizens, said the
admiring son of Renien, I have numbers in different parts of the world prepared
for our island: and I intend it shall not be long before they are here. You
must go my Gesseng, and fetch more from China.' 'Many of these last, replied
Gesseng, are from thence. Besides, they are all instructed in the Chinese
language, like those settled here before them.' 'Very well, returned Nytan, you
will however, I hope proceed with your fleet, once more, on this business, to
China, and when you are there, I shall soon be with you. We will take our wives
with us, and may kind and indulgent Heaven prosper us, as it has hitherto
done.' Nytan was as good as his word; and Gesseng returned with his fleet, to
China taking with him his wife Olivia. His friend with Selina, soon followed
them, in his aerial vehicle. But before Nytan sat out he summoned two powerful
genies. 'Hasten said he to them, to Persia, and fetch hither the men, women and
children I have appointed. They will cheerfully obey your orders. And when they
are here, furnish them with houses and lands, and all things they shall want.'
The genies immediately proceeded on their errand. To conclude in a few words,
Nytan and Selina, Gesseng, and Olivia, were for several days, happy with their
friends in China. After which the two former, promising another visit the next
year, took leave of the Emperor and Empress, their sisters, brothers in law,
and the court, and returned to Ravenzar; where not long after, Gesseng and
Olivia safely arrived in the fleet, having three hundred families. The genies
likewise brought from Persia, seven thousand new citizens, all of whom were
settled to their satisfaction, and far beyond their expectations.

THE ORIENTAL PHILANTHROPIST. BOOK VI.
O! Liberty and Love! triumphant reign!
And you long lives just temperance sustain!
Here to misanthropists, no tyrants sway;
Nor here the poisonous breath of luxury;
But all are virtuous, healthy, happy, free!

AMONG those who were last introduced into the island, by Ravenzar, was a
beautiful and highly accomplished lady Amelia. She was of high descent in a
foreign country; but persecuted and driven thence, on account of her inflexible
attachment to liberty, and to a few friends, of both sexes, who nobly dared to
oppose the oppressive measures of an arbitrary an tyrannical government.
Through their influence and exertions, great numbers became resolutely engaged
in freedom's cause. War was its inevitable consequence. The zealous friends of
the best of causes were indefatigable and persevering till they had formed, and
brought into the field, an army of twenty thousand men, which unhappily was far
exceeded by the opposing tyrants; whose innumerable cohorts poured in upon
them, from all quarters, like a resistless torrent. Victory was then permitted
to decide in favor of the scourgers of mankind. Amelia and her friends being
defeated, she found means with a few adherents, to escape to a forest, under
whose gloomy shades, they imagined they might rest awhile secure from pursuers.
But there they found but a temporary retreat. A party of the enemy, which had
been searching the forest, came upon them. They bravely opposed force to force.
But valorous and desperate as they were, they were incapable of long resisting
ten times their number; and, had not unexpected aid appeared, they must at
least, have yielded to death, or the chains of tyrants. -- A man in flaming
armor, darted like lightning upon their conquering foes; and instantly they
were scattered, like pillars of smoke before the tempestuous wind! the terrific
warrior no sooner assaulted than he defeated and dispersed, and, not a single
opposer, was from that moment either to be seen or heard. Whilst Amelia and her
little company were wondering at this sudden deliverance, the Victor
approached, and addressed them in the following terms -- 'Valiant and worthy
friends! Heaven be praised, that sent me to rescue you from the power of a
detestable herd of tyrants and debauchees, who are the disgrace of humanity.
Your brave resistance of those murderers of the human species, does you the
greatest honor. Forsake then, this land of slavery and oppression, and follow
me to a country of freedom and bliss. Thither will I conduct you in safety;
even where you will find that virtue, glory and felicity, which you have in
vain though nobly exerted yourselves to promote and establish here.' It was the
great, the mighty genie Ravenzar who addressed them; who was answered with the
most grateful acknowledgments, and ready acceptance of his proffered friendship
and protection. He led them out of the forest, taking Amelia's hand, and
committing two little girls she had with her, to the care of his servants, who
were then just come up to the company. He conversed with them, as they walked
toward the road, on such subjects as tended to inspire them with just
sentiments of his character and disinterested views, informing them who he was,
and giving them a concise history of the place whither he intended to conduct
them. 'How fatally said he, do those tyrants, under the specious pretexts of
liberty, and virtue, amuse millions of people! You have seen, how little they
could relish your just remonstrances against their covetous dispositions, their
vanity, intemperance, and hypocrisy. I will convey you my worthy friends, to a
country, where truth and virtue are understood, and where liberty is more than
an empty sound to impose upon those who are willing to be deceived.'

Amelia and her adherents readily followed the genie Ravenzar on board his
fleet, and arrived in safety to the happy island; where they soon experienced
the unbounded generosity of their new friends; who placed them in situations of
life most agreeable to their inclinations, and the wise policies and
arrangements of the country, enriching them at the same time, far beyond their
expectations, or even their desires. Amelia, with her two beautiful girls,
chose a retired situation. Those girls, the one eight, the other nine years of
age, were the orphan daughters of her deceased brother, and had lived with her
ever since the loss of her parents. As she was exceeding fond of them, she had
spared no pains in their education. She was therefore, furnished, agreeably to
her wish as, with a large and well built house delightfully situated about
twenty miles from Xuntien, at some distance from the public road, and
surrounded by the noblest growth of trees; having a fine large garden, in which
it stands upon an eminence that affords a fine prospect of the country, a
branch of the river, hills, lawns, fields and groves, and the dwellings of the
farmers on each side the water. In this romantic villa, Amelia settled, with
her lovely nieces, and a few attendants, of both sexes. After a while, she kept
open doors, entertaining all sorts of company. For, in Ravenzar, there were
none unworthy of her hospitality, friendship, or esteem. A large number, of
both sexes, of learning and fine accomplishments, constantly resorted to her
villa, often continuing there for several weeks. With these she enjoyed all the
superior pleasures of a country life. Though the situation, was retired, it was
by no means a solitary one to her, who loved society. Some times they walked in
the extensive garden and groves; at others they visited the industrious
farmers, who were far from being ignorant, or unconversible, as is the case in
some countries. Amelia likewise, had her hour of profitable employment, study,
embroidering and drawing. From her company and associates, great mutual
advantages were derived, and which extended to the community; which is every
greatly served by the rich, who are virtuous, in whatever sphere of life they
move. Amelia not only read, and studied, but she wrote elegantly and sublimely,
in prose and verse: and her conversation was always highly entertaining, as
well as beneficial and instructing. If her person was beautiful, her mind was
still more so: and though not exceeding twentythree years of age, there were
not many in the world, much older, that, possessed a greater share of
knowledge, wisdom and discretion. Among the gay young noblemen of her native
country, she had many admirers, who sought her hand. But their manners and
principles she abhorred; and the prospects of accumulated splendour and
magnificence, which they set before her, she deemed not worth a single thought.
But a few weeks before she was driven from her native home, she was addressed
by a merchant of fine accomplishments, and gentle manners. His name was
Philenor. For him she entertained the tenderest sentiments, and they had
exchanged mutual vows of love and constancy. But he was now lost to Amelia!
Philenor had sailed to a far distant country; where he was supposed to have bid
adieu to this life. To indulge in silent, unnoticed grief for one, to whom she
once fondly hoped to be united, was that which gave the first rise to her
inclination for retirement. But, reason and virtue came to her aid; and, at
length, convinced of the criminality of yielding to secret unavailing sorrow;
with her former views, she therefore, changed her plan; and courted society.

Amelia however, frequently indulged herself in solitary walks; enjoying the
most delicious pleasure in the contemplation of the beauties of nature;
exalting her thoughts from the wonders of creation, to the consideration of the
power, glory and majesty of the Creator. As she rambled through, the fragrant
groves; as she walked over the carpets of living green, and amidst the flowers
and delicious sweets which exuberant nature had spread around her; -- she
seemed to tread on enchanted ground, or as roving amid the luxuries of a second
paradise! -- In some chosen spot secure from observation, she would often take
from her pocket, a little writing desk; and reclining on the mossy bank, pour
out, on paper, the effusions of a heart ever grateful to its divine former. The
following piece may serve as a specimen of her talent in poetry. It was
undesignedly dropped, in one of her morning walks: and to that accident we owe
the pleasure of transcribing it for the perusal of those who have a taste for
poetical composition. It is addressed to the Creator, on the display of his
glory and goodness in the Creation and perfection of man.

GREAT Source of life, of light, of love!
Thy works do richest blessings prove
To worlds, beyond the grasp of thought,
To strength of our perfection wrought!
To worlds, where endless orders move
In all the beauteous forms of love!
Love every curious art divine,
And every heavenly gay design,
Richly devised in thy vast plan
Yet greatly all confessed in man!
In him thy gayest beauties shine,
Thy finest arts of love combine
To make him loveliest of all
That men or angels lovely call!
Thy building, of divinest taste;
Never to admit decay or waste!
Here all thy richest fullness dwells,
And all thy luster here excels.
Majestic comeliness is here;
And all that Deity holds dear!
Why did thou call creation forth,
And give, to worlds unnumber'd, birth;
In spacious infinite to roll,
Vast as the measure of thy soul?
Why this amazing boast of might?
These splendid blazing orbs of light?
Those flaming seraphs round thy throne,
Arrayed in glories like thy own?
Why this immense variety
Of beings, to exult in Thee;
And all the amazing things we see,
And hear, -- and feel, -- with extacy?
Thy Agency the truth reveals;
Nor ought of thy design conceals. --
In Thee that man might all possess --
Such is thy mighty plan of bliss --
For man, thy glory and thy joy;
Thy heir of immortality!
Such is the voice of nature, round
Creation -- such the joyful sound!
With what inimitable art
Do thou restore the wandering heart!
Banished a moment, from thy sight,
To be restored more heavenly bright!
So glooms of night, to the forlorn,
Give a new splendour to the morn:
Then anguish, grief, and fears give way
To all the sweetness of the day!
In Man we view thy Heavenly face,
Thy lovely form, thy matchless grace,
Thy glorious attributes of love,
Wisdom and truth; -- all here we prove.
In extacy of bliss we gaze;
Lost in a wilderness -- a maze
Of dear delight; -- till sick we grow
Over whelmed! -- Did not compassion flow
With kind relief; -- new life dispense: --
Strength to sustain celestial sense; --
Exquisite taste of joys refined;
Boundless, as thy eternal mind!
In Nature's book, thy name we read:
Our kindred counselor and guide.
Transported with delight, we rove
Through those fair pages of thy love!
With thee we pass through every scene
Of various life; where thou have been
Through the vast universe employed
In thy great works; yet never cloyed
In curious search of glorious things.
Raised, on imagination's wings,
Beyond the ken of mortal eyes,
By reason, guided, it is, we rise
To highest Heaven's bright domain
Nor wish we to descend again!
O happy moments! -- past with Thee
In heavenly converse, sweet and free;
Unfolding great futurity! --
Uniting past with present things,
Which to one point thy goodness brings;
Centering the whole in Thee divine;
Where Heaven and earth in one do join!
Through life, and death with thee we go,
Companion of our weal or woe --
Compass, with the swelling flood;
And, with thee wade through seas of blood;
And walk through Hell's horrendous gloom,
Where cheering light does never come!
Wherever our progress does extend,
Thou art our kind, supporting friend!
From every conflict, far away, --
With thee we rise to glorious day;
Refined for heavenly converse high,
Beyond our weak mortality!
Raptured, we view our destined home;
Nerv'd to immortal strength and bloom!
What glory, in those realms above!
What hidden worlds of untold love!
There God, with awful majesty,
Directs the grand machinery
Of his Creation large, and new!
What scenes he leads his children through;
His Heaven-born sons and daughters fair;
Who his celestial beauties share,
And charms -- unfading as the light,
Whose splendors burn forever bright; --
Beauty and charms in changeless bloom;
Like him they take their (...) from;
And bliss increasing, joys untold,
External ages do unfold; --
Their mighty bliss so vast and great,
Eternity sustains the weight!
Of this low world we take our leave,
Ah! it is not here that we would live!
Since gayer scenes are spread above;
And there we prove more vigorous love!
It Is Heaven invites no pleas will do
Of this weak life, from which we go!
It Is Heaven appears! death's terrors cease!
Ardent we long for our release;
And all things cheerfully resign
To be immortal and divine!
Through wasteless ages, God will prove
True to the objects of his love!
Greatly with God, in life to reign,
Fears we surmount, and fiercest pain!
O Great Supreme! Thou first and last!
Before creations birth, thou wast;
Or worlds from the dread Chaos rose!
'T was then at thy Almighty voice,
They sprang from darkness; and the day
These Heavens illumined; whilst, through the sky,
Move the bright orbs their destined way;
Telling us wondrous things of Thee!
They teach us, thou art good as great;
And point us to our nobler state;
Above, perhaps, yon milky way,
That leads up to thy brilliant day!
Call us to thy fair palaces,
(Never reached by telescopic eyes
But, by the aid of reason's rays:)
Divinely built! -- not rich Peru
Can glorious gems produce like you;
Nor eastern monarch's dress so gay,
Or blaze in such illustrious day!
As thy bright sons! O Court august!
Thou grand metropolis of Heaven
It Is richest gift! and freely given!
Thy gardens, too, of richest mould;
Enclosed with precious stones, and gold;
With crystal streams, and groves, whose shade
For heavenly pastime, sure, were made!
Immortal fruits, and flowers here grow;
Such as famed Eden never knew.
Arabian sweets, of fragrant smell,
Please not the senses half so well!
Blessed region! formed in taste divine;
Where grandeur does with beauty join;
And every sense is feasted high,
With an immortal luxury.
Darkness and night -- black night! thy lour
Shall here excite our dread no more:
But an eternal day will shine,
Of light ineffably divine!
Those things we suns and stars do call,
Compared with thee, mere nothings all.
They not the faintest glimpse could give,
In the gay world, where we shall live!
Yet, now, those orbs, with heavenly art,
Their Maker's kind designs impart
To all, attentive to their voice;
Their oratory without noise,
Sweetly inform each docile mind
That God will prove forever kind.
Go on, bright orators! proclaim
The triumphs of your Maker's fame,
And goodness; -- till ye cease to roll
Through space immense! -- Still charm the soul
With sacred truths! whisper to all
In vain pursuits of fleeting joys,
Or pleasure, which forever cloys;
That they no longer fruitless roam
Abroad for bliss; and charm them home.
Heaven is our home; our place of rest,
By those bright orators confessed.
Inculcated from all we see
Is life and immortality.
Great source of life! by thee we live;
And old Creation's death survive!
Though sun's and worlds in ruin lie;
Still shall we live, exalted high;
And our refined sonnets prove
Chaste commendations of thy love;
Encircle thy blessed throne around;
And from Heavens loftiest arch resound!
Fairest among ten thousand sons
Thy goodness reared all perfect ones!
Yea, as the stars for multitude,
Or sands washed by the foaming flood!
Like stars for ever, too, they shine!
Bright images of thy fair mind.
Whilst vast eternity alone
Shall serve to make thy beauties known!
Our friends, associates, die away;
And leave us here, immersed in clay!
But we indulge not hopeless grief,
Kind Heaven affords a sweet relief!
Inform us they are but gone home;
A nest exchanged for ample room.
As birds, new-fledg'd mount in the air,
With winged joy expatiate there;
So these, enlarged, have soared away,
Beyond the skies, to brighter day!
We wait a moment our remove,
To reunite with those we love.
There my Philenor! Shall we join!
To none, but Heaven I thee resign!
Sublime thoughts like these, discovered an elevation of mind but seldom
equalled by the contemporaries of Amelia, or in any age of the world. The works
of creation, with which we are surrounded and in which we are involved, do
(...) afford a most satisfactory evidence of the (...) intentions of the divine
architect, with (...) to the present and future happiness of man. A greater
degree of felicity, in his present state of existence, is only prevented by his
weakness: and yet, out of this weakness arises his future immeasurable height
of bliss!

Not long after the return of Nytan, and his friends, from China, Selina
proposed an excursion into the country, of which she had heard such uncommon
panegyric's. Nothing could have been proposed more agreeable to him, as he was
sensible it would greatly conduce to the health as well as pleasure of his fair
spouse. Gesseng and Olivia were equally pleased with it, for the like reasons.
They sat out on a fine morning, on horseback. As they rode through the city,
they made an addition of two couple to the company; two servants only attending
them. They rode several miles on the verdant flowery banks of the river. The
tall and majestic oaks afforded them an agreeable shade and defense from the
scorching beams of the sun. Turning into one of the great roads that were cut
out through the mountains, the prospects before them, and on each side, were
luxuriantly magnificent; which were succeeded by those of alternate groves,
fields and vales, buildings and plantations. After traveling near two hours,
through those dellghtful scenes, they entered a gloomy wood. Though the road
was excellent: yet the dark shade of the lofty trees, excluding the rays of the
sun, gave the appearance of night; exciting a pleasing horror and agreeable
solemnity for the succeeding hour; and they conversed but little. Having rode
through the wood, they saw before them a large well built house, with an high
wall of black marble, which they observed to extend through groves of trees,
and over hills, to a great distance. This was Amelia's Villa. On one side
appeared to them part of a branch of the river, which in various windings, ran
through the island; and a number of well constructed houses on its banks. The
scenes, here, were delightfully romantic! 'Every thing invites us, said Olivia,
to rest here; and see who inhabits this retired mansion.' 'You are very right
lady replied Nytan. My curiosity is excited, and, I doubt not, that of every
one. Besides it is high time for us to rest, and procure some refreshment,
where there is no doubt of our being welcome. The inhabitants of Ravenzar are
the most hospitable people in the world. I will ride on, if you please, and
make the first appearance. He then quickened his horse's pace. But Selina's did
not choose to be left behind, so they both advanced together to the gate, which
they found open. Alighting, and leaving their horses, they crossed the court to
a large hall, in which Amelia was reclining on a soffa; who seeing two
strangers advancing, arose to meet them with an air of gaity and engaging
familiarity. -- 'Sweet lady, said Nytan, give me leave to present you with a
sister, who must certainly look upon you as her second self, you so greatly
resemble her.' He was indeed struck with the fine appearance of Amelia, and her
likeness to his Selina. They saluted and embraced her, as was customary in this
island of pure undissembled love. The Prince said a thousand pleasant things.
None could be a more gallant and compassionate admirer of the fair sex. Struck,
and enraptured, as he was, with the loveliness, and likeliness of the two
ladies, Which cried he, is Selina, and which is Amelia? Sure you are
twin-sisters -- what a surprising resemblance of two of the most perfect
beauties nature ever formed!' The ladies were quite merry with his gallantry.
'I think however, added he, Silena may be distinguished by a little paleness.
Then, conscious of the occasion of this distinction, which could not but excite
some anxious sensations, at the same time that it flattered his most pleasing
hopes; he tenderly seated them both on a soffa, calling upon his fellow
travelers, who were entering the hall, to participate with him in the joy and
pleasure of so unexpected and invaluable an acquisition to their society.
Amelia rose to receive them but instantly sunk lifeless on the soffa! Every one
was frightened, and ran to her assistance. Two lovely girls who were at work in
a contiguous apartment, the door of which opened into the hall, flew to her
with a smelling bottle. It soon produced signs of returning life! when Amelia
opening her eyes, fixed them on the astonished and enraptured Philenor! it was
indeed Philenor himself whose sudden unlooked-for appearance had overcome the
tender Amelia. 'O! exclaimed she, Philenor, I had resigned you to Heaven; as
lost to me for the present life!' -- 'Heaven, replied he has rewarded your
resignation by restoring to you, your faithful lover, who will never more leave
you! little indeed, did I ever expect this felicity! But my misfortunes are now
amply recompensed. Yes. It was for this joyful event, that I was invited to the
happy island of Ravenzar, and introduced to the illustrious friends who have
conducted me to the treasure of my heart!

Great was the joy of the company on so fortunate an occurrence, which was
brought forward in the manner following. Philenor was taken off a wreck by
Gesseng, just before his last arrival. The men would most probably all have
perished, had not deliverance been so seasonably sent them. A friendship soon
commenced between two young men so nearly resembling each other, as did Gesseng
and Philenor, both in age and sentiment. The latter had been in the country
with the seamen, saved with him from the wreck, to view a spot of land which
has been recommended to them for their present residence, or future settlement,
if they chose to continue on the island; with regard to which they were to be
wholly at their own aption. Gesseng had mentioned them, to Nytan with good
commendations; highly praising Philenor, as one who would do great honor to
their society. Adding, that he intended to introduce him, on his return from
the country. It had been the intention of Philenor to return to his native
home, as soon as possible by such means as should be concerted between himself
Gesseng and Nytan. To return thither he pleaded indispensable obligations. He,
therefore, purposed to be at court, as soon as he had determined matters with
his seamen. Nytan, with his party of pleasure had been gone from the palace,
but an hour, when Philenor arrived there: and receiving directions had
immediately followed them: overtaking them just as Nytan had preceded his
company, and entered Amelia's gate. Thus it happened that he so unexpectedly
appeared before her; who, having now recovered her presence of mind, ordered
refreshments to be brought into the hall. In the mean time, her new friends
were congratulating her and her lover on so happy a meeting, and saving a
thousand pleasant things. 'But I hope, said Nytan, we are not soon to lose you.
Philenor, I have learned, intended to return in a few days, to his country,
doubtless, in quest of his Amelia. But, now he has found her, I hope that
intention will be laid aside; especially when he is informed what has happened.
He cannot, scarcely, imagine it can be for his Amelia's safety, (if for his
own) to return, at present, whatever he may do hereafter.' 'I think with you,
my lord, replied Philenor on this subject. But I leave all to Amelia.' 'Then,
said Selina, we may all keep up our spirits! mine I confess were a little
deranged, at the very idea of loosing Amelia. But, I dare to say, she will not
he in a hurry to visit a country so abandoned as to persecute such excellence,
and force her to flee from her native home. What say you, my charming friend!'
O! dear lady, replied Amelia, I can add nothing to your arguments for my
remaining here, as in a happy asylum; after I have related to Philenor my
misfortunes; -- only that if I may take his word, we are never more to be
separated.' 'No answered Philenor, most certainly never. The idea of being
separated, is intelerable for a moment! besides, if you, Amelia, choose to
continue here for life, I must of necessity make the same choice. Here, money,
or estate, I have none. But I cannot fail of seeing you happy in the friendship
of those who will never suffer us to want any thing in their power to grant. At
home, indeed, I have large interest, which, I doubt not, may be transferred
here.' 'You will make yourself easy, replied Gesseng, on all accounts. Our
friend Nytan, can inform you, there are the best of lands at your service.'
'And the sincerest friends, said Nytan. Whatever assistance you may require, in
respect of your estate, or friends, we shall cheerfully afford you. Amelia has
here a valuable estate, and the same hour that unites you in one, you will
become lawful possessor of a thousand acres of land adjoining to hers. Besides
you will have apartments in my palace, and a spacious elegant building of your
own, nearly opposite to it, in the city. We have, likewise treasures of money
and jewels, which you are to command as your own. Let us then, my friends
hasten to Xuntien, and see these amiable lovers united. Afterward, we shall
find means to procure them intelligence from their native country.' Philenor
and Amelia, with the most grateful acknowledgments, yielded themselves to the
advice and conduct of their generous friends; who proposed to conduct them
immediately to Xuntien.

Refreshments were now brought in, and set before the company. Nytan and
Selina, after they had all dined, proposed a walk in the garden, which being
agreed to, they went thither. They found it to be laid out in taste. The two
little girls were likewise with them, and admired for their beauty and
behavior. Olivia proposed to take them to Xuntien, declaring they should not
be buried in the country. It is time for them, added she, to see company. 'Have
they been always, Amelia, continued she, thus secluded from the world?' 'Far
from so, replied Amelia: my house is frequented by all sorts of people. We have
seldom two days without company, and the girls have always their share of it.'
'Well returned Olivia, we must have them up to town, however.' 'By all means,
added Nytan, we shall on no account, consent to their being left; and I
believe, Amelia, must shut up her house, for two or three months at least. We
shall be very loath to part with her, and her beautiful neices, in less time.'
Amelia expressed the warmest acknowledgments to her friends; adding that all
should be as they thought proper. 'Well, then, replied Nytan, let us prepare to
set out, or it will be night before we reach Xuntien.' When they were returned
to the house, Amelia was not long in arranging her affairs. She committed the
care of her villa to her faithful servants, and her carriage was brought to the
door; in which she, with Philenor, and her two neices, entered, and all set
forward for Xuntien. The weather was fine, the company gay and cheerful. They
made but one short stage, about half way; and before sunset, reached Nytan's
palace; who led his company into a spacious and magnificent apartment, the
windows of which where open to the garden. Nothing could ever exceed the gaiety
and splendour of this apartment! It seemed to be all alive with portraits large
as were once the living originals; and paintings of romantic rural scenes, all
done in the utmost perfection of art. These were the tapestry work of the
orphan ladies. Neither would it be easy to find any fine prospects superior, if
equal, to those which the windows of this apartment afforded. Here tea was
brought, and other refreshments suitable to the time and and occasion. Every
one took what they pleased from a large marble table, which stood under the
window, loaded with every delicacy which nature provides to recruit (...)
travelers. After sitting an hour as the evening was delightful, and the moon
shone out with unusual luster, they walked out into the garden. The air was
perfumed with nature's sweets, and the brightness of the evening invited them
to continue walking till the hour of supper. This was served up in the
pavilion; the most pleasant situation the garden afforded; commanding several
grand views of the country. It can scarcely be imagined -- magnificent,
delicious and enchanting as was every thing around them, that so respectable
and accomplished a company of friends could be wanting in conversation on such
delightful and interesting subjects as the wonders of creation, the events of
life, and their own knowledge and experience must inspire and dictate. When
they met from the alleys and winding paths, in which each party had been
strolling, Philenor introduced some observations on the various manners of
nations, and the heights of luxury and false magnificence to which some had
arrived; and on the fatal consequences of vice and dissipation. He instanced
several flourishing kingdoms, whose destruction he ventured to prophecy, would
ere long be the necessary result of their extravagancies and vices. These
subjects were renewned in the (...), and led to others equally interesting.
'One great cause said Nytan, of the misery and ruin of nations, (little
attended to) is intemperance in eating and drinking. Men drown their rational
faculties, by indulging their appetites. They load their bodies with bad
humors, and strengthen the false appetites which they have acquired, weakening
and destroying their constitutions. When the body is disordered by
intemperance, the powers of the mind are, likewise weakened and depraved. False
ideas of the enjoyment of life, are entertained, and produce innumerable
expensive luxuries which render the rich bankrupt and oppressive. Their tables
of luxury must be supplied, at all adventures. The universe must be ransacked
for delicacies; and mankind plundered, oppressed, enslaved to fill the purses
of extravagant luxurious avarice. Religion, too, must be prostituted to the
same infamous and detestable purposes.'

'All this have I seen realized, added Eudemon, [he being one of the company
who joined the party at Xuntien,] in the country from which I originated. In
former times, continued he, when the leading men of society were virtuous and
wife, sober and temperate, my countrymen were influenced by their example; and
enjoyed in a very remarkable degree the happiness of civil and domestic life.
But an unhappy negligence and oversight in the all-important care and education
of children, caused intemperance gradually to take root, till it spread, like
an infectious disease, in every family; till, at length, temperance and
sobriety, were words which had wholly lost their original signification, and
must now be considered as importing a decent kind of viciousness, very well
comporting with virtue or religion. In fine, every amiable grace and virtue
became quite different things from what they formerly were; and men of interest
and influence, who valued themselves upon the excellency of their moral
characters, were, accordingly, esteemed as good men -- the best of men; whilst
fashionable temperance was undermining their constitutions, and loading them
with diseases; having already polluted their minds. -- O unhappy country! how
art thou estranged from thy ancient simplicity of manners, which arrayed thee
with glory; from those illustrious virtues, with which thou wast anciently
adorned! how disgraceful is the distinction of men of character, wealth and
influence now become, in discerning eyes, if there is any reality in virtue, if
there be, in nature, any such things as true glory and real felicity! --
disgraceful -- because such pass for great and good, benevolent and useful,
generous and brave, whose only real solicitude is to gratify their avarice and
ambition, their passion for luxurious extravagant pleasures, and foolish
magnificence; -- who prostitute religion to their detestable purposes, and fail
not to call in fanaticism to their assistance, in establishing slavery and
oppression! So long as they can gratify their ruling passions, their hearts are
steeled against humanity, yet with a great parade of patriotism, philanthropy,
and civilized manners; and they can have no attention to Heaven's justice, and
that shame and ruin which must one day overtake them!'

'You indeed speak melancholy truths, rejoined Nytan. What scenes of misery and
distress have such men brought upon mankind in every age, as well as in the
present; some of which I have myself been witness to, not long ago: and where
the lower classes of society, who ought to be cherished and cultivated to the
utmost, are used as beings created only for slavery and imposition. They have
religion: and what is it? The engine of cruelty and oppression: the religious
leaders oppressing the people, at the same time that they grossly deceive them:
in this they are leagued with those who are called the great ones; but who may
more justly be denominated beasts of prey, devouring monsters, or, the plagues
and tormentors of mankind. Such are the effects of unrestrained appetites and
passions; rendering them never-ceasing plagues to each other, destroying virtue
and sincerity, truth and humanity from the world. Custom has long rendered
their vices and hypocrisy consistent with virtue, piety, sincerity and
uprightness. And many, imposing upon themselves, imagine that for their virtue
and good deeds (respected as such) their names will be immortalised. But the
immortality of their fame, will prove the immortality of their disgrace! The
luxury, the profuse magnificence of the rich and powerful are totally repugnant
to the principles and sentiments of a truly virtuous mind. Though in a
situation like ours, magnificence and splendour are unavoidable. Since gold,
diamonds, and pearls are our readiest and cheapest materials for building and
ornament; and the treasures we possess, can scarcely ever be exhausted; by
means of which likewise, we are rendered more capable of extensive usefulness.
But perfect temperance presides at our tables, and real virtue regulates our
actions. These are all the gifts of our heavenly benefactor. It is through his
sovereign will and pleasure that we are temperate and virtuous, and gratitude
inspires and animates our exertions to render others as happy as ourselves. --
But alas! What multitudes are there who most miserably suffer through the
mistaken ideas of living which they have imbibed and cherished! and how many
are there, who endure every hardship for a name or to accomplish some imaginary
valuable purpose; and that with a surprising fortitude and perseverance; who
yet have not the courage to practice a just temperance, and thereby procure to
themselves health, true pleasure and tranquillity, for a long series of years!
-- What absurdity and inconsistency is here! -- and which, those who could
subdue armies, and establish empires, have not been able, as to themselves to
obviate! To what purpose do they glory in their courage and fortitude, who have
not, after all, the courage, the fortitude to restrain their appetites within
the limits of that just temperance, which would insure to them true happiness,
true glory, permanent felicity and honor, and make them illustrious by real
usefulness to mankind. Those who practice a just temperance, enjoy a thousand
pleasures unknown to others: In them we may see its happy effects in every
situation and circumstance. They only can be properly said to enjoy life. Our
happiness greatly depends upon the proper government and arrangement of our
thoughts; which can never be so aranged and governed without the strictest
temperance both in eating and drinking, and bodily exercise. For by the
prevalency of bad humors, arising from intemperance, the mind becomes clouded
and enervated; the reasoning powers are deprived of their natural freedom and
influence. Some indulge and pamper themselves to that degree, that they can
hardly think or crawl: others stupify their senses, and drown their rational
faculties with strong drink. No man can enjoy the free exercise of the powers
of his body or mind, who lives intemperately. What a wide difference subsists
between such an one, and the man who is governed by the strictest temperance!
The former is erroneous in his judgment, wild in his projects, disordered in
imagination, unhappy in his memory, depraved in his principles, a slave to his
passions, restless, sick, diseased and hastening to a premature and miserable
death. The latter is wholly from those evils; suffers no inconveniences from
his own conduct; his passions and appetites being subservient to his reason and
his felicity. He enjoys a sound mind in a healthy and vigorous body increases
in wisdom and experience; and armed with virtue and manly reflection, is always
prepared for every event of life. He lives quietly through a long series of
happy years, and grows ripe for a glorious immortality. Temperance and sobriety
are indeed of the highest consequence, both to the happiness and the usefulness
of life. Experience evinces to every one who has made a fair trial of the
salutary effects of temperance, that, as is a man's temperance in his diet, so
is the serenity, freedom and equality of his mind: and if there is a perpetual
sameness in the one, so, likewise, will there be in the other. To a just
temperance is to be attributed that constant serenity and rationality in the
sages of antiquity, and which prevailed in them (...) proportion to their
proficiency in the (...) practice of temperance. Hence the great and (...)
acquisitions of useful knowledge in (...) ages, fortunately transmitted to
posterity. Hence the stately progress of glorious liberty, with all her train
of blessings, from one region to another, at different periods of time, till at
length, fixing her residence in the temperate and peaceful, climate of
Ravenzar, she diffuses her salutary influence, far and wide, through the
habitable world! O sacred and powerful temperance! what mighty exploits have
thou achieved! what great and excellent things have thou accomplished!
repairing the ravages and devastation which thy opposite had perpetrated! it is
under thy enlivening auspices only, that states or empires can flourish in the
changeless bloom and vigor of youth, or useful science diffuse its illustrious
beams, and add a still new luster and brilliancy to those splendors she has
already so extensively displayed; whose reviving rays have penetrated the dark
corners of the earth which savage barbarism and ignorance had so long involved
in horrendous gloom. But I must not expatiate so largely, even on so important
a subject.'

'I have frequently, said Laertes, [the other citizen from Xuntien,] observed
of persons, who were perpetually complaining of their ill health, that they
were very unwilling to believe what sound reason teaches; namely, that whatever
is received into the stomach more than it can readily digest, or that agrees
not with it; excites those humors which occasion a variety of disorders. That
those humors fill the brain with noxious fumes, and prevent the proper exercise
of the mental powers; render the persons restless and uneasy with every thing
about them, which they impute to wrong causes. At length fevers were brought
upon them, and a variety of symptoms and forerunners of incurable diseases, in
the end seized them. Whereas, those who were guided by their reason (few as
they were) were free from those complaints, and enjoyed a great degree of
health to old age. Their health would have been more perfect, and they would
have lived many years longer had they been more perfect in the art of
temperance. But most of the people among us, (for I am speaking of my former
countrymen) seemed to act more like children, who hanker and fret after every
thing that is to be eat or drank: and with regard to children, the indulgent
parents very readily gratify them in their desires, too often to their ruin.
Ah! Cruelly indulgent parents! happy were it for you, and your offspring, did
you refrain from such pernicious kindness! Yet you still follow the beaten path
of customary folly in which, yourselves being induced, you have dragged heavily
on, a burdensome life; this was owing to the abuse of your stomachs; and for
which you are denied the exhilirating prospects of a long life of health and
happiness!'

'Your observations, resumed Nytan, are such as may very justly be made on many
other countries besides your own; though not I believe in this. We are
sensible, the stomach is a most curious and delicate workmanship of nature,
soon feeling injurious treatment, and terrible, are its resentments. There are
too many, who, owing to the fatigue of labor and business, have been induced
to give way to their appetites to the great prejudice, and often, ruin of their
constitution. But, it ought to be considered, that temperance is requisite in
business and labor, as well as in the use of food and drink. The steady
practice of using the same quantity of meat and drink every day, or at every
meal, regarding, at the same time, its quality, as well as the measure of their
stomachs, is what insures long life, and a perfect state of health; even as the
great system of the creation is constantly maintained in the same condition, by
an exact supply from the divine source of its existence and fecundity. Order
and regularity were observed in the composition of our bodies; and how can we
expect they can be maintained in their proper state of health and vigor,
without temperance? Pherneone of Greece, thus uttered to me, lately, his
melancholy complaint. 'My former tranquillity is no more. I relish not my usual
pleasures. I walk through the same delightful scenes of nature; but they yield
not the wonted sublime enjoyment to me. The delights of the preceding years --
alas! they are vanished!' 'To what, my friend, said I, is this unhappy change
to be attributed? Is not your temperance the same? (for I more than suspected
the real cause.) 'No replied Pherneone, it is not, I must freely own. (...)
have not been able to afford myself my usual diet; and have made too much use
of what agrees not with my constitution.'

I amply furnished him with the means of resuming his temperance. His
tranquillity returned, and he enjoyed his delicious walks, his studies and
amusements as before. But if men will eat and drink, or labor and toil beyond
what their natures can endure, they must suffer the terrible consequences.
Ardenly is it to be wished, their eyes were effectually opened to such
inexcusable folly, and that they might be induced to renounce intemperance,
that baneful source of both public and private calamities; the plague and ruin
not only of individuals, but families, societies, states and empires! -- But,
look into the families-attentively consider the country, where temperance and
freedom, those constant companions, are united; -- who can describe the
felicity and glory there enjoyed! To promote such a glory and felicity, amongst
mankind, let every exertion be made, and every power of eloquence be used,
deeply to impress upon the minds of men men who desire to be free; that the
rich invaluable blessings of liberty, can never be effectually obtained,
secured or enjoyed, if temperance is neglected. The men of temperance and
sobriety are the wisest patriots and legislators, the best citizens, the most
benevolent, faithful and successful instructors. It is with such only, wisdom
dwells, and with whom are found prudent counsels. It is such only who can
possess undissembled benevolence. I have observed a custom in Europe, which
has doubtless, given rise to the greatest evils. It is that of urging, and
even compelling guests to drink beyond the bounds of sobriety, which may very
justly be called a barbarous custom; it having often occasioned the ruin of
many a promising young creature. I am confident the number is far from being
inconsiderable, of those who can derive, from this inglorious practice, the
fatal debauchery of their minds, and all the melancholy and distressing
consequences which have imbittered their lives, and that there are thousands
now living (if living it may be called) the miserable victims of intemperance;
who could attest to the truth of what I have advanced, as awfully verified in
themselves.

But, how shall we address our misguided fellowcreatures, so as to gain their
attention on so interesting a subject.'

'Powerful and persuasive arguments, answered Philenor, should be urged upon
them, and enchanting scenes of virtuous happiness presented to their view. I
would urge them frequently to contemplate the glorious advantages, the
inexpressible happiness to which, by a just temperance, they would attain. I
would likewise press home to them the fatal consequence that inevitably follow
intemperate indulgencies. I would endeavor sedulously to induce them to reason
each one with himself after the following manner. 'Shall I then risk
encountering with the great, the accumulating evils which intemperance produce;
especially when I see them making such terrible havoc with those around me? Is
there not horror in the thought sufficient to deter me? Besides what can be
more shameful than to refuse to be wise! On the other hand, how inviting are
the benefits the rich variety of permanent blessings to which a (...)
temperance calls me! To be free from disquietude and pain, from distressing
anxieties, diseases and agonies; to enjoy the free exercise of my rational
powers, perpetual health and serenity, to live long in felicity and honor; and
when the period of this state of existence arrives, that period which nature
has prescribed, to exchange it for immortality, -- Surely these are glorious
advantages worthy the contention against lawless indulgences though they were
even more alluring than a false taste has rendered them.' 'Men think, added
Laertes, that to restrain their appetites is to render themselves miserable;
till you can persuade them, that though the restraining them is somewhat
irksome at first, yet it afterward becomes to them a second nature to live in
the strictest temperance. When you have induced them to dwell in the subject,
and to hear your arguments with pleasure; they may presently be animated to
every necessary exertion; till at length they attain to an experimental
knowledge of those felicities with which temperance crowns her faithful
votatrires. I would address them, continued Laertes, in such moving language as
the following: -- If temperance be the best preservative of health, the friend
of nature, and the offspring of virtue, the source of industry, and of every
great and good action; if she leads to true glory and renown, as she fits the
mind and body for every valuable purpose and employment; if she gives length of
days, and permanent enjoyment; and if, on the other hand an intemperate course
inevitably leads to irreparable misery; then let these weighty considerations
rouse you from your unmanly indulgencies! break loose from the shameful the
disgraceful fetters with which vice would forever enslave you, before they
become too firmly rivited to be rent asunder. -- Before it be too late, be
entreated to spare yourselves, ere the wanton waste of your natural strength
can never be repaired; before unavailing regret and anguish be forced upon you,
and cruel reflection awakes, like a giant refreshed with wine; at once dashing
in pieces, every delusive hope, and inflicting tortures that can never be fully
expressed! For what can be conceived more dreadful than the condition of a
person, who by his intemperance, has filled his body with loathsome, incurable,
tormenting diseases! add to this the agonizing reflection, that by his own
folly he has rendered, the pleasant and delightsome summer of life, a dreary
winter of premature old age, loaded with infirmities, disorders, and racking
pains! Thus would I endeavor to awaken my fellow creatures to a just sense of
their folly and madness in destroying themselves by their intemperance, and may
ten thousand tongues and pens be employed, in so laudable an attempt, with all
the most persuasive and alluring charms and paraprase of unrivalled eloquence,
exhibiting the unspeakable happiness of a life of sobriety. -- For is there a
subject more worthy of the strongest genius, or that more importunately calls
for the display of the most shining talents, when viewed in all its high
relations!'

It was thus this worthy company past the evening, in conversing on subjects
the most interesting to mankind; whose perfect felicity was among their fondest
wishes, and to promote which they were never wanting in the most vigorous
exertions. The ladies had their share in the conversation, and every sentence
they uttered did honor to their good sense, their education, and their
philanthropy. The time of repose being arrived, they retired, to their several
apartments. In the morning after breakfasting, they resumed their garden walks.
Not that business was neglected. Philenor was not wanting in his address to
hasten his marriage. Nytan exerted himself to the same purpose -- and Amelia,
though employed in contemplation, study and writing, on the retired side of a
hill shaded with groves, found some intervals of time to think on the same
subject. She arose very early in the morning, and, entering the garden alone,
ranged from grove to grove, and from hill to hill; till, at length, she seated
herself on the side of one that commanded a grand and engaging view of nature's
variegated works. Here she continued till the hour of breakfast; and indulging
her poetic and prosaic genius, composed the following little pieces on
temperance and the glories of creation.

'Sacred temperance! with thee are d allied all the graces and virtues that
adorn human nature, which render us worthy (...) that existence which Heaven
has bestowed, and which its goodness continues. Thou art the faithful guardian
of human felicity. All should celebrate thy merited praise, and every tongue
should speak with rapture, of the invaluable blessings which thou do procure!
yet, worthy as thou art of universal regard, and, inestimable as are thy
labors, too few are there to be found, of mankind, and even among those called
civilized nations, who pay a just attention to thy salutary laws! such is the
deplorable depravity of human nature! what a continued series of calamities,
has thy opposite -- intemperance, brought upon the human race! Nor are either
sex to be excepted. -- With what wretched kings and rulers have thou peopled
the world! what miserable heads of families, parents, teachers and children! To
remedy thy growing evils, instructions and warnings have been but to little
purpose inculcated. -- Cold and lifeless treatises on the virtues of temperance
and sobriety, however frequent, could accomplish, upon the voluptuaries, no
salutary effect. When distempers assail them, when sickness and diseases make
depredations on their frames, they reluctantly submit to the necessary
restraints from luxurious indulgencies, and to an abstemious diet; which is
afterward despised and misimproved, when a measure of health returns. A
prudent and regular diet, so essential to health, is then no longer regarded,
and they return to their former phrenzy. -- If many, who are instructors,
understood and practiced a just temperance, what happy consequences might be
expected to follow this example and instruction! if possessed of superior
abilities, they could not fail to recommend to every one, within the sphere of
their influence, the virtue they exemplified in their lives and manners, with
the most alluring charms of eloquence; which doubtless must produce a salutary
effect. -- Happy would it be for the country, where I first drew my breath,
could such valuable instructors be obtained there! I might hope for a
mitigation of its calamities from the reform of its inhabitants.

Descend, celestial spirit! O! inspire
With ardent zeal, men of superior force,
Boldly to stem the torrent of oppression;
Firm to resist the tide of luxury,
That bodes the ruin of my country!
O blessed Ravenzar! have thou none to spare
On Heaven's kind errands to a sinking land?
With power and argument, they would soon subdue
Ten thousand hearts; and leave the tyrant few
To aid his madness. Virtue then should sway
The regal scepter, we its laws obey.
The following she entitled, the glories of the creation, addressed to the
Creator.

What wonders rise from thy creating power!
Almighty Architect! all great, all good!
Omnipotent and omnipresent God!
I feel thy presence, whilst thy works I view;
Myself so admirably formed -- to think on thee!
Source of my being, too; -- upholding all,
Through the immeasurable universe;
Where millions of intelligencies bright,
And glorious, far beyond perhaps, the reach
Of my conception, live -- exult in being!
Amazing condescension! To impart
Life to the smallest dust; that life preserve
Amidst ten thousand accidents and fears!
The meanest insect of thy love partakes,
In common with the nearest to thy throne
In conscious greatness. -- Love created all;
[Love condescending -- to the first -- and last]
And all upholds in being, and in bliss!
By yon bright luminary -- world of fire!
I see -- and bless the hand that fixed it there!
What glories now pour on my raptured sight,
And charm my every sense! woods, fields and flowers,
And verdant lawns! -- Amazing height
Of mountains -- rocks stupendous, hills and groves,
Receding from the view to meet the skies:
These all proclaim thy grandeur, and thy power,
And wisdom infinite; and prove thy love; --
Thy happiness they prove, as blessed in all!
The feathered songsters warble forth thy praise,
From morn to night, incessant; and Instruct
My pen, my tongue, and all me powers I boast,
As gifts of thy munificence, thy boundless love!
Gay scenes of second paradise! through which I rove
In contemplation sacred and sublime!
Think of my gayer friends -- thy noblest gifts
To me, least worthy of the bliss I share
With them in life -- in social converse sweet!
The nuptials of Philenor and Amelia were celebrated in the hall of the
Prince's palace. Ravenzar was at the head of the brilliant company of friends
and citizens there assembled,

Reshang relates, a number of Fairies and Genies there likewise made a grand
appearance. But the limits of a volume are too scanty to contain the surprising
scenes he opens on this occasion, and other succeeding events.

Dinner was served up in a magnificent apartment adjoining the hall. A concert
of music was performed, at intervals, till the company arose from table. The
most perfect temperance was habitual here. Their repast consisted of every
wholesome delicacy. But, on this island of perpetual health, none feasted on
flesh. Here no creature's blood was shed, nor life sacrificed to gratify a
vicious palate. On this island of felicity, [now yielded to inhabitants worthy
of it] cruelty, lust and intemperance were unknown. Here the beautiful variety
of creatures enjoyed their various pleasures undisturbed, and lived in amity
with man; and with him waited the illustrious day, not far off, when all shall
be invested with immortality.

Amelia had composed the following lines expressive of her sentiments of this
exalted and refined society, and of the Prince.

Deeds of immortal fame thy glory raise,
Ages unborn shall celebrate thy praise,
In virtue, honor, peace and length of years,
With each sweet bliss the social life endears!
In thy blessed country thousands with thee share,
And every name is high recorded there,
In monuments that time can never wear.
Hail! favored island, whose denizens prove
Supremely blessed in friendship as in love!
In every clime thy virtues shall be known,
And still commended till become their own.
Thy great example nations shall inflame,
With noble zeal, to obtain a glorious name
Like thine illustrious; not for feigned truth,
Or feigned benevolence, but free of both;
Divinely free, and good and wise and great,
Beyond the reach of fraud or wayward fate.
No mists of error here our prospects thwart;
But truth triumphant reigns in every heart.
All powerful truth! (like the heavenly orb on high,
Before whose fires the clouds dispersse and fly,)
At thy approach each mental mist gives way,
And we exult in intellectual day!
THE ORIENTAL PHILANTHROPIST. BOOK VII.
Welcome, ye friends beloved, and daughters fair!
Not one here lives but with sincerest joy
Hails your return. Herds, fields and forest show they are pleased;
And the glad lion's roar's resounds thought all the coast!

IT was on the first day of the eighth year of the establishment of Ravenzar,
at noon they arrived; after a long absence in various parts of the world.
Prince Nytan had transacted the affairs of his friend, effected an happy
revolution in his native country, which held for several years, in which
Rodrigo swayed the scepter. A counter revolution dethroned him. He was the
friend of Nytan, the pupil of Ravenzar. By their aid, he with a few adherents
to virtue, was soon rendered secure and happy in this favored isle. The Prince
with his illustrious friends, had visited the court of Renien, after having
completed his other affairs abroad. It was about this time, (as related by a
Chinese writer, Leinshan) the Emperor Renien paid a visit to his son, and was
received by his friends and fellow citizens with the greatest respect.

Another writer relates, that the vessel which conveyed the Emperor, was by a
storm, drove on the rocks and split to pieces. That the fairy Leingreing
descended to his rescue, in a magnificent vehicle drawn by dragons. She was
accompanied by two females of exquisite beauty. The spacious vehicle received
the whole company of the Emperor, his two daughters and attendants. Kindred
minds, when they meet, soon become united in the bands of endearing friendship.
They were all safely conveyed, by the fairy to Prince Nytans palace, where they
remained several days when the Fairy announced her purpose of departing with
her lovely companions. Ereng and Yerrie, the Emperors daughters, were seized
with the most poignant grief at the thoughts of a separation from their
newly-acquired friends. They were twin sisters; and the Fairy had lately taken
them into her protection, having relieved them from the deepest poverty and
affliction. This story is affecting and interesting. The Fairy Leingreing was
conveying them to a recess she had provided for them; where they were to
complete their education, and after a series of happy events they were to
become inhabitants of Ravenzar. The Fairy perceiving the grief occasioned by
this separation, assured them of an happy meeting in a few months in the
Emperors palace. The Emperor after enjoying several weeks the pleasures of
Ravenzar returned to his own dominions, full of its wonder's; and it was a
pleasure to a mind like his to acknowledge the superiority of Ravenzar.


This was the day of their return to their beloved fellow-citizens. The shore
was crowded to receive them, and congratulate their arrival. The sun beamed
forth with unusual splendors, and nature added new graces to her enchanting
smiles!

A grand feast was served up in the hall and the courts and lawns around it;
and the whole city entertained, without the least confusion among so vast a
multitude. There were concerts of music at proper intervals, and the
illustrious assembly broke not up till long after the usual hour of repose.

Philenor and Amelia had been persuaded to (...) all thoughts of returning to
their country villa; and the neices of Amelia were become so attached to the
families of Prince Nytan and Gesseng, that nothing could afford them more
pleasure than the resignation of the villa. They were now accommodated with
buildings and gardens adjoining the Prince's. For which purpose the mountains
were levelled to a great extent. One high wall enclosed all the gardens and
buildings of the three friends. Nothing ever equalled their beauty and
magnificence. The resigned villa was made a present to Randor, one of the
sailors ship-wrecked with Philenor. He manufactured the finest of linen. Thus
was this sailor raised from the lowest state of wretchedness, by means of
Ravenzar and the three friends; and placed in the happiest situation in the
finest country in the world. The unfortunate and oppressed are jyoifully
received by the citizens of Ravenzar, formed by Heaven to benevolence. The
Deity ever looks with melting pity on the uniserable and destitute. Not one
escapes his all-seeing eye; and for every one he appears, at the proper hour
and moment of relief. The Prince frequently spent a solitary hour in his
chamber in the grove, the chamber which reminded him of past affecting scenes.
There he often thought of his rural retreat in China, and the happiness it
afforded his friends. He was still fond of that pleasant recess of his own
forming. There he likewise wrote to his sisters. The following extract from one
of his letters is at once expressive of his fondness for that retirement, and
the affectionate and exalted sentiments of his heart. And his memoirs of Elvina
are far from unentertaining. The sisters, when they received the epistle, were
sitting together in one of its most delightful chambers over their tea. It gave
indeed an heightened relish to their evenings repast. The Prince, after
relating some interesting domestic affairs, thus continues, 'And why are we
severed from each other at so great a distance? Is it not to render our
pleasure more extatic, when we meet? Add to this, the other pleasures of absent
friends in each other, and the pleasing, the transporting expectation of futute
meeting. -- O! my dear sisters, how far surpassing the most sanguine hopes is
our felicity here? With what an illustrious groupe of friends am I encircled!
what astonished success has attended our benevolent exertions! and what a
divine accession of celestial aid has exalted our glory and happiness, beyond
the power of language to express! But soon, very soon will you converse with a
few of us, in your happy recess. Ah! sacred, voluptuous retirement! Thee shall
we often revisit; thy romantic apartments -- thy delicious walks. There shall
we talk of the refined happiness of our highly privileged society; and deplore
with you, the vices and errors of that world from which we are detached. How
far, how exceeding far, are mankind distanced from just ideas of living -- from
the true enjoyment of existence. These arise only from a just knowledge of the
Deity, constant dependence upon and unreserved confidence in him. Hence we
reason justly, think and act wisely; and our day is always clear and serene.
Whereas, in the world, (those excepted to whom we have a commissioned access)
men really live together more like infernals than rationals. Their lusts, pride
and vanity render them self-tormentors, and perpetual plagues to each other.
How have I seen it in societies -- in families! There real worth and true
modesty are strangers. They are ignorant of themselves, and the grand
assemblies or pure and shining intelligences that behold them, though invisible
to mortal sight; and of the omnipresent Deity. But a divine reform is not far
distant (...) it began with us to become universal. Celestial information is
making a rapid progress among the nations. They shall behold and love truth and
virtue!

'The retired Elvina, (of whom I formerly gave you some anecdotes) has lately
entertained some of us in her romantic abode. You will be surprised when I
acquaint you she married to the venerable Dargenn. They have enlarged the
boundaries of their dwelling in the forest. I must place some valuable friends
around them.

Elvina still retains, in a great measure, her peculiarities and gloominess of
mind, notwithstanding her change of condition. She has expressed something of
them, and her melancholy turn, in a paper, which I found on the carpet in her
little temple (as she calls it) embowered with trees, that give a deep shade,
suited to the gloom of its owner. It is addressed to the creator, and is the
following.

'Wherefore, O source of intellectual light! am I thus perpetually involved in
darkness -- in the grossest ignorance. What crimes did I perpetrate in my
former state of existence, ere I had a being in this world of wretchedness? Why
am I thus miserable -- thus distanced from thee by whom only I exist?

'Thou art good -- unquestionably good and kind. Wherefore are so many millions
destitute of real happiness -- involved in vice and misery? Why remainest thou
at a distance from those who seek thee? And why am I thus isolated from
society, as not like the rest of the human species; -- thus incapable of social
converse? I cannot attain it. But I would converse with the good, the generous;
with those only would I associate, wherever they are to be found. But I am void
of understanding. Will thou not reform this heart of mine? Will thou not
present me with valuable friends, incapable of deceit and folly, pure as the
crystal stream -- of gentlest manners, made up of kindness, formed in thy
likeness.

'Reach forth the hand of benignity and love, O best and loveliest of beings --
heal, raise, and exalt the lowest of thy creatures; that she may become
cheerful and glad in thee tranquil and serene -- at rest and peace in thee --
that she may possess a gaiety of heart that is of thee; not like that of the
foolish, And why have thou destined so very few to be wise and good? May thy
creature demand of thee? why suffered perpetually to err? Why are we not
unchangeably established in rectitude? Thou have given us pleasures; we know
not how to enjoy them: but convert them into pains, distresses, agonies and
horrid despair. Yet thou art most assuredly good tender and kind: and thy
justice arises from thy goodness. None could possess a good thought, a rational
desire, a tender sympathising heart unless inspired by thee. Appear in thy
divine excellencies. Say, I am thy friend, and I will sustain thee; I am thy
richest, thy changeless, thy exhaustless treasure, thy glory and joy. Then
shall I arise on the wings of love, and diffuse light, and joy, and felicity
around. Draw us to thyself. Unveil thy beauties to our sight. Then, and then
only shall we live. For most surely thou intendest our felicity, and nothing
can thwart thy intention. Thou who art happy, perfectly happy; and good,
perfectly good; must delight in our perfection and happiness. Whence, O whence
this veil of darkness? Haste to rend it from our hearts! But I fear alas! I ask
that which I desire not. We are in love with our eccentricity. We delight to
wallow in our pollution. We desire felicity, but are averse to the means
through which it is obtained. We would feign effect impossibilities; and reap
the delicious fruits of virtue in the thorny fields of vice. Thou Almighty!
All-benificent! art able to rectify these disorders, and dispose each heart to
good.

'Elvina, thou love thy husband: but alas! to attract his affections, thou
have nothing -- nothing lovely or amiable. He married thee to take care of thee
and thy interest. He must despise thee, though he pities thee. Would to Heaven
thou had one agreeable quality! where will thou hide thyself!

All comfortless I wander through the groves,
Where happy birds carol, and sing their loves!
They Are innocent and free, whilst I Am a slave,
In chains of darkness bound: O for a darker grave;
Where not a gleam of light, to show my woe,
And no relief, could find a passage through!
Sweet songsters! you I envy not: sing on,
Then rest till morn, and hail the rising sun!
'The present situation of Elvina's mind is owing to former ill-usage, and bad
health. The regimen prescribed for her will be effectual. She will recover. A
large fortune afforded her the means of forming her solitary habition. Dargenn
conducts with much prudence. 'Yes, I believe the purpose of Heaven is our
immortal felicity, said Dargen, I pretend not to deny it. Indeed the argument
appears unanswerable against the infidels. Do they imagine, said he, the
Creator formed creatures to curse their maker? Which they must do, if he made
but to destroy; gave existence but to annihilate. For a continuation of that
being is of all things the most desirable. And do we know we must forever cease
to exist, that our life may be the more miserable? This makes the Creator a
malevolent being, who merits the curse of his creatures. Then every thing
great, good, and glorious, are sources of misery, and vain is virtue. Neither
have we need of grateful hearts. What have we for which to be thankful, if born
only to see good, and then forever to be deprived of it. If it be so, God and
his creation are utterly contemptible. No wonder men depraved and vicious,
proud and insolent harbor such ideas; they are the offspring of vice and
ill nature. But the virtuous are as sore of their future, as of their present
being and bliss. They know infinite perfection accomplishes endless being the
happiness; and that nothing is more impossible than our total annihilation.
Her few attendants are very good. I shall see my wishes accomplished. Dargenn
will be happy with Elvina; and they will become instrumental of much good in
future life. What a variety of miserable situations is the allotment of the
children of men; which arise from want of judgment, prudence and foresight, and
a readiness of apprehension and discernment, and of seasonable recollection; as
well as from the want of good health, the sure consequence of intemperance or
inattention to their peculiar constitutions! When mankind have the wisdom and
fortitude to be truly temperate, their grievances will cease; -- when Deity
puts forth the healing hand. The cure, the effectual cure is from Heaven; and
ere long will it be accomplished. The gift of existence to men -- how
inestimable! In contemplating it, I am filled with adoring admiration and a
pleasure extatic. To live -- to live to God in heavenly converse with the
Deity, and with each other; in all things to see, to enjoy the all-beneficent
source of life and worlds; -- this, my sisters, is life; life overflowing with
bliss!'

Thus writes Prince Nytan, to his beloved and amiable sisters, from his little
retired chamber; once the prison of his confinement, when decoyed from their
agreeable society in the recess; in which they still, with their invaluable
friends, spent many a delightful hour.

One day when he was enjoying a solitary hour in his little chamber in the
garden, who should enter its door but Sanden and Roderigo, arm in arm. -- He
was both surprised and transported. Springing from his seat -- How agreeably
sudden and unlooked for is this! cried he. Welcome dearest friends! I am
overjoyed to see you! 'Ah my Prince! returned Sanden, this situation, this
apartment! well am I reminded of a cruel traitor and enemy, and of his
attrocious crimes! What celestial goodness would he have blasted!' A shower of
tears succeeded those words. The inside of the chamber he knew, notwithstanding
some alterations, to be the same in which his Prince had been formerly
confined, and destined to death. The Prince was greatly affected for a moment.
But recollecting himself -- 'My dearest Sanden, cried he, how happy have my
little misfortunes rendered me, by procuring me your invaluable friendship!
Such, my Roderigo, is Sanden, both to you and me, that nothing can ever disturb
our mutual felicity.' 'Well replied Sanden, our worthy and amiable friend
shall, at convenient time, be made acquainted with all. You must hasten with us
to the palace, to see the illustrious company we have brought you, and learn
how it has happened, that we, whom you believed to be thousands of miles
distant from each other, now meet in Ravenzar.

Gesseng was arrived with his fleet from China, and Ravenzar and Roderigo from
the country of the latter, with great numbers of worhty families.

Inexpressibly joyful was the meeting of these friends and the newly acquired
citizens. They were feasted several days by the inhabitants of Xuntien.
Ravenzar left them on the third day from their arrival: and, as the fleet was
soon to return to China, Roderigo chose to accompany Sanden, and visit that
renowned empire; from whence, after a few weeks, he returned to his beloved
friends; and was accommodated with Philenor's mansion in Xuntien, till further
arrangements were made in his favor by the vigilence of the Prince and the
citizens.

The principle men of Xuntien and the other cities, now often assembled with
Prince Nytan to consult on the interests of their country, and plan schemes of
utility the most wise, the most benevolent and the most extensive. Here (writes
an historian of Xuntien) was a government of a most superior kind; greatly
resembling that of an higher order of beings, whose existence is beyond the ken
of human sight, except when such of them as are commissioned from Heaven render
themselves visible, and hold converse with the wise and virtuous of mankind. --
Here (in this new-formed community) was displayed the most consummate wisdom,
and the most excellent examples of virtue, piety, and disinterested
benevolence. Here was become universally habitual, a tranquillity and happiness
for incalculable years. Here the citizens, of both sexes, increase beauty, and
vigor, and every amiable accomplishment, as they advance in life. Many, several
hundred years old have still all the bloom and energy of youth, the most
perfect exercise of the mental powers; and wait, in cheerful expectation of the
approaching period when, with immortality, all nations shall be forever united
in the most pure and the most sublime enjoyment of existence. Happy community
so highly privileged! with whom exalted intelligences superior to humanity
often associate! here, too, the tenants of the forests have have put off their
savage nature, and rejoice with man! here no noxious animal lives, nor a
creature perpetrates mischief, or excites a fear! Such is the reward of virtue
like that of the citizens of this favored isle!

Roderigo now employed most of his time in studying the affairs and manners of
the country; was exceedingly happy in the friendship of his fellow-citizens,
and soon became most eminently distinguished for his abilities and his
exertions for the public good. A peculiar circumstance had attended him, even
from his earliest years, and very unaccountable, considering his many amiable
qualities: -- He affected not female society, though few were more capable of
rendering themselves agreeable to the most engaging of the fair. His mind was
exalted, his heart tender and benevolent, and his exterior perfectly formed.
This peculiarity is to be accounted for only from the secret influence of
Ravenzar on his mind, least an attachment should interfere with a series of
events that were to be productive of his future felicity in the connubial
state. Neither is it unfrequent, in this world of mysteries and eccentricities,
that things, unaccountable to human wisdom and discernment, are in the chain of
events wisely ordered, and in their proper place. However, the perfection of
the female character, now presented to him, began to inspire other sentiments
in his heart, than such as he perhaps with too must reason had indulged in his
native country.

THE ORIENTAL PHILANTHROPIST. BOOK VIII.
-- Where
The limpid stream glides murmuring down the dale;
The sighing offers and the turtles moan;
Philomel's notes are heard through all the grove,
And float along with every whispering gale; --
'Twas there she pensive sat, and mused on Love!

THE mild and calm region of peace and health; where unaffected modesty and
sweet affability rendered beauty and wit enchanting, and minds cultivated with
real science; was the blissful lot of Nytan, and the friends with whom he was
surrounded -- in a country destined to be the richest sample, to the world, of
nature in all her loveliness, perfection and felicity. But his generous heart,
expanding with benevolence toward the human race, admitted not of his
confinement, even to friends and citizens so worthy and amiable, or to an
island so delicious, so extensive, and populated by thousands of inhabitants,
every individual of which were ever capable of affording him the most agreeable
entertainment, the sincerest pleasure. They were citizens who delighted only in
real virtue, and whose manners were pure and refined; and therefore could not
fail of being always pleasing and engaging to a mind formed like his. But he
loved to range abroad in quest of adventures indeed of the most excellent and
superior kind; not in the pursuit of vain, foolish ambition, wanton pleasure;
but after objects of benevolence such objects as most expressively called for
those friendly aids, those generous attentions, which Nytan was formed, by the
source of goodness, to in a world administer, in olved in the disgraces and
miseries inseparable from folly and vice; in nations whose great are so meanly
little, and whose instructors and guides are so basely degenerate, so
uninformed in real wisdom and virtue. -- In the pursuit of such adventures,
through which only true glory is acquired, he was unwearied, bold and
enterprising; discouraged by no labors or difficulties, deterred by no dangers.

It was on one of his benevolent excursions to Bagdad, he was accompanied by
Philenor, Silena, Amelia and her lovely neices. Aledden, the grand vizier's
son, had no power to resist the charms of Maria. He first beheld her at the
country seat his father possessed a few miles from the city; at which he, with
his guests, were only refreshing themselves, in order to proceed to his most
favored seat twelve miles further, where were the most magnificent gardens. It
was there the grand vizier, having lately become a widower, chiefly resided.
Aleddin's business prevented his attending the company to that seat, and the
next day he was to go on urgent affairs to a far distant town. He had therefore
but a moments conversation with Maria, in which he expressed to her how painful
was the obligation he was under to separate himself from her and her worthy and
amiable friends. When they were gone forward on their route, he gave way to
chagrin and grief at being so unfortunately circumstanced: when, on looking
over the papers he was to take with him on his journey, he found to his joy, an
essential document missing. This made it necessary that he should set out in
the evening to wait on his father for the paper he had neglected to leave. When
he arrived within view of the house, he was in raptures to see Maria on the
road, far distanced from the rest of the company, who were walking. He hastened
to her, and, dismounting from his horse, begged leave to attend her; informing
her of the circumstance that rendered him so happy as to behold her once more
before he sat out on his journey. In expressing to her his affection he was
heard by Maria with greatest apparent indifference; and at length she insisted
upon his entirely dropping the subject. When they were arrived to the house, he
waited on his father in his closet, who surprised at his own negligence, gave
him the paper, insisting on his returning after supper, and hastening his
journey. He knew the necessity of this too well to object. He was happy however
in the presence of the fair object of his affection at supper, and with the
company and conversation of her illustrious friends. Ritiring to a chamber, he
penned an epistle to Maria, which having finished, and left with a servant on
whom he could depend to deliver to her, if possible, that evening, he returned
to the company, bade them adieu, and departed to prepare for his journey on the
morrow.

When Maria perused the epistle, it presented to her a mind formed to her
fondest wishes. At the bottom of it she read the following lines --

A mind so sweetly formed to love
As thine, sure never can cruel prove,
Hence hope the lover's heart sustains;
Despair suspends, and sooths his pains.
Then view him, fair one, as he is,
Without deceit and mean disguise.
O! (...) his fondest purposes,
And kindly seal his future bliss!
The faithless and inconstant lover
Thy piercing eyes must soon discover:
But Aleddin his heart reveals,
And not a single thought conceals.
As Aleddin had entreated for an answer to his epistle; Maria after several
hours musing on the subject of it, in a delightful grove whither she often
retired, at length took her pen, and complied with his request. Their
correspondence continued till his return when they became constant visitants to
the grove, and admired together the pleasant scenes around it,

After a few days Philenor attended the grand vizier to his house in town to
assist him some business. Amelia and Silena visited the Sultana. Prince Nytan
having spent an hour in writing, walked out alone.

At a small distance from the house, was a large wood. A pleasant opening in it
invited him to enter. One agreeable view succeeding another, drew him forward,
till he found himself on the further side of the wood; and a vast plain before
him, which seemed bounded only by the horizon. Finding himself still inclined
to walk, and excited by some degree of curiosity to know what terminated so
extensive a plain, he pursued his course over it till he saw before him, a
large building, environed by an high wall, be perceived one of the leaves of
the gate open, which an increased curiosity determined him to enter. When he
had entered the gate, he walked through a grand porch of marble, furnished with
soffas and a carpet of cloth of gold. He made a stand in the court, and looked
on all sides to see if any one observed him. But no creature appeared, at which
he was greatly surprised. He walked on to the hall, the gate of which was open,
having a curtain of silk and gold partly drawn before it. Here he made another
stand, and knocked with his staff, at the gate. No one yet appearing, he
repeated knocking, but could make nobody hear. He then put aside the curtain,
and entered the hall, calling aloud as he advanced into it; but to no purpose.
He neither saw nor heard any person or creature. The hall he observed to be
furnished with the most profuse magnificence. The windows being open, presented
to his view an extensive and delightful garden, and the birds charmed him with
sweet melody; the only existing beings he had perceived. He sat to one of the
windows, some time, to rest and entertain himself with the beautiful prospects
of beds of flowers, spacious gravel walks lined with fruit trees, and distant
groves, and raised grounds which extended a great distance before him. At
length he imagined he heard human cries in a distant part of the garden; and a
door, which led into it, being open on the right hand, he hastened through it,
and walked down the garden, on the side from whence the sounds he heard seemed
to arise. As he advanced nearer he was convinced they were the cries of a
person in distress. He quickened his pace, and entered, through a small gate,
into a thick grove. In few minutes, he beheld too plainly, what had alarmed
him. In the center of the grove, was a large vacancy, where three Africans were
beating a man who was almost naked.

The building and the grounds about it, were the property of a rich Turk; who
having lost a lovely and amiable wife, the month after his marriage, had
retired thither from society. He was attended only by a few African slaves, who
taking advantage of his deep retirement, and incensed against him on account of
former rigorous treatment, aimed at his death, and the possession of his
treasures. Prince Nytan having freed the sufferer, and secured the blacks was
entertained by the Turk, Siedden, with the most grateful acknowledgments. One
of the slaves, (dissenting from the wicked purposes of the assassins,) they had
confined; not daring to touch his life, because he was of a great family in
their own country; to which they intended returning; having secretly provided
every thing for that purpose. To this honest and worthy slave, Sieddin gave his
freedom, and a sum of money, by which he was enabled to return to Africa, if he
thought proper. Nytan likewise persuaded him to free the others, to pardon and
dismiss them; offering a supply of money from his own purse to defray their
expenses in returning home. He conversed with them in their own language. He
enlightened their minds and inspired them, at length with unfeigned contrition.
Few sons of Kings thought and acted like this Prince and heir to the Chinese
empire. Sieddin admired his virtues, listened with eagerness and delight to his
instructive conversation, and acceded with pleasure, by him before unfelt, to
his benevolent designs.

Thus was our amiable philanthropist acting in concert with Heaven in deducing
good from evil. The dissenting slave, whose name was Zaddguin, was transported
with joy at this unexpected turn of affairs, this divine interposition to
rescue the distressed and reclaim the vicious and abandoned. Prince Nytan
learned of Zaddquin, that Africa scarcely ever produced a more amiable and
virtuous monarch than was Mingeng, the sovereign of the realm of which he was a
subject. 'He was an enemy to every species of slavery (said Zaddquin.) He
suffers none of his subjects to be concerned in that inhuman traffic. The
Almighty, said he, will avenge it by a dreadful punishment.' 'Yes, answered
Nytan, the emancipation of the human race from every species of slavery is not
far distant. The mists of ignorance are fast dispersing. You, Zaddquin, shall
carry a letter from me to your sovereign. He is the friend of humanity, and
will become an instrument of much good in the African world.'

Thus by the benign interposition of Heaven and the friend of mankind, Zaddquin
again beheld his native country, and his family. He presented the Prince's
letter to his sovereign. Mingeng profited by its instructions, and many of his
subjects, after a correspondence was opened between him and king Zanger, whom
the Prince recommended to his friendship, besides furnishing him with suitable
books in his own language. Useful knowledge began to make a rapid progress
through those two African realms.

Sieddin became a convert to the principles of freedom and truth; between whom,
and Prince Nytan, a correspondence was settled; when the latter, taking leave
of his newly acquired friends, sat out on his walk back to the grand vizier's.
On his way through the wood, he beheld a youth engaged with two others, and
fighting valiantly for his life. They were robbers who attacked him. The Prince
advanced unobserved, and, aiming a stone at the head of one of the robbers,
brought him to the ground: and a second stone levelled the other robber at his
side. The young man found himself at liberty, without seeing the hand that did
the execution on his adversaries. Nytan soon discovered himself; and advancing
to the youth congratulated him on his safety, offering himself for company
through the rest of the wood.

'I am an inhabitant of this wood, replied the young man. The mansion of my
friends is not far from hence: and, as I am obliged to you for my life, let me
prevail with you, my noble and generous friend, to walk home with me, and take
some refreshment, that I may there have an opportunity of showing my gratitude.'

This youth was of an handsome and engaging form; and there was something in
his countenance that gave an additional charm to his address, which agreeably
compelled the Prince to accept of his invitation. They walked together in a
path that led through the thickest of the wood. At length a gradual opening
discovered the young stranger's sequestered abode, which they soon reached. The
mansion was elegant, and surrounded with a variety of fruit trees. They entered
a handsome apartment, in which sat a man and a woman, who appeared in the vigor
and bloom of youth. 'O reward the man who has saved me from robbers,' --
Exclaimed the youth. 'Welcome Prince Nytan, cried they, rising. Your appearance
exactly agrees with the grand vizier's description of the first of men.' And
they cordially embraced. 'Such as I am said the Prince, I profess myself your
friend and servant, and a sincere lover of you and yours.' 'What we speak, said
the beautiful woman, is warm from our hearts. The character given you by the
grand vizier, was sufficient to inspire our love, respect and esteem, amiable
Prince, without the additional obligation to affection and gratitude, on
account of the service you have rendered this youth, the richest treasure of
which we boast. Pray Prince be seated; and henceforward call this house, and
its inhabitants, your own, and likewise all they possess. Now we have seen
Prince Nytan under our roof, we can say we have lived to some valuable
purpose.' The Prince, blushing, sat down, saying he was bound to exert himself
to become worthy of their affections. And I find continued he, I have more
worthy and inestimable friends than the grand vizier had advised me of. But,
pray let me be no longer ignorant by what names to call them.'

'Call me Debournon, said the elder, and the young man, whom you have made
forever obliged to you, Parcellus. My fair partner's name is Sabina. Is she not
fair and handsome, Prince, for a woman who has seen her two hundred and
fiftieth year? and I am only a year older. There has been no very perceivable
alteration in our health's or persons, for above two hundred and thirty years.
We are both the adopted children of your illustrious friend Ravenzar.' How you
astonish me! replied Nytan. This day has been to me a day of wonders: and you,
sire, will be of my opinion, when I have related to you its events! But why are
not you, with your little family (if I see all of it before me) inhabitants of
the island of Ravenzar? For I am persuaded you have been long (ere now)
qualified for that happy country.' 'I will inform you, returned he, presently.
But first let my Sabina set before us refreshment. And while we are eating and
drinking together, I will relate to you our little history. Sabina then laid
the cloth in another room, and placed the table before them, near a door, which
being open, commanded a view of the garden, fields, and groves; the woods being
on either side of the delightful prospect; which the declining sun rendered the
more beautiful and charming; whilst the variety of birds entertained them with
their sprightly songs.

Debournon resumed his discourse. -- 'My dear Prince, said he, illustrious as
you are, and of noblest descent; yet your mind, far more noble, disdains not
the man of meanest birth, whose virtues render him a useful member of society,
and prepare him for the enjoyment of sublimer pleasures and honors than this
transitory scene affords? Permit me to say, my beloved and revered sire,
(interrupted Nytan) that I value not myself for being born a Prince, but only
for that degree of virtue and useful knowledge, which, by the bounty of Heaven
I possess. I have renounced kingdoms; disdained the titles of royalty and
nobility, (they are beneath my ambition) and glory in being only a citizen of
Ravenzar, formed by men, who had no honors of which to boast, but such as arose
from their probity and benevolence. Those only convey real honor to their
possessors. Pardon, sire my interruption, and let me entreat you to proceed in
your relation.' 'My parents resumed Debournon, were the meanest of mechanics in
Bagdad; yet, free from disgrace -- they were honest and industrious. I lost
them very early, and was left a poor friendless destitute orphan. At a
melancholy date, from my existence, the benevolent genie Ravenzar was pleased
to take notice of me; and, after a few necessary gifts and good counsels, he
one day told me that if I inclined to agriculture, he would buy me a piece of
ground, stock it, and provide me with a servant to assist my labor. I
expressed my gratitude, and the pleasure I should take in a country life,
provided I might have time to prosecute my studies. For I was exceeding fond of
books, and possessed an eager desire of learning every thing that was
attainable from the few left me by my father. The Genie highly applauded my
passion for science, and promised me his assistance, and a number of books.
Labor, added he, if exercised with a just temperance, will be of great
advantage to your health; and render you better sitted for study. In a word,
before another month clapsed from the decease of my father, who survived my
mother but a year, that generous friend of the poor, settled me on a part of
these lands which I now possess, and afterward added to my farm a tract of
land containing two thousand acres. In a few years, by his assistance, I built
this house, and let out the smaller one I had occupied, to a tenant of his
choosing, who had sons old enough and capable of cultivating a thousand acres to
great advantage. My income increased, I soon grew rich, and capable of
affording assistance to others, after the noble example of my benefactor.
Without my informing him he knew of the charities I had bestowed, and applauded
my generosity and the prudence and discretion with which I exercised it. When I
was arrived to the age of five and twenty, he entered my apartment with a young
damsel fair as the morn. 'I have brought you a worthy female partner, said he,
say do you like her for a wife?' 'Who, answered I, can be otherwise than
charmed and captivated with so much beauty and loveliness. If I might be so
happy as to gain the affections' -- 'You have gained them already, interrupted
Ravenzar, she is yours. I brought her up for you. Stand forth then and be
married.' And married we were, before we knew, scarely, what we were about. The
Genie having married, embraced, and pronounced his blessing upon us, left us to
ourselves; saying as he went away, 'I will call upon you in the morning, and
spend some time with you. Let your wife rise early, and prepare us a good
breakfast.' As he refused to stay to supper, (it being that hour) we eat and
drank by ourselves, and went to bed.

'Before sunrise, the Genie was at the door, in his chariot drawn by eight
horses. We were ashamed to be found in bed; and rising with the utmost
expedition, went out to receive him, with the best excuses we could make for
not being earlier risers, and being in waiting for his coming. Four
menservants followed him into the house, bearing a trunk, which they sat down,
and then retired. 'The trunk, and its contents are a present to you, my friends
(said Ravenzar). It contains the most valuable of diamonds. Exchange the
greater part of them with the jewellers in Bagdad. -- They are worth twelve
thousand pieces of gold. -- Share them among the needy and unfortunate.
Invisible powers will direct your minds aright.' 'Ye are our guardian angels!
exclaimed Sabina.' 'We are your best friends on earth, returned he. Unseen by
you we instruct you; and save you from innumerable dangers, of which you are
insensible, and yet we ourselves are likewise instructed and sustained by
superior power. All the happy intelligences, throughout the creation, of
various orders,* are continually serving each other in kindest offices of love;
and are attentive to the affairs of mankind. O! how great is the source of our
being, the Creator and upholder of the Universe! How good! how kind! how
tender! -- It is this -- it is this, my friends, that enflames our love, and
inspires us, with unremitting activity, in copying after his works of
benevolence and love I Renew then your strength, ye children of my affection --
from the same divine impetus * in the labors, of your happy choice -- of
diffusing true knowledge and felicity, wherever your influence is appointed to
extend!' Breakfast being ready, we sat down; with our respected guest, feasting
our minds more richly and luxuriantly with his discourse; which charmed and
enlivened, while it instructed. 'The city of Bagdad, said he, (resuming his
discourse at the breakfast table) is large and full of people, of different
nations and religions as absurd as they are inimical to the real prosperity and
happiness of the professors. There are a few, however, and but a few, whose
minds are not wholly perverted by erroneous principles and depraved manners.
Those I shall, in a short time, carry you to see; that commencing friendship
with them, you may become instrumental of confirming them in real virtue and
just sentiments. The present Sultan is endowed with a great share of wisdom,
considering in what a depraved world he was brought up, and the absurdities and
political errors of the times. He is studying a greater reform among his
subjects; by which, he will answer the wife purposes of Heaven, as to future
events. He is a friend to liberty, but will by no means succeed in his
endeavors to promote its cause. His life is thereby endangered: yet Heaven,
for its own wise reasons, suffers him to be too eager and too violent.'

'To live in a land of liberty, said Debournon, and under a mild government,
where peace and good order are not only objects of solicitous attention, but
actually maintained; are temporal blessings highly to be estimated; not the
least of which is liberty of conscience, and free enquiry.' 'I am going to take
you on a tour through Europe in a few days, returned the Genie, and then you
will see what excellent use men make of liberty, and mild governments. But the
most flourishing of mere selfish things, can be but of short duration, and
their continuance very uncertain. The glory and happiness, derived from
undissembled virtue and benevolence, can have no period to their existence.
They survive the rise and fall of kingdoms and empires. They reach into
eternity! Happy, those minds elevated above the follies and trifles that engage
the attention of the greater part of mankind! they are Heaven-taught! they are
divine! and are qualifying for the regions of uninterrupted bliss! I was
intending to say more of the Sultan, and the influence of some of the principal
men of several nations of Europe, but we shall understand each other better,
after we have made the tour of Europe. And I fancy, when you are again returned
hither, you will be apt to prefer your recluse situation, to the fairest
prospects you will have found in the civilized nations, whose leading men have
been too unfortunate in forgetting to take proper care of themselves, before
they undertook the care of others. A sad time of blunders, when wise men and
politicians begin at the wrong end! you look as though you wondered how it so
happens. But I will tell you the cause in a few words. They want good hearts.
They have existence, but know not how to enjoy it: they boast in themselves,
and are ignorant of their own weakness, and blind to futurity, they set their
wills against God's. Yet for their good we gladly labor; and the happy result
is not far off.'

Ravenzar now rose from table, and bid us adieu. 'I shall see you again, in two
or three days, said he, as he entered his chariot, in the mean time, all
happiness attend you -- the happiness of virtuous and benevolent minds!'

'But not to weary you with too many particulars of a life of more than two
hundred years, let it suffice to add -- that, I found myself vastly improved in
knowledge, after traveling, with Ravenzar, through the nations of Europe. On
my return, I beheld, with rapture, my Sabina holding two lovely babes in her
arms! they were twins, a boy and a girl. No words are capable of expressing our
mutual joy on this happy meeting, after an absence of near eleven months. But,
to contract my relation in as narrow limits as possible, -- in twenty years,
Sabina bore me fifteen children, six daughters, and nine sons. Ravenzar visited
us often; and carried away with him all our children as soon as they were
arrived to years of discretion, and settled them in different parts of the
world, under his particular care and inspection. We were reconciled to his
proceedings, from the excellent reasons he produced. But they are now citizens
of your Republic, though as yet, to you not personally known. We shall however,
soon be with them there. And then they will be ready to afford you some
agreeable entertainment in the history of their lives, till they commenced
citizens of Ravenzar. With their history are necessarily interwoven some
remarkable anecdotes of Sabina and myself. The Genie carried us, a number of
times, to visit them. Sometimes we traveled with him in his aerial car, at
others in his chariot, or on horseback; which pleasingly varied the delights of
our journeys, occasioning some curious and profitable, as well as agreeable
adventures. My children's children are likewise dispersed in various countries.
After the same manner, and for the same reasons as were ours, were they
separated from their parents; who, however, cheerfully resigned to superior
wisdom, patiently wait the day when they are to behold them in Ravenzar.
Parcellus, the youth before you, is a native of China; and, (however it may
surprise my friend) is the brother of Gesseng, the companion of your former
travels. He was no one knew how) separated from his parents, at the age of
eleven. Ravenzar brought him to me, at the age of seventeen. He was my
assistant, friend and companion. Here he pursued his studies, and made the
greatest proficiency in all valuable science. His mind was early formed to
virtue. He is worthy of your friendship and love.'

Nytan arose from his soffa -- 'Let me, then, said he, embrace the brother of
Gesseng. You have, continued he, my friendship, and my love. Henceforth, share
with me, with Gesseng and our other friends, in the bounties which indulgent
Heaven has bestowed upon us. What a new and unlooked for joy awaits your
worthy and amiable brother, in which I shall likewise have the pleasure of
participating with him and his family! A happy family, surrounded with happy
friends; amongst whom I hope soon to see you, my Parcellus, and you, my
respected and loved friends!' We wait only leave from Ravenzar, replied
Debournon. -- But night admonishes us of rest, and you will not leave us till
morning. The grand vizier, promised to introduce us to you, and your friends;
which I expected he would have done before this.' 'Let us then retire to rest,
if you please, returned the Prince; tomorrow, I purpose to bring my friends
hither. They then retired to apartments, which, opening into each other,
allowed them the pleasure of conversing, till sleep gently closed their eyes.

THE ORIENTAL PHILANTHROPIST. BOOK IX.
O love! all powerful eloquence is thine
To draw us to thyself. Thou too our light,
Dire darkness shrinks before thy spotless day,
The heaven-descended glory shines around,
'Till love triumphant universal reigns!

THE variety of surprising adventures and pleasing discoveries, consequent upon
a morning's excursion, afforded Nytan the most agreeable entertainment, as he
walked to the Grand Vizier's seat, after breakfasting with Debournon, and his
engaging little family; to whom he was delighting himself with the thoughts of
introducing his friends, as he entered the grand viziers court. Silena and
Amelia, who saw him, from the window of the apartment in which they were
mournfully sitting, arose hastily, and went out to meet him. Their grief was
too great to be concealed, however alleviated by her appearance. 'Alas! cried
he, my lovely women! whence the sorrow so strongly depictured in your
countenances, for the first time, since the happy moments that united our
hearts in the purest affection?' O my dear lord, replied Silena, (as they
mutually embraced) can you inform us of Julia and Maria? -- Julia and Maria!
returned he, surprised, are they not with you? has any thing ill befallen our
lovely girls?' -- Amelia was speechless with grief. She received the embraces
of Nytan in silence; but with flowing tears, expressive of the deepest
affliction. They sat down in the porch. Be comforted my dear Amelia, said
Nytan. Your nieces, I perceive, have absented themselves longer than you
expected, and you fear some disaster. But yield not to such fear. Repose in
heaven. At this moment, I perceive my error, which has occasioned your
affliction. -- My error, returned Amelia, in bringing my girls abroad in this
evil and disastrous world.' 'Blame not yourself, my dear friend, rejoined
Nytan. Of myself I have had too good an opinion, I only am to blame. Nor will I
rest a moment till I restore your nieces to your arms. Silena, instruct me what
course to pursue. I will set out immediately. Where are Philenor and the grand
Vizier?' 'They are gone in search, answered Amelia.' 'We have, added Silena
searched every where in vain. But I am not without great hopes -- if you
enquire once more in Bagdad, where they were last seen.' -- Selina then related
all that had happened the preceding day, and that morning. 'I go then to
Bagdad, said he, but I conjure you, my dear ladies, he comforted. I shall bring
you agreeable tidings.

After some anxious enquiries, the Prince, by means of his little spying glass
discovered the girls in Philenors new built mansion. He immediately gladdened
the hearts of Amelia and his Selina, with a relation of his success, and
carried them to Debournon's At dinner they expressed a wish to see their
admired host, with his little family settled in their happy country, and
likewise the grand vizier, whom they equally admired and respected.

They had scarcely risen from table, when they perceived Ravenzar's chariot.
Debournon and Nytan hastened into the court to receive him. Alighting from the
chariot, he was followed by Parcellus, who then handed out Sabina. 'I picked up
these good people, said Ravenzar, in yonder field; and I assure you, my dear
friends, I value myself on the acquisition. It is of that inestimable worth
that we should not know how to do without it. Such (continued he, taking a hand
of Debournon's, and one of Nytan's, and directing his expressive eyes on Sabina
and Parcellus; then on Selina and Amelia, who were advancing toward them, as
they walked up the court) -- such are the links of mutual affection, in which
we are united by the divine source of life and love; that we must be inevitably
unhappy in the loss of one. But, the chain of love and friendship can never be
broken or impaired, by momentary separations, or casualties incident to the
present state. It will grow stronger and brighter with the increase of years,
and be perpetuated, through endless revolving ages, in the world of perfection.
Permit me, my dear friends, added he, (when the last mentioned ladies joined
them) to felicitate you on this happy meeting; and which I may safely venture
to say, we shall ever recollect with pleasure.' 'It is, I am persuaded, replied
Nytan, an unspeakable happiness to us all, to see and hear our noble and
generous friend and benefactor. Some of us have been afflicted of late: yet the
indulgence of Heaven has converted that affliction into increasing joy; and
your presence, most beloved and respected friend, exalts it to the highest.'
'The affliction of my friends, and their joy, are mine, returned Ravenzar. --
But, added he, perhaps, what I have to communicate, may serve to convince us,
that our mutual joy and pleasure is not now so consummate, but that it may
admit of an higher elevation.' Being entered the apartment, and seated, the
Genie continued his discourse; having by his last words, excited the curiosity,
and raised the expectations of every one.

'The time is fulfilled, said he, addressing himself to Debournon and Sabina.
You are no longer to live in this state of separation from your children. I am
come to convey you to Ravenzar, and our other friends, excepting Philenor, who
will remain with the Grand Vizier, till, with his assistance, his affairs are
settled; after which the aerial chamber will waft them to the abodes of peace
and bliss, together with his son Aleddin. I am further to inform you -- The
Sultan was slain by his janissaries a few hours past; so that there can be no
safety here for the grand vizier and his son; nor for the amiable Sultana. She
is to embark with us, in a vessel of my providing, which waits on the shore.
Your estate here, Debournon, you will not want. I have given it to the two
robbers, who would have killed your beloved Parcellus.' He ceased speaking. The
company looked astonished! but their astonishment was but momentary. They were
too well taught, to misconstrue the sentiments and intelligence designed to be
conveyed, in a gayly abrupt manner, by the last words of Ravenzar. -- 'O my
benefactor and friend! the friend of all! exclaimed Debournon, then your
beneficence will be richly-repaid; -- incapable as you are of irrational
liberality. Something sublimely great has influenced your procedure! the
robbers then were not actually slain, as we imagined. They live -- but no
longer plunderers and assassins. They greatly live, happy converts to virtue,
and will become the friends; no more the oppressors of mankind. It must be so.
And our joy will be boundless to day!' So exstatic is the pleasure which the
reform of the vicious excites in the friends of humanity.

'They are indeed rendered converts to virtue, resumed Ravenzar. Extreme
necessity drove them to the road for plunder; whilst others were doing the
same, with more safety, in thrones or temples. While robbers they were under my
eye. But I will not detain your attention, at present, in relating the means I
have used with them; the murders I have prevented from being perpetrated by
their hands. On some future day, they will have it in their power to entertain
you with their own history. Let it suffice to say, that as they are men of
knowledge and penetration; they are likewise now become men of virtue and
benevolence. And, as such, they are to succeed my Debournon in the same labors
of love to mankind, in which he has been here, so successfully employed. He
has, in Ravenzar, a spacious and delightful mansion prepared; which he will
exchange for this, and double the number of acres he enjoyed here; situated
near the road to Terman, and about five miles from that city. The Sultana we
shall call upon. And what is there my friend, to hinder our supping to night in
Debournon's mansion in Ravenzar?'

The will of their powerful guardian friend, was to them a law. They learned it
with an extatic pleasure, and that night was it happily fulfilled.

Every thing fortunately occurred to hasten the marriages of the several
parties. Almira, and soon after her sister Sapphira, embraced their mother,
from whom they had been long separated. Her name was Adeline. She was full of
the praises of the benevolent Ravenzar; who said she, (relating her story to
Almira) soothed my griefs, assisted me with his advice, and at lengh conducted
me to this sacred asylum, placed me in a pleasant village amongst men and
women, who are more like angels and seraphs than like children of the earth.'
Sapphira had been sold for a slave to Mahumed, though never treated as such.
Roderigo was vanquished by her beauty and uncommon mental accomplishments and
their union was to take place on the same day of that of Maria with Alexis,
Julia with Aleddin, and Parcellus with Almira. A large and brilliant company
were assembled for several days at Debournon's; from whence they rode out in
parties on different routs. Ravenzar and Parcellus directed their course to the
boundaries of the island, on horseback, through a vast forest. I am about to
show you, said Ravenzar to the latter, my private apartments that you may enjoy
them at your leisure, in my absence. Then I shall introduce you to the seat of
our future residence, which you will find elegant, and in every respect adapted
to your taste. As they rode through the forest, Ravenzar discoursed on the
expected future glorious date of the world. 'Many have wrote, said he, on this
subject; and imagine it to be only a state of uninterrupted sensual enjoyments;
in which they are greatly deceived. It will be a state of the sublimest
enjoyment, and of the consummation of every wish of the heart divinely formed
for perfect and endless felicity. It is then the Deity will unfold his
beneficent plan. To that state of perfection all things tend. It is then the
divine architect will, with the most exquisite skill, adorn his creation in his
own beauty and comeliness in the most eminent degrees. For this, he began his
stupendous work. For this light sprang from darkness, creation shone forth in
its various lustres, and intellectual day dawned upon the world. Nature had
been very liberal in the bestowment of her gifts on the youth now traveling
with Ravenzar. He had a clear perception of moral and natural beauties, and was
a most affectionate admirer of every thing beautiful, grand and sublime. He was
enraptured with the magnificent scence of nature; and the progress he had
already made in philosophy, both natural and moral, excited in him adoring
wonder, and ravishing delight in contemplating the great power and goodness of
the creator. The excellent thoughts he expressed, and his agreeable manners,
were highly gratifying to his guardian friend and instructor. 'My dear
Parcellus, said he, words fail to express the pleasure I I take in your happy
turn of mind, and the improvements you have made in science and virtue. You
will be a rich acquisition to all our dear and worthy friends, and one of the
brightest ornaments of their society. Infinitely happy will ye be in each
other. Such are the recompenses of attention to the precepts of the wise; and
vast are the advantages you are now going to enjoy in this secure asylum from
the many evils to which mankind are still subject. Let us strengthen each
others hearts and hands in the performance of our several duties, cooperating
with the Deity in his works of beneficence and love.'

THE ORIENTAL PHILANTHROPIST. BOOK X.
Hail Heavenly powers! whose Celestial skill
Attunes the soul to virtue guards from ill.
Seen or unseen; in heaven, air or earth;
Each day and night ye watched us from our birth!

YOU see yonder towering pile of rocks, whose craggy summits seem blended with
the silver clouds, said Ravenzar, as they approached the boundaries of the
island. It is through (...) we are to enter my apartments. You must remain
here, whilst I proceed forward to open us a passage. When it is accomplished,
you will perceive it, and ride up to me. Alight then, my Parcellus, and rest
awhile under these lofty trees, whose tufted foliage will defend you from the
meridian rays.' Having said this, he rode on to the rocks. Parcellus seated
himself on a mossy hillock, under the shade of a Palmetto; so as that he could
distinctly observe the Genies progress. When the Genie was advanced to those
stupendous rocks, a dark vapor suddenly concealed him wholly from the view of
Parcellus. The Heavens lowered and gathered blackness! A tremendous peal of
thunder shook the solid world! All nature trembled around! The youth was seized
with terror and consternation; It was as universal ruin had commenced its awful
desolating career! but, soon his fears were dissipated, by the returning light,
and cheering serenity of day. Ravenzar again appeared to his view; he beheld a
wide aperture in the rocks, through which the Genie entered, making a sign to
him to hasten forward. Then mounting his horse he rode on to the aperture;
which he had no sooner entered, following Ravenzar, than it was rendered
impenetrable by a black, fiery cloud; which served as a barrier against any
intrusion from without. But it is impossible justly to describe the beauty and
loveliness of the prospect before him! The apartments, seven in number, stood,
at some distance from each other, in a spacious garden, laid out and furnished
with inconceivable magnificence and gaity. They were of solid gold; their roofs
and windows of purest crystal glass; and partially shaded by tall and
broad-leaved trees, whose wide spreading branches waved gently over them; and
had a most enchanting effect on the whole scenery to the eyes of those either
within or without the apartments. The gardens of Nytan, and several others on
the island, with a number of buildings, are very far from being equalled in any
part of the world. But here was a richness, a luxuriancy and splendour,
exceeding those. The groves, the fruit trees, and beds of flowers and fruits,
were disposed with inimitable art. The spacious alleys were of gold and marble.
The walls of this garden appeared to be of looking-glass and of a vast height;
reflecting the gay and beautiful scenes they enclosed. At the distance of about
twelve rods from the apartments, and on the right hand, as they advanced
toward them, the ground was raised a number of feet, with a gradual ascent by
several flights of steps of solid gold; beyond which at some distance,
appeared, numbers of hills, clothed with verdure, rising one above another and
bounding the delicious prospect. Ravenzar and Parcellus, dismounting their
horses, and turning them loose on the lawn, over which they had rode, walked
toward the first apartment in their way. A beautiful youth to appearance,
clothed in a white flowing robe, stood at the door. It was Esdren: who
perceiving Ravenzar and Parcellus, advanced to meet them: 'We have been
expecting you, my brother, said he, to Ravenzar, but were not aware of your
being attended by so lovely a companion, to increase our pleasure.' 'This is
Parcellus, replied Ravenzar, of whom you have often heard me speak, your friend
and mine.' 'Let me then embrace our friend, said Esdren, folding Parcellus to
his bosom. You have other friends within, added he, lovely youth, who will
rejoice to see you; and embrace you with a sincere affection.' They then walked
into the apartment, where Parcellus was overwhelmed with pleasure, and the
caresses of the illustrious friends of Ravenzar; who were assembled, in this
paradise, agreeably to their yearly custom. There were the fairy Perieng, Puria
the consort of Esdren, the fairy Leingreing, and five others from the palace of
pictures, attended by their husbands, who had been lately restored to them; all
arrayed in robes; immortal youth and beauty blooming in their countenances!
None other, than the regions of the blessed above, could boast an assembly more
illustrious and brilliant; of manners and intercourse more refined; or whose
mutual endearments were more extatic! After they had dined, they walked in
parties; Parcellus with Ravenzar, and Esdren, who undertook to show him the
other six apartments, which lay in their way, at convenient distances, and in
the most delightful situations toward each other; having clusters of tall
elms, and other beautiful trees, placed between them, so as to afford an
agreeable shade to those passing from one to another. The fourth apartment was
the largest; having five galleries, and large closets, one within another,
filled with shelves of books of the most superior kind. Having visited them
all, they proceeded forward through the garden, and ascended the hills, from
whence they had a complete survey of the whole garden, and its innumerable
beauties. They seated themselves in an alcove under the shade of mulberry
trees, and entertained themselves a long time with the lovely enchanting
prospects. Esdren displayed the brightest talents in conversation, greatly to
the instruction of Parcellus, to whom his discourse was chiefly directed,
speaking of the delightful wonders of the place -- 'There was a time, said he,
in my remembrance, (though many ages have since revolved) when this island, and
most of the neighboring continents, were buried in the ocean. By slow degrees,
in some places, and in others by sudden convulsions, the land emerged from the
waters. At that distant period, other countries became lost in the ocean, as
these revived from it.' He enlarged upon the various changes he had observed on
the face of the globe, and on the revolutions amongst mankind: then descanted
on the beauties of creation. He likewise made a variety of sublime observations
on the dispensations of Heaven toward the whole intelligent creation. Ravenzar
had his share in the conversation; whilst Parcellus was all attention to the
great and wonderful things he heard. His memory ever retained the whole, and he
then imagined he understood every thing uttered by those sages; whose long
experience had perfected them in the knowledge of the force and meaning, both
of words and things. But an hundred years after convinced Parcellus, that he
had but superficially and partially understood the greater part of the
conversation of that memorable day, evening and ensuing morning. Being at
length disposed to walk further -- 'Come, said Ravenzar, I will show you the
baths on the other side the hills.' They arose, and, walking through a grove of
fir trees, over the summits of the hills, descended to the baths, which were
situated under the wall of looking glass which there terminated the garden.
Three golden buildings covered the crystal fountains; on the hither sides of
which were rich soffas covered with silk and gold, and tables of solid gold,
separated from the fountains by partitions of glass, with curtains of green
velvet: the roof of each building was of glass, and arched, like those of the
seven apartments, with the branches of tall and majestic elms and oaks bending
over them. They were surrounded by a spacious lawn, on which were clusters of
palm trees, orange, fig, and other fruit trees. On one side was a grove of
pines, of a young growth, which ascended part of the hills. On the other side
was a wide alley, bordered with flowers, and various kinds of berries of a most
delicious taste. This alley wound round the hills and communicated with others
of the garden. 'Here; said Ravenzar, after refreshing ourselves in one of the
fountains, we will recline on soffas, and wait the arrival of our friends, who
have already bathed and pursued another walk. The ladies will return in
carriages for the purposes of bringing us provisions and instruments of music:
for here we shall spend the afternoon and evening.' -- After they had bathed;
Ravenzar opened a closet door; and showed a small library of entertaining
volumes. They took each a book, and, reclining on soffas, amused themselves an
hour with reading. After which, they arose, and ascended the hills, looking
round for their friends, who, by this time, said Esdren, must be on the way
hither. But not perceiving them, they seated themselves in the alcove, and
listened awhile to the charming music of the variety of birds. 'How incessant,
said Esdren, are the sylvan choristers of nature's temple, in the praises of
the creator! how lively and animating their notes; as if they emulated the
celestial musicians, who sweep their golden lyres in the heavenly temple above!
-- but see, our friends are approaching who will begin their melodious concert
when the feathered songsters shall have ceased; not to resume their sprightly
lays till the morning's dawn. Let us join our company on foot while the ladies
proceed forward in their carriages, and make ready our evening's repast.' Being
united, they took a different alley from that which the carriages pursued,
which led them round the hills, on the right hand, through several delightful
groves, and prolonged their walk till the ladies were prepared to set at table.
Having arrived, they all sat down to coffee, wine and cakes. All the variety of
birds seemed to have assembled on the trees, in that delicious recess below the
hills, to regale them with their sweetest melody! They advanced as near as
possible to the apartment, perching on the branches that hovered over and
around it; exerting themselves, as inspired with fresh vigor to raise their
highest and most melodious notes, the nearer the hour of their rest approached.
The ravished Parcellus could not refrain from expressing it as his opinion,
that the birds had attained a skill and vivacity beyond their ordinary reach.
It is really so replied the fairy Perieng. Our presence and the divine
complacency, inspire and exalt them; the divine complacency, which delights in
rewarding our faithful and indefatigable labors for the good of mankind, with
such pleasurable retirements, as this, for our relaxation, by means of which we
renew our strength and vigor to pursue the works of benevolence and love.'

After their repast was finished, some of the company joined in a concert of
vocal and instrumental music; which with agreeable intervals of conversation,
lasted till day began to appear, and the milder splendors of the moon to give
way to brighter glories. They returned to their partments; where the company
taking leave of Ravenzar and Parcellus, ascended their splendid cars, and
disappeared. Parcellus lamenting their departure, expressed himself in the
following extemporary distich, with flowing tears. --

No glorious things can ever long remain:
The meteors shine and disappear again.
So dearest, kindest friends alas! must part;
Leave me to fruitless tears, and aching heart!
'Your lines, observed Ravenzar, are true with regard to the present state of
the world. But it is a state that will soon be over. Then all will be like us.
-- Come, my Parcellus, let us return to our lovely friends at Debournon's. Do
you not long to see them? 'Indeed I do, my kind patron, replied he. Their
company will reconcile me to the absence of those who have just left us.' 'We
shall return in a four-wheeled carriage, resumed Ravenzar. I have sundry
articles to convey to your mansion, to which I shall carry you; it being
situated but half a mile on one side of our road. A carriage will likewise
follow us with two large chests filled, the one with gold the other with
diamonds, for your use.' He then touched with his forefinger a little golden
ball, that hung by a wire to one of the pillars of the soffa on which they were
sitting; immediately the sound of a large bell was heard, as at distance: and
presently a door opened, and two servants appeared. Ravenzar ordered two four
wheeled carriages to be made ready, the two chests to be placed in one of them,
and a trunk, that he described in another. 'And, added he, let eight servants
be ready to attend me.' The servants instantly disappeared to fulfill his
orders. 'While they are obeying my orders, said Ravenzar, I will show you where
my servants live. When, at any time, in future you are here, and want
attendants, you have only to touch this golden ball, and a servant will appear,
and call others if you shall have occasion for them.' Saying this they
descended a stair case, through the door by which the servant entered. At the
bottom of the staircase was a long gallery. They walked through it to an
opening, which brought them into a spacious lawn, where stood four handsome
buildings of gray marble. They entered the first in their way; in which were
two young men and women sitting at breakfast. 'We are come, said Ravenzar, to
breakfast with you this morning.' 'You greatly honor your servants, replied one
of the young men, who are always rejoiced to see our good master and his
friends.' This he said rising and placing two chairs at the table in which
Ravenzar and Parcellus seated themselves; the young women presenting them with
tea, cakes and honey. Ravenzar and Parcellus conversed with them with the
greatest cheerfulness and familiarity. When they had all breakfasted Ravenzar
conducted his friend attended by the two young men, into the fields, cultivated
by his servants, which were extensive, and in the most flourishing condition.
'There is not now time, said the Genie, to view the mines of gold, and the pits
where the diamonds are gathered, and the various employments followed here. But
my people will show you every thing at some other time.' A number of men and
women of very agreeable appearances, came from the other houses to pay their
respects to their beloved employer, who received them with an affectionate
regard; and blessing them, he, with Parcellus, attended by the two young men,
hastened back to the stair case, where the young men took their leave, and
returned to their house. 'Some of my people, said Ravenzar, at proper seasons,
work in my garden, keeping it always in good order. But none of them are seen,
at any other time, above these stairs, except when called. Their cheerful
labors supply me with whatever I want, while here; and they are amply
rewarded; living always in plenty, and happy in each other. Their fields and
habitations, are enclosed, on one side, by the wall of my garden; and, on the
other, by the mountainous rocks which bend their craggy summits over the ocean.
Here is the broadest extension of these rocks, which run further, by a mile,
into the island, than in any other part of it.'

The two carriages and the servants being ready, they entered them and sat
forward for the aperture; four of the servants attending on horseback When
arrived to the Aperture, the Genie pronounced several words, and the clouds
retreated on one side to make way for the carriages and horsemen. As soon as
all were passed through, the cloud resumed its station. As they pursued their
way, Ravenzar presented Parcellus with a medal. -- 'On this medal, said he, are
engraved the words which I used for the removing the cloud. You will therefore
be sure to have it with you, my friend, whenever you shall design entering my
apartments. But, see, before us, your buildings. They stand in a garden of two
hundred acres. We will, now, but just look at them, deposit the chest and
trunk, and give orders to the eight servants, henceforwards yours, and then
hasten on to our dear friends.

Having viewed the buildings and gardens, and deposited the trunk and chessts,
they expedited their course to Debournon's.

On the evening following the marriages were solemnized in the presence of
great numbers of congratulating friends. They were the next evening, to meet in
Nytan's palace.

It was a most agreeable entertainment to those illustrious friends on the
intervening day, to read a paper published by Philenor, and dispersed in his
native country, and the neighboring kingdoms, and to learn the recent events
consequent upon it, which, at once show in a striking light the depravity of
human nature; and how ineffectual, and to themselves fatal, is the rage and
vengeance of the sons of pride against the children of virtue under the
immediate protection and guardianship of heaven. The paper was entitled The
Remembrancer, of which the following is a part. --

'By that wisdom which never errs is it decreed, that every atom of the
creation, and every intellectual as well as sensitive existence, performs their
destined rounds. To consummate the plan of eternal love a day -- a glorious
decisive day is fixed; -- a day, to which every revolution and every
dispensation invariably tend; -- when the stupendous plan of Deity shall open
to the view of admiring and applauding worlds! All events, through all ages,
have respect only to this illustrious, this fast approaching day. In the
present Crisis which arrests universal attention among the nations, happy are
those who with incessant benevolent exertions, coincide with the designs of
heaven, wholly (...) of every sordid view and immoveably attentive to the
universal good!

How little does it appear to be realized, that every thing misused or
misspent must be accounted for; -- that the consequences of the abuses of
nature are terrible. We have learned from every age (as far as history
instructs) the awful effects of living without that attachment to the Supreme,
which alone insures human felicity. Why are we no better improved by experience
of past times and our own? Is it that the most dreadful destruction is to
reprove the absurdity and perverseness of our tempers, the madness of our
conduct?

The Deity is infinitely good and kind, as infinitely perfect and glorious. To
resemble him is man's happiness, his honor, his greatness. Alas! we are poor
realisers of the inestimable blessings of existence, and celestial liberality.
We are shamefully unmindful of him who taught our souls to think! No wonder
therefore we are miserable; no wonder we are so disappointed, embarrassed,
blasted in our projects and pursuits. In vain do we look for tranquillity and
bliss, whilst we respect not, love not the author of our being. What then is
our religion, of which we make such a parade? What the worship we offer to
Heaven? How much more like true worshippers would your religious assemblies
appear, did they meet, both rich and poor, on the appointed days, like
affectionate brethren; in the genuine spirit of love, relieving every want,
encouraging each other in true virtue and real goodness with the sweetly
persuasive eloquence of the heart? then would they unquestionably chant forth
the songs of acceptable praise, and the air would resound with truly sacred
melody. Then would they utter a thousand charming things, such as angels might
with delight and admiration listen to hear. New scenes of pleasure would open,
as yet to them unknown. Then would they discern, that in each other, which the
Deity beholds as infinitely attractive -- beauty and charms that never cloy or
fade. Such is the only worship by Heaven approved. Away then -- forever away
with that detestable kind by which divinity and humanity are insulted. -- * * *

* * * -- O ye rulers! -- Ye rich and influential! Is it not high time ye
learned wherein true grandeur consists? How far are ye from entertaining just
ideas of living -- of pleasure -- policy -- economy -- of virtue -- of
humanity -- of true glory! otherwise, would ye rest day or night, till by the
spirit of the Eternal, ye became well instructed to bless mankind? Hasten then,
ye great, ye leading men of the nations! -- Seek him with affiance by whom
alone ye live! cry mightily, and take no denial! -- be blessed and bless mankind!
realise how highly ye are accountable -- '

But this is but a slender part of that interesting and alarming paper. The
enraged powers sent out vast fleets to destroy Ravenzar. They could never find
it. A dreadful storm dispersed them. They all miserably perished. Such is the
inevitable doom of the implacable enemies of God and man! The grand the
benevolent purposes of the sovereign of worlds can never be frustrated.

THE ORIENTAL PHILANTHROPIST. BOOK XI.
Nations opposed to Heaven's will,
Learn wisdom but by suffering ill.
Man blindly rushes on his fate;
His folly sees -- alas! too late.
Yet the Creator, good as just and wise,
Looks on his woe with pitying eyes.
The nations, whom he formed beholds
In mental darkness, and his day unfolds!*
Celestial truth bright orators proclaim;
And love is kindled to an ardent flame!

EARLY in the evening the company were assembled in Prince Nytan's hall. It is
easier to imagine than describe the refined social pleasures of those
illustrious friends, who with heaven's propitious smiles, had attained to the
accomplishment of their utmost wishes. Selina made a number of rich presents to
the newly married ladies, most elegantly adapted to the friendship and the
liberality of her heart. Several weeks they passed together in a round of
convivial pleasures in the palace and in the city. But the Prince was now
suddenly called away to the continent of Africa In the height of sweetest
social bliss, the dearest friends must part, and cheerfully submissive, yield
to Heaven's great behests. A courier, swift as the wind, had brought
intelligence of an alarming nature. -- 'I am instantly to leave you my happy
friends! -- It is your glory and mine that summons me hence; since we are alike
deeply interested in the felicity of mankind, and, under the direction of the
sovereign parent, incessantly employed in promoting its weal, in preventing or
mitigating its woe. Dire mischief lours tremendous where we have been long
laboring to insure mild virtue's tranquil reign! In silence, with pity's
softest eye, you urge me to be gone; nor reluctant do I obey.' -- It was thus
Nytan bid his guests adieu. He rested on the African shore in Zanger's favored
realm, and on the spot where his royal friend had erected, in honor to his
memory, a magnificent dome, and where, at the instant of his arrival, he
resided. Enraptured he embraced his most beloved of friends.

After mutual caresses, Zanger hastily informed his friend of what he already
knew too well; that Mingeng, (the King whose history a preceding page has
introduced) was deposed and banished his kingdom, now distracted and torn by
party rage, and in danger of soon becoming a prey to surrounding barbarous
nations.

'Hinder me not a moment cried Nytan, I must instantly be gone. On my return I
am to take you, my dear Zanger, to our happy isle, where my friends long to
embrace you.' -- He was soon in the midst of the divided people. Seasonable was
his presence, and happy in its consequences was his benevolent interposition.
The leading men of each party he highly blamed, accusing them roundly of
shamefully disingenuous conduct toward each other, as unhappily has in civil
dissentions, been too often the case). All were highly incensed against him,
and began to threaten his life. But they were ignorant of his worth, his
abilities and powerful resources -- in peace or war -- in the cabinet or in the
field; and how easily he could frustrate their nefarious purpose. At the most
interesting crisis he appeared in their assembly, and having solicited
attention, delivered the following memorable oration, with that pathetic
all-commanding eloquence so peculiar to himself.

'Respected citizens, the freedom of my interposition, I perceive, has excited
against me your resentment. Yet suffer me once more to address you, before I
bid you adieu. Alas! what are men, when hurried and agitated by impetuous
passions. You are dear to me as my own existence; since we all are the indulged
children of one common parent, that glorious being from whom originates every
thing great, every thing good, every thing amiable and lovely. We must resemble
our kind beneficents Creator, to be happy, to be honorable. Our deviation from
rectitude is certain incalculable misery and disgrace. But let us no longer
deceive ourselves, nor forget we are accountable for our actions. Alas! it is
high time the nations were fully awakened to sentiments more becoming the
dignity of their nature as the offspring of Heaven! How inconsistent has our
tempers and conduct been toward each other? -- Inconsistent with what we would
be, and with what we are so ready to flatter ourselves we are! men of virtue
and honor, great and good! We differ in our political views; and we are ever
irritating each other by insulting language. From the public advertisers how
shamefully is it evidenced. I have seen your resentments and your personal
altercations! In secret I wept -- my heart bled for my brethren!

By what motives are we actuated in our political exertions? We, who profess to
glory in virtue, generosity, courage, magnanimity; -- in being patriots,
philanthropists? Of what species is our future public and private felicity to
consist? You have perused histories, and have learned the follies of preceding
times. -- Are we never to be really wise and good; to rise superior to the
degrading solicitations of false ambition, or sensuality? And are we created
only to wrangle and fight, afflict and devour each other? Wherefore do we
pretend to possess the noble-exalted rational powers, while we thus act like
irrationals? -- If we possess a courage and fortitude to risk our health, our
limbs and lives in hostile conflicts; to endure every thing in arduous,
hazardous enterprises; -- Why have we not the courage to arrest the fatal
deranging progress of cowardly selfishness? The man uninfluenced by a sincere,
undissembled philanthropy, (which indeed exists not but with every virtue)
however he may plume himself, and figure in the world, is but a cowardly
pusillanimous wretch: and, sooner or later, in the presence of superior beings,
he must be covered with shame. Nothing can be more true, or more worthy of
solemn thought. -- What (...) have such multitudes of us been about? Immortal
beings! gloriously formed, when first produced from Deity's plastic hand! What,
my brethren, have we been pursuing! Alas! it is true that we have been pursuing
only our shame! -- Can there be any thing more contemptible in the eyes of the
glorious and beneficent beings who encompass the eternal throne, than those
selfish minds that prefer their own gratifications to the good of thousands,
whom they might greatly serve by their affectionate attentions, and reform by
their precepts and engaging examples? But we, by our temper and conduct, and
sordid private views, are blasting every benevolent purpose of the generous
heart. What a disgraceful circumstance is it -- how base and pregnant with the
most terrific ruin -- that the divine gifts of speech and language are
prostituted to the cruel murderous purposes of slander and defamation! --
Unhappy beings! -- that would oppress and destroy those we ought to embrace and
cherish! and this, is it for power, or wealth, that we would triumph in the
misery of our brethren -- in our shame?

But how, say you, shall we induce each other to think alike, (who entertain
such opposite sentiments) and annihilate party spirit?

Let us ponder well the dire result of our present conduct. Let us with
solemnity apply to the source of wisdom. To its guidance we must yield, or be
inevitably undone: to exist without it is dreadful; there are deepest horrors
in the idea!

O my friends! let us ponder well at this momentous crisis! let us be awakened
to salutary healing truth before it be too late; nor plunge madly into
distressing desolations beyond conceptions the most terrible! let us
henceforth, then, unite in cherishing the sacred gentle spirit of love. Let us
determine to act disinterestedly; -- to conduct as in the presence of
innumerable glorious pure and happy intelligences, who ever lean on
omnipotence; and as in his presence. Whose all pervading eye searches into the
most secret recesses of every heart. Let us for ever banish, (from this moment)
pride and vain glory, and little-sordid self with all the cowardly fears that
always attend it. Let us have done with every species of vice and intemperance.
True temperance will be attended with every virtue -- every attractive grace.
Few indeed can be fairly allowed to possess so inestimable a gift of Heaven.
Ignorant of its excellencies, men have not desired it; -- they have not
therefore asked it. For the sincere request would never have been denied by the
source of tenderness and love. A just temperance would render us tranquil,
serene and happy. It would meliorate our hearts. Without it our grandeur and
fame are contemptible, because unworthy the acquisition of rationals --
immortals -- who seek the glory founded only on genuine heaven-born virtue. It
would regenerate us, and render us divine. Yet every sense would be regaled
with the variety of delicacies which liberal nature yields. But without a
genuine temperance we can enjoy nothing. Possessing it, we shall enjoy all
things. Freed from the solicitations of false appetites, and racking desires,
and of consequence, from expenses that oppression only can support; we shall
really possess more to enjoy, as we shall have more to give; -- like the giver
of all, existing to relieve the helpless, and communicate happiness. We should
then taste the bliss, we should prove the enrapturing felicities of wisdom and
philanthropy, divine, and no longer labor and rage to oppress and destroy each
other. Innumerable pleasures, in endless blissful series, would then be ours.
-- Citizens with a true magnanimity, let us surmount every opposing passion,
and become the nation so richly blessed! But the reputed temperance is below
the grade to which I would have you soar. The truly temperate enjoy perpetual
health, have the due command of the passions; and practice, with sublimest
pleasure every virtue. Ever long some of you shall behold the divine and
salutary effects of genuine temperance in the country where I dwell: -- OF
citizens! I know not how to part with you till I have effectually convinced you
wherein true glory and permanent happiness consist! Alas! we have widely erred!
We have been unhappily mistaken! -- but I perceive many of you are affected.
Give me leave to point out our future course. Let us feel, the great supreme;
without whose propitious smiles your country falls, and you plunge in the
dreadful abyss of anarchy and ruin! Before the awful majesty of Heaven let us
prostrate low; and own, the glory and honor we have been seeking, in every age,
are shameful delusions; that, in neglecting and despising the author of our
being, we have in fact been neglecting and despising ourselves; -- that our
pursuits have been as mean and despicable, as they must, in the event, be
ruinous, if continued. But we shall now renounce them, and become happy in the
embraces of celestial virtue!

O citizens! what do we not owe to our beneficent creator, who has formed so
glorious a world for our residence; who has laid himself out for our felicity?
what do we not owe to the bright intelligences of the heavenly worlds -- to
ourselves -- to all mankind -- to the whole creation! let us dwell on the
momentous thought! let us aspire to attain all that will in future be valuable,
and which we shall rejoice that we have pursued after millions of ages have
revolved! We cannot endure the idea of being despised in the future world; let
us conduct conscientiously and honorably in this; ever remembering the
Omniscient and Omnipresent discerns every secret motive of the human heart; and
that he can delight only in that real goodness which cheerfully denies itself*
for the peace and happiness of all.'

The eloquent and persuasive orator ceased. The audience was deeply affected. A
new light sprang up in each mind. Numbers convinced, (and now angry only with
themselves) immediately retired from public business. They retired to reflect,
and reform. The sacred influence spread. The flame of celestial love was
enkindled. And thousands of brightest genius' soon became gloriously active
noblest deeds of fame which Heaven itself records. They were kindest deeds of
benevolence and self-denial, wisely adapted to render every individual virtuous
and happy. What wonders the moving eloquence of the heart and tongue accomplish
when employed on a subject like this! The banished and deposed king was
immediately recalled and reinstated. Nytan swayed every mind. It was influence
he merited there to hold. And, though himself united to a Republic (great
indeed) in strongest bands of love, he attempted not innovations. The monarchy
was rendered there propitious and happy, because the people became the children
and subjects of undissembled virtue. To leave his new converts in the pursuit
of virtue, wisdom and knowledge, was his aim: and, happy consequent events in
that kingdom a future page may unfold. At present, the narrator has arrived to
the utmost limits of his intelligence. The successful philanthropist, after
three days, took leave of Mingen and his grateful applauding subjects, and
repaired to the center of a vast wilderness of Africa, in which, environed by
impassible rocks and impervious woods, the splendors of Ravenzars palace
glittered to the sun. Prince Nytan now for the first time beheld it, being
previously informed of its situation by that illustrious friend. There,
secluded from the world, a large society, consisting of both sexes, were
training up, by Ravenzar, for the republic. Ravenzar was present to receive the
friend of his heart. Several days they conversed together on subjects of
highest import. After which, and having been most agreeably entertained by the
society, they took leave of each other, and Nytan hastened to king Zanger, who
feasted him two days with truly royal magnificence, all the principal men and
women of the court being present. Yet was it a feast where true temperance
presided, however unusual at the tables of the great; and from which every one
returned happy, rational and divine.

On the morning the king took leave of the court, and with Nytan, followed by
the blessings of the people, bid a long farewell to the continent of Africa.

'How blessed exclaimed Zanger (as they gently progressed through the air) are
those who render the powers of art and science conducive to human felicity.
What advantages have we in Africa thereby obtained. And what an accession of
happiness is thence derived to two powerful nations!' 'It is indeed glorious
for us, replied his friend, that the divine gifts have enriched us with the
power and the dispositions to serve each other. Ever new and enrapturing are
the sensations of the benevolent mind. Divine love inspires its possessors with
all that is great and good: it views every object in its its true light; and
constantly realises the delightful truth that the creator beholds, in the
children of humanity, forms infinitely lovely and engaging; and, by his
wonder-working power, moulds and refines them to perfect purity and innocence;
adorning them in his own comeliness, and rendering them for ever lovely to each
other. Such a view animates us to every possible exertion in serving each
other: and we contemplate, with horror and disdain, those sensual indulgencies
which effeminate the mind, and cause it cowardly to shrink from philanthropy's
glorious, unparalleled career. Difficulties serve but to invigorate our
resolution, and strengthen our confidence in the Supreme. What rich blessings
grow upon mankind from the multiplied deeds of benevolence! their increasing
happy effects both on the receiver and the bestower, may be compared to those
prolific germs, which from the slenderest size advance in growth till they
become the most beautiful and the most fruitful of trees. But here the
comparison fails. Those trees, however ornamental and useful, must decay and
die: but the works of benevolence undecaying flourish; and are the permanent
sources of pleasures the most refined. The delightful sensations, arising from
the works of charity, are indeed divine. From the source of love and kindness
they originate; and, like every thing divine, they forever exist, and forever
beatify the beings in whose breasts they are naturalised! How glorious is it,
my friend, to be employed in the important work, however arduous, of correcting
the errors of mankind, of awakening their attention to virtue, of promoting
universal peace and harmony! though it be indeed the most difficult of all
works. How long are men gaining just ideas of virtue and happiness! ideas
sufficiently powerful to rouse all the energies of their minds to action! What
difficultties arise from passions and the ignorance and depravity of men! but
the more difficult the work, the more glorious will it appear in its final
accomplishment by the great, the wonder-working power of God, with whom we
cooperate. Its difficulty, yea, impossibility, with us alone, and the
numberless impeding causes of genuine reform, lead us to reflect how consummate
must be the bliss when it is universally effected.

'Our growing numbers are indeed a sacred powerful confederacy of illustrious
personages under a divine influence, against every species of vice and
oppression; aconfederacy not only for our own felicity, but for the promotion
of real virtue and goodness, and for the relief of the wretched, the destitute
and the oppressed, in every region. And, as it intrudes not on other nations,
or societies, it is itself secured against every foreign intrusion. Guided by
the most perfect wisdom, and actuated by the (...) disinterested benevolence,
its laws and regulations are wisely adapted to its peculiar circumstances, and
its members unremittingly engaged in every Heaven-approved scheme for the good
of mankind. Every individual of our nation is well known to the administrators
of the government, is industrious, virtuous and happy. It contains the greatest
geniuses of both sexes. -- Such are Xarien Lateur, Zanthus, Debournon, and many
others, by whom I have the happiness to be always encircled, besides great
numbers who live in the distant towns, villages and cities. -- Such are Zurien,
Aranthus, Pherrdeng, and the most accomplished women. A long list I might
produce of female worthies, whose excellent precepts and examples are eagerly
followed by every one of that amiable and respectable sex. The Philanthropic
son of Renien was upon his fafavorite topics. Zanger was most pleasingly
entertained, whose mind was formed to virtue and benevolence. He expatiated, in
his turn on the delightful themes. -- Prince Nytan pursued several excellent
thoughts of his friend with the most instructive and charming eloquence. He
seemed to rise superior to humanity; and Angels might well listen to the sweet
accents of his tongue, whilst he dwelt on the wonders of his happy isle, the
virtues; the felicities of his citizen-friends. He eulogised those who indeed
merited the highest praise. 'Such concluded he, are the inhabitants of this
favored isle, and such are the exalted sentiments by which they are inspired
and so fervent is the ardor of their philanthropy, that all the energies of
their minds are exerted to the utmost, without cessation or discouragement, in
the service of their beloved and respected brethren of mankind of every country
and nation; wherever dispersed or however deranged; and with the most cheerful
and unreserved filial confidence do they apply to Heaven for every requisite
instruction and aid: nor do they ever apply in vain. By Heaven's direction and
aid I gave them existence as a nation; then leaving them to themselves, and to
adopt the form of government that best pleased them, they chose such an one as
they conceived most suitable to their circumstances. The Lord of Nature is
indeed their sovereign, and they are subjects of his peculiar care. Though I am
heir to the empire of China; and though my father would place me in the throne,
I have prefered being a citizen amongst this illustrious people whose felicity
is so perfect. And here I become most useful to the world. -- But see yonder,
the well defended shores, on which none but the truly virtuous land! You are
now, my Zanger to judge for yourself. We shall soon embrace our friends.

The splended luminary had just began its diurnal course, when they descended
in the Prince's garden. Amelia, from her window, first observed their descent,
and called out to Selina. The company were all in motion, and before they had
reach* the palace gate, they were encircled by the loveliest groupe of
congratulating friends. From every one Zanger received the most cordial
welcome. Their morning repast was prepared in the saloon, to which they
repaired. Nytan related the wonders he had performed. Each heart swelled with
rapturous joy, as well it might. -- A nation plucked from ruin in one
propitious hour! Through every village town and city, the gladdening tidings
ran! For the generous purpose, couriers were instantly dispatched; that every
benevolent heart (and such were all Ravenzar's, might early share in the
sympathetic bliss. At noon the illustrious friends repaired to the city where
they (...) with their fellow citizens in the public hall. Zanger was enraptured
on viewing the splendid scenes of Xuntien, and contemplating the virtues and
the elevated happiness of its citizens. 'Sure, exclaimed he, this is the region
of perfect felicity; and the paradise of Heaven lie transplanted upon earth!
What beauty! what magnificence! what elegance and charming simplicity of
manners! what warm effusions of friendship and amity flow from every tongue!
and what exquisite taste and refinement are displayed in every building, every
street avenue and ornament! what grand enchanting prospects present themselves,
wherever I turn my eyes! Enlarge, extend thy coasts, O favored isle! For thy
numerous increasing denisens make ample room! yes, I foresee thy future
enlargement! On all sides shall thou expand -- to meet far distant shores!
surrounding nations shall closely unite with the; and ocean's billowy waves
shall cease to roll between! Soon shall the sons and daughters fevery clime be
arrayed in illustrious robes like thine; and bliss and glory universal reign!
Pride, lust and jealoussy, hatred and dire contests shall then forever cease!
Celestial love shall dwell -- forever dwell in every breast!

O come, sweet peace! thy sovereign balm prepare!
Ah! gently heal the bleeding wounds of war,
By lusts enkindled! Fierce ambition tame;
That men no longer glory in their shame!
But, every heart renewed and formed to love,
May, like Ravenzar, richest blessings prove!
THE ORIENTAL PHILANTHROPIST. BOOK XII.
What a rich sample of those happy times,
Bards erst did sing, in sweetly flowing strains!
Here I Have a foretaste of the glory -- bliss,
Which Deity descends to pour on all his works!
The proud shall cease the world to rule; No slave
Shall bend low cringing at a tyrant's feet;
No hostile beast, no murderous savage roam;
Blessed harmony prevail, and earth eternal bloom!

ZANGER, having by the aid of Pharenon, acquired the European languages, had
made the grand tour. In which he saw indeed, much to admire, but more to
lament. Nothing excited in him more of surprise and resentment than those
principles, and that conduct, which tended to erase the belief of the souls
immortality, and of the Deity's kind attentions to the works of his own hands;
those tenets which are established indeed, by Divine authority, in the heart of
every citizen of Ravenzar. 'One would think said he, it were impossible that
men of sense and learning could entertain the idea, that beings capable of such
ennobling energies; refined sentiments and endearing affections, as are
evidently the human species, were designed for the enjoyment only of a
temporary existence, and then utterly to perish, to be forever expunged from
the creation. No wonder, continued Zanger, men of such sentiment are among the
chief oppressors of mankind, the perpetual plagues of society.' He became
however, acquainted with a few of those: who were worthy of his esteem and
affectionate attention. Yet no society of men in the world appeared to him
comparable to this, in which, through the friendship of Prince Nytan, he was
now initiated. And he could not refrain from renewed expressions of the high
admiration and exquisite pleasure with which he was affected, as they walked on
to the pavilions of Leingreing, their common benefactress, 'O my friend, cried
he, with what ravishing pleasureable sensations am I overwhelmed, in beholding
the unrivalled charms of your country! wherever I walk, here, I meet only
endearing countenances, encounter kindest greetings; and am received with the
most hospitable, the most cordial entertainment in every dwelling I enter. Here
all is perfect love and sweetness! and the women -- never did I behold more
lovely! They are rather celestials, who have condescended to dwell on the earth
to console, to harmonise, to beatify mankind! What wonders would a party of
these angels effect, in the regions which gave me birth! their divine
allurements would be irresistible -- the tout-ensemble of their matchless
personal and mental charms -- their superior knowledge, their persuasive
eloquence, their unparalleled modesty, engaging manners and virtuous examples!
-- It must be so, my dear Prince -- our fleet must bear away a few of these
invaluable commodities; since you have already told me, it is in contemplation
in your assembly to settle several families abroad, at different future
periods, for the most benevolent purposes.'

'And would it not, think you, replied Prince Nytan, be very hard parting with
citizens, with friends so dear?' 'The love of true glory, replied the king,
removes every difficulty. Neither, my friend, would it be so very hard parting,
since all would often meet again, notwithstanding the great distance of the
countries from each other. Besides, we are to reckon the peculiar pleasures of
epistolary correspondence.' 'You argue eloquently, returned the philanthropic
friend, and, I believe, when you make your benevolent and patriotic claim, it
cannot fail of being approved and sanctioned without a dissenting voice. Our
females will indeed be excellent instructresses and guards to youthful age
against the errors to which they are liable. They will seasonably relieve them
from the often fatal effects of those ssudden and unlooked-for incidents and
assaults on their minds, which have deranged youth, who have, with determined
steps, sat out in the career of virtue, and have not been sufficiently watched
against by either parents, instructors, or guardians, in the countries, where I
have visited.

Zanger was about to introduce the former subjects of discourse when Nytan
placed in his hands an epistle wrote by Amelia, to a young female whom she had
educated, and who resided with Randor in her former mansion. 'This epistle,
said the Prince, is a valuable specimen of the ideas with which our women
inspire their children. Amelia is an excellent tutoress. But we have many such
in our country. Heaven is peculiarly interested in the education of our
children, and has blessed them with wise, faithful and indefatigable
instructors and instructresses. Indeed there is not one amonst them but might
well astonish, and put to the blush, the best in the most civilized nations. I
except the few we have sent abroad through the advice and concurrence of
Ravenzar, Leingreing, and our other guardian angels; for such they truly are,
both to us, and to all to whom they are commissioned from on high.'

As they sat resting, embowered in a delightful wood, Zanger read the Epistle.
It is the following.

AMELIA to CHLORIS.
My dear Chloris,
Your first essay in epistolary writing is beyond expectation agreeable. You
will give me leave, in answer, to continue the important subject with which you
concluded. --

Nature, ever attentive to her children; instructing each individual of all the
immense variety of beings; inciting it to those actions and dispositions which
essentially contribute to, and constitute its felicity; to our sex she points
the most rational conduct and motives; seasonably advises us of every deviation
from the path of rectitude. The happy ease and serenity of the mind is
proportionate to its attention to her salutary dictates. Revere, my Chloris her
sacred friendly voice. Obey her important injunctions; in every instance yield
to her pointed intimations. She invites our sex to aim at every excellent
accomplishment, to become richly adorned with all the amiable graces and
virtues. Nor does she leave us ignorant, that the genuine, ruling motive for
acquiring every mental charm, must be indisputably, the lively consciousness of
its being pleasing to the infinitely lovely and benificent author of our
existence; who, as he is the source of every perfection, (himself* the
perfection of beauty and loveliness) infinitely and immutably great and
glorious, good and kind; it becomes his grateful daughters whom he has blessed
with angel forms, to love him supremely; to aspire, with the most fervent
ardor, to please him who first and best deserves to be pleased. They should
therefore, be ever studious to render themselves lovely and all accomplished
ultimately for his sake. Possessed of this exalted sentiment, they may be
justly said to enjoy real felicity; since it divinely excites them to pursue,
with unremitted zeal, the career of true virtue and honor; aspiring after that
splendid fame which is celebrated in the regions of consummate glory and bliss;
exerting every energetic power to dignify each revolving day and year by those
virtuous and benevolent actions which will be pronounced intrinsically valuable
in future worlds, and prove to them richest sources of joy innumerable ages
hence. Thus, my Chloris, to live is to live to God, to the happy country we are
destined to adorn, and to the world; and justly to merit that distinguishing
and enchanting appellation -- The fair part of the creation; to be hourly
improving in mental beauty and luster; to shine with a still brighter and more
radiant effulgence, till the illustrious day of Heaven unfolds to our
enraptured sight! This is to answer the grand purpose of our existence: this is
to do justice to ourselves, to the world, to its Creator.

How unnatural then, how uncharacteristic must it appear, in a beautiful and
accomplished female, (contemplating, in some retired moment, her own personal
and mental attractions) to refrain addressing, with a fervent and grateful
adoration, the divine author of her existence, the underived origin of beauty
and luster ineffable, which irradiates intelligences around his throne; and who
has so happily formed her mind and person, endowing her with the capability of
higher perfections, and of approving herself to him by every purpose of her
heart, every action of her life. For this only, my amiable Chloris, let us
(...) and desire to live; to honor our beneficent creator, who has so highly
honored us, in bestowing upon us so respectable an existence, and so admirably
forming the creatures of his power and love; -- to love him supremely; to copy
after him in his endearing expressions of love and tenderness.

The more we study the creator, the more shall we resemble him. For the greater
our advances in that knowledge of him, which arises from the contemplation of
the immensely varied displays of his perfections, the more forcibly will his
discerned beauties and excellencies attract our admiration and love; and, the
object we most admire and love, we shall be ever principally solicitous to
imitate. What an immense, stupendous plan of beneficence has the Deity formed!
What a profuse display of wonders -- of benevolence, does the universe exhibit
to each interested spectator of its vast and magnificent scenes! all is the
inestimable product of infinite, of unchangeable goodness and love, and surely,
the more diligently we study the divine benevolence in its multiform, grand and
engaging displays, the more fervent will be our ardors, and the more generous
our exertions in copying after those exquisitely wrought patterns exibited for
our imitation, by that incomprehensibly glorious being, who enthroned with
ineffable splendors on high, is perpetually diffusing every form of happiness
through unnumbered worlds! -- Let us my dear, with wonder -- with awe -- with
gratitude -- contemplate the rank we hold, and are destined to hold in the vast
universe of God; and beware of entertaining too exalted an opinion of
ourselves. Beings greatly superior to us, notice our behavior, and are
interested in our felicity, and Heaven's all-pervading eye penetrates the
innermost recesses of our hearts; in which he requires, and even solicits the
freest residence, and from which he would debar the minutest and most concealed
seat for pride and vanity. Neither are we to despise any of the inferior
beings, from the unwarrantable conceit that we are more worthy, more beautiful
or happier than they. All the infinitely various orders of existences, from the
most elevated Archangel down to the meanest insect, possess their peculiar
excellences and felicities; even the reptiles, from which we have been apt to
shrink with loathing, and innumerable winged and creeping animals scarcely
visible to the sight, (besides countless animalculae too minute for our survey,
possess some advantages of which we are incapable, and enjoy perhaps, greater
degrees of sensual pleasure than our constructure allows us. The whole creation
should be enzoned in our affections, and inspire our grateful song. -- But I am
called from my pen. My dear, for the present, I must bid you adieu.


Zanger, having finished reading the letter, expressed himself as exceedingly
gratified. They conversed on its contents, as they walked through Xuntien to a
grand and spacious opening, presenting to their view two vast and magnificent
pavilions. They were erected by their benefactress Leingreing, near the
delicious spot where she sat, one evening See page 26. Book 3d. -- The author
has no other apology for his attempt to imitate the Oriental tales of fiction,
than the hopes of drawing the attention to interesting realities, of those who
would otherwise be hardly persuaded to peruse his pages.
with the Prince and Gesseng, in sweetest converse, and where they united in
chanting forth the praises of the creator and benefactors of worlds. Hard by
stood a superb dome, on the spot were the Prince first landed on the island.
Those places were dear to the illustrious friends. From each of the pavilions
was a delightful view of one of the most spacious streets of the lofty tower
lately erected, and that rather exceeded, both in dimensions and brilliancy,
its refulgent prototype which ornaments a principal city of the Chinese Empire.
The pavilions were ever open to all the citizens, and were most agreeable
resting places; affording every kind of refreshment after walking in the
adjoining groves and gardens, or along the banks of the river, or after
excursions in pleasure-boats elegantly constructed, and always ready for every
one's use. Here they spent the best part of several days with their invaluable
friends; -- sometimes on the river with various music, answered from the shores
and groves; at others, walking beneath the cool delicious shades. Each pavilion
was furnished with gay apartments, and large closets of books with desks and
implements for writing, besides chambers for retirement. These were at every
ones service; and the books, which were inestimable, always in use.

After a sumptuous entertainment in the city hall, they traveled in parties,
taking different routs through the extensive and populous country. Zanger found
the cities, towns and villages every where grand and beautiful; the whole
country under the best improvements; the inhabitants surprisingly intelligent,
industrious and flourishing, cheerful and truly hospitable. All was far
surpassing any thing he had ever imagined; and which may be summed up in a
word. He saw the glory and felicity of a wise and virtuous nation, cemented by
pure undissembled love. On his return to Africa, (which was at the close of a
month from his arrival on the island) he was at loss for words to express the
wonders he had witnessed, and the sweet affability and condescension of
Ravenzar, Leingreng, Puria Esdren, Perieng; (all whom he had seen and conversed
with at Debournon's mansion, where they became guests for two days) those
illustrious and superior beings, whose power aided Prince Nytan in peopling the
island, erecting its magnificent edifices, and forming the minds of their
inhabitants worthy of celestial converse. But, looking on the present exhibited
scenes, and the future, through a perspective grand, decisive and truly
interesting; we may well in delightful transport exclaim --

Far other power than fabled builders boast,
Shall rear new cities, like Ravenzar's gay;
With citizens adorned of innate worth,
Like hers, and ever-blooming health enrich all climes
With beings worthy of the gift of life;
And make this globe a paradise of bliss!
Then fervent, all address the heavenly power;
Nor our devout oraisons ere give over,
Till love and virtue sway each kindred heart,
And the true zest of happiness impart.
Columbia's worthies then shall stand confessed,
Enrob'd with virtue, in true glory dressed:
Whose bright effulgencies the world illume,
All, to their nobler merit yield the plume.
Their virtues proved and tried through many a scene,
And arduous conflict, the more glorious shine.
Great nations emulate such matchless worth,
And bless the power that gave Columbians birth! Such indeed throughout the
world is their exalted fame. Highly favored of Heaven, may the laws of unerring
rectitude be ever their guide, and wisdom their stability. A fair inheritance
is their possession, not to be polluted or spoiled by the vicious, or wrested
from them by secret or open invaders! If it may be compared to a beautiful and
magnificent garden, most elegibly and commodiously situated; it is verifyed and
illuminated by the intellectual sun; whose cherishing rays let no noxious mists
or malignant vapors obscure, nor cause the delicious fruits and fragrant
flowers to fade. By the hand of diligence let it be carefully weeded and
pruned, that its salutary fruits and herbs may grow and flourish, and its
odoriferous and embellishing flowers ever look lively and gay; while the
defensive walls that enclose it around, remain solid and impregnable to every
inimical assault!

Rise Federal City -- rise -- in glory rise!
In wisdom's cement thy firm basis lies,
Nor storms, nor ages shall thy strength impair;
Nations unborn thy splendors shall admire;
To thee shall flock, whilst Bards, inspired, proclaim
Thy patriot virtues, and immortal fame!
Heroes deceased the ruins of the grave survive,
In every clime, in every heart they live.
The just can never die -- the just -- the good --
Not death o'erwhelms, nor time's destroying flood.
Like Suns they shine with splendors ever bright,
Beyond the reach of malice, slander spite,
Or gloomy frowns of an eternal night!
Blessed sacred prvilege of virtues sons,
From earth removed, and greatly WASHINGTON'S!
But deaths and griefs soon shall forever cease,
And earth and Heaven be one inchangeless bliss!
A ray divine shows glory yet to come;
The living and the dead in one eternal home!
This Heaven's denisens and earth's incessant pray,
And hail the approach of God's illustrious day!
PROPOSAL, For printing by subscription, a volume entitled* THE CASTLE OF
SERREIN, Or ARODE OF PERPETUAL PLEASURES: Illustrating the singular characters
and manners of its inhabitants.

In a series of letters by SEIGNORA R * *

Interwoven with her own memoirs; The interesting events of the present age;
And, contemplations on the grand scenes opening on the World.

The volume to contain 150 pages 12mo.

Price to Subscribers 3/6

As a number of copies are already engaged, it is expected the work will be put
to the press in a few weeks.


