AN ORATION, PRONOUNCED JULY 4th, 1800, IN THE BAPTIST MEETING HOUSE, IN
PROVIDENCE. IT BEING THE ANNIVERSARY OF AMERICAN INDEPENDENCE.

BY JONATHAN RUSSELL, ESQUIRE.

RHODE ISLAND: PROVIDENCE PRINTED; -- WARREN, REPRINTED AND SOLD BY NATHANIEL
PHILLIPS.

M,DCCC.

AN ORATION.
IT is a magnificent spectacle to behold a great people annually crouding their
temples to consecrate the anniversary of their sovereignty. On this occasion
the heart of every true American beats high with a just and noble pride. He
still hears the illustrious Fathers of his Country appealing to the Supreme
Judge of the World for the rectitude of their conduct, declare that the United
States "ARE AND OF RIGHT OUGHT TO BE, FREE AND INDEPENDENT." The black
catalogue of injury, abuse, contempt and crime, which exhausted forbearance and
drove us to resistance, rushes on his mind. He passes in review those great men
who then burst upon the world, and who, endowed with every virtue and every
talent which could fit them for the arduous task in which they engaged,
appeared to be expressly commissioned by Heaven to rule the storm of
revolution. It was then indeed that human nature, which for eighteen centuries
had appeared nearly to have lost those qualities which alone ennoble it,
emerged at once from its degradation, and recovered the luster with which it
shone in the happiest days of antiquity.

ON the islands of the Adriatic, the mountains of Biscay, and the rocks of Uri,
the spirit of Liberty had indeed successfully sought a refuge, but driven at
last, from all that could delight her on earth, she had already flapped her
wings on the glaciers of Switzerland, and was taking her flight toward Heaven
-- The American people rose -- they burst their fetters -- they hurled them at
their oppressors -- they shouted they were FREE -- The sound broke across the
Atlanlic -- it shook the fog-wrapt island of Britain, and re-echoed along the
Alps. The ascending spirit heard it -- she recognized in it the voice of her
elect, and holding her course westward, she rejoicing saw her incense rise from
a thousand altars. Her presence assured our triumph. Painful however was the
struggle, and terrible the conflict which obtained that triumph -- our harbors
filled with hostile fleets -- our fields ravaged -- our cities wrapped in flames
-- a numerous, veteran and unprincipled enemy let loose upon us -- our army
thinned by battles -- wasted by sickness -- disgusted by treachery and
desertion -- a prey to every species of privation and reduced to the last
misery next despair -- Even then, however, this little army showed themselves
worthy the holy cause for which they contended. Driven from Long Island -- from
the heights of Harlem -- from White Plains pursued from post to post even to
beyond the Delaware -- they would often turn upon their insulting foe -- and
mingling their blood with the melting lava of the cannon's mouth, foretell them
of Tronton, Germantown and Monmouth.

BUT it was not in the ardent conflicts of the field only that our countrymen
fell; it was not the ordinary chances of war alone, which they had to
encounter. Happy indeed, and thrice happy were WARREN, MONTCOMERY and MERCER;
happy those other gallant spirits who fell with glory in the heat of battle
distinguished by their country, and covered with her applause. Every soul,
sensible to honor, envies rather than compassionates their fate. It was in the
dungeons of our inhuman invaders; it was in their loathsome and pestiferous
prison-ships, that the wretchedness of our countrymen still makes the heart
bleed. It was there that hunger and thirst, and disease, and all contumely
cold-hearted cruelty could bestow, sharpened every pang of death. Misery there
wrung every fiber that could feel before she gave the blow of grace which sent
the sufferer to eternity. It is said that poison was employed. No -- there was
no such mercy there -- There nothing was employed which could blunt the
susceptibility to anguish, or which by hastening death could rob its agonies of
a single pang. On board one only of these prison-ships above eleven thousand of
our brave countrymen are said to have perished. She was called the Jersey. Her
wreck still remains, and at low ebb presents to the world its accursed and
blighted fragments. Twice in twenty four hours the winds of Heaven sigh through
it, and repeat the groans of our expiring countrymen, and twice the ocean hides
in her bosom those deadly and polluted ruins, which all her waters cannot
purify. Every rain that descends washes from the unconsecrated bank the bones
of those intrepid sufferers. They lie naked on the shore accusing the neglect
of their countrymen. How long shall gratitude and even piety deny them burial.
They ought to be collected in one vast ossery, which shall stand a monument to
future ages of the two extremes of the human character; of that depravity
which, trampling on the rights of misfortune, perpetrated cold and calculating
murder on a wretched and defenseless prisoner, and that virtue which animated
this prisoner to die a willing martyr for his country. Or rather, were it
possible, there ought there to be raised a Colossal Column, whose base sinking
to bell, should let the murderers read their infamy inscribed on it, and whose
capital of Corinthian laurel assending to Heaven should show the fainted
Patriots that they have triumphed.

DEEP and dreadful as the coloring of this picture may appear, it is but a
faint and imperfect sketch of the original. You must remember a thousand
unutterable calamities, a thousand instances of domestic as well as national
anxiety and distress, which mock description. You ought to remember them, you
ought to hand them down in tradition to your posterity, that they may know the
awful price their fathers paid for freedom.

IT would be well however amidst these bitter recollections, to suppress if
possible the muttered curse of indignation; to pass in silence over the name of
that nation which was our enemy; and if the effort is not above human
magnanimity, to hold her, without antipathy, "as we hold the rest of mankind,
enemies in war, in peace friends." Of all the passions which vex the human
breast there is none perhaps which dupes stupidity or excites malevolence like
national antipathy. It hangs with a dark malignity about the heart, and gives a
tone to all its emotions. It violates not only the evangelical precepts which
enjoins the forgiveness of injuries, but disregarding the maxims of justice and
even of common sense, it denies to virtue its excellence, it takes from crime
its guilt, and disturbs society by a furious denunciation of vengeance without
being able to assign its provocation. To a man under the influence of this
unhappy malady, the manners of the unconscious foreigner, his gestures, his
language, his food, and even the fashion of his coat are sources of uneasiness.
But this is not all: He, who has once justified himself in his hatred to a part
of the human race, has surmounted the first great barrier to crime,
benevolence. When Amilcar took Hannibal at only nine years old to the altar,
and made him swear eternal enmity to the Romans, he violated the most sacred
duties of the Father and the Man. He ought to have filled the heart of his son
with benevolence for the promotion of his felicity, and that of his fellow-men.
Was there not malignity enough in the human breast without exacting a guarantee
for its hatred; or was it to be feared that Hannibal would too easily have
forgiven his enemies unless forbid by the awful religion of an oath? National
antipathy has been the low and ignoble policy employed by some governments to
secure support in the wild wars of their ambition, but it is a policy which
deeply affronts the people with whom it is employed, a policy which I trust the
just and noble spirit of every AMERICAN will spurn -- What -- must we be led to
believe that the rest of mankind are fools and villains before we can have a
good opinion of our own wisdom and virtue; or must we be worked into an idea
that they are all cowards before we dare to place a confidence in our own
courage. No -- let us have the generosity, the magnanimity, the justice, to
give to all nations their due; let us dwell on those qualities which exalt
rather than those which disgrace them, and let us found our glory on our own
worth and not on their defects.

THE two great objects which divide the industry of the world are agriculture
and commerce. Statesmen and moralists have calculated the effects which each of
these has on the manners and opinions of mankind. They have been generally
inclined to believe that commerce corrupts and makes mankind venal. Among the
adversaries, however, of extensive commercial intercourse, will often be found
men too deeply impressed with the charms of a country life, or those who have
received disgust from the anxieties and disappointments of trade. They reflect
that Carthage was the most commercial nation of antiquity, and there so little
regard was paid to the principles of integrity, that Punic faith became
proverbial throughout the world. From among the nations of modern times, they
choose out Hamburg. This city, which in a high and pompous style calls herself
free and imperial, is purely commercial. Confined within her ramparts, she
holds no intercourse with nature, and it is scarcely known by some of her
inhabitants, whether the vegetables they eat are not manufactured like the
clothes they wear. They have no fashions, no manners, and scarce a language of
their own. They never think of their God unless it be to effect an insurance
against his dispensations. People of all nations and tongues resort there; and
when the citizens of this mighty republic assemble on their Exchange, which to
them is the Camp of Mars, they form a motley group of different from and
complexion, of different manners and religion, of different accents and dress
from all the different quarters of the world, united and alike alone in their
object, that of making money. There many a battle is fought, kings dethroned
and nations conquered for half per cent, Money is their great good; every thing
is bought and sold, hospitality herself is set upon the tariff, and they will
almost give you the price current of an oath. Talk to a Hamburgher, who
probably was first a Dutchman, a Ragusan, a Genoese, or an Englishman, about
the love of country and he will think you mad -- he has no country. Talk to him
about liberty and he will praise it, because he thinks you mean a free trade.
He troubles himself no further with the political changes in the world than
they affect the markets, and if he has a preference for one country above
another it is that where the best speculation is to be made. -- Such is the
sombre pencil with which commerce is pourtrayed. Agriculture is touched with
brighter colors. It is remembered that in the early days of Rome every thing
virtuous and honorable was found among the rural tribes -- The cultivation of
the soil gives health and vigor to the body, and purity and tranquillity to the
mind. The human form attains in the labors of the field its utmost development.
The full chest, the muscular and brawny arm and the toil-strung sinew are the
reward of the husbandman. He preserves with nature all his relations. He every
where converses with his God. He every where contemplates order, economy and
peace, and his soul is filled with a delightful harmony. The seasons return
with unerring regularity; nothing is in vain; every thing progresses toward
some end for which it has been designed by the eternal wisdom, and every thing
attains this end, without interference and without confusion; amidst the low
but transporting music of the spheres. The cultivator of the soil is indeed a
Patriot. The habits formed in his youth never desert his age. The very trees
and rocks among which he has grown up are objects of his affection. He loves
the soil which has rewarded his labors, and he finds music in the echo of his
native hills. Even the fidelity of the honest Swiss was not proof to that
touching air The Rans des Vaches.
which brought to his remembrance the charms of his rural home. Strongly
however as agriculture and commerce may appear to be here contrasted: they are
not naturally enemies, nor even rivals; they are friends and ought to unite for
the attainment of a great and common object. In this country above all others
do they require the mutual aid of each other. Agriculture supplies Commerce
with the articles of her exports, and with a ready market for her returns.
Commerce, in her turn, incites the husbandman to labor beyend his wants, by
administering to his enjoyments. -- Make Commerce the only honorable pursuit;
the farmer would desert his plough, and leave the most delightful country in
the world to become again a howling wilderness -- Destroy Commerce, the farmer
would transform himself into a winder of silk or a knitter of lace, or, what
alas is more probable, he would be actuated by no nobler incentive than his
coarse appetites, he would feel the last ray of civilization expire within him,
and he would revert to all the horrors of savage life. Is it not then
astonishing that any man should wish for the destruction either of agriculture
or commerce, since the first is necessary to life, and the second to make life
amiable. It is the spirit of party alone which can be guilty of such madness.
But of what is not the spirit of party guilty? It assails the fairest virtue --
it overturns the statues of heroes -- it ransacks nature for a poison, and by
the midnight taper consults with science how to apply it. A thorough party-man
forgets even himself, he is deaf to the suggestions of self-love -- he is
absorbed in the sole desire of oppressing his opponents, and if ever a ray of
pleasure crosses his dark and sullen soul it is when he has succeeded in
inflicting some misery upon them. In his blind excess he neither loves himself,
his party, or his country; but he hates religiously every one who differs from
his opinions, when, perhaps these opinions were as lightly embraced as they are
malignantly defended. He often in fact has no more faith in these opinions than
the man he would sacrifice for not adopting them. He can decree to Aristides
the ostracism and to Socrates the deadly hemlock, and the next day advocate the
just politics of the one and the pure morality of the other. This party, than
has indeed no principle to rest upon, he is hung up like a pendulum and in
eternal oscilation as stupidity or design may set him in motion, the rapidity
of his vibrations are inversely as his length. Beware how you indulge this
terrible spirit of party. There is no security in the triumph it may obtain,
for you to day; tomorrow the very instruments of that triumph may be turned
upon you with affrightful execution. The same irregularity, which at one moment
brought the loyal and virtuous Stafford to the scaffold, was found a fit
instrument the next for the execution of the popular and illustrious Sydney:
the same guillotine severed the neck of Danton, which had fallen on that of
Louis, and Marius returned from the ruins of Carthage to glut himself with
vengeance on those who had driven him thither.

REVOLTING however as this barbarous spirit may appear, it generally chooses
its* dwelling in the fairest portions of the world, and although in its excess
it appears the implacable and mortal enemy to liberty, yet is it nearly allied
to that genius of faction which has often proved her strong but untractable
friend. This last indeed appears to be the thunder, which, while it shakes,
refreshes and purifies the political atmosphere. Wherever it has been
completely silenced every foul and noxious vapor has arisen which could
extinguish life, or fully its charms. You may have the silence of death, you
may have the patient despair of slavery; but violence will never obtain for you
a free and animated tranquillity. Ireland will indeed be quiet when every tree
is turned into a gallows, and France, had the energy of Robertspierre continued
a little longer would have lost the last virtue that could rebel. All history
is indeed full of the factions of free States. These, however, like the
mountains oak appeared to gather vigor from the storms that shook them. Athens
in one year, under the death-like tranquillity of a tyrant, lost more strength,
more riches, more elegance, more glory than amidst the bosterous agitations of
all her parties or even the conflicts of civil war. But these were not the
beggarly and servile conflicts between a red rose and a white one, not whether
a weak and inglorious bigot, or a wanton and abandoned debauchee should be
king; they were not those temporary bursts of misery which now and then agitate
the wretched inhabitants of Constantinople, and which an execution will allay
without exhibiting any evidence of its justice. They sprung from that unbroken
spirit, that wild and unfettered boldness, that restless, that uncontrollable,
that sublime love of Liberty which sometimes indeed mistakes its means but
never loses fight of its object; which while it seems to endanger often secures
that object, and which burns with undiminished force while one generous
sentiment lingers in the human breast to support it. I would rather, exclaimed
a noble Palatin The Palatin of Posania; his words are Malo Libertatem
periculosam quam quietum servitium.
in the Polish diet, I would rather have danger with liberty than safety with
servitude. It is indeed better to be tossed by the rudest storm that ever vexed
the political ocean than to be motionless in port, and like a Genoese
galley-slave have Liberty only on your chains. But is the human race then
doomed to the melancholy alternative of servitude or eternal insurrection. Must
they be forever buffeted from despotism to anarchy, and from anarchy to
despotism? If from these evils there is a refuge, it is not in the energy of
government only, nor in the tame and worn-down spirit of the people -- It is in
the diffusion of knowledge, the indulgence of political opinion and the
cultivation of the social virtues. You may give to government sufficient power
to quell an insurrection, you ought to give it; but there are but two causes of
insurrection; oppression and delusion. Will the energy of government redress
the first? It is but a sanction to it. Will it cure the last? There is no
avenue by which violence can arrive at the understanding. It may well be
doubted if among the fifty thousand Moors, the fierce Zealot Ferdinand of
Arragon.
who conquered Grenada caused to be baptized at the point of the bayonet, there
was a single convert to the Catholic faith. It is the light of knowledge alone
which can dissipate error; it is that alone which can give a people worth and
respectability in the eyes of their rulers, and at the same time teach them the
necessity of supporting a righteous government. Ignorance, by eternally
brooding over imaginary griefs, often produces real ones. That acquaintance,
which every one has the leisure to acquire, with the springs of human action
and the leading events which have taken place in the world, must show the most
timid how terrible that security is which absolute power affords, and convince
the most adventurous and hardy of the tremendous attributes of that freedom
which exists in tempests and convulsions. Charondas, of all the legislators of
antiquity, has alone the glory of having known the true source of republican
happiness. He established FREE-SCHOOLS.

MUTUAL moderation between those of different political sentiments is essential
to social harmony. It was said with truth, some thousand years ago, that it is
not the opinions of men, but their quarrels about these opinions, which disturb
the world. We have seen among religious sects, the astonishing effects of
toleration. From the conquest of Britain by the Romans, to the settlement of
this state by its illustrious Founder, that balm to religious dissension
appeared, like the lazerpitium of Egypt, to have left the world, or to have
been considered as a worthless weed. It was then that the fiercest passions of
the human breast, clad themselves in celestial armor, and retiring into the
impenetrable recesses of conscience, harrassed the world with inexorable and
cruel warfare. It was then that mankind, in contending for the altar, forgot
the GOD, and destroyed in the name of religion, every thing that was dear to
humanity. But when toleration returned, all sects and persuasions, happy in the
security obtained for themselves, ceased to molest others; and piety confiding
vengeance to him, who has said it is mine, once more kneeled to the divinity.

IF such is the power of toleration over bigotry and superstition, which are
uncontrollable by any earthly wisdom, whose flights are above the sublimest
reason, and leave the understanding wearied and confounded whenever it attempts
to pursue them; what have we not a right to expect from political moderation?
Politics have no forbidding mysteries; they do not strain themselves to be
co-extensive with faith, which, expanded by the ardours of zeal, often
stretches beyond the utmost confines of possibility; they never leave the earth
unless when hoisted for a moment from their sphere, by the gas of visionaries.
Here every thing may safely be brought to the test of reason, and here truth,
when pursued with sincerity and moderation, will not be pursued in vain. Every
absurdity and extravagance necessarily contain the seeds of their own
mortality, and unless they receive a forced and artificial existence from
persecution, they will die a speedy and tranquil death. It is a powerful truth,
that no doctrine hostile to social order, can long prevail among a calm and
enlightened people. Government has the safe keeping of the public repose, but
it has no right to interfere with the consciences or reasonings of the
governed. An interference of this kind is indeed as fruitless as it is unjust.
How weak was I, exclaimed the Imperial bigot Charles the 5th.
in his convent in Estre Madura, to have endeavored by violence to reduce
Europe to one faith, when I am unable to make even two watches move alike.

THE next political heresy after intolerance, which merits the reprobation of
every good citizen, is deception. Every Government which derives its support
immediately from the people, ought to walk in the light. It ought to be able to
meet every investigation, with a serene front; and with that confidence which
conscious integrity inspires. A people the least enlightened cannot long be
deceived, their good sense will ultimately detect every intrigue, and they will
be terrible to those who may have abused their credulity. Darkly barbarous
indeed must be that nation which it is necessary to cheat into happiness, and
unrighteous and unprincipled must be that government which will descend to
fraud for any purpose. The false notions of the people are sometimes however
called honest prejudices, and the deceptions of government are hallowed with
the name of pious frauds. But every man of feeling must weep over that honesty
which is the mere result of delusion, and every man of virtue must execrate
that piety which couples itself with a fraud. -- In America, "however, where
the right of sovereignty resides indisputably in the body of the people, and
where ALL are equal by law and by birth Adams' Defense of the American
Constitution.
," if you expect purity in the stream, you must keep the source free from
pollution. If there is not virtue in the people, it cannot reasonably be
presumed to exist in those who are chosen by, and from the people. There is no
magic in an election, which will make a sage of an idiot, or transform a rogue
into an honest man. Neither is candor and confidence to be expected in return
for violence and jealousy. Every passion constantly tends to reproduce itself
in its object: Even the divine command to return good for evil, having had to
encounter the strongest propensities of the human heart, has obtained but a
partial obedience. If you desire then moderation and confidence from your
rulers, you must treat them with moderation and confidence. Do you ask what
duty imposes on you the obligation of leading the way. It may be answered, that
if ever the delightful competition of being and doing good takes place, it must
begin somewhere, and you must have a better opinion of the virtue of others
than you have of your own if you expect they will begin it.

THE politician may amuse you with a favorite system, he may tell you of the
excellence of this or that form of government, he may paint to you the magic
there is in a balance of three powers; but every nation will be free or
enslaved, happy or miserable, not by the parchments or prescriptions of the
magistrate, but by the manners and character of the people. Should the Grand
Signior, by his Firman, establish throughout his dominions a Constitution
exactly similar to that of the United States, would Syria, Palestine and Egypt
rise from their ruins, or degenerated Greece rekindle the holy fires of her
freedom. No -- Slavery would there still hug her chains; the Arab would still
watch for plunder behind the fallen towers of Palmyra, and the barbarous
inhabitant of Romelia would step heedlessly over the fragments of the Areopagus
and the prostrate columns of the Parthenion. The balance of three powers has
been exalted above the influence of religion. But where shall we find its
excellence. Shall we look to the governments of ancient times? They have
perished? Shall we search for it in England? Did it exist there in the absolute
despotism of the Tudors? Did it flourish in the murder and exile of the
Stuarts? Is it to be found in the venality of the house of Hanover?
Prerogative, indeed, has dropped the scepter, but corruption pours invisibly her
aerial acid on the heart, and stifles there every noble passion. Patriotism
herself has become a mercenary, and the honest Englishman of the present day,
like Isaac, the tyrant of Cyprus, is well contented with his chains if they are
but of silver. It is a kind of quackery in politics to prescribe one and the
same constitution, as a sovereign remedy to the evils of all nations. The
excellence of a government does not consist in either concentrating or dividing
its powers, nor in an hereditary or elective executive, but in being adapted to
the peculiar manners and circumstances of the nation, where it is instituted.
Superlatively happy, however, is that nation, where the people are sufficiently
temperate and enlightened, to submit to a government of their own choice; for
although monarchy may be best for some countries, yet those countries are for
that very reason more miserable than where a republic is best. Every man in the
United States, who wishes for monarchy, must have either the vanity to think
himself more virtuous than his fellow-citizens, or the consciousness that he is
not sufficiently virtuous to discharge his duties voluntarily. That man is no
less a revolutionist, who would rear a throne on the ruins of a republic than
he who would establish popular dominion on the destruction of royal power.

IT was a maxim of the great De Wit, that no nation however weak ought ever to
relinquish a single point, the justice of which is obvious. That nation indeed,
which dares not to be just to herself, will never be just to others. Such a
nation has no business with sovereignty. It is extravagant and ridiculous for a
people to boast of independence, when they are afraid to make peace with one
power least they should provoke another. It must be humiliating to every man of
spirit, and distressing to every man of principle, tamely to submit to the
abuses of a haughty nation, and even to court her favor by wantonly defying
her rival. Base and pusillanimous is it to play the hero where there is no
danger, and the coward where there is. This is a mode of conduct which may
answer the narrow and selfish views of a few little, headstrong political
bargain-makers, but it can never gratify the just pride of a great people.

PERHAPS the expectations of many would be here disappointed was the war which
now rages in Europe to be passed over in silence. In that war we behold
something to admire but much to condemn. It makes the warriors' pulse beat
quick and high. Military skill has there attained its perfection; Hannibal and
Fabius -- Turenne and Conde, Marlborough and Villars, with all their diversity
of excellencies every where find equals. Yet the skill of the General does not
surpass the courage of the Soldier. Across the rage of battles, in the deadly
breach, over the smoking ashes of cities, and the convulsive members of the
slain, he seeks for glory. In the onset prompt -- impetuous -- terrible as the
glowing thunderbolt; in defense, firm, and calm, and immovable as a rock of
adamant -- a magnanimity -- a fortitude -- an intrepidity every where prevail
-- Victory has lost her insolence, defeat her disgrace, and death his terrors.
But we must turn from the splendour of this scene, where virtue appears at once
to weep and to rejoice, where destruction herself rises on her pedestal with a
high and imposing majesty, and where human nature indemnifies herself for the
calamities she suffers by ennobling the hand which inflicts them -- we must
turn from this scene to the cold crimes of politics.

ON either side we behold the atrocity of the end aggravated by the atrocity of
the means, and the charms of profession harshly contrasted with affrightful
realities. Universal domination has entered the lifts against universal
monopoly -- while liberty and the rights of man have found themselves among the
auxiliries of tyranny, and religion and the love of order have been pressed
into the service of sacrilege and confusion: -- LIBERTY -- has the demolished
the Bastile merely to take her sullen seat among the ruins, and to hurl them at
affrighted humanity; and the rights of man do they consist in the expedition of
a trial or the dispatch of an execution -- do they hang upon the lamp-post or
stream beneath the guillotine -- are they to be found in provincial Holland --
in distressed Liguria -- in divided Venice, or on the desolated mountains of
Helvetia.

ON the other side, does RELIGION leave her holy places to trample upon every
thing venerable in years, amiable innocence, or respectable in virtue. Does she
execute military law on the catholics of Ireland; does she hang the Jews at
Milan; does she mangle, and tear, and devour, the wretched protestants at
Naples. Does the love of order fill the world with ruin, discord and murder?
Does it open the sluices upon the peasants of Belgium? Does it fire the
kelp-thatched hovels of the fishermen on the coasts of Normandy? Does it excite
treachery, sedition and mutiny on board the fleets of Holland? Does it wake the
furies of civil war on the confines of Almorica, and pay the Vendean and Chouan
Brigand for the extinction of the human race. Does religion, does the love of
order bring single and double knotted devotion from the wilds of Muscovy to fix
her polluted altars on the plains of Italy. Do they -- but here the full heart
must have vent -- do they double the most southern promontory of Africa to go
and overthrow the throne of an independent monarch of Asia. The blood of Saib
was as pure that of the Bourbons -- as noble as that of the Brunswicks. Unhappy
monarch, was it not enough for him to behold his territories dismembered and
devastated -- his subjects slaughtered and enslaved -- but were his throne, his
family and his life devoted to destruction. He defended his power with a spirit
which showed he deserved it. His death was worthy of a king. He fell gored in
front by many a wound, and the mangled bodies of his faithful subjects raised
over him a glorious mausoleum. Let the pretended champions of religion, of
order, and of ancient institutions tell of the plunder each assassin shared
from the profaned regalia of this murdered monarch; let the first and most
celebrated minister in Europe insult his fallen fortunes, in cold and
contemptuous irony, with the title of Citizen Tippoo; yet the wrongs of Citizen
Tippoo shall be remembered, when the subverters of his power, the destroyers of
his life, and the calumniators of his fame shall be crushed with execration or
forgotten in oblivion. Let us take care how we bestow applause from the
prevailing passion of the moment. Gedzar Gedzar, says Baron de Tott, signifies
in the Turkish language, Butcher, and that this very Pacha assumed it as
expressive of his love of Human blood. See 3 vol. Mem. B. de Tott.
Pacha and Suwarrow were the heroes of the last year, but the first has already
become again the butcher of Acre, and the last the sacker of Ismael and the
bloodsucker of Warsaw.

SHOULD we be involved in the present European contest, if we are just we shall
have nothing to repent -- if we are united we shall have nothing to fear. UNION
is the heart through which must circulate those streams of life, of health, of
joy, which shall animate every member, which shall heal every disease, and
which shall give a zest to every blessing. United you may set securely like a
mighty giant on your mountains, and bending a stern regard upon the ocean dare
the coming of the proudest foe; the little topical eruption of a County or a
State shall yield to the hale vigor of the whole; and every part reciprocating
those good offices, which a diversity of soil and climate give them the high
privilege of rendering acceptable -- you shall exhibit a spectacle which shall
awe and delight the universe. Policy, genius, nature herself invites to union.
She has bound us together by a chain of mountains which no human strength can
break -- she has interlaced us by a hundred majestic streams, which pass and
repass the boundaries of States; which parting nearly from the same sources
flow in a hundred different directions, disregarding the little prejudices of
the districts they fertalize; and now approaching, now receding from each
other, they wind in a thousand mazes and weave a knot which no intrigue can
loosen, which no sword can sever. Who will not rise superior to local
prepossessions -- who will not feel himself the citizen of a common country,
the child of a common parent; and who is he, wherever may be his abode, whether
on this or the other side of the Chesapeak, whether on the banks of the
Missisippi, or the borders of the Atlantic, who, while he exults in the name of
an American will not regard as his brother every one who has a title to that
proud distinction.

BE UNITED, was the last injunction which trembled from the lips of our
departed WASHINGTON. At the name of Washington, does not a melancholy pleasure
sadden and delight your souls. The Fourth of July shall never pass but HE on it
shall be remembered. He has filled the world with his and our glory. The Tartar
and the Arub converse about him in their tents. His form already stands in
bronze and marble among the worthies of ancient and modern times. The fidelity
of history has already taken care of the immortality of his fame. His example
shall animate posterity, and should faction tear, or invasion approach our
country, his spirit shall descend from the divinity and inspire tranquillity
and courage. Death has not terminated his usefulness, he has not yet ceased to
do good, and even now he holds from his tomb a torch which cheers and
enlightens the world. He loved truth, let us love it; let us seek it with a
sincere and single heart. It will reward the search. It is great, immutable and
eternal. The fugitive falsehoods of the moment shall perish; party and passion
may write their names upon the plaster, but this shall one day moulder, and
truth remain forever inscribed upon the marble. But mistake not for truth that
consistency which constitutes the mock virtue of the present day. Is the
pursuit of this preposterous virtue the commission of one fault often makes a
thousand others necessary. The unfortunate man who has committed it must not
allow that he has erred, he must not take council of conscience, he must not
claim sanctuary in the charity of his kindred men; but he must have the spirit
to adopt a system which shall vindicate the infallibility of his head, though
at the sacrifice of every amiable quality of his heart; and impelled by the
power of consistency he must press onward, though, like the Leming, he mark his
course through life by a right-line of destruction. But truth, though it never
changes, never errs -- it shines with a mild and equal luster -- it breaks
through the clouds of ignorance and barbarity -- it dispels the emanations of
vice and folly, and like the sun diffusing light and joy, it goes on forever
rejoicing in its course.

FINIS.

