MR. RIPLEY'S SERMON, DELIVERED ON THE DAY OF THE EXECUTION OF SAMUEL SMITH.

LOVE TO OUR NEIGHBOR EXPLAINED AND URGED IN A SERMON, DELIVERED AT CONCORD,
MASSACHUSETTS, DECEMBER 26, 1799, Being the Day on which SAMUEL SMITH was
executed for Burglary.

By EZRA RIPLEY, A. M. Minister of Concord.

Published for the Benefit of Criminals.

Printed by SAMUEL HALL, No. 53, Cornhill, BOSTON. 1800.

MATTHEW xxii. 39. THOU SHALL LOVE THY NEIGHBOR AS THYSELF.
THE crime, which is this day to be capitally punished, is a direct violation
of the law of love to our neighbor. The words read will not, therefore, it is
presumed, be thought unsuitable for the theme of a discourse, on the present
very solemn and affecting occasion. They are very concise and simple in
expression; but their meaning is great, their contents are weighty and
extremely interesting to individuals and to society.

I shall endeavor to show,

First, The true meaning of the law of love to our neighbor in its nature and
extent;

Secondly, The reasonableness and obligation of this law; and, then, make
improvement by way of inference and application.

First. I am to show the true meaning of the law of love to our neighbor in
its nature and extent.

It pleased God to create man in his own moral likeness; to endue him with
knowledge to understand the divine character and his own duty; with rectitude
of mind and holy principles of action, that he might obey his Maker, and be the
object of his complacency. On the understanding and heart of man the Lord wrote
two comprehensive and unalterable laws, viz. Love to God, and Love to men. --
These were to him the rule and covenant of life. Accordingly, Jesus Christ, who
taught the will of God in perfection, when this question was put to him, "Which
is the great commandment of the law?" answered, "Thou shall love the Lord thy
God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind. This is
the first and great commandment. And the second is like unto it, Thou shall
love thy neighbor as thyself. On these two commandments hang all the law and
the prophets."

Although by the sinful lapse of man our nature is so depraved, that we are
prone to transgress, and our moral powers are so debilitated, that we cannot
render perfect obedience; and, in boundless compassion, a Savior is provided,
to redeem us from sin and the curse of the law; yet Jesus Christ "came not to
destroy the law, but to fulfill it." Matthew. v. 17.
He came not to lower its demands and weaken its obligation but to obey it
perfectly for man; not to excuse any from the duties enjoined, nor to tolerate
the least sin, but to exemplify its perfect morals, and aid us in sincere and
universal imitation of himself. This law, therefore, is now our rule of life.
Sincere obedience to it is a service most reasonable, useful, and necessary.

Love is one of the primary affections of the mind, and always inclines us to
will and to do whatever appears to be right and good. It is the opposite of
hatred, which invariably prompts to sin, unless it be directed against sin
itself. Love to God exhibits itself in reverence and worship, admiration and
praise, obedience and gratitude, confidence and trust. When this affection is
in proper exercise, and the divine character is rightly apprehended, it becomes
complacency, and is productive of joy and delight. Love to our neighbor
expresses itself in good will and kindness, truth and justice, righteousness
and charity. And when real amiableness of character is perceived, love
surpasses the ordinary bounds of benevolence, and is refined into complacency,
the result of which is harmony and happiness.

Let us now attend particularly to the second table of the law, love to our
neighbor, which enjoins all relative and social duties, and prohibits all the
contrary vices. These precepts, which are six in number, and begin with the
fifth in the decalogue, have respect to all stations and relations in life, and
extend as well to the desires of the heart, as to the outward actions. The
first enjoins on children all due honor and obedience toward their parents;
and with equal reason, on parents, all proper affection and care toward
children. It requires all suitable respect to superiors, kindness to equals,
and condescension to inferiors, and prohibits every sentiment and action
inconsistent with these virtues. The second is, Thou shall not kill; and
forbids every disposition and action, which tends to injure the life and health
of our neighbor, with all hatred, malice, and revenge; and requires a sincere
desire and endeavor to preserve his life and health, and to promote his
happiness. The third prohibits the violation of the marriage covenant and every
kind and degree of lewdness, and requires chastity in heart, speech, and
behavior. The fourth is, Thou shall not steal. By this command, all thest,
burglary, robbery, fraud, counterfeiting the currency and legal writings, and
whatever tends unjustly to deprive our neighbor of his property, is absolutely
prohibited; and the opposite virtues, by parity of reason and full implication,
are strictly commanded. The fifth utterly forbids all perjury, lying,
falsehood, and prevarication; and implicitly enjoins on every man, to speak the
truth to his neighbor in conversation and in witness bearing, whether he speak
without or under the obligation of an oath. The sixth aims directly at the
heart. It forbids coveting the property and enjoyments of our neighbor; and
implies that we be contented with such things as we have by the allotments of
Providence, and can procure by honest industry. The coveting, which is a
violation of the divine law of love to our neighbor, is an earnest desire to
possess and enjoy the possessions and comforts of other people, without regard
to equity and justice. To covet in this sense is sinful; and it prompts to
unrighteous measures to obtain the things coveted. It induces deception, fraud,
stealing, and the most atrocious crimes. Thus, to covet is the corrupt fountain
whence flow those injurious vices, which frequently scourge individuals and
society. This is the bitter root from which spring up fraud, injustice,
stealing, robbery, and, sometimes, murder. According to the confession of the
unhappy convict before us, all his crimes, which have more directly procured
prosecutions, prisons, punishments (and I may add, the gallows) may be traced
to this secret, fruitful, and corrupt source. There is a sense in which it is
virtuous to covet, viz. to "covet earnestly the best gifts." We may ardently
desire to excel in goodness and usefulness, and for this purpose, to be
distinguished by endowments. But this desire having for its objects spiritual
things and the benefit of men, is the very opposite in its nature and effects
to that sinful lusting, or coveting, after evil things, and things to which we
have no just right.

That such, as above stated, is the true meaning of love to our neighbor, is
evident from a great number of passages in the sacred scriptures. To cite one
only may be sufficient to our present purpose. -- "Render therefore to all
their dues; tribute to whom tribute is due, custom to whom custom, fear to whom
fear, honor to whom honor. Owe no man any thing, but to love one another: for
he that loves another has fulfilled the law. For this, Thou shall not kill,
Thou shall not commit adultery, Thou shall not steal, Thou shall not bear false
witness, Thou shall not covet; and if there be any other commandment (that is,
enjoining relative duties) it is briefly comprehended in this saying, viz. Thou
shall love thy neighbor as thyself." Romans xiii. 7, 8, 9.


The sense of the text will be more perspicuous, whilst we attend to the nature
of love. It is a true character given in scripture of the Deity, that he "is a
God of peace, and not of confusion:" and a more perfect one, when it is said,
"God is love." Hence all moral duty, all religion, which is designed to make
men good, holy, and happy like God, is summed up in love. The moral law is a
transcript of the divine mind, and consists summarily in love to God and love
to men. According to this statement, it is evident that love to our neighbor
is of the same nature and kind, as the love of God to men. He has for men a
love of benevolence and a love of complacency, which he expresses, as they are
by moral character qualified to receive.

I will now distinctly consider love to our neighbor in both these operations.

The love of benevolence intends a disposition to do good to our neighbor, and
an actual exhibition of the inward purpose. There must be both the willing mind
and the actual performance of good deeds. True benevolence is therefore totally
opposed to all hatred, violence, injustice, and unkindness in disposition and
behavior. "Love works no ill to his neighbor." Romans xiii. 10.
Nor must this exercise of benevolence be the result merely of a casually
unruffled state of the passions, nor be limited by particular occasions and
circumstances; but it must be the prevailing bias and the habitual frame of the
mind and heart. Neither is it dependent on the temper and treatment of others;
but it is the most prominent and permanent feature of the soul toward our
neighbor, which both really and apparently includes and gives complexion and
life to all the other features. A person truly benevolent would feel a
disposition to do good and to make his fellow creatures happy, though not one
of them were disposed to receive his kindness, or to be grateful for his
favors. In this, as he ought, he resembles God, who causes his sun to rise
and his rain to fall, as well on the evil, as on the good, as well on the
ungrateful, as on the thankful. Otherwise, the benevolence of a person would be
measured by the worthiness or unworthiness of the objects. In this case,
multitudes would not have the least benevolence shown them, for they are wholly
unworthy.

But as one perfection of God cannot be in such a sense infinite, as to
infringe on any one other perfection, so neither does christian benevolence
interfere with the proper exercise of justice, even when it inflicts pain and
punishment. Love to others, to society, to ourselves, may require us, in a due
course of law, to abridge the natural and civil liberty of individuals, to
inflict punishment on offenders, and even to take away the life of malefactors,
whose abuse of liberty, vicious conduct, and continuance in life are dangerous
to the peace and happiness of individuals and the community. The law of love
commands, and government is obliged, as far as possible, to preserve the peace
and order of society, and the quiet possession of life, liberty, and property
to individuals. Persons the most humane and benevolent, are, sometimes,
constrained by the law, by a sense of duty, of justice, and benevolence to
punish offenders, for whom they have pity and compassion, and whom they would
joyfully relieve, could they do it in consistence with equity and fidelity.
Love to society, to the great body of the people, frequently requires the
execution of justice on individuals in pains and penalties. From this view it
is evident that the love of benevolence due to our neighbor, is of the same
nature with the disposition and moral character of God, who is infinite in
benevolence.

The love we owe to our fellow-men resembles that of Deity in another respect,
viz. in distinguishing between the objects of kindness and the objects of
complacency. And it is only when love is considered, as complacency, that it is
limited by the character of the persons loved. To this operation of love I will
briefly speak.

Love becomes complacency only when the object is possessed of good and amiable
moral qualities. As God, who scatters blessings on the evil and the good, has
complacency only in the good; so christians, however affectionate and
charitable they may be, can have complacency only in the virtuous and good, who
are possessed of such amiable qualities, as answer to their ideas of moral
beauty. There is no religious harmony between the virtuous and vicious, though
the latter as well as the former may possess many agreeable qualifications.
Natural and acquired accomplishments may engage our natural affections and give
us real satisfaction, as social beings: but without moral goodness there can be
no religious complacency and mutual delight. "For what fellowship has
righteousness with unrighteousness? and what communion has light with
darkness? and what concord has Christ with Belial? or what part has he that
believes with an infidel? and what agreement has the temple of God with
idols?" We are liable, however, through ignorance and error in judgment, to
withold our complacency from some to whom it is due, and to bestow it on others
really unworthy.

The qualifying words in our text, as thyself, are designed to express the
quality, rather than the degree of love. To love our neighbor as ourselves,
is, to exercise toward him the same kind of tender affection, benevolent
disposition, and friendly care, which we do for ourselves. This construction
answers all the purposes, and preserves the force and perfection, of the
precept, without involving any absurdity, or discouraging human exertions. Some
persons, perhaps, may love some other, as much, as they do themselves, in some
respects at least: but this sense is not enjoined, I conceive, as the rule and
measure for all men. The same kind of attention, care, and endeavor, which we
generally have for our own person, character, interest, and happiness being
exercised toward our neighbor, is to love him as ourselves. In this light I
understand the precept.

The extent of this law under consideration next demands attention.

Our blessed Savior has taught us by the story of the man, who fell among
thieves, that we are to look upon all men as our neighbors, and especially,
when we have any concerns with them, and opportunity to show them kindness. Our
Lord, on having this question put to him, "Who is my neighbor?" answered, "A
certain man went down from Jerusalem to Jericho, and fell among thieves, which
stripped him of his raiment, and wounded him, and departed, leaving him half
dead. And by chance, there came down a certain priest that way; and when he saw
him, he passed by on the other side. And likewise a Levite, when he was at the
place, came and looked on him, and passed by on the other side. But a certain
Samaritan, as he journeyed, came where he was; and when he saw him, he had
compassion on him, and went to him, and bound up his wounds, pouring in oil and
wine, and set him on his own beast, and brought him to an inn, and took care of
him. And on the morrow, when he departed, he took out two pence, and gave them
to the host, and said unto him, Take care of him, and whatsoever thou spendest
more, when I come again, I will repay thee. Which now of these three, think
thou, was neighbor to him that fell among the thieves? And he said, he that
showed mercy on him. Then said Jesus unto him, go, and do thou likewise." Luke
x. 30, etc.
It is worthy notice, that the unfortunate man was a Jew; the priest and
Levite, who neglected him, were of the same nation; but the real neighbor was
a Samaritan; and such alienation and enmity subsisted between the Jews and
Samaritans, that the former had no dealings with the latter. It is here clearly
set forth, that we are to consider all men as our neighbors, and that we are
bound by the law of love, to aid and relieve the necessitous, whenever we have
opportunity and ability.

All this is perfectly consistent with self-defence, and even taking the life
of an enemy, when he will not cease to behave inimically on easier terms. I
speak here only of public enemies and private assassins and robbers, who
threaten, or endeavor, to destroy life. Ordinary personal enemies should be
the objects of our love of benevolence. Our Lord commands, "Love your enemies,
bless them that curse you, do good to them that hate you, and pray for them
that despitefully use you and persecute you." If we love our friends only, what
reward have we? Do not even publicans and sinners the same?

Our affection may be proportioned to the nearness and dearness of relations.
But I will not enlarge on this idea. One observation farther ought not to be
omitted. It is the command of Christ, "Whatsoever ye would that men should do
unto you, do ye the same unto them." In this precept, there is no exception of
persons or characters. Whatsoever ye would, or could, in reason and propriety,
desire men to do unto you, in present, or change of, circumstances, that do ye
unto them; that is the rule of your duty, the measure of your conduct toward
them.

Should a transgressor of the useful and necessary laws of society, suffering
punishment for evil doing, say, I would that men take no cognizance of my
crimes, or that they release me from prison, and excuse me from punishment, it
would be altogether unreasonable. The offender ought to query thus, Would I,
that men should do unto me and mine, as I have done unto them and theirs? Would
I, that they should follow such pernicious practices to my detriment, as I have
followed to their injury? And were I in their place and they in mine, would I,
or could I, in reason and justice, relcase them from prison and punishment, and
suffer them to pursue their vile and mischievous career without interruption?
Such queries properly made and answered, are sufficient to silence the
complaint of oppression to sufferers for evil doing, and to suppress, in
criminals under punishment, that spirit of hatred and revenge against
government and people, which they too frequently indulge and exhibit. Their
revenge should turn upon themselves and their own evil practices, and not on
society, which is obliged in self-defence, and in love to others, to discipline
them by the civil law, "which is made, not for a righteous man, but for the
lawless and disobedient." 1 Timothy i. 9.


There are two essential properties of love, viz. sincerity and impartiality,
which merit some attention in this place. But they are so far obviously implied
in the preceding, and I have already been lengthy in explanation, that barely
to mention them must suffice. I proceed

Secondly, To show the reasonableness and obligation of the law of love to our
neighbor.

The reasonableness of this law appears in its adaptation to the nature,
powers, condition, and exigencies of man. "God has made of one blood all
nations of men, for to dwell on the face of the earth;" and has given to all
the same general nature and destination, the same wants and obligations. We are
all members of the same great family, and are necessarily connected by mutual
desires, attachments, and wants. Our intellectual powers, social faculties, and
animal propensities, our condition in the world, our dependence on each other,
and our exigencies, being in general the same, it is most fit and reasonable
that we be under the obligation of the law of good will and kindness, of
reciprocal affection and aid; and this law is properly expressed by the words,
benevolence, love, charity. Our nature and condition in this life demand, and
our rational and social faculties dictate, mutual expressions of love and
kindness. All the understanding of man, and all the reason and fitness of
things, require, approve, and urge this divine law of love to our neighbor.

The vast benefit, which results from the exercise of love, and the destructive
evils, which follow the opposite, farther prove the reasonableness of this law.
The happiness to individuals, to families, and to all societies, which is the
genuine fruit of love, is beyond all calculation and description. The full
exercise of love toward all our relations, society, and the whole family of
man, is itself a state of happiness, especially if it be accompanied by love to
God. And when love is the principle, the spring, the rule of action in all the
members of a family, society, or world, the whole must be most pleased and
blessed. There would be no discord, jealousies, nor fears; no hatred, malice, nor
revenge; no injustice, fraud, nor pilfering, no violence, oppression, nor
falsehood; no coveting, discontent, nor repining; no intemperance, lewdness,
nor idleness; no disobedience to parents, neglect of children, nor disrespect
to constituted authorities. There would be no need of penal laws, prisons, and
corporal punishments. Every family, society, and the world, would be a heaven
in kind.

But on the other hand, what countless evils, what sin and misery naturally and
necessarily flow from the opposite principles and practices, to individuals, to
families, and to society! Let us suppose, for a moment, the entire cessation of
love, and the full operation of hatred one to another, and of all those corrupt
lusts and passions, which spring up in the human heart. Every man would covet,
and then steal, or violently seize the things of his neighbor. The more artful
and mighty would prey upon the more weak and defenseless. Injustice and rapine
would be the order of every day; and mutual fears, plots, contentions,
violence, and murder, would be only the more conspicuous lines in the horrible
portrait. Parents would be against children, and children against parents;
husbands and wives would be plagues to each other, and brothers, sisters,
connexions, and neighbors, would be mutual tormentors. Even natural affection
would cease to operate under the reign of hatred; friendship would be unknown;
and people would often become murderers of fathers, of mothers, of children,
and deadly enemies to all about them on every trivial occasion. The general
consent and practice would be, to bite and devour one another, and the
unavoidable consequence would be complicated wretchedness and destruction.
Every family, every society, if societies properly speaking could subsist, and
the world itself would be a hell in sort, and a lively picture of the infernal
regions. Who does not see the boundless reason of love to our neighbor, and
the necessity of it to human happiness and moral excellence!

To what has been said very little need be added, to show the obligation of
this law on every one of the human race. Its obligation results from its
reasonableness, its utility, the necessity of it to the happiness of men, and
to the very existence of social order and civil society, and from the authority
of God in the command. We have shown the reasonableness, the utility, and the
necessity of such a law; its obligation on us, therefore, is manifest and
undeniable. While the nature and condition of man shall be, as they now are, so
long we shall be indissolubly bound by the law of love. In its very nature it
is unalterable and perpetual; for the duties required originate in the eternal
reason and fitness of things, and in the moral nature, relations, and condition
of man. "Till heaven and earth pass, one jot or one tittle shall in no wise
pass from the law, till all be fulfilled." Matt. v. 18. Luke xvi. 17.
We must, therefore, obey this law of love in the sincerity of our hearts, and
look by faith to Jesus Christ, as the end of the law for righteousness, or
suffer forever the penalty, the just punishment of our transgressions.

The obligation of this law appears farther, as it is enjoined by the authority
of the eternal God. It is true, he gave the commands because they were, and
are, replete with reason and goodness, most suitable and needful. But whatever
God commands, whether it be a moral or positive law, is obligatory on us, and
the more so, if possible, in proportion to the manifest reason and fitness of
the law. I will only add, on this article, they who presume to contemn this
authority and disobey this law, must, one day, experience, unless they repent
of sin and believe in Christ, what it is to fall under the wrath of God and the
curse of this law without remedy or hope.

IMPROVEMENT.
1. The allowed transgressors of the law of love to their neighbor, have not
the love of God in them, nor his love of complacency toward them: but they are
enemies to him by a sinful disposition and by wicked works. "For this is the
love of God, that we keep his commandments." 1 John, v. 3.
"And if a man say, I love God, and hate his brother, he is a liar; for he that
loves not his brother whom he has seen, how can he love God whom he has not
seen?" 1 John iv. 20.
There is an inseparable connection between the two great commandments of the
law. Unseigned obedience to both, according to the gospel, is necessary to
prove the renovation of our minds, the goodness of our hearts, and
qualification for the blissful presence of God.

2. The transgression of this law renders necessary dreary prisons, pecuniary
and corporal punishments in a course of civil law, and occasions vast
infelicity and expense to the peaceable and virtuous members of society. Were
it not for sins against our neighbor, yon dismal jail would be unnecessary.
Those iron doors and bolts might be converted into instruments of agriculture.
Idleness and vice, complaints and groans, oaths and imprecations, misery and
wretchedness, would there no longer wound our sensibility and pain our hearts.
No more would wretched criminals be doomed to smart beneath the painful
scourge, nor mount the shameful pillory to bear the public scorn, and in their
flesh receive the indelible marks of infamy and vice. The now intended use of
yonder fatal gallows might be changed. Instead of a machine to take the
precious life, and send a fellow-mortal to the world of spirits, it might be
used to shelter, or to warm, the shivering limbs of poor and virtuous families.
Instead of all this solemn pomp, this awful scene, this terrible parade of
execution, at the sight of which compassion mourns, and pity weeps, each
countenance bespeaks deep felt concern, and every nerve perceives unusual
tremor; instead, I say, of this new trial of humanity to most of us, we might
be quietly in search of sacred truth, or with united hearts and voice,
proclaiming praise to God for blessings social, civil, and religious, or, in
the private walks of life, engaged in pleasing offices of love. O, the
happiness of this reverse! And O, how much to be lamented is the want of
universal love to neighbors!

3. Love to society joins with self love in punishing the transgressors of this
law. We form the social compact, institute civil government, enact laws,
authorize judiciary courts, for the great purpose of preserving, in peace and
safety, our property, our life, our civil and sacred rights and privileges. By
thus entering into the obligations of civil society, we agree most solemnly, to
aid and defend each other and the whole body against every one, who shall
trespass on society or an individual. We should at once violate all our social
and civil obligations, and expose ourselves to rapine and ruin, were we not to
rise against the criminal invaders of private and public rights and property.
We are bound by love and duty to each individual and the whole community, to
support the order of society, and to aid the execution of the laws against the
wicked disturbers of private persons and society. In the painful task of
inflicting punishment on offenders, we are actuated by love, duty, conscience,
and faithfulness; and ill will, hatred, and revenge, have no part in this
business. The same principles, doubtless, actuate government, which is the
people by civil constitution. This consideration should prevent the indulgence
and even the rising of enmity in the breasts of criminals against the
government, the legislature, judicial courts, jurors, and executive officers.
The motives, which prompt to punish, are the very opposite to those, which
incited to acts of wickedness.

4. They who steal, break up and plunder houses and stores, set fire to
buildings, rob travelers, secretly take or destroy the property of others by
art or violence, commit murder, or otherwise wilfully endanger the life of
another, are in a state of real hostility against society and the individual
members of it. They are governed by hatred to their neighbor, and by those
base passions, which follow in her train. In the perpetration of the less
atrocious of those crimes, their hatred may seem to them, to wear only the
appearance of coveting, dishonesty, and injustice; to indulge which they feel
strongly inclined. They may even imagine that they harbor no ill will toward
any person, and may in reality be kind to some neighbors, Smith repeatedly
spoke to me of his neighbourly disposition and actions, and said, it was a
comfort to him, to reflect that he had been a (...)
who are situated near to them, and whose friendship and aid they frequently
need. But they know not their own selves. They are deceived by a false
coloring. The truth is, they are in heart and life the allowed enemies of
society; and a change of local neighbors and circumstances would prove them
such in every direction. Not love and goodness, but hatred and injustice reign
in them, and have dominion over them. Cupidity, avarice, revenge, or some
peculiar circumstances, may be the immediate spur, but the principle is hatred,
or, to say the least, the absence of love gives an opening for the operation of
the vile and malignant passions.

5. To exercise and cultivate love to our neighbor is of the highest
importance. Thus doing, we may be harmonious and happy in all the various
stages and circumstances of ordinary life. But in the contrary, we must be
miserable in this world and in that which is to come. Without love to our
neighbor, we are pests in society, and are prepared for the company of demons
in the regions of discord, hatred, and misery. A thorough change only can
qualify us for a world of love and happiness.

6. It is vastly important that the social duties of love be impressed on the
minds of children and youth. Great care should be taken by parents and
instructors, to implant the principles of virtue and piety, and to form the
dispositions and habits in early life. Thus educated, there is good ground for
hope, that they will resist the force of opposite principles and temptations in
riper years. Children should be encouraged in every virtuous sentiment and
practice. They should be incessantly taught to revere the rights of others, and
to realize the obligation of love and goodness.

7. The wilful transgressors of this command to love our neighbor, are, in
that character, totally disqualified for heaven and happiness. Their
dispositions and habits are opposed to love and holiness. -- They have no moral
taste for intellectual and religious exercises and enjoyments. It is true, they
may desire happiness and dread misery. This is natural. But the bias of the
mind, and the prevailing tendency of the soul, are inconsistent with the pure
joys and holy employments of heaven. Being under the influence of vicious
passions and habits, they must of necessity be miserable. And were they to be
introduced to the immediate presence of God, and the company of saints and
angels, they would feel the horrors and pains of hell: for heaven and hell
consist principally in character and condition, and in the enjoyments and
torments thence naturally resulting. A wicked mind, having all the passions and
propensities raging, but without desired gratification, must necessarily be in
misery. But on the other hand, persons in the full exercise of love and
goodness must infallibly be pleased and happy. How, then, can the wicked and
unholy, who love not their Maker and fellow men, escape the wrath to come?
There is one only method, viz. repentance toward God and faith in Jesus
Christ. They must so repent of all sin, as to forsake and hate moral evil, and
thoroughly reform; and they must so believe in Jesus Christ, as the Son of God
and only Savior, as cordially to accept what he has done for sinners, and
sincerely conform to his gospel. Christ is the only way of salvation, the only
name given under heaven whereby we must be saved. Acts iv. 12.
God is ready to show mercy, to grant pardon, and to give eternal life to
those, who sincerely repent of their sins, trust in Christ, and look for
salvation through him. Such repentance and faith include a change of heart, a
renovation of the whole man, and the restoration of that moral image of God,
which was lost by sin. Thus they are qualified to enjoy heaven, while they are
pardoned and justified for the sake of the complete atonement and perfect
righteousness of Jesus Christ. In this way, all people, who hear the sound of
the gospel, who read the Bible, have the offer of salvation from sin and wrath
to come. "If any man thirst, let him come; John vii. 37.
and whosoever will, let him take the water of life freely. Rev. xxii. 17.
Jesus Christ is able to save them to the uttermost, that come unto God by him.
Heb. vii. 25.
He is exalted, a Prince and a Savior, for to give repentance and forgiveness
of sins." Acts v. 31.
The chief of sinners, and at the last hour of life, if they sincerely repent,
and believe in Christ, shall be accepted of God, and saved in the great day of
the Lord.

It is now proper to make application and addresses. And

1. To you, Samuel Smith, who are this day to suffer the pains of ignominious
death, by the hand of civil justice, for aggravated violations of the law of
love to your neighbor. Unhappy man! We feel for you the bowels of compassion,
and ardent desires for your future salvation. We have aimed to instruct and
benefit you, and not to increase your disgrace and wretchedness. We pretend not
that your sins are more heinous in the sight of God, than the sins of many
others thieves, who have not been convicted of capital offenses. And it has
been a satisfaction to me and others, to hear you declare with so much evidence
of sincerity, that you have never had an intention to take the life of a fellow
mortal. But the law, that punishes burglary with death, proceeds on the
supposition, that house-breakers for the purpose of stealing, intend to commit
murder, if it be found necessary to prevent detection. It may, however, have
been more owing to the restraining grace of God and to circumstances, that you
have not shed innocent blood, than to your own principles and resolutions.

The disappointments and troubles, which you met with, when young, It is
thought not expedient to mention particularly the causes of those troubles
above suggested.
and the consequent derangement of your mind and worldly affairs, if your late
declarations be true, were powerful temptations, in a mind destitute of
religion, to the practice of injustice and stealing: and your sufferings
deserved commiseration. But instead of turning to God and submitting to him in
the day of adversity, you chose the way of wickedness. And after all that can
be said in your favor, it is evident that you have been a heinous sinner,
during many years. This you have readily acknowledged, as also the justice of
God in bringing you to legal conviction and punishment. Although, as you say,
you have been kind in many instances to some people in your particular
neighborhood, and to your children, as a fond parent, yet your life, for
thirty years past, has been a predatory warfare against society and individual
families and persons. The law of God condemns you, as a transgressor. But had
you lived without any open and gross acts of wickedness forbidden by the moral
law, and yet in the neglect of Christ and his gospel, you must be under the
sentence of the divine law. "He that believes on him is not condemned; but he
that believes not is condemned already, because he has not believed in the
name of the only begotten Son of God." John iii. 18.
To be condemned by the law of God, as a transgressor, and for rejecting Jesus
Christ, and to have that sentence executed at the final judgment, must be
infinitely more dreadful, than to be condemned and executed by the laws of
society. -- Man has power only to kill the body; but God is able to destroy
both soul and body in hell. Matt. x. 28.


Ministers and other people have affectionately endeavored to assist you in
preparation for another world. With what success, I am not able to say. -- The
present is the last opportunity you will have for instruction, for repentance,
and for reconciliation with God. You are now once more exhorted to repent of
all your sins, and urged to fly for refuge to Christ the Savior. Look on him,
whom your sins have pierced, and mourn. Now is the day of salvation, and, I
believe, literally the last day of grace and mercy to you. Now, then, after so
long a time, harden not your heart. Heb. iv. 7.


In the most full and unfeigned manner, confess and forsake your sins, and then
you may hope for mercy. "Whosoever confesses and forsakes his sins shall have
mercy." Humbly rely on Christ alone for salvation, and, then, though your sins
are of a scarlet color and a crimson dye, they shall be white as snow and
wool. Isa. i. 18.
"He that believes shall be saved."

Endeavor to pray to God in the name of Christ, if peradventure the thoughts
of thine heart and the sins of thy life may be forgiven. Pray that God would
create in you a clean heart, and give you a right frame of spirit; and continue
to seek him to the last moment of your life, with this resolution, if you
perish, it shall be pleading for mercy through the glorious Redeemer.

While you have a heart to pray, to be sorry for sin, to love your neighbor,
and look to Christ, you need not despair of salvation. God has no pleasure in
the death of the wicked, but that he repent, and turn, and live. Ezekiel. xviii.
23, 32.
But to evidence true peace with God, you much be at peace with men. You must
forgive to every one, both real and supposed injuries. You have said, people
have falsely accused you, and thereby brought on you vexation and expense: but
in this case, you must freely forgive them, as you hope for pardon from God.
Our Savior has declared, "If ye forgive not men their trespasses, neither
will your Father forgive your trespasses." Matt. vi. 15.
Indulge no hard thoughts toward any persons. O forgive your fellow-men, while
you pray God to be merciful unto you a sinner. And now we commit and commend
you to God and to the word and power of his grace and mercy in Jesus Christ,
praying that you may be eternally a monument of mercy and an heir of glory.

2. Our text furnishes an interesting portion for criminals in general. This
address has been added since the discourse was delivered.
Consider, ye transgressors of the law of love to your neighbor, your late
wretched companion in wickedness, who has suffered death for his crimes; and be
warned by his awful doom, to fly from the wrath to come, and to forsake those
paths of vice, which lead to a similar end. Your situation is extremely
dangerous and awful. You have hitherto escaped the tremendous scene and pains
of execution; and most of you, perhaps, have not committed those crimes, which
are made capital by the law. And as you have not had your fears alarmed by the
immediate prospect of death and judgment, I have reason to believe that you are
careless about your souls and another world. Do you not still put far away the
evil day, and neglect to consider your ways? As you have chosen the way of
transgressors, and some of you have continued long in opposition to God and
men, you are in imminent danger of being forsaken of God, of being hardened in
sin, so as to commit more and greater wickedness, and be brought to the
gallows. You stand on slippery places, and your feet will slide in due time.
Psalm. lxxiii. 18. Deuteronomy. xxxii. 35.
You have been often reproved in various ways, and by many persons. Your
imprisonment and corporal punishments are constant and sensible admonitions to
you, and fully demonstrate to you that, "the way of transgressors is hard." You
are now, by this discourse, warned and exhorted to repent, and turn from your
evil ways, that iniquity be not your ruin. Consider, I beseech you, the solemn
words of inspiration, "He that, being often reproved, hardens his neck, shall
suddenly be destroyed, and that without remedy." Prove. xxix. 1.
O, tremble for yourselves, left God should verify to you this awful
threatening, and suddenly cut you off from the light of life and the hope of
heaven!

Were you to love your neighbor as yourselves, you would never invade, nor
steal, nor destroy his property. You would no sooner unjustly deprive him of
his possessions, than you would utterly destroy your own; nor sooner endanger
his health, or happiness, or life, than your own. You are bound to do unto
others, whatsoever ye would that they should do unto you. Then, "let him that
stole, steal no more: but rather let him labor, working with his hands the
thing which is good, that he may have to give to him that needs." Ephesians. iv. 28.


Take heed that you do not increase your sins and treasure up wrath by
indulging hatred and revenge against society and particular persons. What can
they do to preserve their peace and property better, than to confine and punish
you? Do you think, government wishes to create unnecessary expense and trouble?
Or that it delights in your confinement and disgrace? no; as it did nothing to
provoke your first offense, so you are disciplined by the law, only to prevent
you and others from farther crimes, and to defend the innocent in the quiet
enjoyment of life, liberty, and property.

Beware of coveting the things, which belong to other people. "Thou shall not
covet." Suffer me now, once more, to warn and beseech you, to resolve in the
presence of God, and with prayers for his aiding grace, that henceforth you
will industriously follow some honest calling, and "be content with such things
as you have;" that you will "be diligent in business, fervent in spirit,
serving the Lord."

3. Parents and heads of families should be religiously attentive to prepare
the rising generation for social and civil life. Let it be your constant care,
to train them up in the way they should go, and then you may confidently hope,
they will not depart from it in riper years. Some parents, like pious, but
faulty Eli, are too indulgent to their children, and do not seasonably and
resolutely restrain them from vicious practices: and many like him also, when
it is too late, mourn their folly. Some parents err on the other hand,
especially in respect to worldly affairs. You should be kind and just to your
children, and to young people under your care, as well as strict and vigilant
over them. You should "not be bitter against them," nor refuse to give, or pay
them, in proper time, what is reasonable and just, "left they be discouraged,"
their innocent emulation be cramped, their affections be alienated, and their
minds indisposed to the steady pursuit of profitable business. The unhappy
criminal before us, has declared to me, in a feeling manner, and with a
request, that I would warn parents against injustice to their children, that
the hard treatment of his father, Smith often spoke of his mother, and always
with affection and respect. He esteemed her as a kind parent and excellent
christian.
when he wished to settle in a family state, was one great source of his early
trouble, and the principal cause of his beginning to steal. Whether we give
full credit to this story, or not, it is an undoubted truth, that the hardness
and injustice of parents and masters toward children and servants, have very
pernicious effects on their minds. Such treatment tends directly to counteract
a sense of equity, goodness, and love, and to quench every spark of laudable
ambition. If you would have those under your care grow up and persevere in the
exercise of love to their neighbor, in the full extent of the law of love, you
must not only teach them their duty by precepts, but you must set before them a
living example. Then shall your hearts be made glad by the wisdom and virtue of
your children and charge.

4. Young people are instructed by our discourse. My young friends, you see the
shame and wretchedness, which attend on vice, and that "sin, when it is
finished, brings forth death." Be solicitous to shun the paths of sin, for
they lead to destruction. Cultivate a lively sense of love to mankind, and ever
act on the strictest principles of benevolence, truth, and righteousness to all
people. Dread the first step to any scandalous vice, and "abstain from all
appearance of evil." Fear God, and keep his commandments, through Jesus Christ,
as the only sure and peaceful way to honor, glory, and eternal happiness.

5. Let this numerous assembly make application. Every person is under the
obligation of the law of love to God and our neighbor. How have we obeyed this
law? Have we loved our neighbor as ourselves? Are not many of us guilty
concerning our brother? Let us search and prove our own ways, and resolutely
reform whatever we find to be inconsistent with love. Let every one set his
face, as a flint, against prevailing vices. Accept the admonition, which this
dying criminal has desired might be given, not to neglect public worship, and
the religious observation of the Sabbath. Smith had been very faulty in respect
to public worship and the Sabbath, which he lamented. He saw that it kept him
ignorant and hardened and gave him opportunity to contrive and perpetrate
wickedness.
Such neglect keeps people out of the way of hearing the word of God explained,
and of having their duty inculcated upon them. When people forsake the house,
profane the day, and neglect the word of God, let them expect that their
temptations and their sins will be multiplied, and that God will cast them off
forever.

This day, my hearers, for the first time in this town, we see, as to this
world, the closing scene of coveting and stealing. God grant there may be none
occasion for another of this kind. But if any present should ever meditate the
crime of theft with approbation, let him also think of the gallows. The
connection between the crime and the gibbet, is much nearer and more natural,
than many suppose. Behold this thief, and tremble at the thought of stealing,
which naturally leads on to burglary, ^^^bery, murder, and the gallows. Let
sinners see and fear. Let them suppress every injurious passion, and covetous
desire, left they be imperceptibly hurried on to the commission of one crime
after another, until swift destruction come upon them. Let us all resolve to
embrace, by divine aid, with all our heart, the perfect law of love to God and
man.

"Now unto him who is able to keep us from falling, and to present us faultless
before the presence of his glory with exceeding joy, be praise and honor
forever."

AMEN.

