DR. THACHER's SERMON, ON THE DEATH OF General Washington.

A SERMON, OCCASIONED BY THE DEATH OF General George Washington, AND PREACHED
FEB. 22, 1800, BY THEIR DIRECTION, Before His Honor MOSES GILL, Esquire. Commander
in Chief, the Honorable COUNCIL, the Honorable SENATE and HOUSE of
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE Commonwealth of Massachusetts.

BY PETER THACHER, D. D. CHAPLAIN TO THE GENERAL COURT.

BOSTON -- PRINTED BY YOUNG and MINNS.

COMMONWEALTH OF MASSACHUSETTS.
IN SENATE, FEB. 24th, 1800.
ORDERED, That JONA. MASON, Esquire. with such as the Hon. House may join, be a
Committee to wait on the Rev. Doct. THACHER, and present him the thanks of the
Legislature for the Discourse he delivered on the 22d instant, before His Honor
the Lieutenant Governor, the Hon. Council, and the two branches of the General
Court, and request a copy for the Press.

EDWARD M'LEAN, Clerk of Senate.

SERMON.
II. CHRONICLES, XXXV.25. AND THEY SPOKE OF JOSIAH IN THEIR LAMENTATIONS TO
THIS DAY, AND MADE THEM AN ORDINANCE IN ISRAEL.


WE cannot wonder that the people of Israel were thus deeply affected by the
death of a good prince who was their warm friend and their great benefactor.
JOSIAH was the common center around which every good citizen of Judah revolved;
and on him they relied, under GOD, to defend their country if invaded from
abroad, and to crush, with the weight of his name and virtues, faction and
rebellion at home.

HOW melancholy is the reflection that in the universal dominion of death over
the human race, men of the most sublime virtues and most illustrious talents,
are not only subjected to it, but frequently become the more early victims of
his power; while some others who cumber the ground, and infest society, still
live to disturb and distress all around them! We cannot comprehend the designs
of Providence! It becomes us only to submit and to adore, to bow before the
throne of the highest, encircled as it may be with the thickest clouds, and to
know that "the Judge of all the earth will do right."

ALAS! that the empire of death is so universal; that the wise and the prudent,
the brave and the virtuous, must submit to its power, as well as "the fool and
the brutish person." It is indeed "appointed unto all men once to die, and
there is no discharge in that war."

WHEN the power of the king of terrors is exercised over those who, like
JOSIAH, were highly esteemed and fondly beloved; when it levels, with its fatal
wand, the men who stood high above their fellow mortals, and removes to their
long home those whose services and sufferings had purchased the freedom and
happiness of a nation, we cannot be surprised that uncommon grief should
possess the heart, and uncommon tokens of mourning should be displayed!

THE people of Judah, not content with simply committing their hero to the
tomb, and bedewing his hearse with the tears which a recent loss occasions,
resolved to manifest their grief by long and uncommon mourning. All Judah and
Jerusalem, we are told, mourned for JOSIAH. They attended his remains to the
sepulcher of his fathers, with deep and solemn grief. But they did not cease
the expressions of it, when the clods of the valley covered him, and the grave
concealed him from their view. But, "led by JEREMIAH, the prophet of the LORD,
they lamented for JOSIAH." Determined to perpetuate their gratitude, "the
singing men and women (the poets and historians of that age) spoke of JOSIAH in
their lamentations to the very day" in which the chronicles were written. This
was many years after the death of JOSIAH; probably after the return of the Jews
from the Babylonish captivity, when the sacred canon was completed, under the
auspices of heaven, by EZRA the high priest of the LORD.

WHEN we lose those who are peculiarly dear to us, and those whom we highly
honor, we cannot endure the idea of their being forgotten. We determine that
they shall live in our remembrance, and that their names shall be transmitted
with honor and respect to the "generations which are yet to be born." It is a
sentiment similar to these which led our civil fathers to institute the
religious solemnities in which we are now engaged. Some weeks have elapsed
since we were deprived of the great and good man who was so long the pride and
the father of his country. Every thing which gratitude could dictate, affection
inspire and eloquence express has already been said and done on this occasion.
The service before me is therefore a difficult one.

BUT, this solemnity is of a religious nature. The humble worship of the Deity
is our object, and a moral improvement of a death so affecting, our design in
the exercise before us. My duty is not that of the eulogists, whose classic
elegance and glowing description have drawn the character of the illustrious
dead, and richly emblazoned his fame. No; it belongs to the present discourse
to lead our thoughts from earth to heaven; to adore the divine sovereignty; to
acknowledge his gracious hand in all that the departed was himself and did for
us; and to point out the lessons of wisdom, civil and religious, which we may
learn from the affecting event!

THE sovereignty of GOD, like the thunders and lightnings and thick cloud which
surrounded him on Mount Sinai, veils from our eyes many of the motives which
influence the divine conduct, and operate in the government of the world.
Without control or restraint he does his pleasure in heaven above and on earth
beneath. GOD is absolute and unlimited in his will and purposes. Himself the
first cause, the source, the fountain of all existence and energy, he has
communicated to his creatures whatever they possess, and the highest archangel
in heaven is as entirely subjected to the divine sovereignty as the meanest
reptile on earth. "GOD is a rock, and his work is perfect." The plan of his
government is fixed beyond alteration, and all creatures are in his hands as
the "clay is in the hands of the potter."

THE divine sovereignty would be a doctrine of terror and distress to us, did
we not know that it resided in a being perfectly wise and essentially good. It
is not the exercise of power, prompted by caprice, actuated by resentment, or
dictated by folly. It is the result of infinite wisdom which beholds the past,
the present and the future at one view, which knows the nature and the
consequences of all events, and will bring them to pass in the time and by the
means which are most honorary to him, and most beneficial to his creatures.
Viewed in this light, the sovereignty of GOD should calm our hearts, engage our
trust, command our obedience, and elevate our affections. With the inhabitants
of heaven we should in humble devotion and grateful rapture, exclaim,
"Alleluia, the LORD GOD omnipotent reigns!"

IN all the circumstances which relate to the world and to man, from the
revolution of a kingdom to the lighting of a sparrow, we view and should
acknowledge this sovereign providence of the most HIGH. "In him we live and
move and have our being." We are supported by his bounty, defended by his
power, pardoned by his grace, and sanctified by his spirit. Surrounded by his
immensity, we are always before his eyes. He upholds us in life. His
"visitation preserves our spirits," and he has determined the bounds of our
habitations which we cannot pass."

DEATH is an interesting period to us all, and for wise purposes we are made to
dread its approaches. When its icy hand is laid upon us, or when its fatal
vortex swallows up those who are dear to us as ourselves, then we should
realise the sovereignty of GOD. "Behold, he takes away, who can hinder him?
there is no man who has power over the spirit to retain the spirit in the day
of death." When the decree goes forth from the eternal throne, when the "time,
the set time" is come, then the grim tyrant performs his fatal office. The
prayers and tears of an assembled nation; the fondest affection of immediate
friends; the most brilliant virtues; the most illustrious character; the esteem
and honor and veneration of a world cannot for a moment arrest the progress or
prevent the approach of death! The great and the small; the high and the low,
the rich and the poor, bow their heads and die!

BUT under the exercise of this act of sovereignty, at a day of lamentation
like the present, let us contemplate the wisdom and goodness and righteousness
of GOD. "He is in heaven and we are upon earth, and therefore it becomes us
that our words should be few." Our understandings, darkened by sin and clogged
with mortality, are sometimes perplexed with the ways of GOD. But submission to
his will becomes us who "are of yesterday, and know nothing." We are as certain
as he exists that GOD cannot do wrong. When therefore we mourn a loss like that
which now covers America with sadness, we are to submit without a murmer to
those dispensations which we cannot comprehend, and keep "our hearts fixed,
trusting in the LORD."

BUT when, in our lamentations, we speak of the friends, the patrons whom we
have lost, we cannot fail to recollect their amiable characters and their
excellent virtues.

LET us constantly remember that GOD is the source of all virtue and of all
excellency; that mortals are good in themselves and useful to us as he makes
them to be so. We may meditate with pleasure on their virtues. We may remember
them with the warmest esteem and tenderest affection; but we should never be
unmindful, that every talent of nature, of reason and of art, descends from him
who is "the father of our spirits, the former of our bodies, and the author of
all our mercies."

WE mourn this day "a prince and a great man fallen in our Israel;" a man more
truly elevated in the esteem of the world than any monarch who wields a
scepter, or any hero who commands an army! The people of America have borne
witness to his numerous virtues; and now, we will summon his illustrious shade
to aid us in support of the religion which he honored, and to make those men
virtuous and good whom he was instrumental of making free and happy.

Too often the public virtues of a great character are clouded by private
views. Sometimes those who are most useful to the world, and whose solid
services and brilliant talents, compel our respect and admiration, prove
themselves in the more retired walks of life to be "weak like other men." It is
happy for America, now she mourns her darling son, that not even the envenomed
tongue of malice, battening on the faults of its neighbors, nor the rageful
voice of party, more cruel than the grave itself, can assail the fair fame of
the man whom she laments! In the domestic relations; in his private dealings;
in his daily department, you always beheld him discreet, amiable, dignified! He
shone, not with the luster which dazzles courts and armies, but with the purer,
the more honorable rays of private virtue.

WAS it not a sense of religion which led our late excellent friend to
acknowledge, when at the head of our armies, and more lately when he presided
in the nation, our absolute dependence upon the GOD of providence, ascribing
the honor of his victories and our deliverance to him who "sets up one and
puts down another!" In his public instruments; in his last precious legacy
to his country, and in his private conversation he expressed the deepest
reverence for the infinite and eternal being who is "in all and over all, and
by whom all things consist." His constant attendance on the christian church,
his reverend observation of the LORD's Day* as well as his whole behavior,
demonstrated his belief in the religion of the Cross.

"HE that is slow to anger is better than the mighty, and he that rules his
spirit than he that takes a city." Never does a man appear so truly great as
when he subdues those passions which infuriate others, and hurry them to the
most fatal excesses. And here our beloved chief discovered true greatness, and
placed before our eyes an illustrious example. His mildness, his patience, his
impartial benignity enabled him to control the passions of others, and
reconcile contending interests. His self command enabled him to rule those who
did not possess their own minds. A reserve, partly the gift of nature and
partly the effect of prudent habit, prevented him from betraying his own
purposes, or expressing sudden and unsuitable feelings. His patient endurance
of wrong from the envious and the mistaken, made him their superior, and
converted his enemies into friends. The enemies of his country I mean; personal
enemies he had none.

"HE that walks uprightly, walks surely." The blessing of GOD, the favor of
men, and the testimony of a good conscience are the consequences of an honest
and faithful discharge of our duty. These consequences of his integrity did our
late excellent President enjoy. Neither wealth nor flattery nor clamor nor
violence could corrupt his heart, or detach him from his duty. Honestly did he
exert his whole power and influence to serve his country, nor can an instance
be produced of his having neglected its concerns, or betrayed its interests.

IT it is recorded of NAAMAN that "by him GOD gave deliverance to Syria." And
him whom we mention in our lamentations this day, GOD made the principal agent
in giving freedom and deliverance to America. A soldier in early life, when he
was highly useful to his native province, he possessed a cool judgment and a
determined courage. Without the ardent impetuosity, the furious valor which
sometimes give success to folly and prosperity to injustice, he was intrepidly
brave. His love of liberty, his well known military talents, led the venerable
band of patriots, who, at the commencement of the revolution, conducted our
councils, to consign to him the chief command of the American forces. Many of
us remember this period, when at the hazard of his life and fortune, he first
headed our feeble armies. -- "Gallant mortal" -- how did our souls love and
honor him when first we beheld him on yonder plains flying to the relief of the
oppressed, and defending the freedom of his country! How anxiously did we watch
his footsteps through the dangers of our revolution, and how did our hearts
warm with gratitude to heaven and to him, when we found that the soldier had
not destroyed the citizen; that the lust of power which led so many generals,
the CAESAR'S of old and the CROMWELLS of later days, to destroy their country
and advance themselves, had no existence in his noble bosom; but that he could
cheerfully resign his brilliant and flattering command, and seek the shades of
private life! -- Thither did he modestly retire from the applauses of his
country and the world, and shook from his venerable brow the laurels which
oppressed him!

TO such a man it was self denial to leave the happiness and the security of
private life, and again to enter on the fatigues and hazards of elevated
station. -- But the call of his country General WASHINGTON never declined. The
unanimous suffrages of his fellow citizens (an election without a parallel in
the history of the world) selected him to administer the free and excellent
constitution of government which he had assisted in forming. In the cabinet he
shone equally as in the field. The interests of the Union and of the several
States he guarded with the tenderest care. Our foreign relations he conducted
with a temperate firmness which defeated the designs of faction, crushed the
efforts of rebellion, and prevented us from being fatally affected with the
convulsions which have shaken Europe to its center, and agitated the whole
world!

LIKE JOSHUA, the brave leader of Israel to independence and Canaan; like
DAVID, the intrepid defender of his country; our late illustrious chief when,
with manly dignity and patriotic affection he retired from the chair of
government, left a legacy the most valuable and important to his country. While
we are governed by the moral and religious principles, and preserve the policy
with respect to our internal and external affairs which he recommends, we shall
be free and happy. When we leave them to adopt other principles and maxims, we
shall deserve any consequences which may take place.

NO man's character is fully ascertained till his death. And happy is he who
dies as he has lived in the exercise of firmness of spirit and benevolence of
heart. So died our beloved friend! Without the sickness and long debility which
sometimes precede death; in the full exercise of reason, of humanity and
patriotism, he suddenly encountered the universal conqueror. He submitted, for
resistance was vain! -- But nobly, and like a hero he submitted! -- Great in
his last moments, with his own hands he closed his own eyes, and gave up the
Ghost!! -- Happy man! Useful and beloved in life, calm and composed in death,
embalmed with the tears of thy friends and thy country, GOD did bless thee
above other mortals!

AND now, let us make a solemn pause in our lamentations, and amidst our grief
acknowledge the goodness of GOD in raising up this great man, in qualifying him
so essentially for the service of his country, and continuing him to us for so
many years. On this day, when we used to celebrate his birth with warm and
grateful pleasure, we feel his loss most deeply. But, how much more deeply
should we have felt it, had he been taken from us at any period of our
revolutionary war; or when the whole weight of his influence and character was
necessary to preserve us from being involved in the confusions of the European
world, or when insurrection reared its hydra head, and threatened the most
fatal consequences?

BUT that GOD who has always been kind to America in raising up from among her
own sons those who "naturally care for her state" and watchfully guard her
interests, continued his life till a period when our excellent constitution is
firmly established, and the prospects of disuniting and destroying us are
greatly weakened. While we mention WASHINGTON in our lamentations this day, let
us be thankful that so many great and good men in our Federal and State
Governments are still spared to us; men whom GOD has qualified for eminent
service, and called to fill the most important stations. Let us be thankful for
the inestimable life, the uncorrupted integrity, the superior wisdom, and the
pure patriotism of ADAMS, the wise and the good, who now presides over these
states! May the Almighty continue him for many years, to be the father of his
country, and the friend of mankind!

LET us be deeply humbled before GOD, this day, under the frowns of his
providence in taking away men so great, so good, so useful as those whom we
have lately been called to deplore.

WHEN GOD removed from his ancient Israel "the stay and the staff, the mighty
man and the man of war, the prudent and the ancient, the honarable man and the
counselor," it was considered as a token of the divine displeasure, and called
not only for grief but humiliation. Great and good men are instruments in the
hands of GOD to effect his purposes. They accomplish his will, and by them he
does good to us. When they are taken away therefore, we ought to humble
ourselves in his sight. When those by whom GOD has been used to do good to us
are removed by death, have we not reason to fear that he means to deprive us of
the good itself?

GOD is, we trust and hope, the guardian and friend of America, and his
gracious favor is the palladium of our country. Its existence and prosperity do
not depend upon any one man, or any number of men, let them be ever so wise or
good. "The LORD is our defense, and the holy one of Israel is our King." It is
true that when we sustain the loss of such men as a WASHINGTON and a SUMNER, we
are constrained to say, "Help LORD, for the godly man cease, the faithful
fail from among the children of men." When those who "seemed to be pillars" are
removed, we feel the goodly fabric of our government shaken. But, "the residue
of the spirit is with GOD." He gave us these excellent men. He continued them
to us as long as he saw to be best. And now that he has taken them away, we
will submit to the will of Heaven, and rely on him who has never forsaken us
nor our fathers.

BUT surely when we mention the virtuous and the good in our lamentations, we
should be stimulated to emulate their virtues, and be studious to follow their
advices, founded on experience, wisdom and love of their country.

IT is not to the parade of mourning, nor to the dictates of affectionate
feeling only that we should this day attend. We ought to be made wiser and
better by an event so affecting, and services so solemn as we are now
performing. Our civil rulers have called us to celebrate the days of mourning
for our beloved friend, in order to fix deeply in our minds a reverence for his
character, and a respect to the principles which he practiced himself, and in
his dying legacy recommended to us. You, especially, venerable fathers, who
compose the executive and legislative powers of the Commonwealth: You who so
lately solemnized the obsequies of our own beloved Chief Magistrate, will
suitably meditate on the uncertainty of human life, and the vanity of human
greatness. You will feel the importance of faithfully discharging your whole
duty, both public and private, so that you may be approved of GOD, and
"accepted of the multitude of your brethren." Go ye and imitate the
self-command, the disinterestedness, the cool wisdom and warm patriotism of the
man whom a nation this day laments. Go ye and serve GOD, and your generation
according to his will!" Go ye, continue in your uprightness, and still preserve
the usefulness which gives us security and prosperity! -- This is an awful and
a solemn scene! Here the supreme executive power, and the high legislative
authority of the Commonwealth, assemble in religious worship, to acknowledge
and adore the governor of the universe under one of the most distressing events
in his providence, and to condole each other on this melancholy dispensation.
All the people of the Commonwealth unite this day in the expressions of their
grief, and sympathize with their civil rulers on the great and universal
bereavement! May our mourning be useful, and may we be "taught to profit by the
things which we suffer."

ON imbibing the principles recommended by our late illustrious chief, equally
distant from tyranny and licentiousness, depends the safety of our country. If
we wish to be great among the nations abroad, and to be peaceful and happy at
home, we must preserve inviolably our union. We must guard against improper
foreign connexions. We must maintain a spirit of mutual forbearance and good
will, and must cultivate especially those principles of religion and morality
which are the only solid cement of society, and the only firm foundation of
liberty. Where GOD is neglected; where the religion of CHRIST is denied; where
men are governed not by reason or religion, but by party views and furious
passions, there may be the name of liberty, but the thing never can exist. If
we are careful to preserve and to foster the universities, the schools we now
maintain: If we honor and respect the day and the ordinances of GOD: If we
despise and neglect vice, and honor and support virtue: If we embrace the
doctrines, and submit to the precepts of the Gospel, we shall be a happy
people, and transmit our civil and religious liberties, a fair and a large
inheritance, to the latest posterity.

BUT while we sympathize with a nation in their afflictions, let us not forget
the private distresses which this solemn event has occasioned. We mourn with
the desolate widow, who is deprived of the "guide of her youth," the friend of
her riper years, and the most valuable of her earthly blessings! Calmly and
with composure may she submit to this afflictive event; and since her
attachments to earth are diminished, may she prepare to join the "desire of her
eyes" in a better world! May his friends, his relatives, his domestics, while
they mourn his loss, imitate his virtues, and may none who bear his illustrious
name, tarnish its luster, or bring disgrace upon it.

AND now, friends and fellow-citizens, let us "cease from man whose breath is
in his nostrils, for where is he to be accounted of!" If those who are the
delights of their country, and the veneration of the world: If men of the
purest characters: If those for whom prayers are continually ascending, that
they may be spared and blessed: If they are taken away: If they are laid low in
the dust, how shall we escape this common lot of humanity! If these cedars of
Lebanon, "the height whereof reaches up to heaven, and the sight thereof unto
the ends of the earth:" If they bow and break, what shall become of the "hyssop
which springs out of the wall!" -- Surely we are hastening to the silent
tomb, "the house appointed for all living!" We shall soon follow the friends
whom we deplore, the wise and the good, whom we honor, through "the dark valley
of the shadow of death!" -- Let it be therefore our most earnest solicitude, to
partake of the grace of the Gospel, to do our whole duty, and promote the
welfare and happiness of our fellowmen, so that when we fall asleep, we may be
"found of our judge in peace," and be "received into everlasting habitations!"

AND now unto him, who is "prince of the kings of the earth," "before whom" all
nations are as the drop of the bucket, and the dust of the balance," to the
infinite, perfect, eternal mind, "the same yesterday, to day, and forever," be
glory and honor, dominion and power, both now and forever,

AMEN.

