Dr. Thacher's CENTURY SERMON. DEC. 29, 1799.

A SERMON PREACHED TO THE CHURCH and SOCIETY IN BRATTLE-STREET, BOSTON, DEC.
29, 1799, AND OCCASIONED BY THE COMPLETION OF A CENTURY FROM ITS FIRST
ESTABLISHMENT.

By Peter Thacher, D. D. PASTOR OF SAID CHURCH.

BOSTON: -- PRINTED BY YOUNG and MINNS, STATE-STREET -- MDCCC.

CENTURY SERMON.
Acts II. 42. AND THEY CONTINUED STEADFASTLY IN THE APOSTLES DOCTRINE AND
FELLOWSHIP, AND IN BREAKING OF BREAD AND IN PRAYERS.


TO the primitive christians, to those who heard the words of CHRIST himself,
or who obeyed the inspired dictates of his immediate successors, the text
refers. They describe the effects which necessarily arise from true and vital
piety. These effects are, an attachment to the peculiar and important doctrines
of the gospel, a spirit of condescension and benevolence to our fellow
christians and our fellow men, and a deep reverence for, as well as a punctual
attendance upon, the ordinances of divine worship. These are the genuine fruits
of righteousness, flowing spontaneously from a renewed and holy heart.

IN every age of the christian church, its real members have deserved and
received the character given in the text. The word, the will, the precepts of
CHRIST have always been dear to them, and engaged their attention and
obedience. Those who are truly conscientious cannot be easy when sacred truth
is either denied or corrupted; neither will they be easy when they are "taught
for doctrines the commandments of men," or are obliged to submit to ceremonies
which they do not consider as authorized by the word of GOD.

IT was this noble and christian spirit which peopled with civilized and
christan inhabitants the wilds of New England. Our venerable ancestors felt
themselves aggrieved in their native land. They were forbidden to practice the
worship and discipline which they deemed scriptural and important, and were
obliged under heavy penalties to conform to such as they viewed in a different
light. Now that the controversy is mellowed by time, and mutual harmony has
removed the roughness, which, for want of candor and more frequent
communication, adhered to both parties, we are ready to wonder that so much
keenness should be discovered, and so great sacrifices made to what we esteem
matters comparatively indifferent. -- But it is not possible for us to discover
the motives of men, and therefore we have no right to judge or condemn them.
That the founders of our churches were actuated by motives really
conscientious, we are certain: For, only to the claims, the strong claims of
conscience, will men sacrifice their native country and their domestic
happiness, by emigrating to a foreign and inhospitable shore. They loved GOD,
and "went after him into the wilderness." Here they established a civil polity,
the spirit and energy of which remain to the present day. They established
literary and religious institutions, which have been the great sources of the
freedom and happiness of our country. They founded churches which, "having
obtained help of GOD, continue unto this day."

A GREAT degree of harmony prevailed in our Country, and between our Churches,
for many years. It was sometimes interrupted indeed by sectaries who inserted
themselves among us, and endeavored to establish tenets of doctrine and
discipline, which would have overthrown all civil government; spread anarchy
and confusion over the face of the new settlement, and would probably in the
issue have defeated the designs of the original emigrants. The principles of
self defense led to measures, which under other circumstances, might not have
been justifiable. The intruders were banished from the territory, and some were
more heavily punished. Our fathers had purchased an asylum for themselves, an
abode where they could hold their own sentiments and practice their own modes.
They supposed therefore that they had a right to enjoy this liberty in quiet.
They supposed that those who differed from them had no right to invade the
wilderness they had subdued or to interrupt their tranquillity, but ought to
find some other place where they might worship in peace in their own way
without disturbing their neighbors.

AMONG the Churches of New England, that which I now address has always held an
honorable place. One hundred years were, the last week, completed, since the
respectable founders of this institution first assembled publicly for the
worship of GOD upon the very spot which we now cover. This circumstance has led
my thoughts to the subject before us, and induced me to attempt giving you a
brief summary of the affairs of this Church from its first settlement to the
present day, and to suggest to your minds and my own, such reflections as may
make us wiser and better.

A NUMBER of good men, distinguished for their liberality of thinking, as well
as for their regard to the gospel and its ordinances, laid the foundation of
this church. While they respected the religious practices of the day, they
thought that in some respects they might be improved. The country had then been
settled seventy years, and in this period very little alteration had taken
place in doctrine, discipline or manners. As to the doctrines of religion,
these good men did not professedly differ from their brethren of other
churches. In a manifesto, published with a view to make known their purposes in
the undertaking before them, they thus express themselves on this point, "We
approve and subscribe the confession of faith put forth by the assembly of
divines at Westminster. We design only the true and pure worship of GOD
according to the rules appearing plainly to us in his word."

BUT in several respects they differed from other churches as to modes of order
and discipline. In worship they differed from them as to reading the scriptures
and the use of the LORD's prayer in public. To the first of these practices it
was objected, that the scriptures could not be understood fully without an
exposition, and that unlearned and unstable men would be apt to wrest them to
their own destruction. In reply to this, our founders justified their conduct
by saying, that this objection would operate equally against reading the
scriptures in private, because they might be thus abused, and thus the practice
of the church of Rome in withholding the scriptures from the people would be
justified; that the word of GOD could not be injurious to those who honored and
obeyed it, and that many ought not to be deprived of a privilege because a few
might abuse it; that we should hear the language of GOD himself, and then
exercise our own judgment (not that of any earthly teacher) in determining its
true meaning; and that it was doing honor to the scriptures to have them read
(agreeably to the practice of the primitive church) in their pure unadulterated
state, during the public worship of GOD.

THE ancient dissenters did not approve the frequent use of the LORD's prayer
in the liturgy of the church of England. They styled this a vain repetition.
Their separation made them wish to keep as far as possible from the customs of
the parent church, and they accordingly seldom or ever used this excellent
form. The founders of this church avoided both extremes. They concluded to have
this concise and comprehensive prayer used once in each season of public
worship. The practice has been invariable to the present day.

THE admission to full communion was justly deemed, by the first settlers of
this country, a matter of great importance. The general opinion was, that none
should partake of this privilege but such as were truly born of GOD. In order
that the church might judge of this fact, a relation of his christian
experiences, either written or oral, was required of every candidate for this
privilege. This usage had degenerated into a matter of mere form, and such a
similarity prevailed in these instruments, as gave too much occasion for
ridicule. In this church therefore the practice was disused. At least it was
not required, while every one was left at liberty to do it, which, however, has
never in a single instance been improved. They required that the pastor or
pastors should be satisfied as to the qualifications of those who offered
themselves to baptism or the communion, and this satisfaction, properly
expressed, they considered as a sufficient reason for admission, without a
formal vote of the church.

"We apprehend (says the manifesto before mentioned) that a particular church,
as such, is a society of christians by mutual agreement usually meeting
together for public worship in the same place and under the same ministry,
attending on the ordinances of GOD there. Under this principle we have never
been in the habit of requiring or giving dismissions from or to other churches.
If any person statedly congregates or communicates with us, we consider him as
a member of our church, and admit him to all christian privileges. At the same
time we view him as subject to christian discipline from us in case of
offense." -- So liberal has the spirit of this church always been as that its
arms have been opened to receive christians of all protestant sects and
denominations, and admit them to the same privileges as they enjoyed in their
own communities.

IN ancient days the choice of a minister (as well as the choice of all civil
officers) was confined to those who were in full communion with the church. In
this respect also our original constitution differed from the general practice.
"We cannot, says the manifesto, confine the right of choosing a minister to the
communicants alone, but we think that every baptized adult person, who
contributes to the maintenance, should have a vote in electing." This
principle, founded in strict justice and reason, has been invariably practiced
upon ever since.

So proper and necessary do these alterations appear to us, and so generally
are they adopted at the present day, as that we wonder any person should oppose
them. But there were many men, some from a reverence to ancient institutions,
and a conviction of their propriety, some from dread of innovation, and others
from a fear that this new and popular society would diminish their own
societies and lessen the influence they held; who exclaimed loudly against this
new establishment. Respectable and opulent as were the men who formed it, they
found it difficult for a time to stem the torrent of public opinion which ran
strongly against them, and overcome the jealousy which their neighbors felt of
being eclipsed by them.

UNDER these circumstances, it was necessary for them to choose a minister who
agreed with them in sentiment; who had a liberal mind, and who had firmness
enough to support his own opinions in the face of prejudice and passion. Such a
one they found in Mr. BENJAMIN COLMAN, a young man born in their own town,
educated at their own college, but who, by a residence of four years in
England, had overcome local prejudices; and was ready to pursue a mode of
church worship and discipline similar to that of the dissenting churches in
England; among whom he had been an useful and acceptable preacher. -- From an
apprehension that he might meet with difficulty in procuring an ordination
here, they requested him to ask it of the ministers in London, who readily
granted his desire, and by prayer, with the laying on of the hands of the
presbytery, he was separated to the work of the ministry, August 4, 1699.

THE church continued to flourish under the ministry of this excellent man for
many years. Not long after his settlement, a proposition was made to join with
him in the pastoral office a Mr. ELIPHALET ADAMS. He preached to the society
under this idea for two years and an half. This proposition did not succeed.

THE commencement of our intimate connection with the first church in this town
was in the year 1711. In consequence of the destruction of their meeting house
by fire, they assembled here for a year and an half, when their present edifice
was completed. This connection was cemented by our being united in the lecture
preparatory to the sacrament. The latter union took place in the month of
March, 1720. The happiness and edification of both societies have been greatly
promoted by this measure. We have felt ourselves to be in a sense one. And when
either of us have needed accommodation, in consequence of repairing or
rebuilding our respective places of worship, we have always found it with each
other.

THE prejudices or rather taste of the age may be found from observing the
refusal of the society to accept an organ bequeathed them by THOMAS BRATTLE,
Esquire. who was their principal benefactor, Since that period there have been many
large donations made to the society by its affluent and respectable members. It
would be difficult to particularize all these. It is but justice however to
remark, that the late Governor HANCOCK was the greatest benefactor the society
ever had. He gave the bell and a pulpit made of mahogany, and curiously carved,
besides a very handsome subscription in money, at the time of rebuilding the
meeting house. He presented us also with an elegant folio bible to be read in
public. He subscribed very largely, and more than any individual, toward the
expense of purchasing the present organ. The late Governor BOWDOIN also, with
his family and connexions, have been great benefactors to the society.
and in a sense their founder. This took place in the year 1713, when they
voted, "that they did not think proper to use the same in the public worship of
GOD."

Aug. 16, 1715, Mr. WILLIAM COOPER was called to the pastoral office in
connection with Dr. COLMAN. His youth and his modesty led him to beg, that his
actual separation to the work of the ministry might be delayed as long as
possible. With a request, which did Mr. COOPER so much honor, the church
complied, and he was not ordained till May, 1716.

WITH two pastors distinguished for their literary and ministerial
qualifications; both warmly engaged in the service of their master, and united
in their sentiments, their exertions and their ardent zeal, the society
increased from year to year in numbers and respectability. Many "were added to
the church of such as, we trust, are saved," and the candle of the LORD shone
brightly on our tabernacle.

No cloud intervened to diminish this brightness till the month of December,
1743, when Mr. COOPER was suddenly snatched from the arms of his family and
flock, and translated to a better world. Could the warmest affection, the
highest esteem, the most fervent prayers of his people poured out in secret, in
the family and in the church of GOD, have protracted his life, it would not
have been taken away. But the will of GOD was done, and he fell in the midst of
his days and usefulness.

BUT this heavy loss was compensated by the appearance of his son, the late
excellent Dr. COOPER, in the sacred desk. In this place he commenced and
terminated his ministerial labors. His mild and gentle manners, his delicate
taste, his brilliant talents for the services and devotions of the pulpit, as
well as their regard to the memory of his father, fixed the eyes of this people
upon him. Within a very few weeks they called him to office. Having discovered
the same modesty and made the same delay as his father had done in similar
circumstances, he was ordained on the twenty-first of May, 1746.

THIS event was succeeded by one of a very different nature. On Aug. 29, 1747,
the venerable Dr. COLMAN died suddenly! This great and good man possessed a
capacious mind, a strong inclination for what is called belle lettre, as well
as more serious learning, a natural politeness, and an easy dignity of manners
which commanded respect and conciliated esteem. His foreign correspondence was
extensive, and his influence was always exerted to serve our college and his
country.

No proposal has since been made to have more than one pastor at a time in the
church. The late Dr. COOPER, by his exemplary life, his elegant discourses, his
fervent prayers, his patriotic services, and his graceful manners, acquired a
very high reputation at home and abroad. -- No remarkable event took place
during the course of his ministry, excepting an alteration in the version of
the psalms and the demolition of our ancient place of worship, with the
erection of the present elegant and This building cost six thousand pounds
sterling.
costly edifice, in which public worship was first celebrated July 25, 1773.

For thirty-seven years, in the course of which term our trying and distressful
but glorious revolution began and was completed, Dr. COOPER continued the
beloved, the useful and successful pastor of this church. But death, with
inexorable hand, arrested him in the zenith of his popularity and acceptance,
Dec. 29, 1783. Few men have lived more esteemed, or died more lamented.

ON Jan. 12, 1785, I received the pastoral charge of this church. With the
events which led to and succeeded this solemn transaction you are all
acquainted. With truth I can say, that you have done all which affection could
dictate or bounty bestow, to render my life easy and respectable. That I have
been so little useful to you and your children, has been my constant burden.
But may we yet see better days on this account; And may my life and my
usefulness terminate together!

As an evidence of the change of public opinion, I observe that the grand and
melodious organ, which now assists our plasmody and devotions, was opened for
the first time on the 17th day of June, 1792. That, which eighty years before
was rejected when offered freely, was then procured at a great expense.

IT has been the honor and felicity of this church that its union has never
been interrupted. In all societies there will of course be men who have an
attachment to their own opinions. In this society, the gentleness of manners,
the candor, condescension and brotherly love, which are the ornament and the
band of religious associations, have conciliated the affection and quieted the
minds of those who have thought differently from the majority. "No root of
bitterness has sprung up among us." The love of peace and harmony has ever
prevailed, and we have a fair prospect of continuing a happy society.

AND now, my brethren, be thankful to GOD, who has so remarkably smiled upon
your predecessors and yourselves even to this day. "The vineyard which his own
right hand planted," has flourished and increased for one hundred years. No
furious blast has overthrown it. No insidious enemy has undermined or
extirpated it. We behold it this day flourishing in its original beauty, and
bringing forth, we trust, the clusters of Canaan," good fruit unto GOD. It is
our hearts desire and prayer to GOD, "that a pure and a spiritual church may be
continued here so long as the sun and the moon shall endure. When we shall be
gathered to the dust of our fathers, and the "places" which now know us shall
know us no more, may a generation rise up which shall love GOD more, and serve
him better than ever we have done. May the members of this church be more
exemplary, and its ministers more useful, through all succeeding ages! May it
flourish with the vigor of youth and the wisdom of age, till the present
dispensation shall be completed, and the church universal shall be translated
from earth to heaven!

LET us reflect with delight and reverence on the immutability of GOD! The men
and the things of time pass rapidly away, but he abides "the same yesterday,
to day and forever!" Although we may not "put our trust in princes nor in the
sons of men, for their breath goes forth and they also are vanity," yet we may
safely rely on the wisdom and goodness of the ruler of the universe! To his
Son, our Savior, we may safely confide our immortal interterests; and in his
universal government we may always rejoice, for the judge of all the earth will
do right!

How swiftly, my brethren, does time pass away! Another year, and a full
century since the institution of our religious society, have now elapsed!
Events, the most important to our country and the world, have taken place in
it! Some of us have witnessed these scenes, and others have lived many years of
this century! Let us all make a solemn pause, and inquire what is our state and
condition! Have we improved our time and our talents, and what is the
foundation of our hope toward GOD! We may never witness the close of another
year; and there is not the most distant probability, (I had almost said
possibility) that any one of us will see the end of another century! There is
no hazard in predicting that, before another hundred years revolve over this
church, every one of us, of every age and description, will be numbered with
the dead, and gone to our account! Where shall we then be? In happiness or
misery, in heaven or in hell? How shall we appear before the judgment seat of
CHRIST, and what will be our sentence at the last day? These are solemn
questions. They relate to our souls and eternity. They require serious
examination, and deliberate answers. Let us this day "think on our ways, and
turn our feet unto GOD's testimonies. Let us make haste, and not delay to keep
his commandments."

"OUR fathers, where are they, and the prophets, do they live forever?" The
men, who once worshipped on this very spot, are "gone the way of all the earth,"
and their bones are now mouldering to dust in the dark and silent grave! Soon
shall we follow them, and have no more share in any thing that is done under
the sun! May GOD prepare us for this solemn hour! May GOD enable us to "serve
him and our generation according to his will! And may we so worship him in his
courts below as that we may be prepared to serve him, with perfect purity and
happiness, in his temple above!

AMEN.

