Mr. SPALDING's SERMON, On the Death of GENERAL WASHINGTON.

A SERMON, PREACHED AT THE TABERNACLE, IN SALEM, DECEMBER 29, A. D. 1799, ON
THE DEATH OF General Washington.

By JOSHUA SPALDING, Pastor.

PUBLISHED BY DESIRE OF THE TOWN.

SALEM: Printed by THOMAS C. CUSHING, at the Bible and Heart.

ERRATA.
Page Line 8 13 for "description" read descriptions. 11 last, for "toils" read
plots. 12 6 from bottom, for "christian" read chieftain. 14 10 for "suffers"
read suffers. 15 7 from bot. for "led" read lead. 17 7 from bot. for
"continues" read continues.
A SERMON.
ECCLESIASTES i.5. THE SUN ALSO ARISES, AND THE SUN GOES DOWN.


THE face of man is upward, and his eyes behold the heavens. By this, man is
distinguished, and highly privileged above all the lower creation: for truly
the light is sweet, and a pleasant thing it is for the eyes to behold the sun.

Contemplating the firmament of light -- the stars which the Lord ordained; how
high! how large! how numerous! how bright! -- we gaze with admiration: a flood
of glory pours upon our minds; and our hearts are kindled with a pathos as of
burning coals. Yet the moon, when she arises, rules the night: as queen of
heaven, she commands the attention of every eye: all the skies, silently, put
on her silver robes; and wide over the earth extends her reign of light! --
But the sun also arises! and where are now the stars? and where their
beauteous queen? In the haste of willing obedience they have all retired,
opening for him the wide path of heaven its whole length; which, at once, is
filled with his golden beams.

Here is wisdom! When we understand that the heavens were made in wisdom, we
perceive that the natural heavens are the exact type and pattern of all worlds:
and we are led to contemplate, with wonder and pleasure, the analogy of all
God's works.

This is a meditation the most profitable and sublime: and we are warranted by
the scriptures to enter the sacred field, and make use of these first works of
God, to assist our thoughts and reflections upon those wrought through every
age, down to the present moment. In the scriptures, very frequently, the just
are compared to the stars, the believing, to the moon, and the eminently good,
to the clear shining of the sun.

But the world on which we are now called solemnly to meditate is social
America: in this hemisphere many great lights have arisen: stars of magnitude
have here beamed, and held a resplendent course; and often has America, in her
social walks, beheld the moon rounding her full orb, bright and unclouded.

But the sun also has arisen: one character has here been exhibited, as
distinguished and unrivalled, as the sun in the firmament; and which the
stupendous task has devolved upon me, this day, to eulogize.

But where shall I begin! The stars cluster, we compare one with another; they
are formed into constellations, and have their order: but there is, there can
be, but one sun; with him there is none to compare: nor does the sun present
particular distinguished points, which might direct a description: it is one
body of light.

GEORGE WASHINGTON, the man ordained by Heaven to rule our social day, was
every way qualified and marked out for his work. His person was most excellent
-- his countenance peculiarly bright, and indescribably expressive of the
noblest intellectual powers, dispositions and acquirements. His limner needed
not to depart from the truth for the sake of the picture: the greatest likeness
was the best picture. And the same observation may be made of his historian:
the best informed, and the most upright and impartial historian, will give the
greatest and best character of WASHINGTON.

I had a great desire to see the man of whom I had heard so much, to satisfy
myself, if veneration and love had not given wings to the imagination, in the
description given of the dignity of his person, and the symmetry and expression
of his countenance; but when I saw him, one bright day, at the head of his
army, marching against Cornwallis, I was satisfied: I found, that, as prompt as
the imagination ever is in dressing, gracing, and exhibiting to advantage, the
dear object of the heart, something was here to be conceived of only by the eye.

A man, kept from a view of the face of the creation, might form ideas of the
beauty of some objects beyond what, in comparison with others, belongs to
them; but he would never form too exalted ideas of the sun: the livliest and
most pleasing imagination of the brightness of the sun, is the sight of the eye.

This countenance, as we naturally expect, was the true index of the mind; a
mind full of light and heat, which nothing can describe, but the whole life of
WASHINGTON.

He was seriously reserved, but of easy address; moderate, yet resolute; grave,
yet sprightly; mild, but heroic; prudent, but vigorous; liberal, liberal, with
economy.

His discernment was surprising; his judgment, no less wonderful: he
penetrated, weighed and forecast every thing; and his application was incessant
-- All directed to the wisest and noblest objects -- social happiness -- his
country's freedom, independence, honor and prosperity -- liberty, liberty --
the rights and duties of man -- and whatever might exalt and felicitate the
whole human race.

Humane -- he pitied his enemies, and rendered good for evil. Hospitable -- his
door was opened to the stranger, as to a friend: and impartial -- to him all
had free access: no sect or party, society or district, formed his circle; but,
like that of the sun, it included all.

Interesting himself, deeply and conscientiously, in the cause of virtue; he
was forward to sustain labors, and faithful in every trust -- private and
public -- in social life -- at the head of armies -- as a magistrate -- in war,
and in peace: persevering in the pursuit of the benevolent object to the end.

But what, perhaps, is most wonderful in this character, was that which is
commonly called good fortune; but which we know to be the special agency of
Divine Providence: for the race is not to the swift, nor the battle to the
strong.

General WASHINGTON sprang from one of the wealthiest and most respected
families in America; and soon, in the events of Providence, became almost the
sole object of special attention and care. Being the favorite of the family,
and of all acquaintances; in a part of the country distinguished for literary
improvement, and popular education; and possessing from a child the best
constitution, and almost uninterrupted health; his advantages were the best
that could have been enjoyed.

And no sooner was he formed for any conspicuous station, than he was placed in
the very sphere where he might shine with every possible advantage.

He never had to seek a sphere of action: that Hand which stretched out the
heavens, and ordered where the sun should rise, opened before WASHINGTON every
door. Usually, for men to ascend to the lowest spheres of light, hoc opus, hic
labor est; but, for WASHINGTON, the eburne gate was lifted up, and it was
neither labor nor pains to ascend to the vertex.

He was ever prosperous; whatever he engaged in ended well: and miraculous
indeed were his preservations -- amidst common dangers -- and in battles, where
the slain on the right hand and on the left were many -- but most of all from
the fell snares and toils of a wily, watchful and implacable foe; who knew all
the depths of Satan, and could easily descend to the lowest, even to
countenance and encourage the dark assassin. But the soul of WASHINGTON was
guarded by more than shield or sword: it was bound up in the roll of life, and
hidden beyond the search of malice. He lived! he conquered! he saw his labors
all finished -- his desires all accomplished! He ran the whole race, and
reached the goal; neither faint nor wearied; but like the strong man, that
enjoys the evening with the vigor of the morning. Millions, in a proper
sense, gave him their hearts; Genius devoted his song; and Nature decreed her
Vernon for his triumph.

He was beloved, greatly beloved, most universally beloved! by affinities, by
domestics, soldiers, citizens, countrymen, and foreigners; by great and small.
He was the beloved child, the beloved youth, the beloved man, the beloved
christian, and the beloved sage. The true and general affection that he shared
compares with all the rest, and strikingly evinceth the agency of that Hand
which holds all hearts: and worthy was he to be thus beloved.

Our WASHINGTON lived at the most eventful and momentous period: he shined, a
summer's sun: he held his course, a harvest day. His was a day of great men,
and a day of great events; and all conspired to make WASHINGTON great.

A HANCOCK, an ADAMS, a FRANKLIN, a JEFFERSON, a WARREN, a GREEN, a TRUMBULL,
a LIVINGSTON, a HENRY -- a cloud of seventy-five men was prepared as a chariot
for the advent of WASHINGTON.

A George the Third, a British court, navy and army, had just arisen to the
zenith of empire, and the height of insolence; ruling the seas, and, with a
countenance the most terrific, menacing every shore, and claiming a right to
bind freeborn America, in all cases whatsoever. Never was there a cause of
resistance more just; never, a clearer call to put on the harness; never, a
cause more interesting to the human race, that called for the sword.

This was thy day, O WASHINGTON! Thou wast raised up for such a time as this!
All this train of wonderful events united together to make our Golden Orb the
center of the social system.

But, though we view a man, in society, worthy of a comparison with the sun, in
the natural world; yet we view neither the one nor the other as perfect or
divine. There are spots in the sun; his beams are sometimes scorching; and,
though he eclipseth all the heavens with his brightness, he in his turn suffers
eclipses.

There were, doubtless, some imperfections in the character of WASHINGTON; but,
like the spots in the sun's disk, they were lost in his excellences; they were
comparatively small.

But, alas! some men have been so stupid and dishonorable, as to give to the
sun divine honors -- to pay to the creature the homage due to the Creator!
Has the worship of the heathen added any thing to the glory of the sun? Far
otherwise: instead of adding, in this way, they have detracted from his glory.
The idolatrous worship, which has been offered to the natural sun, has risen
up, like the fog of marshy places, and obscured his beams. Heathen lands are
justly styled dark and benighted lands: their idolatries cast a gloom over the
face of the creation.

And with what indignation should we express the conduct of some men, in
favored, enlightened America, whose foolish hearts, being equally darkened
with those of the heathen, have acted the same stupid and brutish part! who
have attempted to obscure the brightness of the wonderful character of
WASHINGTON, by the fumes of idolatrous praise! Were these WASHINGTON'S friends?
Never! never! but the enemies of the revolution, seekers and time-servers.
Never did this effulgent character shine so dimly, as when it has been thus
profanely eulogized.

It is observed of the heathen, in their adorations paid to the sun, that their
servile minds led them to dwell much upon his rare and most unpleasant aspects:
they have more to say of his eclipses, than of all his bright and benignant
influences -- a striking proof of their being influenced by the devil. And the
same circumstance may be observed of the adulators of WASHINGTON. Audacious
men! they have dared to insult his ever-faithful friends, when attempting to
defend his true character against their impious flattery; and call them
WASHINGTON's enemies, because they would not bow down, and give to the
creature, the most exalted creature, the glory due to the Creator.

But WASHINGTON desired not this: it was to him most painful, as the tear of
sorrow often bespoke. He realized he was a man; a mortal man; an accountable
man. He confessed imperfections, which none but himself could see. And no man
appeared to have a clearer and more constant view of the divine agency over
him, than himself. How earnestly and repeatedly did he call on all his friends
-- on all America -- to give the glory to God! How does this aggravate the
conduct of his blasphemous adulators!

O WASHINGTON! did thou say in thy Farewell Address, "I shall carry with me
the hope that my country will never cease to view the errors I may have
committed with indulgence; and that, after forty-five years of my life
dedicated to its service, with an upright zeal, the faults of incompetent
abilities will be consigned to oblivion?" Wist thou not that they were already
covered and consigned to oblivion by the effulgence of thy beneficent life?

But the sun goes down. How solemn the moment! how affecting the scene!
America, covered with her tokens of mourning, turns her eyes to the western
horizon, to behold an event often contemplated with an anxious heart -- a
setting sun -- a sun going down, to arise no more.

We have no reason to expect another WASHINGTON in America; for by wisdom God
created the heavens, and there is but one sun in the wide expanse: we may not
look for another so distinguished a character in our sphere, while the present
order of things continues.

The stars also, his compatriots, have become occidental, and rapidly fall from
heaven. This year has been remarkable for the decease of great men in America.
Solemn thoughts press upon the mind! The social system has received a great
shock in the death of WASHINGTON; and what can be shaken must ere long be
removed.

How ominous is this event! When you consider this, and the general aspect of
all the great events now taking place through the world, with a recollection of
my particular views of the divine prophecies, you will not suppose the thought,
in me, arises from the enthusiasm of the moment, that they portend the closing
scene -- that the night is approaching, which will immediately precede that
other day, new in its nature, divine, and eternal. May we be prepared for that
most solemn scene; and may this event be sanctified to us, and to all the
people, for that end.

But we have consolation in the midst of our mourning; light arises in the
darkness. WASHINGTON died in the full confidence and affection of a free and
happy people: and though our Golden Orb descends below the horizon of natural
life, the skies still reflect his rays. O WASHINGTON! thou still live in the
grateful heart of republican America, and there thou will ever live.

More! infinitely more! Behold a Divine Sun arises! O ZION! thy Sun still
shines in all his strength; and thy Sun shall not go down! The LORD is thine
everlasting light, and thy God thy glory.

What infinite obligations of gratitude and praise are we laid under to God,
who according to WISDOM framed the heavens; who appointed the sun and the moon
to shine in their glorious spheres, and marshalled the stars in their beautiful
order; and who has stretched out those heavens before our eyes, as the pattern
of all his wonderful works, in the social and civil worlds, and of what,
finally, will be exhibited in perfection in the world of glory!

O give thanks unto the Lord, for he is good, for his mercy endures forever!
to Him that by wisdom made the heavens, for his mercy endures forever! to Him
that made great lights, for his mercy endures forever! to Him that raised up
WASHINGTON, preserved him, and gave him victory, peace and prosperity, for his
mercy endures forever!

And O give thanks unto Him who has made the heaven of heavens, for his mercy
endures forever! who has caused the Sun of Righteousness to shine there, for
his mercy endures forever! and who has given his redeemed people the certain
prospect of seeing and enjoying that Sun, a long, eternal day, for his mercy
endures forever!

AMEN.

