REFLECTIONS ON THE SEVEN DAYS OF THE WEEK.

BY Mrs. Catherine Talbot.

A NEW EDITION.

NEWCASTLE: PRINTED BY S. and JNO. ADAMS. 1800.

Advertisement.
It is hoped, that the good sense and exalted piety of these Reflections may
render them of some use to the world in general: And those who had the
happiness of a personal acquaintance with the Author, will be pleased to have
an opportunity of profiting by her thoughts, now they are no longer permitted
to enjoy the blessing of her example.

SUNDAY.
O LORD, thou have searched me out, and known me: Thou know my down-sitting
and mine up-rising: Thou art about my path, and about my bed, and spiest out
all my ways.
How true, how astonishing is this thought! Almighty GOD, my maker, is ever
present with me. He is infinite in being; and therefore must be every where. He
is infinite in knowledge; and therefore every thing must be known to him. No
creature is too inconsiderable for his notice, who is the maker of all, and
cares for all alike. The friends, the relations, and acquaintance, whom I see
and converse with every day, know not half so much of my conduct as He does,
nor are half so attentive to it How hourly careful should I be, then, to
approve myself to him! Among my relations and friends there are some whom I
regard more than the rest, either out of greater affection for their goodness
and kindness; or out of reverence for their greater wisdom and dignity; or out
of interest, as being capable of doing me more good or hurt. All these motives
of the highest regard are joined in Him. His excellence is more than thought
can conceive: Whatever is beautiful, or good, or amiable in the world, flows
from Him as its source. In Him is all greatness and majesty, all wisdom and
knowledge; every thing that is glorious, awful, venerable. My hourly dependence
is upon Him, and all my expectations through an eternity to come. From him I
have received my life, my being, every power and faculty of soul and body.
Every innocent delight I enjoy, is his gift: In every danger he is my present
help. No power but his could guide me safely through the intricate mazes of
life. Hitherto his providence has carefully watched over me, and his right hand
has (...) me up: And through all my future life, (...) is truth itself, has
promised never to fail me nor forsake me, if on my part I will but serve him
faithfully, as in my baptismal vow I have promised to do. That blessed covenant
I am going to renew, by partaking of the holy sacrament. Had not our blessed
Savior died to redeem mankind, we must all have appeared before an all-seeing
God, of infinite justice and holiness, without security of being considered
otherwise than as objects of displeasure. But we know that he looks upon us now
as objects of the tenderest mercy. He invites us to pour out our hearts before
him at all times: To call upon him in the time of trouble: To look unto him and
be saved. O my soul, in all thy ways acknowledge him, and he shall direct thy
paths!

Let me then ask myself, as in his sight, What is the general turn of my
temper, and disposition of my mind? My most trifling words and actions are
observed by him; and every thought is naked to his eye. Could I suppose the
king, or any the greatest person I have any knowledge of, were within reach of
observing my common daily behavior, though unseen by me, should I not be very
particularly careful to preserve it in every respect decent and becoming?
Should I allow myself in any little froward humors? Should I not be ashamed to
appear peevish and ill-natured? Should I use so much as one harsh or unhandsome
expression even to my equal, or my meanest inferior, even were I ever so much
provoked? much less should I behave irreverently to my parents or superiors.
This awful Being, in whom I live and move, and from whom no obscurity can hide
me, by whom the very hairs of my head are all numbered, He knows the
obligations of every relation in life: He sees in their full light their
reciprocal duties of parents and children, of husbands and wives, of neighbors
and fellow servants. He knows the aggravated guilt of every offense against
these ties of society, however we may be disposed to treat them as trifles: and
every piece of stubbornness and pride, of ill-humour and passion, of anger and
resentment, of sullenness and perverseness, exposes us to his just indignation.

MONDAY.
BLESSED are they that do hunger and thirst after righteousness.
-- Our Lord and Savior has pronounced this blessedness, and through his grace
I hope to partake of it. Hunger and thurst naturally prompt us to seek, without
delay, the means of satisfying them. What then is the food of the mind?
Wholesome instruction and religious meditation. If then I sincerely do hunger
and thirst after righteousness, I shall be frequently feeding my mind with
pious books and thoughts. I shall make the returns of these meals as regular as
I can, and seldom shall I find any necessity strong enough to make me miss them
a whole day together. -- But then it ought to be remembered too, that even
these, the best hours of my life, ought never to encroach upon the duties and
employments of my station, whatever they may be. Am I in a superior station of
life? My duty then probably takes in a large compass; and I am accountable to
my Maker for all those talents entrusted with me by him for the benefit of my
fellow creatures. I must not think of living to myself alone; or of devoting
that time to imitate the employment of angels, which was given me for the
service of men. Religion must be my chief end, and my best delight; it must
regulate all I think or do; but whatever my station is, I must fulfill all its
duties. Have I leisure and genius? I must give a due portion of my time to the
elegant improvements of life; to the study of those sciences that are an
ornament to human nature; to such things as may make me amiable and engaging to
all whom I converse with, that by any means I may win them over to religion and
goodness. For if I am always shut up in my closet, and spend my time in nothing
but exercises of devotion, I shall be looked upon as morose and hypocritical,
and be disregarded as useless in the world. When this life is ended, we have a
whole eternity before us to spend in those noblest employments and highest
delights. But man, in this low state of mortality, pays the most acceptable
obedience to God, by serving his fellow creatures.

Perhaps all these considerations are wide from my case. So far from having
leisure upon my hands, I have scarce a moment free from the necessary
engagements of business and bodily labor. While I am working hard for bread
for myself and my family; or attending diligently the commands of a strict
master, to whom I am justly accountable for every hour I have; how can I find
frequent opportunities for studying the word of God, or much time to spend in
devout meditation? Why, happily, much is not required, provided I make the best
use of what little I have. Some time I must ^eeds have on Sundays, and this I
may improve. I may diligently (...) to what I hear at church: I may examine
whether my own practice is conformable to what I am there taught; and I may
spend some hours in that day, either in good discourse with such as are able to
instruct me, or in reading such religious books as are put into my hands. Still
enough will be left for cheerful conversation and pleasant walks. Why should
either of them be the less cheerful, for a mixture of religious thoughts? What
indeed is there so gladdening as they are? Be my state ever so mean and
toilsome; as a Christian, if indeed I behave like one, I am equal to the
greatest monarch upon earth. Be my misfortunes and sorrows ever so severe; as a
Christian, I can look beyond death to an eternity of happiness, of happiness
certain and unspeakable. These thoughts, therefore, I should keep upon my mind
through the whole week: They should be the amusement of my labor, and the
relief of my weariness: And when my heart is thus ready, I shall gladly take
every opportunity to sing and give praise. I shall awake early to worship that
GOD, who is my defense and delight; and I shall close every evening with prayer
and thanksgiving to Him, whose ways are ways of pleasantness, and all whose
paths are peace. Whenever I can have a quarter of an hour to spare from the
necessary business, and the (at fit times) as necessary relaxations of life,
which, while they are innocent, moderate, and reasonable, will never be
disapproved by that good GOD, who has created every thing that is comely and
pleasant in the world, and invites us to rejoice, and do good all the days of
our life; when I have any spare time, I shall gladly spend it in reading, with
reverence and attention, some portions of the Bible. In all my common
conversation, I shall have my eye continually up to Him, who alone can direct
my paths to happiness and improvements, and crown all my endeavors with the
best success. I shall try to be something the better for every scene of life I
am engaged in: to be something the wiser for every day's conversation and
experience. And let me not fear, but that if I daily thus faithfully strive to
grow in holiness and goodness, be my growth at the present ever so
imperceptible, I shall in due time arrive at the measure of the fullness of
stature in Christ.

That I may be better for the last twenty-four hours, let me examine a little
what temper I have been in all that time. In general, perhaps, I can recollect
nothing much amiss in it: but let me descend to particulars. Things are often
very faulty, that appear at first sight very trifling. Perhaps I have so fond a
conceit of myself, as to think that I can never be in the wrong. Has any
uneasiness happened in the family this last day? Perhaps I think the fault was
wholly in others, and the right entirely on my side. But ought I not to
remember, that, in all disputes, there is generally some fault on both sides?
Perhaps they begun; -- But did not I carry it on? -- They gave the provication:
-- But did not I take it? -- Am I not too apt to imagine, that it would be mean
entirely to let a quarrel drop, when I have a fair opportunity to reason, and
argue, and reproach, to vindicate my injured merit, and assert my right? Yet,
is this agreeable to the precepts and example of Him, "who when he was reviled,
reviled not again?" Is it agreeable to his commands, who has charged me, if my
brother trespass against me, to forgive him, not seven times only, but seventy
times seven? Is it agreeable to that Christian doctrine, which exhorts us, not
to think of ourselves highly, but soberly as we ought to think; and that in
lowliness of mind every one should think others better than himself? And, alas!
how often do I think this disrespect, though a slight one, provoking to me?
this situation, though a happy one, not good enough for me? How often have I
had in my mouth that maxim, that a worm if it is trod upon will turn again?
Wretch that I am! shall I plead the example of a vile worm of the earth for
disobeying the commands of my Savior, with whom I hope hereafter to sit in
heavenly places?

TUESDAY.
I MUST work the work of him who sent me, while it is day.
-- If our blessed Savior, infinitely great and excellent, was, when he
assumed human nature, so far from being exempted from the general law of labor
imposed on our first father and all his race, who is there amongst men, that
shall plead an exemption? The duty of employment is two fold. First, as we are
active and spiritual beings, ill would it become us to sit wrapped in indolence,
and sleep away an useless life. Constant activity and extensive usefulness, is
the perfection of a spiritual being. The Great God himself is infinitely
active. "My father works hitherto," says our Savior, "and I work." In their
various degrees, all the orders of angels are ministering spirits. In the happy
worlds above, all is life and activity. And shall man, who is so fond of life,
lose half his little portion of it in a lazy slothful state? shall he quench
those sparks of immortality that glow in his bosom, and content himself with
being, for three parts of his time, little better than a lump of organized
clay? Innocent man in paradise, was not made for idleness: but guilty fallen
man is peculiarly born to labor, and to trouble. Equally just and merciful was
the doom pronounced to Adam; In the sweat of thy face thou shall eat bread.
Human nature, corrupted and depraved by the fall of our first parents, would be
incapable of employing ease and leisure to any happy purposes. Greatly do we
need constant employment to keep us out of the reach of those temptations from
within, and from without, that in idleness particularly assault us. Greatly do
we need to have much of our minds taken up with perpetual attention to
necessary business and hourly duty, that they may not prey too much upon
themselves. Labor and pain are the necessary, though unpalatable, medicine of
our souls. Shall we refuse to follow the prescription of that heavenly
Physician, who drank the bitterest cup for us? Toil and trouble are the just
punishments of guilty human nature: Shall we rebel against our awful Judge?
Activity and employment are the law of our being: And shall we not obey our
sovereign Ruler, our great and good Creator?

What then is my proper business and employment, that I may set diligently to
it? In most stations in life, this is too evident to be asked: And it is
equally certain, that every station, even the very highest, has its proper work
and labor, which whoever performs not to the utmost of his power, is a wicked
and slothful servant, for we have all a master in heaven.

Come, then, my heart, let us cheerfully set about our business. Be it study
and improvement of the mind, or toil of the body, or industry of the hands: Be
it care of our families and domestic affairs: Be it care of the public, and
distribution of justice: Be it care of our neighbors, and charity to the poor:
Be it education of children, instruction of the ignorant, attendance on the
sick, culture of the ground, defense of our country: Whatever it be, let us do
it diligently and heartily, as unto the LORD, and not unto men. As subjects,
children, servants, let us obey our rulers, parents, masters. And if it be the
will of Providence to disable us, for the present, from all active service, by
confining us in chambers of sickness, in a weak and useless state, let us set
the example of an uncomplaining submission and cheerful resignation; and let
patience, at least, have its perfect work.

This submissive, this humble, this obedient disposition, is poverty of spirit.
We ought to think nothing beneath us; nor to desire any thing but what is
allotted us. We ought to imagine nothing our own, and surely therefore not our
time: Yet how apt are we to think it quite a hardship put upon us, if any small
portion of it is to be spent disagreeably, and if we have not hours, and days,
and years, to indulge in careless idleness and giddy pleasure!

Among other works, that of reforming my temper is surely a most necessary one.
Let me therefore take myself a little to task. How have I behaved the last day?

I have not, perhaps, been positively out of humor: But have I guarded my
disposition against every failing? Have I not indulged a nice fancy, in taking
some disgust at any of those I converse with; which, trifling as it seems at
present, may, in time, quite alienate our minds from one another? A
disagreeable look, or manner, too often gives a prejudice against persons who
are really deserving. Let me be upon my guard against such prejudices. Let me
overlook all trifling infermities in others: But let me spare them the pain and
difficulty of having many such to overlook in me. Let me observe in every thing
a perfect cleanliness and neatness; for nothing is so disgustful as the
contrary. Let me be mild and civil, moderate and discreet, in all my ways of
speaking: Let my behavior always be easy and obliging, natural and unaffected.
Let me always preserve, as much as I can, even under severe trials, a cheerful
pleasing countenance: And, among other things, let me try to avoid, as much as
possible, falling into those little foolish tricks and peculiarities, which
every body is so apt to acquire, without even perceiving it. I cannot help
seeing in others how disagreeable they are, though in them I ought as little as
possible to attend to it. But let me watch myself a little, and discover, in
order to reform, whatever I may have in me that makes me less agreeable, and
therefore less useful, in society.

WEDNESDAY.
AND GOD saw every thing that he had made; and behold, it was very good.
Such was the face of things at the creation. Every view, that could be taken,
was a view of order and beauty, of happiness and pleasure. Too soon, by the
frailty and by the guilt of man, this happy state was changed; and through sin,
death and misery entered into the world. Every part of our world was affected
by the general disorder. The earth produced thorns and thistles. The seasons
became unfavourable. The beasts grew wild and savage. And hence sprung a
necessity of labor and self-defence. Toil and weariness must be its natural
consequence to bodies now become mortal and corruptible. Pain and sickness, the
infirmities of old age, the fear of death and sufferings, both for ourselves
and our friends, with all that variety of evils that burden human life; all
are the sad effects of sin. The disorder of our minds, the vehemence of our
passions, the dimness of our understandings, those tendencies to evil, which
even the best people, at some times, must feel strongly working in their
bosoms, are the bitter fruits of the original corruption of human nature in the
first of men, our common parent. Hence, surely, we should draw the strongest
motives of humility, and throw ourselves down, in the deepest abasement of
soul, before that GOD of holiness, in whose sight the heavens are not pure, and
who charge his angels with "folly;" How much more man which is a worm, and
the son of man which is a worm? Unassisted human nature could not be in a more
perfect state, than our first parents were created: Infinitely superior,
certainly, to whatever we can imagine of good or excellent among ourselves. If
they were such frail, such wretched creatures, and so soon forfeited their very
beings -- Good GOD! then what is the very best of us! Let our confusion be ever
before us! "Let the shame of our face cover us."

Strange it may seem, after these considerations, to mention a happy and
cheerful enjoyment of our beings, as a serious and important duty. Many good
persons, who have deeply dwelt on this dark view of our mortal state, have
represented it as utterly unfit and sinful for such creatures, in such a world,
to think of any thing but suffering and mourning. But as sure as our heavenly
Father is good to all, and peculiarly so to us his helpless new-adopted
children, so surely they are widely mistaken. The blessed promise of our
redemption was uttered in the same moment with the doom of our mortality, and
from that moment all was good again. Pain, and suffering, and sorrow, became
remedies to cure our corrupted nature; temptations, but a purifying fire to
prove and to refine our virtue; and death, a kind release from toil, a happy
admission into a better paradise. Through our blessed Savior, we have obtained
the grace of GOD to guide us in all our ways, and to support us under all our
distresses. Through him, in him, we have every thing that can make us happy,
unless we wilfully destroy ourselves. Rejoice, then, in the LORD, all ye
righteous; be thankful all ye who are true of heart.

Serious and careful indeed we ought to be, watchful and diligent, humble and
submissive: Reflecting deeply on the frailty and vileness of our nature, and
the important, the eternal interest that depends on this our short and very
uncertain time of trial here. In this sense, we ought to work out our salvation
with fear and trembling, and even to rejoice before the LORD with reverence.
But while we keep innocence, and take heed to the thing that is right, let our
cheerful hearts and looks confess the goodness of our gracious Master, who
gives us rain from heaven, and fruitful seasons, filling our hearts with food
and gladness: of Him, who has made every thing good and pleasant; who has the
tenderest consideration for all our infermities, and has provided every support
and every relief that can make our passage through this world tolerable and
comfortable to us. With joyful gratitude let us accept and improve these his
mercies and indulgences. Let us make this world as happy as we can to ourselves
and one another: To do this, we need only be good Christians. Our wills being
perfectly resigned, will acquiesce, without pain, in whatever disposals
Providence may see fit to make of us and ours: And taking "no thought for
tomorrow," we shall neither be tormented with vain schemes, nor anxious fears.
Our desires being moderate, we shall pass quietly and easily through life: And no
unruly passions or vehement wishes will discompose our peace. Being free from
private interests and selfish views, we shall have no rivalries nor contests
with our neighbors. Being in perfect charity with all men, we shall with all
be easy, cheerful, friendly; in every thing studying to promote their good and
happiness: And in our turn receiving from many of them offices of kindness; and
from such as are ungrateful, receiving the greatest benefit of all, a noble
opportunity to exercise those duties on which GOD's forgiveness of ourselves
depends. With pleasure and complacence our heavenly Father looks down on every
society of his children united in brotherly affection, and gives his blessing
to every set of friends, and neighbors, and relations, that perform their
mutual relative duties as they ought, and love and delight in one another.
Every innocent entertainment, that keeps up the cheerfulness and kindness of
society, he approves. The voice of joy and health is in the dwellings of the
righteous. Our health can alone be preserved by temperance, calmness, and
industry. Industry, too, makes the world look beautiful around us. It turns the
barren wilderness into a fertile pleasant land; and for thorns and thistles
plants the rose-tree and the vine, or sows the tender grass or useful corn.
Industry preserves us from inclemencies of weather, and finds some means to
supply every want. It procures us wherewith to give alms to the poor, and
thereby enables us to lay up a treasure in heaven.

Happiness, then, a great degree of it, is in our power, even at present. But,
fools that we are! we forfeit even present happiness, for the indulgence of
every peevish, froward humor. Let me examine myself a little on this. As much
as I condemn it, am not I often guilty of this unaccountable folly? Am I not
readier to cherish unkind suspicions of those I live amongst, than to put a
fair and favorable interpretation upon every disagreeable incident? Am I not
almost upon the watch to take offense at every trifling disregard? Do I not
think it beneath me ever to take the first step toward a reconciliation? Do I
not make it a point of honor to keep up resentment, even though it pains me? How
much happier are they, who go through the world with an easy good humor! Never
suspecting that any body means them ill, who does not really and seriously hurt
them: Passing over every trifle: And by placing themselves above all such
peevish follies, maintaining more real dignity than those who are the proudest.

THURSDAY.
BLESSED are the merciful, for they shall obtain mercy.
How greatly do we all of us need this blessing, poor guilty creatures, who are
every day offending Infinite Goodness, and provoking Almighty Power and Perfect
Justice! How then shall we be merciful as we ought? Can this duty be practiced
by any but the great, or injured; -- in relieving the distressed, or in
pardoning offenders? Yes: Every one of us may practice it every day we live. It
is a great mistake to think there is no superiority, but that which rank and
fortune give. Every one of us may, in something or other, assist or instruct
some of his fellow creatures? for the best of human race is poor and needy, and
all have a mutual dependence on one another: There is nobody that cannot do
some good; and every body is bound to do diligently all the good he can. It is
by no means enough to be rightly disposed, to be serious, and religious in our
closets: We must be useful too; and take care, that, as we all reap numberless
benefits from society, society may be the better for every one of us. It is a
false, a faulty, an indolent humility, that makes people sit still and do
nothing, because they will not believe that they are capable of doing much: For
every body can do something. Every body can set a good example, be it to many
or to few. Every body can in some degree encourage virtue and religion, and
discountenance vice and folly. Every body has some one or other whom they can
advise, or instruct, or in some way help to guide through life. Those who are
too poor to give alms, can yet give their time, their trouble, their
assistance, in preparing or forwarding the gifts of others; in considering, and
representing distressed cases to those who can relieve them; in visiting and
comforting the sick and afflicted. Every body can offer up their prayers for
those who need them: Which, if they do reverently and sincerely, they will
never be wanting in giving them every other assistance that it shall please GOD
to put in their power. Even those whose poor and toilsome life can admit of
their giving no other help to society, can, by their frugality and industry, at
least keep themselves, in a great measure, from being burdensome to the
public. A penny thus saved, is a penny given. Dreadful state of those idle
creatures, who, dragging on a wretched, profligate life, in laziness and rags,
draw to themselves those charities that ought to support the helpless and
really disabled poor! Severely, I fear, shall they be accountable for it at the
last day; and every one in proportion, who lives an useless and burdensome
drone in society. It is our duty to prevent poverty, as well as to relieve it.
It is our duty to relieve every other kind of distress as well as the distress
of poverty. People who are always innocently cheerful and good-humoured, are
very useful in the world. They maintain peace and happiness, and spread a
thankful temper among all that live around them.

Thus far in general: But it is well worth considering, in particular, my own
duties and obligations. Who are the people that I ought especially to study to
make happy? Are they parents? -- What a debt of gratitude do I owe them for all
their care of me, and for me, in my helpless years? How kindly did they bear
with the froward infirmities of my childhood; and shall not I with most
affectionate tenderness support and relieve all those which years and cares
bring upon them? My more active strength and vigor, my younger spirits and
clearer thoughts, may now make me, in my turn, very helpful to them. If they
are good people and good parents, I am sure this is my duty: If otherwise, I
owe them one of still higher importance; I owe them the most earnest endeavors
I can use for the reformation of their faults, or instruction of their
ignorance. This duty extends to all my relations; and to all from whom I have
ever received any benefit, or any offices of friendship. If it is my misfortune
that any of them should be bad people, though they have been good to me; or if
any of those who are related to me are engaged in a wrong course of life; ought
I to fly from them, and leave them to ruin? No: gratitude and affection forbid
it. Ought I then to encourage vice, and flatter folly, if it happens among
those that I love? This, my higher duty to Almighty GOD, to truth and virtue,
absolutely forbids. What then is to be done? To preserve the tenderest
affection for their persons, and keep up and declare openly the strongest
abhorrence of their faults; to avoid every degree and every instance of ease
and familiarity, that may seem to give the least countenance to their vices:
and at the same time to employ every art, and every earnest endeavor, than can
have the least chance of reclaiming them: To pray for and pity them: To reprove
and advise them; to please and oblige them in every thing I innocently can: --
But if, upon the whole, I find them irreclaimable, and myself in the least
possible danger of being infected by their example, -- then to fly them as I
would the plague; then to cut off a right hand, and pluck out a right eye, and
break through every fondness, and every attachment, that would destroy my
highest, my eternal interest. No ties that subsist amongst human creatures can
be so strong, can be so dear, or ought to be so indissoluble, as those which
for ever bind us to our Creator and Redeemer.

Next to the bonds of nature, are those of choice. Married persons are bound to
the observance of very sacred vows; and ought therefore often to recollect
them, and examine their conduct by them. Among other things, they should
carefully consider, whether they have so strict a guard upon their temper as
they ought, now the happiness of another person is made so greatly to depend on
their easy good humor and cheerfulness: Whether they assist and improve one
another; and whether they are ready to receive assistance and advice as kindly
as to give it: Whether they preserve a delicacy of behavior, a neatness of
appearance, a gentleness of manners, a mildness of speech: Whether they enter
kindly and affectionately into one another's interests and concerns.

Friends should consider what engagements they are entered into with each
other, how strictly they are bound diligently to promote each other's welfare:
To think of one another heartily and kindly: To overlook offenses, to bear
infirmities: To repay kindnesses a thousand fold: To be watchful over each
other's conduct: To be true, sincere, faithful, obliging, open, constant: And,
to have the generous courage of reproving and opposing each other's follies and
faults.

All persons should consider to whom they are accountable for their time, their
labor, the superfluity of their fortune: To masters, to friends, to society in
general, to the deserving or the helpless poor. Rich persons owe a due portion
of their riches to works of charity and to the public: The great owe their
protection to merit: And all people owe it to themselves, to improve every
moment, and every opportunity, this life affords them.

Surely while I am making these reflections, I cannot omit more literal debts,
and more immediate duties. Do I owe money I am not able to pay? Let me retrench
every superfluous expense, till my real debts are paid. Let me work and labor
indefatigably, till I am enabled to be honest: And let me not be one moment
easy, while I unjustly live on the expense of other people, and am hurtful to
the society that ought to be the better for me.

It is worth considering, too, what promises I have made. Were they ever so
rash, if they engaged me in nothing contrary to innocence, it is my duty to
fulfill them. Happy if it teaches me the wisdom to be more cautious for the
future.

FRIDAY.
BLESSED are they that mourn, for they shall be comforted.
Alas! does it not seem from this and many other passages of Scripture, worthy
of all observance and of all acceptance, as if it was our bounden duty in this
world to lead a melancholy, wretched, uncomfortable life? And can this indeed
be the will of Him who delights in mercy; who fills our hearts with food
and gladness; and has, in not a few places, expressly commanded us to rejoice
evermore? Is there, then, an inconsistency in the duties of religion? God
forbid! Yet short-sighted men, capable of taking into one view but a part of
the vast and perfectly consistent scheme of duty, and guided too generally by
passion or weakness, are perpetually acting as if this was the case. Some free
spirits there are who throw off all awful restraint, and, fully satisfied with
themselves if they keep within the widest bounds of what is just allowable,
indulge without caution in every thing they think so. Their whole time is given
up to mirth and jollity: Their whole fortunes, perhaps, are spent upon
themselves, without any regard to the calls of charity or duty. Jollily they go
on in life, till some unforeseen misfortune stops them short, and throws a deep
gloom over their funny landscape.

Another sort of people, much to be esteemed, and greatly to be pitied, are
scrupulous about every thing; and frighted by a misapprehension of some
alarming texts, dare not allow themselves in the most innocent conveniences,
and most harmless, and on many accounts useful and commendable, pleasures.
Their minds are so truly pious, that they are far from deliberately thinking of
the infinitely great and good GOD as a hard and rigid master: But they act with
such a slavish fear, as must needs make those who are less well-disposed frame
such horridly false imaginations of him; and their well-meant strictness has
the most dangerous tendency in the world.

Between these two extremes undoubtedly lies the plain path of duty: The narrow
but not thorny road, that leads through the truest comfort this life can
afford, to everlasting happiness in a better.

The natural enjoyments of life are dispensed to us by a gracious Providence,
to mitigate its natural evils, and make our passage through it not only
supportable, but, at fit times and seasons, so far pleasant as to make us go on
with vigor, cheerfulness, and gratitude: And to give us some kind of earnest
of what we are bid to hope hereafter; some kind of faint notion what happiness
is; some sensible assurances, that there really is such a thing, though not to
be in any high degrees enjoyed on this side of the grave. -- Still it is a yet
more merciful dispensation of the same fatherly care, that pain and
imperfection, satiety and disappointment, should be so mixed up with all our
best enjoyments in this low state of being, as to turn our chief aim and desire
toward heaven. And let us not fear, unless we wilfully and madly throw
ourselves into a giddy round of pleasures on purpose to be intoxicated by them,
Providence will mercifully interpose in the fullest tide of innocent
prosperity, and make us by some means or other feel an emptiness and
dissatisfaction in the best this world can give: Especially may this be hoped
by those, who take care to keep their minds always open to such serious
thoughts and right impressions as will perpetually present themselves, if not
rejected; and who reserve some leisure time in every day, for reading and
reflecting.

Our Maker knows so well the weakness of our frame, that he has not left it to
us, to inflict upon ourselves, merely by way of punishment, such sufferings as
he sees it necessary for us to undergo. That task would be so hard a one, that
he would by no means impose it upon us. No: He will take care himself, that we
shall unavoidably feel and experience a great deal of that evil which sin
introduced into the world; and all he requires of us, is to support it as we
ought. He requires nothing contrary to reason and the innocent inclinations of
nature. If any of his laws appear harsh and difficult, it is from their
opposition to our acquired habits, our prejudices and corruptions. To forgive
injuries, to return good for evil, to live peaceably with all men, to be always
mild, obliging, and good-humoured, to be kind and patient, charitable and
industrious, temperate, sober, and modest, these are no grievous laws to a pure
and well tuned mind; nor can its genuine dictates be better complied with, than
by observing them. Still, they will be a very grievous restraint on the
licentiousness of our corrupted wills, our heightened passions, and indulged
imaginations. To be continually attentive to our conduct in every minute
instance, to set a watch before our mouth, and keep the door of our lips, to
set scourges over our thoughts, and the discipline of wisdom over our hearts,
requires a soberness of mind, a diligence, a resolute adherence to duty, that
may undoubtedly deserve the name of self-denial and mortification; though, in
effect, nothing so certainly ensures our happiness both here and hereafter. To
think we can do this by our own strength, would be presumptuous and vain. Tell
a man, helpless with the palsy, that perfect health is his natural and eligible
state; convince him ever so clearly how happy it would be for him to become
active and industrious -- your eloquence is mockery, and will not help him to
the use of a single limb. But though we daily confess that we have no health in
us, HE who did actually say to the sick of the palsy, "Arise, take up thy bed
and walk," and was immediately obeyed, can effectually relieve our still more
helpless state. To this sovereign Physician we can apply for help; and, by the
aid he imparts, are enabled to follow the regimen he enjoins; and thus to go on
from strength to strength, till unto the GOD of gods shall appear every one in
Sion.

Though our comfortable passage through this life, and the attainment of
unspeakable blessedness in another, are the allowed, the necessary, the
enjoined objects of our pursuit; yet still, in a great degree, we are to
renounce ourselves. By sincere humility we are to consider the vileness and
wretchedness of our natural state: We are to acknowledge, that of ourselves we
are able to do nothing as we ought; and, far from indulging any thoughts of
vanity or self-complacence, we are, when we have done our very best, to confess
with unfeigned lowliness, that we are unprofitable servants. We are to trust
and hope alone in the merits and intercession of our blessed Redeemer; and to
own ourselves less than the least of God's mercies. As his creatures, we are to
direct all our thoughts and actions to his honor and service, Whether we eat
or drink, or whatever we do, we are to do all to the glory of GOD. In every
thing, we are to consider carefully the rule of duty: not scrupulously or
superstitiously; for that tends to the dishonor of GOD and religion, as well
as to our own discomfort. We are never to do any thing for so low an end, as
merely to gratify our own childish humor; but, in all cases, to moderate and
guide ourselves by the rules of reason and religion. Thus, even in using the
necessary refreshments, and easy amusements, and innocent pleasures of life, we
are to behave with a due sense of that GOD who is everywhere present. We are
to look up to him with thankfulness, as the bountiful bestower of all good; and
cheerfully accept these indulgences for the ends to which he has appointed
them. Food, to restore our strength wasted in active service, and to preserve
our health and ease: Sleep, to renew our wearied spirits: Pleasure to gladden
our hearts, and fill them with pious gratitude and filial love. This cuts off
at once all that intemperance that crosses those good purposes, destroys our
healths, distresses our hearts, makes our lives sluggish and useless, and
dissipates or corrupts our minds. Riches and honors also are to be received
with thanksgiving, by whomsoever Providence allots them to; but then they are
to be diligently, and carefully, and generously employed in the best purposes:
and even the richest and the greatest ought to deny themselves all indulgences
of mere humor and fancy, how well soever they may seem able to afford it, and
kindly and faithfully consider the more pressing wants of their distressed
fellow creatures. To answer the purposes of charity, the rich must be frugal,
and the poor industrious; and all give freely and discreetly, as proper calls
require. Every body, in their turns, to maintain the peace of society, and
Christian concord, must repress the little risings of temper, and fretfulness
of humor; must be ready to forgive and forget, to indulge and overlook.

It is endless to go on enumerating instances, in which the just, the necessary
adherence to our duty, requires us to deny our sinful selves. Our cowardice,
our false shame, our vanity, our weakness and irresolution, our fondness and
partial affection, our indolence and love of ease: These, and numberless
infirmities more, must be struggled with and conquered, when we are called out
to encounter dangers; to confess our Savior before men; to withstand the
strong torrent of custom and fashion, of importunity and ill example; to turn a
deaf ear to flattery, or heartily acknowledge our errors; to resist
solicitations; to give righteous judgment; to forget all our private relations
and attachments, where justice or public good are concerned; to resign our
dearest enjoyments, when it is the will of GOD we should; to check our sorrows
in their fullest flow; and to go on indefatigably improving ourselves and doing
good to others, till the night overtake us, in which no man can work.

The sufferings which it shall please Almighty GOD to inflict upon us, we are
to accept with humble resignation; acknowledge his justice, and submitting to
it without a murmur. Thus patiently also we are to receive all the lesser
crosses he sees fit to lay upon us: nor ever suffer ourselves to fret or repine
at the various infirmities of human nature in ourselves or others. All these we
must look upon as parts of that penalty justly inflicted on our first parents
guilt; and heartily thank Him, that he does not, according to the terrifying
notions of Popery, either expect us to inflict them on ourselves, or give us
the dreadful alternative of a purgatory after death. Uncommanded severities,
that are of no apparent use, but to torment ourselves, and sour our natures,
and shorten our lives, can never be acceptable to our gracious Maker. Our
blessed Savior, when he mentions fasting as a duty along with prayer and
almsgiving, leaves the frequency and strictness of it to our own discretion;
and only insists upon one circumstance, which is, that we should avoid in it
all hypocrisy and ostentation; and be careful to keep up all ease, good humor,
and agreeableness of behavior. There are very proper occasions for exercising
this duty without the least superstition or moroseness, and where it may tend
to the best purposes: -- Public calamities, private distresses or temptations,
perplexities and difficulties, times of peculiarly solemn devotion, and of
resolutely endeavoring to conquer such obstinate faults and ill-habits as,
like the dumb spirit in the gospel, can come out only by prayer and fasting.
But where it makes us appear stiff and disagreeable, interferes with the
innocent cheerfulness of society, or may influence our health or temper in any
wrong way; in such cases, it becomes a hurtful superstition, and as such
unallowable. To observe the public fasts appointed by authority, in a manner
suited to every person's strength and ability, with decency and reverence, can
have none of these evil consequences: and the practice of this duty, at fit
times, and in a reasonable degree, is an excellent remembrancer of the
wretchedness of being attached to any sensual gratifications, and the easiness
as well as necessity at fit times to forbear them.

SATURDAY.
ANOTHER week is past; another of those little limited portions of time which
number out my life. Let me stop a little here, before I enter upon a new one;
and consider what this life is which is thus imperceptibly stealing away, and
whither it is conducting me? What is its end and aim, its good and its evil,
its use and improvement? What place does it fill in the univease? What
proportion does it bear to eternity?

This mortal life is the beginning of existence to beings made for immortality,
and graciously designed, unless by wilful guilt they forfeit it, for
everlasting happiness. Compared with eternity, its longest duration is less
than a moment: therefore its good and evil, considered without a regard to the
influence they may have on an eternity to come, must be trifling to a degree
below contempt. The short scene begun in birth, and closed by death, is acted
over millions of times, in every age; and all the little concerns of mortality
are pursued, transacted, and forgot, like the labors of a bee-hive, or the
bustle of an ant-hill. The thing which has been, it is that which shall be;
and that which is done, is that which shall be done; and there is no new thing
under the sun. Our wisdom, therefore, is to pass through this busy dream as
calmly as we can; and not suffer ourselves to be more deeply attached to any of
these transitory things, than the momentariness and unimportance of them
deserves.

But considering this short life as a probation for eternity, as a trial whose
issue is to determine our everlasting state, its importance to ourselves
appears beyond expression great, and fills a right mind with equal awe and
transport. The important day will come when there shall be a new thing indeed,
but not under the sun: For "heaven and earth shall pass away;" but the words of
HIM who created them, shall not pass away.

What then is the good or the evil of life, but as it has a tendency to prepare
or unfit us for that decisive day? when the Son of Man shall come in the clouds
with power and great glory and shall send his angels, and shall gather his
elect from the four winds: That Son of Man who is the Son of GOD, blessed for
evermore; and once before came down from heaven, and took upon him this our
mortal nature, with all its innocent infirmities and sufferings; and subjected
himself even to the death of the cross, that he might redeem us from all our
sins, and obtain the gift of everlasting life for all who should not willingly
frustrate this last and greatest effort of divine mercy!

What then have we to do, but with love and gratitude unutterable to embrace
the offers of salvation, and henceforth become in every thing his true and
faithful disciples? To whom should we live, but to Him who died for us? To whom
should we give up ourselves, but to Him who gave up himself for us? whose yoke
is easy, and his burden light. In whom should we trust, but in Eternal Truth?
In whom should we cheerfully hope, but in Infinite Goodness? Whom should we
copy, but HIM, who was made like unto us in all things, sin only excepted, and
has left us an example, that we should follow his steps? which if we do
faithfully to the utmost of our power, his grace shall so assist us, that in
the end we shall be where he is, to behold his glory, and partake his bliss.

Let me think then, and think deeply, how I have employed this week past. Have
I advanced in, or deviated from the path that leads to life? Has my time been
improved or lost, or, worse than lost, misspent? If the last, let me use double
diligence to redeem it. Have I spent a due portion of my time in acts of
devotion and piety, both private, public, and domestic? and have they been
sincere, and free from all mixture of superstition, moroseness, or weak
scrupulosity? Have I, in society, been kind and helpful, mild, peaceable, and
obliging? Have I been charitable, friendly, discreet? Have I had a due regard,
without vanity or ostentation, to set a good example? Have I been equally ready
to give and receive instruction and proper advice, careful to give no offense,
and patient to take every thing in good part? Have I been honest, upright, and
disinterested? Have I in my way, and according to my station and calling, been
diligent, frugal, generous, and industrious to do good? Have I, in all my
behavior, consulted the happiness and ease of those I live with, and of all
who have any dependence upon me? Have I preserved my understanding clear, my
temper calm, my spirits cheerful, my body temperate and healthy, and my heart
in a right frame? If to all these questions I can humbly, yet confidently
answer, that I have done my best: If I have truly repented all the faulty past,
and made humble, yet firm and vigorous and deliberate resolutions for the
future; poor as it is, the honest endeavor will be graciously accepted: And I
may tomorrow gladly and securely approach the sacred table, and partake that
bread of life, which our blessed Savior gave, to nourish to all goodness those
who receive it worthily, and to be not only the means of grace, but the pledge
of glory. Amen and Amen!

FINIS.

