THE NARRATIVE OF MR. JOHN SOREN, A NATIVE of the United States of AMERICA,
PIRATICALLY CAPTURED ON THE HIGH SEAS, IN REQUITAL FOR AN ACT OF HUMANITY, IN
SAVING A BRITISH TRANSPORT, WITH NEAR 300 TROOPS ON BOARD, FROM SINKING.

WITH AN APPENDIX, CONTAINING THE DOCUMENTS REFERRED TO IN THE NARRATIVE, A
Letter from the American Minister, AND TESTIMONIALS OF THE TRUTH OF THE
STATEMENT FROM MAJOR MANSERGH, THE COMMANDING OFFICER OF THE TROOPS, AND
CAPTAIN DAVIS.

London, PRINTED, AT THE ORIENTAL PRESS, BY WILSON and CO. BOSTON, REPRINTED,
And Sold for the Relief of MR. SOREN and his Family. 1800.

THE NARRATIVE OF MR. JOHN SOREN.
IT has seldom happened that the wrongs of an Individual have had a greater
claim to the attention of the Public than those which are the subject of the
following Narrative. The generous and disinterested conduct of the benefactor
has never been more strikingly contrasted with the ingratitude and persidy of
the object of his humanity: the national character of Englishmen was never more
dishonored than in the character of Captain Potter of the Isabella; and the
credit of Government was never more deeply interested in any thing than in
taking care that the injuries of Mr. SOREN shall not remain unredressed.

MR. JOHN SOREN, a native of Boston, in the state of Massachusetts, a citizen
of the United States of America, and a partner in the house of Holyoke and
Soren, in Boston, being, in the month of November, in the year 1795, at
Hamburgh, freighted an American ship called the Enterprise, then lying there,
of the burden of 170 lasts, or 340 tons, on a voyage from thence to Surinam,
and from Surinam back to Hamburgh. The ship was the property of Mr. Clough, of
Witchcasset, in the state of Massachusetts, also a native and citizen of
America. The charter-party was made between Mr. Soren, on behalf of Mr, Holyoke
and himself, as freighters, and Wyatt St. Barbe, a native of England, and 30
years a citizen of America, but then residing at Hamburgh, as master and
commander of the ship, on behalf of the owner. By that charter-party Vide the
Charter-party, Appendix, No. 1.
, dated the 24th of November 1795, and regularly attested by a notary-public,
the freighters engaged to ship on board the vessel, on her safe arrival at
Surinam, a full convenient cargo of West-Indian products, to be brought back to
the port of Hamburgh, and to make the Captain's allowance of privilege, as in
similar cases: the stipulated freight for the outward and homeward voyage was
2600 l. sterling, with 15 l. per cent. primage for the whole ship's hold. The
object of Mr. Soren was, to ship at Hamburgh a sufficient cargo fit for the
market at Surinam; and, by the produce of that cargo, and by means of letters
of credit which he had obtained on Surinam, to the amount of nearly 15,000 l.
sterling in the whole, to purchase, at Surinam, coffee sufficient to load, not
only the Enterprise, but several other ships, which he intended to freight at
Surinam or other ports, the comparative prices of that article, at Surinam and
at Hamburgh, at that time affording him the best ground to expect that his
adventure would prove a very profitable speculation. In prosecution of this
object, he shipped on board the Enterprise, at Hamburgh, goods to the amount,
in prime cost, of 3200 l. and upwards Vide the Bills of Lading and Invoice, No.
2 and 3 in the Appendix.
, and caused insurances to be effected on them, and on the supposed profits, by
underwriters at Hamburgh, to the amount of 5000 l. and upwards. Captain St.
Barbe at the same time shipped linen, groceries, liquors and glass, on account
of himself and Messrs. Furst and Co. citizens and burghers of Hamburgh, to the
amount, in prime cost, of 901 l. 8s. 11d. sterling.

On or about the 5th of February 1796, Mr. Soren sailed in the Enterprise on
his intended voyage. On the 25th of the same month, being in latitude 44 1
north, longitude 18 35 west, at one p. m. Captain St. Barbe and Mr. Soren
observed a ship toward the south-west, with an English ensign reversed, which
they considered as a signal of distress* they sailed toward her, and about
four o'clock p. m. came up with her, and learned she was the Isabella,
belonging to Messrs. Tarleton and Backhouse, of Liverpool, Charles Potter
commander; that she had a letter of marque, and had been freighted by the
British Transport-office to carry nearly 300 troops from Cork to Barbados: she
was in a very leaky and almost sinking condition, both pumps incessantly going.
The Captain, with one of his mates, came on board the Enterprise; and, having
shortly informed Captain St. Barbe and Mr. Soren of the perilous situation in
which he found himself, requested them to see him into Lisbon or Corunna:
Captain St. Barbe replied, that to go to either of those places, would be too
great a deviation from his voyage; but that, with Mr. Soren's approbation, he
would with much pleasure accompany him to Madeira, Teneriffe, or any of the
Windward Islands; and render him every service in his power, consistently with
the duty he owed to the owners and proprietors of his ship and cargo: Mr. Soren
readily assented. Potter seemed rejoiced at the proposition, and said he would
send on board his own ship for the approbation of the commander of the troops
Captain Mansergh, now Major Mansergh.
: he sent his mate accordingly; but not to communicate to the commander of the
troops, or to his crew, the humane offer of Mr. Soren and Mr. St. Barbe! The
reader will be startled at the relation which follows; he will with difficulty
conceive the possibility of a transaction so replete with perfidy and
ingratitude: it is nevertheless true, and can be established beyond
contradiction by the testimony of all the officers of the troops then on board
the Isabella who are now alive: This monster in human shape, without a shadow
of proof, without the slightest ground of suspicion, without having seen a
single article of the cargo, or a single paper, without having had any
communication with any one on board but Captain St. Barbe and Mr. Soren, at the
very moment when he was expressing his thanks for their kindness, which was to
rescue him, his passengers and crew, from almost inevitable destruction, had
conceived the diabolical project of making prisoners of his benefactors, and
seizing their ship as a prize! He whispered to his mate; the mate obeyed the
suggestion: he returned on board the Isabella; he brought back with him on
board the Enterprise a party of soldiers and sailors, with muskets and
bayonets fixed: Potter, on their arrival, insisted the ship was French; that
the cargo consisted of French and Dutch property; that the Captain must be a
Frenchman, because his name was " St. Barbe;" and that Mr. Soren had two sets
of papers! Remonstrance was vain: the miscreant took possession of the ship as
a prize; made Mr. Soren and the chief mate, the carpenter, and eight of the
seamen, prisoners; and drove them, with pistols cocked at their breasts, and at
the point of the bayonet, out of their own ship into the Isabella, which was
every moment in danger of sinking!

It was afterward learned, that Captain Potter, when the Enterprise approached
the Isabella, represented to the officers of the King's troops that she was an
enemy, and was bearing down upon them in order to attack; that the officers,
observing her inferior size, the small number of men on board, and no
appearance of guns or of warlike preparation, reasoned with him against this
representation; that, nevertheless, and notwithstanding the perilous condition
of his own ship, he ordered the guns to be got ready, and the soldiers to be
arrayed on deck, ready for an attack; and that it was this circumstance which
enabled him, with such promptitude and facility, to obtain from the officers
the party of soldiers who took possession of the Enterprise.

When Mr. Soren arrived on board the Isabella, and stated the circumstances of
his situation, and the manner in which he had been treated by Potter, the
officers of the troops, whose humanity and polite attention to the sufferers
reflects on them the highest honor, reprobated in the severest terms the
inhuman conduct of Potter; and Captain Mansergh, the commanding officer,
declared, that had he known the real circumstances of the case when Potter sent
to him for a detachment, he would not have permitted it to go.

Potter having, in the manner before stated, taken possession of the
Enterprise, continued on board her till the following day, when he obliged
Captain St. Barbe to deliver up to him, as well the greatest part of the ship's
papers, and those relating to the cargo, as many others of a private nature:
after examining them, he began to rummage the hold; and, after breaking open
several cases and boxes, took out gin, provisions, and whatever he thought
proper, and afterward gave them to the guard of soldiers, in whose charge he
left the ship.

When he returned on board the Isabella, the officers of the troops
remonstrated with him on the impropriety of his conduct, and advised him to
release the Enterprise, as there was not the slightest color for his taking
her as prize: he told them that it was no business of theirs; that they were
only passengers; produced his letter of marque, which, however, only
comprehended French property; that his owners, Messrs. Tarleton and Backhouse,
were persons of property, and were responsible for his conduct; and that, if,
through the interposition of the officers, he should be obliged to part with
his prize, they must answer to his owners. In addition to what he had said the
day before, he declared, what was most certainly false, "that he knew St. Barbe
well, that he was a rogue, and that, if he had him in England, he had papers
sufficient to hang him."

Mr. Soren represented to him, that after the humanity of Mr. St. Barbe,
manifested to him and nearly 300 persons on board his vessel, his conduct was
reprehensible in the extreme; and requested, as he was completely in his power,
that he might be permitted to return to the Enterprise, rather than remain, on
board the Isabella: Potter replied, that Mr. Soren was his prisoner, and that
he would conduct the two ships to the Rock of Lisbon, and from thence send the
Enterprise to Barbados for condemnation. Mr. Soren then represented to him,
that he acted in open defiance of the law of nations, and in direct violation
of the treaty lately concluded between Great Britain and America; and desired
that he would, as he proposed, direct the ship's course to Lisbon, where they
might both have ample justice done to their cause. Potter then shifted his
ground; he pretended that he could not reach Lisbon. The officers of the troops
desired that he would steer for Madeira, to which Captain St. Barbe had at
first offered to accompany him: to this he apparently agreed; but steered to
Teneriffe.

When arrived at Teneriffe, Mr. Soren requested his permission to go on shore:
the answer was, "You may jump into the sea, if you like it; but neither you nor
Captain St. Barbe shall go on shore till the arrival of the British Consul."
That gentleman was then at the Grand Canary. Captain Mansergh interposed, and
almost by force took Mr. St. Barbe on shore with him in his boat; they applied
to the Governor of Teneriffe, and, by their representation, obtained an order
for Mr. Soren's being also permitted to land. In consequence of this order, Mr.
Soren, after having been detained upwards of twenty-four hours, landed on
Teneriffe, literally a stranger, without money, without friends, stripped of
every thing, his gold watch The watch was afterward restored, with five
guineas of his money, by the good offices of Captain Mansergh.
, his cash, all his private property, except a few articles of wearing apparel!

In a few days, the British ship Isabella was condemned, as incapable of
proceeding on her voyage. The fact, on inquiry, turns out to be, that this ship
was upwards of thirty years old, and, at the time when she was freighted to
Government, was unfit to be sent to sea; and had it not been for the continued
exertions of the soldiers at the pumps, and, even notwithstanding those
exertions, had she met with a severe gale of wind, she must have gone to the
bottom.

On the second day after the arrival at Teneriffe, Captain Potter began to
tranship from on board the Isabella, on board the Enterprise, military stores
and baggage, and to unstow the cargo of the Enterprise, breaking open some
packages, and starting others, for the purpose of sitting up births for the
accommodation of the soldiers, who, to the number of 150, with women and
children, beside the crew of the Isabella, were afterward embarked on board
the Enterprise, on which Porter hoisted the British jack ensign and flag.
During the detention of the Enterprise at Teneriffe, through the wantonness of
Potter and his crew, she experienced almost every species of injury, and was so
much damaged, that when she arrived at Barbados she was much reduced in value.

While at Teneriffe, application was made by Captain St. Barbe to Peter Favene,
Esquire. the British Consul there, for an investigation of Potter's conduct. That
gentleman, though fully satisfied, from the perusal of the documents produced,
that there was no foundation for seizing the Enterprise as a prize, and though
he strongly reprobated the conduct of Potter, yet declined to interpose, from
an opinion that, as Consul, he had no power to make the required investigation;
and referred the parties to a regular Court of Admiralty at Barbados, whither
Potter said he intended to carry the ship for condemnation Vide Mr. Favene's
Letter to Charles Long, Esquire. Secretary to the Treasury. -- Appendix, No. 4.
.

On the voyage to Teneriffe, Potter, by plying the sailors of the Enterprise
with liquor, and by promises, endeavored to prevail on them to give evidence
that the Enterprise was a French or Dutch ship. Finding his atttempts by
entreaties ineffectual, he put them on an allowance of bread and water, and,
even of these, a scanty allowance. By this treatment the health of the mariners
was much injured, and more particularly that of the carpenter, who, in addition
to other ill-treatment, was kept in irons, as a punishment for refusing to
swear to the effect Potter wished him to do. With two only was he able to
succeed, who afterward declared they were induced from threats and ill
treatment, and that what they had been prevailed upon to depose was false, and
extorted from them in the hopes of obtaining an alleviation of their
sufferings. -- As a proof that his understanding was as weak as his heart was
wicked, he also attempted to tarnish the honor of the British military, who
certainly do not hold in light estimation that delicate point, by promising
them a share of the prize, as he termed it, with him; they disdainfully refused
his offer, and expressed their united disapprobation of his conduct in manly
and unequivocal terms.

Previous to the departure of the Enterprise for Barbados, Mr. Soren requested
Potter to permit him to have his private effects, not forming a part of the
cargo: he refused to restore a single article, except some private letters of
trifling importance. He carried his brutality farther: he refused Mr. Soren a
passage to Barbados, "unless he would go in the common way;" in other words,
"unless he would go in the steerage; and he turned Mr. St. Barbe, who, with Mr.
Harlow his mate, proceeded to Barbados, out of his state room, notwithstanding
the remonstrances of the British officers that he ought to be permitted to
remain in possession of it.

Mr. Soren being refused a passage in the Enterprise in a decent way, was
advised by Captains Mansergh and Thomas to leave the conduct of the business at
Barbados to Mr. St. Barbe, and to come himself to England, where it was
supposed he might obtain redress for the injuries he had sustained. How far
this supposition was well-founded, will be seen in the sequel.

On the 25th of March 1796, Potter sailed in the Enterprise from Teneriffe,
and, on the 16th of April following, arrived in Carlisle Bay, Barbados. Potter
then exhibited a libel against the ship and cargo, as prize, in the
Vice-Admiralty Court there; to which a claim was entered by Captain St. Barbe,
on behalf of himself and the owner of the ship, and the several persons
interested in her cargo; and a petition was preferred by him to the Judge of
the Court, praying that the libellant might be compelled to give security for
costs, in case the ship and cargo should not be condemned as good and lawful
prize. This petition, after argument of counsel, was granted, and Potter not
giving security as ordered, the libel was dismissed Vide the Proceedings of the
Court, Appendix, No. 5, (A.)
; on which Mr. St. Barbe petitioned the Court for damages. Potter filed a
petition, praying that an attachment might issue against the ship and cargo,
alleging that sufficient evidence had been obtained to prove them the property
of an enemy, until he or the King's Advocate-General should proceed further
against them: this petition being granted, a libel was filed by the King's
Advocate-General against the ship and cargo as a droit of the Admiralty; and
this on the very day appointed for the investigation of the merits of Captain
St. Barbe's petition for damages Vide the Affidavit of Captain St. Barbe,
Appendix, No. 6.
. To this libel Captain St. Barbe also put in his claim on behalf of himself
and the owner of the ship and proprietors of the cargo; and the case being
heard, the ship and cargo were ordered to be restored Vide the Proceedings of
the Court, Appendix, No. 5, (B.)
.

Captain St. Barbe wished then to renew his petition for damages; but he was
advised by his counsel that it would be to no purpose, as Potter had in the
mean time absconded, and had no property within the reach of the Court, and as
the King's Advocate paid no damages Vide Captain St. Barbe's Affidavit,
Appendix, No. 6.
.

It has been stated that Potter had plundered the ship; he had expended a great
quantity of the stores; many perishable articles were completely spoiled; the
dry goods which remained unplundered, were much damaged; the ship had been
robbed of great part of her materials, and was otherwise much injured; the worm
had got into her bottom; and Captain St. Barbe found it absolutely necessary to
proceed to Alexandria in America, to have her sheathed and repaired. When she
had undergone such repairs, which amounted to between 3000 l. and 4000 l., he
returned with her to Hamburgh, the place to which she was to have returned
after she should have made her voyage to Surinam.

Before the ship's departure from Barbados, the remainder of her cargo, from
the depredations of Potter, was sold for 2779 l. 8 s. 0 d.; from which,
deducting the expenses of sale, amounting to 270 l. 3 s. 1 d. there remained
the sum of 2509 l. 5 s. 5 d. Barbados currency; in sterling money, 1756 l. 9
s. 9 d.; a loss being thus sustained of 2349 l. 12 s. 6 d. on the prime cost of
the cargo at Hamburgh. The loss on the whole of this transaction, to Captain
St. Barbe and his owner, and to Mr. Soren and his partner, amounted in the
whole to 11,553 l. 19 s. 8 d. sterling Vide the Statement in the Appendix, No.
7.
, independently of the loss of the voyage, and the probable advantage which
might have accrued from it.

When Mr. Soren was informed of what had passed in the Vice-Admiralty Court at
Barbados, he directed Captain St. Barbe to apply to the Underwriters at
Hamburgh, from whom he received the following answer: -- You are not entitled
to recover, inasmuch as, having borne down to the relief of his Majesty's
transport, laden with troops, in distress, you altered the ship's regular
course, and deviated from the voyage on which you made the ^^^urance. -- To the
credit of the character of the British merchants, Mr. Soren has been informed
by several Gentlemen at Lloyd's, that he would not have received such an answer
from the Underwriters at that place.

Mr. Soren was now advised to have his case drawn up, and submitted to the
opinion of Counsel. A case was accordingly prepared, and laid before Mr. Gibbs,
one of His Majesty's Counsel: In this case it was stated, that, on the sailing
of a letter of marque, security is given for any damage or injury which may be
done to any of His Majesty's subjects, or of foreign states in amity with His
Majesty; and that, in the case of the Isabella, a bond had been given in the
penalty of 1500l. -- and the following Query was put:

What steps ought the unfortunate sufferers to pursue to seek redress for their
several injuries? Must such redress be sought by actions at law against Messrs.
Tarleton and Backhouse, the owners of the letter of marque, as Potter, the
commander of her, is run away? And will such actions lie? And in that case, and
on separate actions being commenced, cannot Soren, St. Barbe, and Clough, be
evidence for each other, as to the extent of the injuries suffered severally?
And is the bond for 1500l., given by Jordan, Kembie, and Sowerby, assignable
for the benefit of the sufferers? And, ought an application to be made to the
Lords of the Admiralty in this case, or whom else, by petition or otherwise, to
direct the same to be put in suit? And, upon the whole, point out what steps
they ought to take to seek effectual redress; and, if actions are maintainable,
what evidence will be necessary to support such actions.

The following is a copy of Mr. Gibbs's answer: -- This is a case of most
dreadful hardship upon those whose property has been thus attacked; but it
appears to me that the Vice-Admiralty Court at Barbados, when they determined
that the ship and cargo were no prize, and ordered them to be restored, ought
to have decreed a compensation for the loss sustained by the capture; and after
the case of Le Caux and Eden Vide Doug. Rep. 57^ (594.)
in Douglas, I take it to have been settled, that no action will lie in any of
our Common Law Courts for the recovery of such compensation. The question of
Prize or no Prize? is exclusively of Admiralty jurisdiction, and draws with it,
as an incident, the question of compensation for the injury occasioned by the
capture. I think that this objection extends also to the suit on the bond.

V. GIBBS.
Temple, Nov. 13, 1797.



The statement of the case was also laid before Sir William Scott, then the
King's Advocate-General, who gave his opinion in the following terms: --

The application of the parties in this case ought to have been to the Court of
Vice-Admiralty for costs and damages, it being the proper duty of that Court,
not only to make restitution where it is due, but likewise to decree costs and
damages when the capture was grossly improper. If the Judge refuse improperly
to decree costs and damages, an appeal lies from that refusal; but I do not
think that any common law jurisdiction either can or will examine the question
whether the capture was unjust or not: it is a question merely of Admiralty
cognizance; and if the Court of Admiralty or Court of Appeals has not decreed
it to be an illegal seizure, a Court of Common Law will not take upon itself to
pronounce such a judgment. I must observe, that a decree of restitution does by
no means infer that the original seizure was illegal and violent; for there may
be just cause of seizure, although the property may, upon further inquiry, be
restored.

I am of opinion that the decree, standing as it does, unaccompanied with costs
and damages, must be taken in all Courts to imply that costs and damages were
not due; and this imputation is the stronger against the claimants for their
not demanding them; for, if they did not demand costs and damages in the proper
jurisdiction in which they ought to be awarded, the inference would be, not
only that costs and damages were not due, but that they were not due in the
opinion of the claimants themselves, who did not so much as venture to ask
them. -- Upon these grounds, I am clearly of opinion that no action can be
maintained against the captors.

WM. SCOTT.
November 24, 1797.
In consequence of these opinions, Mr. Soren was advised to lay his case in the
form of a petition before his Majesty in Council, A petition was accordingly
prepared Vide Appendix, No. 8.
, and sent to Lord Grenville, enclosed in a letter from Mr. King Vide Appendix,
No. 9.
, the American Minister: his Lordship laid it before the Privy Council, who
considered the case as a case of peculiar hardship, and that Mr. Soren was well
entitled to some compensation for his loss; but they were of opinion that the
application ought to have been made to the Lords of the Treasury. This being
communicated to Mr. Soren, he prepared another petition to the same effect,
and, through the medium of Mr. King, procured it to be laid before the latter
Board: he was constant in his attendance every Board-day for six months; at the
expiration of which time, the case was referred by the Lords of the Treasury to
the Commissioners of the Transport-Office, who made a most extraordinary report
to Charles Long, Esquire. of the Treasury: That the ship called the Isabella was
not a regular transport in the service of Government, but only freighted by
them to carry troops to Barbados; and that, therefore, their department, or
their agents, were not responsible, but the master of the Isabella Vide Lord
Grenville's letter to Mr. King, Appendix, No. 10.
.

It is difficult to comprehend how the distinction between "a regular transport
in the service of Government," and "a ship only freighted by them to carry
troops," could affect the claim of Mr. Soren, or of the master or the owner of
the Enterprise, on the justice of Government for a compensation for the loss
they had sustained by means of the iniquitous conduct of a man certainly in the
service of Government; or the right of the owner of the Enterprise, to the
proportion of freight, at least, for the conveyance of the troops from
Teneriffe to Barbados.

It has been mentioned, that Mr. King enclosed Mr. Soren's petition in a note
to Lord Grenville: His Lordship transmited it to Sir William Scott, who
returned an answer to his Lordship, in which he stated, "that he was no further
acqainted with the merits of the case than as they had appeared to him in a
statement of the circumstances which had been submitted to him on the part of
the American owners for his opinion, and in the papers then transmitted to him
by his Lordship;" and concluded by observing, "that if the course of law had
applied an adequate remedy for injuries, and the parties entitled to it had,
for some reason or other, declined to resort to it, it could not found any
claim upon the justice of that Government under which an injury of that species
had been committed without being followed by its proper satisfaction Vide Sir
W. Scott's Letter to Lord Grenville, Appendix, No. 11.
"

Mr. Soren learned that Messrs. Tarleton and Backhouse, the owners of the
Isabella, had applied to the Transport Board for an indemnification for the
loss of the ships in the service of Government, and that, in the statement of
the loss sustained by them, they had charged 750l. for the conveyance of the
troops from Teneriffe to the West Indies in the Enterprise. As he had in fact
received no remuneration from Messrs. Tarleton and Backhouse, or any other
person, for that conveyance, he laid his case with this additional circumstance
before Dr. Nicholl, now the King's Advocate in Dolor's Commons, who gave an
opinion, of which the following is a copy:

This vessel having been seized as prize, and proceeded against as such in a
regular Court of Vice-Admiralty, any demand for costs and damages, arising out
of that seizure, could only be set up under those proceedings; and a sentence
of restitution having taken place, unaccompanied by a decree of costs and
damages, and that sentence not having been appealed from, I am of opinion that
the parties are precluded from setting up any demand of costs and damages,
either in a Court of Admiralty, or by any other judicial proceeding.

If the owners of the Isabella should obtain, from the Transport Board, a
compensation for the use made of the Enterprise while in the possession of the
prize-master -- whether Mr. Soren or Mr. St. Barbe might not, by some
proceeding at law or in equity, recover over from them the amount of such
compensation, is more than I (not practicing in those Courts) can undertake
with confidence to state; but in a Court of Admiralty the parties can have no
relief.

J. NICHOLL.
Commons, August 11, 1789.
In the month of September 1798, Mr. Soren was advised to make another
application to Lord Grenville individually, requesting his Lordship's
interposition in his favor: this he did in a letter Vide Mr. Soren's letter to
Lord Grenville, Appendix, No. 12.
which he procured to be delivered to his Lordship through the medium of Mr.
King. What step was taken by his Lordship in consequence of this application,
he could not learn, till after an attendance of several months on his
Lordship's Secretary, Mr. Hammond, by whom he was at last informed, that his
Lordship had written on the subject to the Right Hon. Henry Dundas, who was
then in the country, and for whose return Mr. Soren was under the necessity of
waiting till the month of March 1799.

In the month of October 1798, Mr. Soren being informed that Messrs. Tarleton
and Backhouse were men of great property, was advised to go down to Liverpool,
and make personal application to them for some relief; and, having, as before
stated, been informed that they had received from Government the freight of the
troops to Barbados, to ascertain whether he could, by any means, or in any
shape, proceed against them in case of their refusal.

Soon after his arrival at Liverpool, he had an interview with Mr. Backhouse,
who seemed to pity his case, and disposed to do something for him: he
reprobated the conduct of Potter in merited terms, and said "he wished he had
hold of him for Mr. Soren's sake;" but at the same time he informed him that
Mr. Tarleton was out of town, and that nothing could be done without his
presence and consent.

Mr. John Tarleton arrived, and Mr. Soren waited on him; but what was his
surprise when he found that Mr. Tarleton attempted to justify the conduct of
Potter; said he was perfectly right, and insisted that Mr. Soren was loaded
with enemies' property!

In what terms can the conduct of that man be adequately reprehended, who could
justify a miscreant who had committed a piracy which disgraces humanity? -- Mr.
Soren pities Mr. John Tarleton, and would not exchange situations with him,
were his fortune ten times what it is; and, with this observation, let Mr. John
Tarleton be dismissed.

In consequence of the suggestions of some professional men at Liverpool, Mr.
Soren entertained some hope, that all legal redress against Messrs. Tarleton
and Backhouse was not absolutely shut against him: he therefore laid his case,
with some additional circumstances and observations, before Mr. Park, who
considered it as a case of much compassion; but his opinion was equally
unfavourable to Mr. Soren's claim to legal redress with those which had
preceded it.

Mr. Park's opinion was in the following words:

I have perused all the papers laid before me with considerable attention; and
although I think it a case of unparalleled hardship, and infamous misconduct,
yet I am sorry to say, that as these proceedings have taken place under color
of prize, and as a Court of Admiralty has already taken cognizance of, and come
to an adjudication upon, the principal matter, I am of opinion the misconduct
of the Captain, either by an action against him or his owners, is not now
triable in Great Britain in a Court of municipal law. I am aware that Mr. Soren
was not personally present, to lay his claim before the Vice-Admiralty Court of
Barbados: but I think that makes no difference; for, in contemplation of the
law of England, the sentence of a Court of Admiralty binds every man; and the
Captain, though not specially so constituted, was the agent of all parties as
to this purpose.

I have also attentively read the case of Le Caux v. Eden, referred to in the
opinion given by Mr. Gibbs; and I am clearly of opinion, that although the
circumstances of that case are very different from, and not to be compared in
enormity with, those of the present, the principle of that decision, and of
others therein cited, applies most strongly to the present. The general
principle there established, as well as in Rous v. Hassard, and in Livingston
v. Welsh, is, that although an action of trespass would lie for taking a ship
or goods, or imprisoning, or otherwise cruelly treating a man on the high seas;
yet, when it is taken as prize, though taken wrongfully, though it be restored,
though there be no color for the taking (as here), the Judge of the Admiralty
must judge of all the aggravation and consequences, as well as of the principal
matter; and if an action were brought in a Court of common law in England, the
plaintiff could not recover.

What redress Mr. Soren can obtain in a Court of Admiralty in the present stage
of the business, he has already been informed by men very competent to advise
him; and I fear he can have no other remedy than by an application to the
favor of the British Government, whose subject has behaved in a most
oppressive, wicked, and inhuman manner.

J. A. PARK.
Carey-street, Lincoln's End, Jan. 9, 1799.
My Lord Grenville had, soon after the receipt of Mr. Soren's letter,
transmitted it to Sir William Scott, in a note, desiring him to report the
circumstances of the case, and the grounds on which legal redress was rendered
impossible.

Sir William returned the following answer:

MY LORD,
I am honored with your Lordship's letter, dated September 21, enclosing the
copy of a letter received from Mr. Soren, and desiring me to report to your
Lordship the circumstances of the case, and the grounds on which legal redress
is rendered impossible. In obedience to your Lordship's request, I have
considered the same; and report to your Lordship, that the ship Enterprise,
belonging to Mr. Soren, an American subject, was taken and carried into
Barbados by the British letter of marque ship Isabella, in a manner, as Mr.
Soren has uniformly represented it, very inconsistent with justice and good
faith. That proceedings were commenced in the Vice-Admiralty Court of that
island, by the decree of which the vessel was finally liberated; but, that no
costs and damages were awarded -- none having been proved on the part of the
owner. That all avenue to legal redress is irrevocably closed, by this omission
on the part of the owner, or his agent; for, that a simple restitution having
been accepted in the Court below, the proceedings there were completely
finished, and cannot be revived by a new demand for costs and damages, which
had never been urged in the original cause: and, for the same reason, no such
demand can be addressed to the Court of Appeals; the sentence having been
accepted by the owner or his agent in an unqualified manner, and without any
ulterior demand, from the rejection of which he might legally have appealed.
And as to a Court of common law, to which he was advised to resort, it is
sufficient to observe, that that Court has no jurisdiction upon subjects of
this nature; but that the matter of prize, with all its consequences, as well
of costs and damages, as of every other species, belongs, altogether and
exclusively, to the Courts of Admiralty.

Your Lordship will, therefore, be pleased to observe, that the hardship of
this case, whatever may be its extent, arises entirely from the neglect of the
owner or his agent; which Mr. Soren justifies or excuses, by imputing it to ill
advice administered in the island. One certain hardship I have already pointed
out to be the entire loss of legal redress; and with respect to redress of an
equitable nature, it is not perhaps too harsh to remark, that if a country
provides Courts of Justice and a regular course of legal proceedings for the
reparation of wrongs done by its subjects to the subjects of foreign powers, it
has done all that the intercourse of nations requires; and that the dereliction
of such legal remedies, under the plea of private ill advice which the parties
have received to that effect, has not been held, as far as I know, to found a
demand upon the equity of the public Government of the country. It is, however,
due to the claimant to remark, that he has, in his present application, stated
a public service of considerable merit toward the King's Government, in the
conveyance of His Majesty's forces, on board his vessel, to the island of
Barbados, when the Isabella transport was incapable of conveying them; and I
submit to your Lordship's judgment, how far the proof of such a fact, aided by
such circumstances of the case as address themselves to compassion, may entitle
the party to be favorably considered by his Majesty's Government.

I have the honor to be, My Lord, Your Lordship's most obedient servant, WM.
SCOTT.
Sept. 27, 1798. To the Right Honorable Lord Grenville.




Lord Grenville immediately transmitted to Mr. Dundas the letter of Mr. King,
of the 26th of December 1797, enclosing Mr. Soren's petition, that petition
itself, the first letter of Sir William Scott, Mr. Soren's letter to Lord
Grenville, and the last letter of Sir William Scott, with a note, recommending
the case to Mr. Dundas's consideration Vide Lord Grenville's Note, Appendix,
No. 10.
.

On the 12th of March Mr. Dundas sent a letter to the Commissioners of the
Transport Board, of which the following is a copy:

Downing-street, March 12, 1799. GENTLEMEN,
The case of Mr. Soren, freighter of the American ship Enterprise, with which
you are already fully acquainted, and to which the enclosed papers relate, is
so singularly hard, and so peculiarly entitled to relief, that I have received
his Majesty's commands to desire that you will cause to be paid to him, as
owner of the ship Enterprise, the same allowance of freight and passage-money
for every British officer and soldier received by him from on board the
Isabella, and landed at Barbados, as he would have been entitled to, had he
received them on board in England, and conveyed them to that island in safety,
upon his producing sufficient certificates of the service having been performed
in the manner he has stated: this allowance to be made according to the rate of
the contract made with the owners of the Isabella: and I hope, for every
reason, that this affair may be concluded with as little delay as possible.

At the same time I cannot avoid suggesting the propriety of your endeavoring
to ascertain how far it may be possible to recover, from the owners of the
Isabella, the amount, or any part, of what has been paid to them for this
service, which they certainly did not duly perform

I am, Gentlemen, Your most obedient humble servant, HENRY DUNDAS.
Commissioners of Transports.




In consequence of information received by Mr. Soren, that my Lord Grenville,
as well as Mr. Dundas, were favorably disposed to him, and had actually
interfered on his behalf and that a correspondence had been held by letter on
the subject, with others of his Majesty's Ministers, he was advised to
endeavor to obtain copies of such correspondence; and accordingly he made
application at the Transport-Office, from which, on the 7th of April last, he
obtained, among others, copies of the above three letters.

What report the Commissioners of the Transport-office made in consequence of
Mr. Dundas's recommendation of the case to their consideration, Mr. Soren has
not learned; but he was informed at that office, that it was the opinion of
some persons there that the Lords of the Treasury ought to cause to be paid to
him, the amount of the loss sustained on his cargo, as well as the freight for
the conveyance of the troops. He renewed his attendance at the Treasury, and
continued it every Board-day till the month of July following, when he was
informed by Mr. Long, that the Lords of the Treasury had directed the
Transport-office to pay him 500l. This rather surprised him, as Messrs.
Tarleton and Backhouse had paid for the conveyance of about 60 of the troops in
the Teneriffe Packet the sum of 1500l. and at that rate the conveyance of the
remaining 150 in the Enterprise would amount to 3750l. Mr. Soren, therefore,
took the liberty of remonstrating with Mr. Long on the smallness of the sum,
when that gentleman assured him that was the whole that was ordered him, and
intimated, that unless he accepted the sum then offered, he had to expect
nothing. The difficulties in which Mr. Soren had been involved, from the total
ruin of his fortune, and the disappointment of the very flattering prospects he
had reasonably formed from the event of his voyage, the distress he had
suffered from the great length of time which had clapsed from the period when
his ship was seized, and the dread that Mr. Long's intimation might be
realized, induced him to accept the proffered sum; and it seems he has but
small foundation to hope for any further compensation for his loss, and the
injury he has sustained, unless the preceding simple narrative of his case
should happen to (...) the eye of those members of Administration who appear to
have formed a just estimation of the gross injustice of the capture, and the
unparalleled circumstances of wickedness and oppression with which it was
accompanied.

The objection to Mr. (...) claim of compensation is, that he has let pass the
proper time for making that claim. -- It is certainly true that a Court of
Admiralty has the sole and exclusive jurisdiction of the question, " Prize or
no prize?" and that, having cognizance of the principal question, it has also
the power, and the exclusive power, of awarding costs and damages to the full
extent, to the captured, where the circumstances of the case warrant such a
decree. It must be admitted, that a decree of restitution by no means implies
that the captured are entitled, as a matter of course, to a decree of costs and
damages: there may have been probable grounds of seizure, though, on a full
investigation, the ship and cargo seized may be justly restored. It must also
be admitted, that where the parties libelled, omit, in the proper stage of the
proceedings, to pray for costs and damages, the fair inference, in the first
instance is, that they are satisfied their case does not entitle them to demand
them: and it cannot be denied, that, in a legal point of view, Mr. St. Barbe
was Mr. Soren's agent, though not specially constituted such; and that Mr.
Soren was, in the same point of view, bound by his acts or omissions; but
neither can it be denied, that a man may suffer great injustice, and sustain
most grievous hardships, from the default of his agent, without being justly
charged with the consciousness of the want of merit in his cause, and that he
may, by accident or misfortune, or by the artful management of his opponent, be
completely shut out from legal redress, without forfeiting his claim to
compensation from that Government, by the nefarious acts of whose servant he
has been reduced to ruin.

This is peculiarly the case of Mr. Soren: he exercised an act of the most
benevolent nature toward a ship in distress, in the danger of every moment
going to the bottom of the ocean; this ship, and its commander, were in the
service of the Government of Great Britain: he received a most ungrateful
requital; his ship and cargo were seized as prize, without the most distant
shadow of a cause; he was cruelly put in a situation which prevented him, but
under the most mortifying circumstances, from following his property to the
place where he might in person have claimed the protection and justice of the
proper jurisdiction. There does not even seem to have been any censurable
default in his agent. Mr. St. Barbe did, in fact, in the proper stage of the
proceeding, petition for costs and damages; this was rendered nugatory by the
management of Potter, who procured the ship and cargo to be libelled as a droit
of Admiralty at the suit of the King's advocate, on the very day when his
petition was to be taken into consideration. Before the second libel could be
disposed of, Potter, against whom alone the decree of costs and damages could
be pronounced, absconded, leaving no property against which such a decree could
attach: the King's Advocate pays no costs or damages: in the present case he
acted merely in an official capacity, on the suggestion of Potter: it is
therefore to be attributed to accident, or at the most an excusable want of
foresight on the part of Mr. St Barbe or his advisers, or to the guilty
management of Potter, that the proper time for demanding legal redress has
passed.

Had the Enterprise been captured by a person armed with a mere letter of
marque, or even by a King's ship in the ordinary course of warfare on the seas,
without the circumstance of her having fallen into the snare by an act of
benevolence on the part of her commander and supercargo; though there had been
no color for the capture, though there had been no circumstance of suspicion
to justify the capture, though there had been a decree of restitution on the
fullest and clearest evidence that she was not a fit subject of seizure, though
it must have been manifest to all the world, that if a petition for costs and
damages had been preferred, it must have been decreed; yet if the parties
interested had, in the proper stage of the proceedings, through ignorance, or
accident, or ill advice, or any other cause, omitted to claim those costs and
damages, it is not contended that there would have been any moral obligation on
the Government, under the sanction of whose flag the injury had been committed,
to refund the injured party the loss he had sustained.

In the present case, it is not contended that Government were bound, by any
rule of strict moral obligation, to compensate Mr. Soren for any disappointment
in his expectation of speculative gain on the event of his voyage; but, on an
attentive perusal of his case, it is hardly to be supposed that the impartial
reader will think it unreasonable or too sanguine in him to have hoped that he
would have been reimbursed the difference between the prime cost of his cargo
and the produce of the remains which escaped the hands of his plundering
captor, together with the full freight for the troops conveyed in his ship from
Teneriffe to Barbados. His right to the latter can hardly be disputed on
strict legal principles; though, perhaps, he might not be able, in any form of
action, to recover against the Commissioners of Transports, because he had no
contract with them. This right must indeed be considered as acknowledged by
those who ordered the payment of the 500 l.; for it seems to have been ordered,
not as an offering of generosity in compassion to the hardships of his case,
but as an equivalent for the freight of the troops: it was, in fact, by no
means an equivalent according to the usual rate in such cases. By what hidden
influence so small a sum was ordered, it is difficult to conjecture: it is
manifest, from the letters of Lord Grenville and Mr. Dundas, that it was the
wish of both those ministers that Mr. Soren should have an ample compensation.

The contrast between Mr. Soren's present situation, and what it might have
been, had he been fortunate enough not to have fallen in with the Isabella, is
most distressing. From Hamburgh he failed with a cargo, the prime cost of which
exceeded 3000 l.: it consisted of articles which would have been of high value
in the place to which they were destined; the profits would have been large;
the produce was to have been laid out in the purchase of an article which might
probably have been sold at Hamburgh at double the original price; and to this
was to be added the profit arising from so much more of the same article as
could have been purchased at Surinam for 15,000 l.; for to that extent Mr.
Soren had letters of credit on that place: the whole profits of his voyage must
have placed him in a state of enviable independence. He is now stripped of
every thing; he has wasted four years of the prime of life in fruitless
solicitation; he has again to begin his career of industry, with a wife and
three infant children, without the aid of capital, though not perhaps without
friends. His case is respectfully submitted to the attentive perusal of the
Public, but more particularly of those whose situation in life, or the
situation of whose friends and relatives, may possibly expose them to the same
kind of distress which he has experienced.

APPENDIX.
No. I. Copy of Charter-party.
BY this present charter-party be it known unto whom it may concern, that on
Tuesday the 24th day of November, in the year of our Lord 1795, before me,
Charles Conrad Frederic Hartman, notary-public by Imperial authority lawfully
admitted and sworn, dwelling and practicing in the free imperial city of
Hamburgh, personally came and appeared Messrs. Holyoke and Soren, of Boston,
but now of this city, merchants, affreighters, of the one part, and Captain
Wyatt St. Barbe, master or commander of the American ship or vessel called the
Enterprise, of the burden of 170 lasts, or thereabouts, letter, of the other
part; who declared, that by the interposition of Mr. Peter Sprinkhorn, of
Hamburgh, sworn ship's-broker, they had covenanted and agreed on the freighting
and letting the said vessel for a voyage from hence to Surinam and back to this
port, on the terms as follow; that is to say:

1st, Captain Wyatt St. Barbe is obliged to proceed, within thirty days, from
hence, either in ballastor with permitted goods, to Surinam, and there to let
and deliver his said ship tight and staunch, well caulked, tackled, apparelled,
manned, and provided with every thing else necessary for the performing of the
said loading and voyage, as also with the proper ship's papers, to the sole use
and free disposition of the freighters, (the proper place for putting in the
sails, cables and provisions, as also the necessary room for the crew,
excepted, as being for the ship's use,) he not being permitted to load any
goods or merchandises for whomsoever, without the consent of the freighters, on
pain of forfeiting the freight-money agreed upon for such goods, except three
tons per hundred, which the captain may have on board for his own account,
according to the custom of America.

2d, The freighter's promise to cause to be shipped on board the said vessel,
on her safe arrival at Surinam aforesaid, a full convenient cargo of West
Indian products; but the captain is allowed three tons per hundred, as he is
privileged according to the custom of America; with which cargo the captain, as
soon as he shall be dispatched by the shippers, is to depart immediately, wind
and weather permitting it, and to proceed on his voyage directly to this port
of Hamburgh.

3d, On the ship's safe arrival at the unloading place, and the captain having
well and faithfully delivered the cargo according to the bills of lading by him
signed, (save that he shall not be answerable for the risks and damages of the
sea,) the freighters are obliged to cause to be paid unto the said captain, or
to his order, exactly, and without exception, his freight-money, stipulated at
the rate of two thousand six hundred pounds sterling, good and lawful money of
Great Britain, with fifteen per cent. primage for the whole ship's hold, and
the performance of both voyages. On account of which freight, the captain is to
be furnished at Surinam with what money he may be in need of, the extraordinary
average which might happen on this intended voyage being to be regulated and
paid according to the custom of the sea.

4th, For loading at Surinam, forty running days, and for delivering here,
thirty running days, in all, are agreed, beginning at Surinam aforesaid as soon
as the captain shall have advertised the shipper of his ship's being ready to
receive the cargo on board, and continuing here the day after the said ship's
being reported at the Customhouse, and the captain's having informed the
consignees of the cargo of his being prepared to deliver the same. If detained
longer, the freighters are to pay him six pounds lawful British sterling money
demurrage, for every day so detained, day by day, as it becomes due.

5th, The freighters cause the cargo to be shipped on board, and so likewise
landed, free of any expenses to the captain, provided his ship be moored at
proper places, so as the depth of the water will permit it; but the captain is
obliged to assist with his boats and people in taking in the cargo at Surinam
aforesaid.

6th, The Custom-house duties for the cargo shall be cleared by the freighters,
and those for the ship by the captain*

7th, In case the ship should happen to be lost on her homeward passage, which
God forbid, the freighters are bound to pay for the outward voyage to Mr. St.
Barbe, or Messrs. Parish and Co. his correspondents here, one thousand two
hundred pounds sterling, good and lawful money of Great Britain, with fifteen
per cent. primage, after deducting the money which the captain may have
received at Surinam as aforesaid.

And for the true performance of all and singular the above covenants and
agreements, the said parties do hereby mutually bind themselves, especially the
freighters engaging the said cargo, and the said captain, his ship and freight,
submitting the same to the laws and practice of the sea, all upon faith and
honesty, and without any fraud or collusion: In witness whereof, both parties
above named have hereunto set their hands in my registry in Hamburgh, the day
and year aforesaid.

(Signed) HOLYOKE and SOREN. WYATT ST. BARBE.

(L.S.) Which I assert under my usual firm, and seal of office of notary
hereunto affixed. CHARLES HARTMAN, Notary Public.
(1796.)
No II. Bills of Lading.
Shipped, by the Grace of God, in good order, and well conditioned, by Parish
and Co. in and upon the good ship called the Enterprise, whereof is master
under God, for this present voyage, Wyatt* St. Barbe, and now riding at anchor
in the river Elbe, and by God's grace bound for Surinam, to say: three barrels
of smoaked beef, two chests of glass, two packs of fish, thirty barrels of
pease, twenty-four chests of cheese, twenty-five chests of cheese, two hundred
and ten pieces of bacon, twenty-four barrels of salt, seventy-nine thousand
pieces of bricks, fifty cases of gin, for account and risk of Holyoke and
Soren, citizens of the United States of America, being marked and numbered as
in the margin, and are to be delivered in the like good order and well
conditioned, at the aforesaid port of Surinam, (the danger of the seas only
excepted), unto Messrs. Holyoke and Soren, or to their assigns, he or they
paying freight for the said goods as per agreement, with primage and average
accustomed. In witness whereof, the master or purser of the said ship has
affirmed to four bills of lading, all of this tenor and date; the one of which
four bills being accomplished, the other three to stand void. And so God send
the good ship to her desired port in safety! Amen. Dated in Hamburgh, the 25th
of January 1796. -- Contents unknown, free of breaking.

WYATT ST. BARBE.

Shipped, by the grace of God, in good order, and well conditioned, by Parish
and Co. in and upon the good ship called the Enterprise, whereof is master
under God, for this present voyage, Wyatt St. Barbe, and now riding at anchor
in the river Elbe, and by God's grace bound for Surinam, to say: twenty-one
bales of linen, for account and risk of Holyoke and Soren, citizens of the
United States of America, being marked and numbered as in the margin, and are
to be delivered in the like good order and well conditioned at the aforesaid
port of Surinam, (the danger of the seas only excepted), unto Messrs. Holyoke
and Soren, or to their assigns, he or they paying freight for the said goods as
per agreement, with primage and average accustomed. In witness whereof, the
master or purser of the said ship has affirmed to four bills of lading, all of
this tenor and date; the one of which four bills being accomplished, the other
three to stand void. And so God send the good ship to her desired port in
safety! Amen. Dated in Hamburgh, 25th January 1796. -- Contents unknown.

WYATT ST. BARBE.

Shipped, by the grace of God, in good order, and well conditioned, by Parish
and Co. in and upon the good ship called the Enterprise, whereof is master
under God, for this present voyage, Wyatt St. Barbe, and now riding at anchor
in the river Elbe, and by God's grace bound for Surinam, to say: twelve bales
of linen, for account and risk of Holyoke and Soren, citizens of the United
States of America, being marked and numbered as in the margin, and are to be
delivered in the like good order and well conditioned, at the aforesaid port of
Surinam, (the danger of the seas only excepted), unto Messrs. Holyoke and
Soren, or to their assigns, he or they paying freight for the said goods as per
agreement, with primage and average accustomed. In witness whereof, the master
or purser of the said ship has affirmed to four bills of lading, all of this
tenor and date; the one of which four bills being accomplished, the other three
to stand void. And so God send the good ship to her desired port in safety!
Amen. Dated in Hamburgh, 30th December 1795. -- Contents unknown.

WYATT ST. BARBE.

No. III. Invoice Merchandise, shipped by John Soren, at Hamburgh, on board the
ship Enterprise, Wyatt St. Barbe master, bound to Surinam, on account and risk
of Holyoke and Soren, of Boston, North America.
12 Bales Linen, 21 Bales ditto, 3 Barrels smoaked Beef, 2 Chests ^la^s, 3
Packs Fish, 30 Barrels Pease, 24 Chests Cheese, 25 Chests ditto, 210 Pieces of
Bacon, 24 Barrels Salt, 79,000 Bricks, 50 Cases Gin, 504 Pieces Britannias, 204
do. Plattillas, 312 lb. Twine, 12 Gold Watches, 7 Dozen and seven pair Thread
Stockings, 1 Case Jewelry, Invoice Muslins, 2 Pipes Teneriffe Wine.
No. IV. Letter from PETER FAVENC, Consul-General for the Canary Islands, to
CHARLES LONG, Esquire.
SIR,
The motive of troubling you with this letter is at the request of Mr. Soren,
relative to a transaction that took place in the year 1796. In the month of
March, in the said year, arrived in Santa Cruz, in the island of Teneriffe, an
English vessel, commanded by a man of the name of Charles Potter; she was from
Cork, with troops on board, bound to the island of Barbados. On her arrival,
through the channel of one of my agents, the said Potter applied to me for my
advice and assistance, as his vessel was very leaky, and totally unfit to
proceed on her voyage; indeed, by his own confession, had he not had the good
fortune to fall in with the American ship, the Enterprise, bound from Hamburgh
to the island of Demarara, he would, in all probability, never have reached
Teneriffe, or any other port. Happening at that period to be in the island of
Grand Canary, with some friends, I immediately came over to aid him in the best
manner I was able. He stated to me the service Captain St. Barbe and Mr. Soren
had rendered him, in bearing down when he hoisted signals of distress; but,
waving the gratitude he should have felt for what in all probability was the
preservation of his life, and of those entrusted to his care, he proclaimed the
American ship a lawful prize, having naval stores on board, and being bound to
an enemy's port: Of this I had great doubt, from the documents he produced; and
from the event I am justified. He was pressing with me to condemn her; but this
I could not, it not laying solely in my breast -- I advised him carrying her
down to some island where there was a regular Court of Admiralty established.

His own vessel, the Isabella, having been condemned and sold, it was necessary
for him, the said Potter, to devise some plan for the conveying these troops to
their destination. As many as he could, he put on board the Enterprise; and
having freighted a brig called the Teneriffe Packet, he in these two vessels
conveyed the troops, which all arrived safe, and without the least accident. In
regard to Potter's conduct, I think it was totally unjustifiable, with respect
to Mr. Soren, Captain St. Barbe, and the proprietors of the goods on board the
Enterprise, he having acted toward them with the greatest ingratitude; and not
having it in his power to make them the proper retribution, I think, from the
service the country has received in these troops being so soon forwarded to
Barbados, to which place much time would have elapsed before their arrival,
had the Enterprise not been seized upon in the very cruel manner she was, some
adequate compensation for the loss sustained by the parties interested ought to
be made: but this it does not become me to point out; to superior judgment I
leave that.

If it would not be inconvenient to you, Sir, or intruding too much on your
time, I should feel myself honored in half an hour's conversation with you on
the subject of Messrs. Tarleton and Backhouse, of Liverpool, whose conduct, in
some part of this transaction, I think, should be condemned.

With respect, I have the honor to be, Sir, Your most obedient servant, PETER
FAVENC, Consul-General for the Canary Islands.
Sise-lane, Bucklersbury, Monday, July 8, 1799. Charles Long, Esquire.



No. V. (A) BARBADOS. -- At a Court of Vice Admiralty for this Island
established, held at the House of the Hon. Jonathan Blenman, Esquire. sole Judge,
on Thursday, June 2, 1796.
The Court being sat, the petition of Wyatt St. Barbe, praying that Charles
Potter, captain and commander of the private ship of war Isabella, and
libellant of the ship Enterprise, be obliged to give security in this
honorable Court for costs, in case the said ship Enterprise, with her cargo,
etc. should not be condemned as good and lawful prize, was by order read. Then
Mr. Wimberley, junior, advocate for the said petition, rose in support of said
petition, and was followed by Mr. Attorney General on the same side. Then Mr.
Gibbes Walker Jordan rose to oppose the said petition, and was followed by Mr.
Solicitor General on the same side. Then Mr. Wimberley and Mr. Attorney General
severally replied, and concluded with moving, that the prayer of the said
petition be granted. Whereupon his honor the sole Judge was pleased to order
and direct that the prayer of the said petition be granted, and that the libel
of the said Charles Potter against the said ship Enterprise be and stand
dismissed, if the said libellant shall not give security in the Registrar's
Office of this honorable Court within fourteen days, that time being named by
the libellant.

A true copy, examined. JOHN STRAKER, D. Registrar in Cur. V. Adm.

No. V. (B) BARBADOS. -- At a Court of Vice Admiralty for this Island
established, held at the Town Hall, by the Hon. Jonathan Blenman, Esquire. sole
Judge, on Tuesday, Sept. 6, 1796.
The Court being sat, the libel and allegations of Matthew Coulthurst, Esquire. his
Majesty's Advocate General, against the ship Enterprise, Wyatt St. Barbe
commander, and the cargo which was on board her at the time she was brought
into this Island as a droit of Admiralty, were produced and read.

Then the claim and answer of the said Wyatt St. Barbe, as well for himself as
in behalf of Stephen Clough and of Messrs. Holyoke and Soren, citizens of the
United States of America, and of Messrs. Furst and Haller, citizens and
burghers of Hamburgh in Germany, was produced and read. Then the depositions
which had been taken in said cause, and the preparatory examinations and
depositions which had been formerly taken on the libel of Charles Potter
against the said ship Enterprise, were severally produced and read. Then, on
motion of Mr. Solicitor General, the Court was adjourned to Thursday, September
the 8th, 1796, at nine o'clock in the morning, at the Town Hall.

BARBADOS. -- At the Town Hall, pursuant to the above adjournment, Thursday,
Sept. 8, 1796.
The Court being sat, and the Advocates and Proctors present, Mr. Solicitor
General opened the cause, and was followed on the same side by Mr. Advocate
General.

Then Mr. Wimberley, jun. advocate for the claimant and defendant, opened the
defense, and was followed by Mr. Edward Applethwaite.

Then the advocates for the said libellant severally replied; whereupon the
sole Judge was pleased to dismiss the said libel; and order and decree, that
the said ship Enterprise, with her cargo, boats, tackle, and apparel, be
restored and delivered up to the said claimant and defendant, Wyatt St. Barbe,
for himself, and the several owners thereof, agreeably to his said claim.

Then Mr. Wimberley moved, that the papers of the said ship Enterprise, which
had been delivered to the Registrar of this Court, by Charles Potter, the
former libellant, be restored to the said Wyatt St. Barbe; which the sole Judge
was pleased to grant.

A true copy, examined. J. STRAKER, D. Registrar in Cur. V. Adm.

No. VI. Affidavit of Wyatt St. Barbe.
Wyatt St. Barbe, a citizen of the United States of America, and late master of
the ship Enterprise, makes oath and faith, that when the libel preferred by
Charles Potter, before the Vice-Admiralty Court of Barbados, against his said
ship, was dismissed by the said Court, this deponent petitioned the said Court
of Vice-Admiralty, for damages; that on the day appointed to investigate the
merits of the said petition, the said ship Enterprise was again libelled by
Matthew Coulthurst, Esquire. the King's Advocate, as a droit of Admiralty, under
pretense of the ship and cargo being Dutch property; that after hearing
counsel, and finding that the said ship and cargo were wholly the property of
American citizens, and that the commission of the said Charles Potter extended
only to the capture of French property, the Judge of the said Court of
Vice-Admiralty ordered the ship, and what remained unplundered of the cargo, to
be restored to this deponent. And this deponent further says, that his
counsel, Messrs. Robert Wimberley, jun. and Edward Applethwaite, and his
proctor, Mr. Thomas Went, all concurred in advising him not to petition again
for damages, as the said Charles Potter had run away from the said island,
leaving no effects behind him, and as the King's Advocate pays no damages: and
the said counsel and proctor further advised this deponent to go away with his
said ship Enterprise, and appeal to the High Court of Admiralty in England for
redress.

WYATT ST. BARBE.
Sworn at the Mansion House, London, this 31 st day of Aug. 1799, before me, R.
C. GLYNN, Mayor.

No. VII. Actual Loss sustained by the Captain and Owners of the ship
Enterprise, in consequence of her capture and detention.
CAPTAIN ST. BARBE AND THE OWNERS' LOSS.
Freight as per Charter-party, L.2600 0 0 Primage 15 per cent. 390 0 0 Eight
months Demurrage, 1344 0 0 Captain St. Barbe's property, as per Invoice, 900 0
0 Disbursements on the ship, portage bills, and law charges, etc. as per
account, 3676 9 5 Captain St. Barbe's personal expenses at Barbados, 300 0 0
9210 9 5 MR. SOREN'S LOSS.
Amount of cargo, as per invoice, L3200 0 0 Other cargo not in the invoice 150
0 0 His expenses 750 0 0 4100 0 0 13310 9 5 Deduct amount net sales of cargo at
Barbados 1756 9 9 L.11553 19 8

No. VIII. PETITION TO HIS MAJESTY.
To the KING'S Most Excellent Majesty in Council, The Humble Petition of JOHN
SOREN, of Boston, in North America, merchant, partner in the house of Holyoke
and Soren, of Boston aforesaid, and WYATT ST. BARBE, captain of the American
ship Enterprise, belonging to Clough, of Witchcasset, Massachusetts, in North
America aforesaid, SHOWS,
That your petitioners entered into a charter-party, or agreement together,
bearing date at Hamburgh the 24th of November 1795, whereby it was agreed that
your Petitioner, Captain Wyatt St. Barbe, should proceed from Hamburgh
aforesaid, with the said ship, either in ballast or permitted goods, to
Surinam; and your Petitioner, John Soren, agreed to ship on board the said
vessel, at Surinam aforesaid, a full cargo of West India products, on the terms
therein mentioned.

That your Petitioner, John Soren, shipped a cargo on the said vessel,
consisting of linen, cheese, bacon, and other goods, which he purchased at
Hamburgh, for the sum of 3204 l. 3 s. 4 d. of sterling money of Great Britain;
and your petitioner, Wyatt St. Barbe, also shipped a quantity of linen,
groceries, liquors, and glass, on account of himself and Messrs. Furst and Co.
citizens and burghers of Hamburgh, to the value of 901 l. 8 s. 11 d. of like
sterling money.

That your Petitioners set sail in the said ship, on the 5th day of February
1796, from Hamburgh, to Surinam, there to dispose of their said cargo; and your
Petitioner, John Soren, also intended to take in another cargo of coffee at
Surinam, upon his own account.

That your Petitioners, on the 25th day of February 1796, the said ship
Enterprise being in latitude 44 1 N. and longitude 18 35 W. on her said voyage,
discovered a ship with an English ensign reversed, hoisted as a signal of
distress: Your Petitioners, therefore, immediately made sail for her, and came
up with and spoke her, and found her to be a British vessel, called the
Isabella letter of marque, belonging to Messrs. Tarleton and Backhouse, of the
port of Liverpool commanded by Captain Charles Potter, and chartered as a
transport-ship by the British Government, and was then on a voyage from Cork to
the island of Barbados, with a considerable number of your Majesty's troops on
board. Your Petitioners found her in a very leaky and disabled condition, and
in great distress and danger, and both pumps going incessantly. Captain Potter,
of the Isabella, came on board your Petitioner's vessel, and, after
representing to your Petitioner, Captain St. Barbe, the extreme perilous
situation of his ship and company, entreated your said Petitioner to accompany
him, and see him safe into Lisbon or Corunna; in answer to which, your
Petitioner, Captain St. Barbe, observed, that having freighted his own ship,
the Enterprise, for Surinam, his going with her to Lisbon or Corunna would be
so great a deviation from his own voyage, that it would be thereby destroyed;
but that, on account of the very distressed situation of the Isabella and her
crew, he would accompany them to Madeira, Teneriffe, or any of the Windward
Islands, and would accommodate the officers and as many of your Majesty's
troops as he could in his own vessel, and would also render every other
assistance in his power. To all which your Petitioner John Soren also most
readily gave his consent.

That Captain Potter appeared to your Petitioners to be very well pleased and
satisfied with the humane offer of your Petitioners, and said he would
immediately send on board his own vessel for the approbation of the colonel and
other officers of your Majesty's troops. He accordingly sent his own mate, who
had come on board your Petitioner's ship along with him, to his own vessel, in
order to communicate, as your Petitioners understood, the very obliging offer
made by your Petitioners, as beforementioned: but, instead of this, with an
ingratitude and treachery scarcely to be paralleled, he desired his mate to
bring along with him a party of the ship Isabella's armed force, for the
purpose of capturing your Petitioner's said ship, the Enterprise,
notwithstanding she belonged to, and was freighted and commanded by, the
citizens of the United States of America, a country at peace with your Majesty,
had nothing but neutral goods on board, purchased at Hamburgh for sale at
Surinam aforesaid, notwithstanding the offers made by your Petitioners to
Captain Potter, to see the Isabella and her company safe at Madeira or
Teneriffe, or any of the Windward Islands, as aforesaid, and notwithstanding
your Petitioners had sailed a considerable way out of their own track for the
purpose of saving the said ship Isabella from being lost, which in all
probability would have happened but for the timely interference of your
Petitioners.

That the said mate returned with a party of armed soldiers and sailors from
the Isabella, and seized your Petitioner's said ship and cargo as a prize, and
made your Petitioners and the crew prisoners, and forced your Petitioner, John
Soren, with the chief mate and crew, out of their own ship into a boat, and put
them on board the Isabella, though she was still in the most dangerous and
distressed condition, as if for the very purpose of sacrificing them to that
fate from which your Petitioners had saved them.

That when your Petitioner John Soren arrived on board the Isabella, he stated
the circumstances to the officers of your Majesty's troops on board, and they
reprobated, in the strongest terms, the shocking and inhumane conduct of
Captain Potter.

That Captain Potter obliged your Petitioner Captain St. Barbe to give him up
all his papers, and broke open several cases and boxes, and took thereout part
of the cargo, whatever he thought proper.

That Captain Potter proceeded with both vessels to St. Croix, Teneriffe, and
then transhipt military stores and baggage from the Isabella (she being
entirely unfit for sea service, and accordingly condemned) to your Petitioner's
ship, the Enterprise, and broke open some other packages, and started others,
for the purpose of fitting up births for the accommodation of the soldiers,
who, to the number of 150, with women and children, besides the Isabella's
crew, were embarked on board the Enterprise.

That during their stay at Teneriffe, your Petitioner, John Soren, frequently
requested Captain Potter permission to go on shore, that he might apply to the
British Consul there for an investigation of Captain Potter's proceedings,
which Captain Potter refused; and your Petitioner, John Soren, was detained a
prisoner on board the Isabella, until he was liberated by order of the Governor
of the island -- but he was not then permitted to carry on shore any of his
private property.

That Captain Potter sailed from Teneriffe with your Petitioners' said ship,
the Enterprise, and your Petitioner, Captain St. Barbe, on board her, but
leaving your Petitioner, John Soren, at Teneriffe; and your Petitioners' said
vessel arrived in Carlisle-bay, Barbados, on the 16th day of April 1796.

That during the voyage of the said ship from Teneriffe to Barbados, Captain
Potter endeavored to seduce and corrupt the sailors of the Enterprise, by
giving them liquors, making them great promises, and otherwise, to induce them
to swear that the ship and cargo were French and Dutch property; but finding
such attempts ineffectual, he put them upon a very scanty allowance of bread
and water, by which the health of the seamen was greatly injured, particularly
of the carpenter, who was likewise kept in chains.

That upon the arrival of the ship Enterprise at Barbados, Captain Potter
instituted a libel against her and the cargo, as a prize, in the Court of
Vice-Admiralty in Barbados; to which a claim was entered by your Petitioner,
Captain St. Barbe, on behalf of himself and the owners of the said ship and
cargo; and an order was made, on the application of your said Petitioner, that
Captain Potter should give security for costs, in case the said ship should not
be condemned: -- Potter did not give security as ordered, but absconded; and
the libel was dismissed.

That, very soon afterward, a libel was filed by the Advocate-General against
the ship and cargo, as a droit of Admiralty; to which a claim was also put in
by your Petitioner, Captain St. Barbe, on behalf of the ship's owners and the
persons interested in her cargo; and proceedings being had and examinations
taken in the said cause, the same was, on the 8th of September 1796, heard
before the Hon. Jonathan Blenman, sole Judge of the said Court; and upon such
hearing, the said libel was dismissed, and the ship and cargo ordered and
adjudged to be restored to your Petitioner, Captain St. Barbe, as the claimant
of the same.

That your Petitioner, Captain St. Barbe, on the said ship being delivered up
to him, and such part of the cargo as had not been taken out of the said
vessel, during the time she remained in possession of the said Captain Potter,
sold and disposed of such remaining cargo, by auction, for the net sum of 1756
l. 9 s. 9 d.; which occasions a loss to your Petitioners of the sum of 2349 l.
12 s. 6 d. sterling, upon the cost price of the articles purchased at Hamburgh.

That your Petitioners have annexed hereunto an account of the actual loss
sustained by themselves and the other owners of the said ship and her cargo.

That the owners of the Enterprise and her cargo, but for the detention
aforesaid, would have gained a considerable profit upon the sale of the cargo
at Surinam; and your Petitioner, John Soren, had likewise engaged, by the
charter-party, to freight the said vessel with coffee, at Surinam, to the
amount, in weight, of 600,000 lb.; upon which, with other coffee he had
intended to ship for Europe, a considerable profit would have arisen.

That the said vessel, during the time she was in the hands of the said Captain
Potter, was robbed of great part of her tackling and apparel, and the worms had
eat her bottom, and she was otherwise so much damaged, that your Petitioner
necessarily expended large sums in repairing her.

That your Petitioners did not apply to the Vice-Admiralty Court of Barbados
for the payment of their said damages and costs, because, before the dismissal
of the second libel instituted by your Majesty's Advocate-General against the
said ship and cargo, Captain Potter had actually absconded from the island of
Barbados, and no damages or costs, as your Petitioners are informed, are paid
in prosecuting in your Majesty's name.

That your Petitioners, since their arrival in England, have been advised by
Sir William Scott and Mr. Gibbs, one of your Majesty's counsel, that your
Petitioners cannot obtain any redress or compensation in any of the courts of
law in this Kingdom, for the damages and costs which they have sustained by the
premises, either from Messrs. Tarleton and Backhouse, the owners of Captain
Potter's vessel, or from the said Captain Potter, who has absconded.

Your Petitioners, therefore, most humbly pray Your Majesty will be graciously
pleased to take the aforesaid matters and things into your royal consideration,
and grant to your Petitioners such relief as Your Majesty in the exercise of
your royal wisdom and bounty shall think fit and expedient.

And your Petitioners, as in duty bound, will ever pray, etc. JOHN SOREN,
Citizen of America. WYATT ST. BARBE, Citizen of America.


No. IX. Note from Mr. King to Lord Grenville.
Mr. King presents his compliments to Lord Grenville, and takes the liberty to
send enclosed to his Lordship, the petition of John Soren, and Wyatt St. Barbe,
American citizens, who, being unable to procure compensation in the ordinary
course of justice, in a case of extreme hardship, have requested Mr. King to
transmit to Lord Grenville their petition, and to ask his Lordship's
interference in their behalf.

Great Cumberland Place, December 26th, 1797. Transport Office, 7 th April,
1800.
(A true copy)

W. HARDING.



No. X. Note from Lord Grenville to Mr. King.
Lord Grenville's compliments to Mr. King, and has the honor of transmitting
him an extract of a letter from the Transport Board to Mr. Long, on the subject
of the memorial of Messrs. Soren and St. Barbe.

"Having considered the papers referred to us by the Lords Commissioners of his
Majesty's Treasury, and contained in your letter to us of the* 8th inst.
relative to the complaint of John Soren, of Boston, in North America, and Wyatt
St. Barbe, captain of the ship Enterprise, against Charles Potter, master of
the Isabella of Liverpool, employed in the service of Government, who is stated
to have taken forcible possession of the said ship Enterprise, to the great
loss of the owners; we humbly beg leave to report to their Lordships, that the
said ship Isabella was not a regular transport in his Majesty's service, but
engaged to take upon freight only, in the month of September 1795, a certain
number of troops from Cork to the West Indies; that, under the circumstances of
this ship engaged only upon freight, and therefore acting by no means under the
direction of this Board, further than the perfecting her engagement of
conveying troops from Cork to the West Indies, the capture of the Enterprise
became the act and deed of the master of the Isabella, for which he stands
responsible, and not this department or its agents."

No. XI. Letter from Sir William Scott to Lord Grenville.
MY LORD,
I am honored with your Lordship's letter, dated December 29th, enclosing a
copy of a note received from Mr. King, together with its enclosure, relative to
the ship Enterprise, and requesting me to report to your Lordship my opinion on
the merits of the case, as far as I might be informed thereupon. In obedience
to your Lordship's request, I have considered the same, and report to your
Lordship, that I am no further acquainted with the merits of the case, than as
they have appeared to me in a statement of the circumstances which was
submitted to me on the part of the American owners for my opinion, and in the
papers now transmitted to me by your Lordship -- That, according to the
representations contained therein, the American owners have sustained a very
considerable loss, in consequence of the misconduct of the privateer; but that
the law had offered a remedy for the injury, by giving them a demand for costs
and damages against Captain Potter, or, in case of his insolvency, against his
securities, and against his owners, who were all answerable to the extent of
the damages that might have been awarded against him -- That this demand ought
to have been made in the Vice-Admiralty Court, and was not in the least degree
precluded by the subsequent proceedings carried on in his Majesty's name
against this ship and her cargo -- That the American owners made no such
demand, and must therefore, in all legal consideration, be presumed to have
acquiesced in the justice of a simple restitution, without costs and damages;
and, by that acquiescence they stand barred from the possibility of obtaining a
legal relief, either in Courts of Admiralty or in courts of any other species.
What other relief they are desirous of obtaining in consequence of their
present application, they do not define in the prayer of their petition: but I
must submit generally, that if the course of law has applied an adequate remedy
for injuries, and the parties entitled to it have for some reason or other
declined to resort to it, it cannot found any claim upon the justice of that
government under which an injury of that species has been committed without
being followed by its proper satisfaction.

I have the honor to be, etc. WM. SCOTT.
January 6th, 1798.
No. XII. Letter from Mr. Soren to Lord Grenville.
MY LORD,
My disagreeable situation in this country, arising from the circumstance of
having administered to the relief of the British ship Isabella letter of
marque, commanded by Captain Charles Potter, obliges me to apply to your
Lordship for that redress and assistance the forms of law here deny me.

I beg leave to bring to your Lordship's recollection an application made on my
behalf as freighter of the American ship Enterprise, Captain Wyatt St. Barbe,
by Mr. King, the American minister, to your Lordship. The answers I have had
the honor to receive, have been wholly against any legal claim upon my part,
by reason of non-application for damages, upon the acquittal of the Enterprise,
libelled by Captain Potter in the Vice-Admiralty Court at Barbados as a prize.
The reasons the Captain of the Enterprise assigns for such non-application for
damages are, that his counsel at Barbados advised him to apply for damages in
England, because Potter had absented himself from the island, and there was not
any person within the jurisdiction of the Admiralty Court against whom damages
could be awarded, and as the owners of the Isabella, Messrs Tarleton and
Backhouse, resided at Liverpool, in England.

I have procured the several opinions of Sir William Scott, Dr. Nicholls, and
Mr. Gibbs, one of his Majesty's counsel, who inform me no redress can be had by
application either in the Admiralty or common law courts here. It falls, my
Lord, hard indeed upon me. I shall, unless I have a claim upon the humanity and
accustomed generosity of the British Government, be utterly ruined -- hard, my
Lord, because I had no opportunity hitherto of making any effectual application
for redress. Having been left by Captain Potter at the island of Teneriffe, and
wholly unable to proceed to Barbados, to prosecute my case in the Admiralty
Court there in person, I proceeded to England, (all my property withheld from
me, and consequently with much inconvenience), to lay my case before the
British Government. I have been in this country upwards of two years, solely
upon this business; and I assure your Lordship, from the circumstance of being,
by such capture, stripped of the greatest part of my property, that I have,
during my residence here, undergone much personal inconvenience.

The Isabella had on board near 300 troops for the West Indies. Humanity, my
Lord, induced me to relieve the ship, and by the assistance I rendered, the
majority of those persons were conveyed in the Enterprise to the places of
their destination. This, my Lord, Captain Potter would not deny, was he in this
country. Some recompense I submit, should be made, for forcing me out of my
ship at the point of the bayonet, after having offered, to render any
assistance in my power to Captain Potter; for sending me on board the Isabella
in the miserable condition she was; but certainly, my Lord, for forcibly taking
possession of a neutral ship, and expending my property. I only ask similar
humanity to be shown toward me, for my preservation, as I extended to the
persons on board the Isabella; for I am at this moment without the prospect of
placing myself in a situation to enable me to provide for my support. The
British Government has in fact had the use of the Enterprise to forward the
troops: I submit, my Lord, whether some compensation ought not to be awarded
for my assistance in that respect. My voyage to Surinam for coffee is entirely
lost, and I have been unable to fulfill my mercantile engagements -- Unable to
proceed to Barbados, I did, as I thought, and still think, all in my power to
seek redress, by sailing for England to make application there. No one, my
Lord, upon examination of my case, can doubt the hardship of it; and the only
argument to be alleged against my application is, that Captain St. Barbe (being
advised by his counsel at Barbados) did not petition for damages there upon
the acquittal of the ship, at which place I am now even shut out from applying
for redress; nor was there a possibility of ever applying on my part. How hard
your Lordship sees these circumstances are upon me. I humbly conceive the
British Government has, in many cases, assisted persons who do not stand in a
situation to make legal demands, but whose claims are equitable and
compassionate. Such, my Lord, I apprehend is my case: and as I have hitherto
had no opportunity of prosecuting my case in person, I have to request such
assistance and redress, through your Lordship's means, as from the circumstance
of having relieved a British ship in distress, with his Majesty's troops on
board, which has brought me into my present condition, the equity of my case,
and my distressed situation, demand.

I have the honor to be, My Lord, Your Lordship's most obedient And very
humble servant, JOHN SOREN.
Sept. 19, 1798.
No. XIII. Letter from Rufus King, Esquire. the American Minister, to Mr. Soren.
Great Cumberland Place, July 25, 1800. SIR,
Soon after the receipt of your late letter, recapitulating the oppressive
circumstances of the capture of your vessel and cargo, I sent it enclosed in a
note to the Treasury, with a view of assisting you in obtaining the difference
between the sum you had received, and that which had been earned by your
vessel, according to the usual rate of compensation in the transport service;
and I am sorry to inform you that the answer which I have received affords me
no reason to believe that this moderate demand will be satisfied. According to
the legal opinions which you have taken, you can have no remedy in the ordinary
course of justice, and the result of my applications convinces me that so far
from obtaining from the English Government indemnity for your losses, it is not
likely that you will receive the residue of the compensation due for the use of
your vessel in the transportation of a number of the King's troops to the West
Indies. Under these circumstances, I think it my duty to recommend to you to
relinquish all farther solicitation, and to return home without delay.

I am, Sir, Your obedient servant, RUFUS KING.
Mr. Soren, 51, Gloucester-street.



No. XIV. Letter from J. W. Mansergh, Esquire. of the 32d Regiment of Foot, and
commanding officer of the troops, to Mr. Soren.
Hungerford Coffee-house, Strand, London, 4 th of May, 1800. SIR,
I have perused the narrative relative to the conduct of Captain Potter, with
respect to the American ship Enterprise, and find the statement true and
correct, to the time when that ship arrived at Barbados: In a few days
afterward I went with the regiment to which I belonged to St. Domingo.

The attention of myself and brother officers to you and your ship's company,
which you have mentioned in such handsome terms, was no more than was due to
people who had so humanely come to the relief of a ship in the miserable and
distressed condition in which the Isabella transport then was; and I should
think it a want of justice and candor not to acknowledge in this public
manner, the obligation I and those under my command were under to you and
Captain St. Barbe, for saving us in all probability from destruction.

When Captain Potter insisted upon making prize of your ship, I interceded with
him as much as in my power, representing to him that he could not condemn her;
and that even if he could, ( even if she belonged to our most inveterate
enemy), yet, on account of the humane and generous manner in which you and
Captain St. Barbe had behaved to us, she ought to be restored. Finding I could
make no impression on him by calm remonstrances, I assumed a tone of authority,
and insisted he should: on which he produced to me a letter of marque, and
declared that if I interposed in liberating his prize, I must be answerable to
his owners.

When at Teneriffe, I again urged him to discharge the Enterprise; at the same
time informing him, that as there was no other ship to be had at the island,
and as I conceived from the situation of public affairs a rupture between Great
Britain and Spain might be apprehended, in which case the troops under my
command might be detained prisoners of war, I would take upon myself, with the
consent of you and Captain St. Barbe, to charter that ship in the name of
Government, to carry as many of the detachment as she could to Barbados. He
peremptorily refused to relinquish her as prize: on which I told him I was much
concerned at being obliged to be witness of his infamous conduct, and that I
was certain his owners, as well as every other person in England who should
hear of the transaction, would highly condemn him.

At Teneriffe I reported his conduct to Mr. Favene, the British Consul there;
and at Barbados to Admiral Sir John Laforey, commander in chief of his
Majesty's fleet at that island, and also to his Excellency Governor Ricketts,
who all expressed their opinions, that his treatment of you and Captain St.
Barbe was cruel and oppressive in the extreme; and further, when at Barbados,
I made an affidavit of the facts before a magistrate, in which I was joined by
Captain Davis, and should also have been joined by Captain Thomas, but he was
prevented, being obliged to go on board a ship which was under way for St.
Domingo.

Thus, Sir, I trust it will be manifest to all who shall read the narrative of
your sufferings, that those who had the best opportunity of observation, were
perfectly satisfied of the iniquity of Captain Potter's conduct. As to myself,
I shall ever retain the most grateful remembrance of the obligation I owe to
you and Captain St. Barbe; and am, Sir,

Your much obliged and humble servant, J. W. MANSERGH, Major 32 d Regiment of
Foot.
Mr. Soren, No. 51, Gloucester-street, Queen-square, Bloomsbury.



No. XV. Attestation of W. Davis, Esquire. Captain in the 32d Regiment of Foot.
Being called upon by Mr. Soren, proprietor of the cargo of the ship
Enterprise, which was taken possession of by the Isabella letter of marque,
conveying troops to the West Indies, to state circumstances relative to the
capture of the said ship, on or about the 23d of February, 1796: I do hereby
affirm, that the ship Isabella was in the greatest distress at that period,
having sprung a dangerous leak, in consequence of which it was deemed expedient
to make signals of distress to a ship in sight, which proved to be the
Enterprise; the Captain of which ship, (in my opinion, prompted by humanity
alone, as he might easily have avoided us by superior sailing,) came down to
our relief. Captain Potter, commanding the Isabella, seized the American ship
and took her into Teneriffe, on pretense of her having enemy's property on
board. The Isabella being then condemned, the Enterprise was fitted up as a
transport, and in that capacity conveyed, to the best of my recollection, about
150 soldiers to Barbados.

WM. DAVIS, Captain 32 d Regiment.
1 st June, 1800.
No. XVI. -- Names of the Officers on board the Isabella Transport, at the time
the American ship Enterprise came up to her relief.
Captain Mansergh 32d regiment. Captain Davis, do. Lieutenant White, do. dead.
Hospital Mate Egan, do. attached. Lieutenant Mailland, 56th regiment. Hospital
Mate Burke, do. attached. Captain Thomas, 67th regiment, dead. Lieutenant
Burke, do. Ensign Gordon, do. dead. Ensign Percival, do. Hospital Mate Crawley,
do. attached.
London, printed, at the Oriental Press, by WILSON and Co. Boston, reprinted,
and sold for the relief of Mr. SOREN and his Family.


