Mr. SPRING's Sermon, ON THE DEATH OF General Washington.

GOD the Author of Human Greatness. A DISCOURSE, ON THE DEATH OF General George
Washington; DELIVERED AT THE NORTH CONGREGATIONAL CHURCH IN NEWBURYPORT,
DECEMBER 29, 1799.

By SAMUEL SPRING, Pastor.

Printed at Newburyport, by EDMUND M. BLUNT.

DISCOURSE, etc.
1 CHRONICLES, xxix. 12. BOTH RICHES AND HONOR COME OF THEE, AND THOU REIGNEST
OVER ALL; AND IN THINE HAND IS POWER AND MIGHT; AND IN THINE HAND IT IS TO MAKE
GREAT, AND TO GIVE STRENGTH UNTO ALL.
THE GREAT AND BELOVED MAN IS DEAD! The light of America is extinguished: and
all the enlightened friends of merit are the subjects of deep affliction. For
though the Savior of his country "Died in a good old age, full of riches and
honor," yet, at this dreadful period, when the world trembles before the
horrid ravages of the combined powers of darkness, the loss of WASHINGTON, that
able statesman and unrivalled General, is like the departure of the sun in his
zenith, and matter of great lamentation. Resignedly, therefore, to mourn the
event before God, "who kills and makes alive," and pay our tribute of
respect to the memory of him whose same has filled the world and will forever
grace the most instructive page of history, is the present duty of every class
and description of men.

To aid a devout and correspondent course of exercises and reflections, at this
solemn season, by illustrating THE DIVINE INFLUENCE IN HUMAN GREATNESS, shall
be the employment of the subsequent discourse.

THE text and the occasion we trust obviously meet, and readily harmonize. For,
if the Divine Being is the author of Human Greatness, we ought gratefully to
acknowledge it, and submissively hold our peace before the dark dispensation of
providence. Those, who are qualified to bless God for raising up Great Men, are
equally qualified to adore his name when they are removed. For Christian
gratitude and resignation are inseparably connected, during our probationary
state.

THAT, God is the author of Human Greatness, it is manifest, because men as
well as worms of the earth, and even the angels of light are creatures, and
consequently dependent on the creator. In every possible attitude, mode and
state, creatures are absolutely dependent. Longer than the duration of his
dependence, no being can remain a creature. It is impossible for the most
exalted creatures to survive their dependence: Dependence, absolute dependence
on God in all respects, is inseparable from the existence of man. For whether
wise or simple they are the workmanship of God. Hence the voice of inspiration:
"Both riches and honor come of thee; and in thine hand is power and might; and
in thine hand it is to make great, and to give strength unto all. For promotion
comes neither from the east nor from the west nor from the south; But God is
Judge, he puts down one and sets up another. The Lord changes the times
and seasons; he removes kings and sets up kings; he gives wisdom to the
wise and understanding to those that know understanding. The heart of the king
is in the hand of the Lord and he turns it whithersoever he pleases as the
rivers of water are turned." Reason, philosophy and inspiration unitedly
conspire to impress the doctrine, that God is the author of Human Greatness.
For all men, from the womb to the grave, are wholly dependent on God through
all the vicissitudes of life. "The lot is cast into the lap, but the whole
disposing thereof is of the Lord." Independently of the divine agency we
"Cannot make one hair white nor black. For in God we live, and move, and have
our being, and in him are all our ways. O Lord, I know that the way of man is
not in himself: it is not in man that walks to direct his steps." This is a
general view of the subject; but justice, on this great occasion, requires a
more particular consideration.

First. GOD is the author of Human Greatness, by furnishing those who are
ordained to move in the most elevated spheres of action with an answerable
source of genius. The foundation of human greatness is laid by the Creator in
that depth of genius, which is not the common lot of the general mass of man.
The genius of Cyrus, Newton and others, whose fame will keep pace with time, is
imparted by the forming hand of God to those whose destination requires it:
and, so necessary is a rich source of genius to attain human greatness, that no
man destitute of it can excel. Common abilities, by diligent and painful
application, will make a reputable figure by the side of great men; but cannot
ascend the summit of human greatness. Glimmering stars never shine like the
sun. Men, whose genius is calculated to conduct them safely amid the luminaries
of heaven, with great facility reach that height of science, which others
cannot by the most unwearied industry, during the compass of human life. All
great men command great abilities; and the greatest manifestly command the best
abilities. Genius is the peculiar foundation on which celebrated characters
have raised their astonishing superstructures. This being manifest, it is also
equally manifest that God is the author of human greatness by the profuse
donation of genius. For who has made the difference between the simple man and
the great Philosopher? Who, says the simple cottager to the man of science,
made thy abilities? and who made mine? Has not the skilful and sovereign hand
of the creator made the wide difference between us? Let me, then be humble and
contented: and be thou thankful and understanding. For of those, to whom much
is given, much will be required. Great men in this world ought to be great in
the next. This leads us to add,

Secondly. THE agency of God is directly concerned in human greatness by amply
furnishing the favored sons of genius with an answerable education. Unless
seasonably cultivated the best natural abilities will not constitute human
greatness. Destitute of education, a man possessed of the genius of an angel
will never excel. The most costly teints of the east, except displayed by a
finished pencil, will not approach the perfection of nature: the finest piece
of marble, except formed and polished by the unerring hand of the sculptor,
will neither exhibit an elegant monument, nor bust: and thus that ponderous
mass of genius, which God liberally imparts to some of the human race, will
forever remain dormant and comparatively useless, except roused, invigorated
and directed by education. How many men of genius are there among the rude
Africans? How many among the wild savages of America? How many among the common
people of our acquaintance, who, while destitute of generous education, yet
discover some of the prime marks of original genius? The flint is full of fire;
but some exertion is necessary to display the sparks. Now, we ask, what raised
Newton with such celerity from the obscurity of an awkward, ignorant boy to
that immortal height amid the spheres? The answer is education. What with such
rapidity has distinguished many writers, statesmen and generals from their
equals both in point of age and genius? Education. The influence of education
makes the difference in a great measure, which is so obvious, between this
nation and that, this family and that, and even between this man and the other
who, when infants, were nourished together by the same breast. This in a word,
other things equal, is the ground of the vast difference between Legislators
and Barbarians, the great Philosopher and the untutored Indian.

THIS point granted, that education claims the merit of making the difference
between the rude and informed, the comparatively useless and useful class of
men, we ask who is the author of that generous education of which some of the
human race are the subjects? Shall the sons of science like the dark Illuminati
of the age bless the stars, Jupiter or Minerva or Dame Nature or any other
vanities of a demoralized heart as the beneficent author of education? The
child of modesty will not venture on such daring ground. For, not to name
Deity, the public mind, that reveres revelation, is entitled to some respect;
and pays no solemn tribute to the Fates. Are, then, the instructors at colleges
and schools the exclusive authors of education? Are parents and the community
the prime source of education? No, my candid auditors, God is the author: and
our enlightened country, the instructors of colleges and schools and a thousand
other advantages which we and our children possess are but the instruments and
means which God improves to expand the minds of men and prepare them for
usefulness. God makes the children of men both wise and great. He furnishes
families, schools and colleges with the means of instruction, and by countless
measures which entirely escape our notice brings forward the children, the
youth and the men whom he has ordained for lamps and pillars of the church and
state. His attention to the education of those intended for human greatness is
marked with the infinitude of his love. The playful child at school little
thinks of the high decree of heaven respecting his future sphere of action.
Cyrus was chosen, named and girded by the Lord to dry up the river Euphrates,
to open the two leaved gates, to break in pieces the gates of brass, to cut in
sunder the bars of iron and to destroy the pride of Babylon. He was therefore
educated in the school of arms both in Persia under the direction of Cambyses
and in Media under the direction of Astyages. Daniel was ordained to bless the
afflicted, captivated church in a strange land and was accordingly favored
with a princely education in the royal college. Paul was brought up at the feet
of Gamaliel that he might be qualified to stand before the potentates of the
earth and publish the resurrection and the glad tidings of salvation. Luther,
Calvin and several others were registered in heaven to introduce the
reformation, and were therefore furnished with answerable information, zeal and
fortitude. Their minds, nerves and hearts were formed to face the opposition
and intrigue of Charles the fifth and Francis the first, and to confound the
bishops, legates, cardinals and father of Rome. To shake the foundation of the
papal throne, and give his people rest, was the decree of the Almighty, and by
his gracious influence suitable agents were raised up to execute his purpose.
It is the Lord who makes great and gives strength unto all. He forms the
minds of men for the interesting parts they have to act upon the great theater
of life, and blessed be his glorious name. For his wisdom, power and goodness
are infinite. To illustrate the divine influence in human greatness, let me
observe

Thirdly. That God not only furnishes men with genius and education, but with
ample opportunity to exert and improve their abilities. Joseph, when a blooming
youth, was advertised of his future greatness by several dreams. But not
comprehending his visions, he like a child, in the simplicity of his heart
disclosed them to the family. This, as his suspicious brethren construed his
dreams in connection with the splendid coat and the partial fondness of old
Jacob, was the occasion of their hating him with all the heart. They,
therefore, after a fixed intention to terminate his days, the execution of
which was seasonably prevented, in the most unbrotherly and inhuman manner,
sold him to a company of merciless strangers, who greedily made merchandise of
him in Egypt. Thus the rigid hand of adversity followed the unhappy youth,
without intermission, till he was cast into prison. The history is too
affecting for persons of humanity to pursue, except they anticipate the event.
But, why must the lovely youth be stolen from the dear embraces of his aged
father by unnatural brethren, and plunged into the lasting furnace of
affliction? The answer is obvious; that he might supply a starving world with
bread, and justify the ways of God to man. While we, therefore, grieve for the
affliction of Joseph, we cannot but rejoice in the view of his superior
greatness and excellency. To ease the insupportable burden of his trembling and
afflicted brothers, he therefore wisely without exculpating the guilty, says
"For God did send me before you to preserve life." By the peculiar afflictions
and trials, which he long experienced, the Lord made him great. Like Christ,
his great antitype, he was made perfect through suffering.

To emancipate the oppressed Hebrews from the rigor of Pharaoh, Moses the
servant of God was born with a great mind, and educated in a princely style at
the court of Egypt. The ever watchful eye of heaven was upon him from the
moment he escaped the bloody hand of the executioner, by being concealed among
the flags till his education was completed: For he was the goodly child whose
face displayed the peculiar features of future greatness. As soon, therefore,
as the period arrived for him to discover his abilities by the most noble
exertions, God led him into the school of affliction. In circumstances of
adversity Moses began to exhibit his talents and unfold the great design of
heaven respecting his future dignity. When he terminated the strife between the
Hebrew and the Egyptian; when he returned from the burning, emblematic bush to
authenticate his divine legation before Egypt's proud and inflexible king; when
amid the plagues and horrors of the land he chose the affliction of God's
people rather than all the honors and emoluments of the world; when he led the
reluctant, complaining nation of Israel to the frightful margin of the dividing
sea; when we behold the man executing his part of the great deliverance, we are
dazzled with the splendor of his greatness: For he shines brightest in the
furnace of affliction. He became great by the difficulties he removed, by the
obstacles he surmounted and by the trials he endured. He was destined by God to
dispel the night, and rise and shine like the opening day. In honor,
therefore, to the memory of the righteous, which is precious, when he had
finished his course, the Lord said to Joshua, his prime minister: "Moses my
servant is dead." The Eulogy is short but divinely sentimental. More would be
superfluous and less deficient. Blessed are those who deserve the approbation
of God. Joshua, that spotless character also became the great and excellent
statesman and general in consequence of being confined by Jehovah to the
practical school of war. His peculiar circumstances in the course of events
made him the peerless general: For upon him devolved the great work of
dispossessing the heathens, and planting Jacob in the promised land.

THE same course of providence put the sword of the Lord into the hand of
Gideon, and invested him with human greatness. While threshing wheat at Ophrah
to hide it from the ravaging enemy, he was called by the angel of God to be the
deliverer of his nation. He obeyed the command, he quitted his work, he
marched, he accomplished the divine purpose, and is enrolled among the great
men whose peculiar embarrassments and afflictions gave them opportunity to
express their valor and dignity.

DAVID, in this connection, must not be passed by in silence. For the extensive
field of action into which he was called from the simple employment of a
shepherd obviously crowned him with human greatness. He was born for the day in
which he lived, and his abilities were adequate to the arduous task reserved
for him by providence; but as gold is proved and purified by fire; so David's
superior greatness was displayed in consequence of the peculiar dangers and
evils which he experienced. Though no merit can be imputed to his enemies, we
cannot but remark that they, under the direction of providence, were the
occasion of his superlative honor both in the field and on the throne.

WE have previously taken notice of the agency of God relative to the education
of Daniel* whom he formed for the subject of human greatness. But we have equal
liberty to observe, in this connection, that the great dangers and calamities,
to which Daniel and his captivated friends were exposed, made them great and
distinguished characters. From Babel's den of lions and burning furnace the
page of inspiration furnishes the greatest and best of human characters. For
these displays of excellency we are not indebted to their enemies, but to the
God of heaven.

WE will mention but one instance more. It was the peculiar scene of
difficulty, affliction, danger and distress to which the Apostles and primitive
christians were subjected, which gave them opportunity to distinguish
themselves so gloriously in favor of the cause of Christ. God gave them
abilities and information as their mission required, and in the course of
events gave them full opportunity to display their excellency. By the divine
agency, in this manner, all great men have been formed; and aside from this
course of operation there have been but few great men on earth.

Fourthly. GOD is the author of human greatness, by directing men to embrace
and diligently pursue those employments which correspond with their abilities.
"Nature, says a celebrated author, has thought fit to make a distribution of
her talents among men. She has pitched upon some particular persons, to give
them aptitude to perform rightly some things which she has not rendered
possible to others. Nature indeed has made an unequal distribution of her
blessings among her children; yet she has disinheritted none; and a man
divested of all kinds of abilities is as great a phenomenon as an universal
genius." These observations merit attention; but, as no man can be the subject
of common information who will not listen to the voice of instruction; so, the
greatest genius will not excel, in his proper sphere of action, unless he
diligently applies. Nothing short of well directed attention to his own
particular employment will make the child of genius a man of eminence. He who
attempts every thing will accomplish nothing. It is frequently said that some
men are born poets, others, musicians and others, generals. The remark is not
groundless. But the import is neither more nor less than this, that they are
the subjects of peculiar aptitude of genius for their respective spheres of
employment. For we all know that no man will excel in poetry, music or the
field of war, who is destitute of diligent application. The all attentive
providence of God permits none to excel but the diligent. The diligent hand
makes rich; but drowsiness will clothe a man with rags. In but few instances
is the hand of divine agency more conspicuous, than in directing some men whose
motives will not bear examination to excel in those arts and sciences which are
so beneficial to the world. How many thousands of bold soldiers are there in
the bloody field of battle who have no relish for the discipline of Christ? The
serious and consoling consideration is this, that whether men of genius or
simplicity choose or refuse to be influenced by good motives, God will improve
them to magnify his great name. "For he has made all things for himself, yea
even the wicked for the day of evil. The wrath of man shall praise the Lord,
and the remainder thereof he will restrain."

BUT, the field opened by the subject is too extensive to be farther explored
in this discourse. Let us, however, remark in connection with the preceding
observations, that the circumstances and events which concur in the course of
providence to constitute a great character, are innumerable. As many things are
necessarily effected by God to furnish a piece of bread; so many more are
effected to clothe a man with human greatness. Divine agency does not make a
great man in a day. God spends more time in making a great general or statesman
than was spent in making the worlds. All the events and circumstances connected
with the infant, the child, the youth and the man, are under the direction of
God in order to constitute human greatness. Hence David, the renowned king of
Israel, while contemplating the character of God, who formed him, and qualified
him for great actions and placed him upon the throne, in this most devout and
humble manner celebrates the divine praise: "Both riches and honor come of
thee; and thou reignest over all; and in thine hand is power and might; and in
thine hand it is to make great and to give strength unto all. But who am I and
what is my father's house."

LET us now improve the subject by several inferences and reflections
answerable to the solemnity of the occasion.

First. WE infer the sovereignty of God in the unequal distribution of natural
abilities to the children of men. For the inequality among men, in point of
genius, is as obvious as any thing in nature. To some God gives great natural
abilities, to others small ones, and to many others genius of the moderate
size; and who shall complain of the unequal distribution? Has the prince of
angels reason to complain, that his mind is not equal to the mind of the
creator? Shall Newton complain, that he was not made an angel? Shall the least
mind of the human race complain of not being the greatest? For if all men were
generals, the field would be destitute of soldiers; and if all men were angels,
the world would be destitute of inhabitants. The infinitude of the divine
wisdom and goodness must silence every complaint of the nature. For God knows
best what agents to employ, and in what manner to accomplish his glorious
purpose by the creation.

Secondly. WE infer the sovereignty of God in the unequal distribution of the
advantages of education. A large proportion of mankind are now in a savage
state. Many others, in consequence of their situation, are almost destitute of
the common means of information. Comparatively, the bible and the rudiments of
knowledge are in but few hands at the present day. But while we lament the
ignorant state of the generality of men, we see some of the race favored with
the peculiar advantages of erudition. Why this striking difference between man
and man, one nation and another? For all men are equally dependent. Has God
made the great Philosopher and the ignorant savage of the mountains? Has he
furnished the one with the wings of a seraph to soar amid the stars and left
the other to roam the forest like the leopard? Why this great inequality amid
the offspring of man? For God is as able to make one man the subject of human
greatness as another. But the objection is easily invalidated, in the view of
every impartial and informed mind. For God is light and love; and if variety
and contrast were not necessarily connected with the great interest of
eternity, neither light, nor darkness, nor land, nor water, nor men, nor
angels, nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature would exist. But, who
will presumptuously assert that creation is destitute of value and will in the
final issue of events tarnish the honor of the creator? For God has made
angels and men and all other objects, and governs them according to the counsel
of his own will to answer the best end. Be silent then, O man, and remember,
that the difference between the genius and information of one man and another,
is the fruit of infinite wisdom and goodness. Shall not God do what he will
with his own? Is thine eye evil because God is good? Is not the universe the
property of God? and who shall teach the proprietor of all things what
improvement to make of his possessions? Let us adore the Divine Being and enjoy
the perfection of his administrations. For, while God makes the difference
between the mind and information of one man and another, his requirements
invariably correspond with the advantages which he confers.

Thirdly. WE infer the peculiar darkness of the present dispensation of
providence. For Washington, the corner stone of the American fabric, is
removed. The Lord gave him to the nation and the Lord has taken him away. Had
he survived his abilities and usefulness and become a burden to himself and
friends, the public mind would be very differently affected by his departure.
But, he did not out live himself. For though he almost reached the common
limits of life, yet till death arrived he retained that majesty of mind and
vigor of body which he enjoyed in the active period of man. Like the declining
sun whose undiminished orb cheers the world at the close of day, so the light
of America retained his verticle greatness and splendor, even at the horison
of human life. We have therefore, lost the great statesman, the deep
counselor, the unshaken patriot, the matchless general and the man of science
whose same has filled the world. While other great captains have blazed like
the lightening to destroy, he like the sun shone to protect and preserve.
Beloved by his country and revered by her enemies, he led our arms to victory
and final conquest without wading through rivers of blood: And never, except at
the doleful period of the war, when he commanded the discouraged, destitute and
bleeding army, whose influence cheered their sinking hearts, was Washington's
presence more needed than at this dark period. The President and Congress mourn
the termination of his counsel and direction and the army laments the loss of
his military arrangements. The States at large present distinguished tokens of
the deepest sorrow in consequence of his death, and we ardently hope that the
increasing influence of our enemies, at home and abroad may not teach us in the
heat of war to realize our present professions. For the trump of war would, if
possible, rouse Washington from his tomb, once more to direct our arms and save
America. Though we have confidence in our generals, yet if called to arms we
should in case of discouragement and distress, greatly need his presence and
military address. We still remember, that during the most dangerous period of
the late war his personal influence effected more than could be effected by
Congress or the power of the states. But, alas, he has left the field of
action! He has dropped his armor. His victorious sword is safely suspended as
a peculiar memorial of the conqueror. But let us not injure his ashes by
extravagant tears. Rather let us submissively remember, that the God of armies
has dismissed our General from the field; and let us wisely improve the
providence. Let us sympathize and condole like christians with the beloved and
bereaved Lady of our late General. Her affliction is great because her loss is
great. She weeps freely, but no earthly friend can console her broken heart.
Let us then beg God to visit her lonely mansion, which is full of sorrow, with
his gracious presence; and send a condoling angel to wipe away her willing
tears as they flow from the fountain of grief. Let us mourn with the President;
for he has lost the man who diligently traveled by his side through the wide
and hazardous field of public life. Let us condole with the American soldiers,
who have lost the General whose presence and martial dispositions were the
confidence of battle and the preludes of victory and triumph. Let us mourn with
our country that her great luminary shone no longer. For we need his beams to
dispel the dismal night in which we are involved. While the enemies of America
will clap their hands and stamp with their feet and rejoice with all their
heart to hear that Washington has closed his eyes, let us be humble that we
need the affliction. For he was worth ten thousand other men. In his breast,
face and deportment there was the influence of an army. Our domestic and
distant enemies have much less to fear at present from our arms, than before he
resigned the command to the messenger of heaven. For he was able to inspire his
country with fortitude, when ready to despair. O how did his seasonable
addresses, in the course of the war animate the hearts of the people and add
vigor and energy to the authority of the states! In the darkest times his
wisdom guided Congress and his influence supported the union. Not to derogate
from the dignity of others, Washington was the grand spring of the Federal
Machine. We lately experienced his influence when discouragement seized our
minds in consequence of the daring insolence of France. The public mind, when
it was judged necessary to raise an army, was highly agitated, and in a
trembling manner began to anticipate the horrors of a French war. The prospect
was gloomy; for the Americans in the full enjoyment of liberty were averse from
war. But upon Washington's accepting the command of the army, the gloom was
dispelled. Every bosom beat with joy and the public face appeared cheerful,
when the Hero expressed his readiness to quit the evening pleasures of life for
the hardships and dangers of the field. The event at once created both officers
and soldiers and organized a respectable army; for the proved veterans, whose
strength was not exhausted by following him during the late successful war,
were emulously engaged to enjoy his command. The account of Washington's being
at the head of the army no sooner reached us, than even the little boys were
fired with the martial spirit and paraded the streets as though they thirsted
for the honor of battle. His same, in a word, has made an army of little
soldiers, who are determined never to survive the liberty of their country. For
this token of good we are indebted to the peculiar influence of that military
genius who still lives in the rising, expanding mind of America. But alas the
Hero is gone! The most able and successful general in the world lies in the
dust! How are the weapons of war perished! Let us mourn; let us be skilful in
lamentation. For he was conducted into the field and dismissed from it, by the
Lord of Hosts, who directs the armies of heaven and all the inhabitants of the
earth.

Fourthly. If God is the author of human greatness, let us be thankful for
Washington the distinguished instrument of his goodness to America. Being
ordained for the most renouned character, God furnished him with a great mind
and a correspondent education. Aside from the testimony of many learned
characters with whom he was long and intimately connected both in private and
public life, his writings and actions exhibit ample evidence that he was a man
of great genius and erudition. These necessary foundations of future greatness
being laid, God gave him early opportunity to exert his abilities and display
his worth. In 1755, he was Colonel of a regiment under General Braddock who
commanded an army near the Allegany mountains, for the purpose of repelling the
combined force of French and Indians. Braddock was a European officer, an
enthusiast for discipline; but by no means qualified, as he scorned the
advantage of fighting behind rocks and trees, to meet an army of skulking
Indians. Young Washington, who was well acquainted with ambush fighting, it is
said, advised him better than to expose his army in battle, in open sight of
the skulking, invisible foe of the wilderness. But Braddock, who was not afraid
to fight Indians at midnight with a lanthorn in his hand, spurred his horse and
led on his troops. Suddenly, but not unexpectedly to Col. Washington, the
Indians fired upon the vanguard of the army which immediately fell back in
confusion on the main body and the panic became general. Bold Braddock with the
greatest obstinacy remained on the spot calling to order while his officers
were falling thick around, until he had several horses shot under him. At
length he received a ball through his lungs and dropped, and total confusion
ensued. With such bold generals Indians choose to fight. Alas for the day. But
then, then was the time for the martial foul of Washington to display itself.
Then in the midst of the dying groans of brave men and the horrid shout of
savage conquest God began to raise him above other officers. His direct course
to future greatness in the field was pointed out. For the young colonel took
the command and guided the wounded and vanquished troops safely through the
dangers of the wilderness. Till that distressing scene neither he nor his
country knew the vast resource of his military genius.

IN consequence of making this retreat, and other exploits, he was necessarily,
at the commencement of the revolution, appointed by Congress commander of the
American army. In the summer, 1775, he took the command of the undisciplined
troops at Cambridge, but too late to direct and improve the military abilities
of Warren and other brave men whose memory will survive the marble pillars and
monuments on which their names are inscribed.

THOUGH a minute detail of Washington's achievements from the commencement to
the termination of the war is not expected from the pulpit, yet the occasion
requires a summary: for gratitude will retain his doings and sufferings in
favor of his country. The most pressing adversity necessarily attended his
first efforts, in consequence of confronting disciplined Britains with
undisciplined Americans, whose term of service was too short to season their
bodies and form their minds for the field. The General had more to fear from
the contracted inlistments and supplies of his own army than from the whole
force of the enemy. He requested of his country nothing but patience and a
permanent army properly supplied. " Furnish us with men and provisions, and by
the blessing of Providence, we shall secure our liberty," was the import of his
melting addresses to the public. But what tongue or pen can fully describe the
embarrassments and obstacles with which he struggled, in consequence of not
being properly supported? His distressing flight through the Jerseys in '76, at
the head of a handful of discouraged men, with elated Britains at his heels, is
still fresh in the memory of Americans: for, instead of divesting him of
generalship, it only roused his great mind and prepared him for the shout of
cardinal victory which he immediately gained both at Trenton and Princeton. If
we recall his military condition in the middle states, where he made the most
interesting exertions and was subjected to the greatest afflictions to defend
his country, while the balance of victory remained long in a wavering, doubtful
state, we are astonished at the man: for his wisdom, fortitude and perseverance
all shine superlatively bright. Neither of his military talents can be extolled
beyond the rest: for his peculiar assemblage of abilities approaches the
perfection of the soldier. In a word, while we follow him both in prosperity
and adversity, through the states, during the war, and remember his extensive
arrangements from north to south, while the weight of empire rested on his
shoulders, we are filled with admiration before the standard of human
greatness. For, though he had sacrificed his ease and interest, and diligently
spent the most valuable period of his days in the midst of the extreme labor,
hardship, sufferings and dangers of the field to defend his country, yet when
his work was done, like a patriot, he declined any pecuniary consideration. The
salvation of America was his reward; and instead of styling himself Emperor of
America before he disbanded his successful, disciplined army, he in a flood of
tears, thanked his brave officers and soldiers for their faithful service in
the cause of liberty, dropped his sword, congratulated his country, styled
himself GEORGE WASHINGTON, and returned to Mount Vernon. On his own plantation,
at a distance from the clash of arms and the concerns of public life, we behold
the Virginia Farmer. But the author of great men does not permit long
retirement, because they are raised up to direct great concerns. Washington
was, therefore, called by the suffrages of the states to the Presidency of the
Union. To gratify a fond nation that hailed him as the Savior of his country,
he accepted the office and presided as chief magistrate, at a dark period, in
the most dignified manner, till he was tired of the weight of the public, and
once more retired. But once more he was recalled from his delightful retirement
into the field of war; and finally, he was summoned from the field of war to
resign his armor, not to the nation, but to the God of armies, and to sleep in
the dust. The author of his matchless greatness has long improved him as the
grand instrument of his mercy to this nation and to the world, and wisely
terminated his career.

WHILE, then, we honor the memory of the creature, let us, with all the heart
HONOR THE CREATOR. For God is the author of human greatness. Let us also look
to the Lord for other Washingtons to fill the cabinet and command the field. If
we trust in the Lord he will be our rock and salvation.

FINIS.

