MR. STRONG's DISCOURSE, ON THE DEATH OF GENERAL WASHINGTON.

A DISCOURSE, DELIVERED ON FRIDAY, DECEMBER 27, 1799, THE DAY SET APART BY THE
CITIZENS OF HARTFORD, TO LAMENT BEFORE GOD, THE DEATH OF Genesis George
Washington; WHO DIED DEC. 14, 1799.

BY NATHAN STRONG, PASTOR OF THE NORTH PRESBYTERIAN CHURCH IN HARTFORD.

HARTFORD: PRINTED BY HUDSON AND GOODWIN, 1800.

FUNERAL SERMON.
MY BRETHREN,
SO general an appearance of affliction was never depicted here before. To
stand in this immense concourse of fellow citizens, where every face is marked
with sorrow, almost unmans the speaker. Verily there is a great mourning here
today, like the mourning of Israel when MOSES died, and to improve the
occasion let us turn to

EXODUS xi. 3. -- Moreover the man MOSES was very great in the land of Egypt,
in the sight of Pharoah's servants, and in the sight of the people. IT must be
a solemn season, when a great people lament before the LORD, the death of
those, whom his infinite goodness has made the instruments of their greatest
benefits. On such occasions the mind must be impressed with me sovereignty of
GOD, and frailty of man in his best earthly estate; and a tender and respectful
remembrance of deceased virtues will open all hearts to a mutual condolence.
All blessings are from GOD, who upholds the civil state, girds the civil and
military rulers of men, and keeps his church in peace and quietness, through the
influence of his servants who fear his name.

The LORD has set his king upon his holy hill of Zion, who is the CREATOR,
REDEEMER, and JUDGE of men. He is GOD forever on the throne in heaven, and through
the earth, and to fulfill his counsels he works through instruments prepared by
himself, and made worthy of acting in his name, and bearing the marks of a
divine commission. There have been but few men in the world eminently great,
and those have, in general, been on the side of virtue. There have been many
tyrants and destroyers, for it requires only small talents to work ruin; but to
build up, to bless, to humanize society, to defend the oppressed, to vindicate
human liberty, and at the same time restrain licentiousness, is an arduous
task; where none but good men will be inclined to expose themselves, and which
none but great men are able to accomplish.

That we may on this occasion, honor the supreme Sovereign of the world, and
duly estimate the public loss sustained, let us,

1. Contemplate the providence of GOD in raising up great and eminent men, and
qualifying them for the good which they are appointed to do to mankind.

In the formation of such persons, there must be a union of rare and great
natural talents, with an eminent love of moral virtue. whenever GOD has a
great work to do in the world, he forms instruments fitted for the trust to be
reposed in them, who are possessed of talents, guided by his providential care,
and inspired with a spirit of understanding from himself, whereby they are
enabled, whatever difficulties and opposition may occur, to do the things
determined for them.

We know that those, who despise a supreme providence, are prone to refer every
remarkable thing, either to a certain blind necessity of nature which they
cannot describe, or to the effects of accidental but uncommon genius; indeed
like other foolish men who think themselves to be wise, they have recourse to
any means which will hide the being, the holy perfections, and the providence
of GOD. Herein infidels show themselves to be at an equal remove from piety,
wisdom and truth; and that they are as far from discerning in what the true
greatness of a creature consists, as they are from being good and pious.

The rise of eminent and good men is one of the highest displays of a supreme
Providence, for they always appear at periods, when there is a work prepared
for them to do, for the honor of GOD and the good of the world, and at no other
times; so that we may consider their formation and introduction to the scenes
of action, their good lives and their great actions, evidential of a SUPREME
BEING, of the stability of his counsels and the irresistible energy of his
government.

Divine wisdom, in the provision of means and instruments, always has regard
to the magnitude of the work that is to be done by them in the world, under the
direction of his providence. To accomplish a great work in the earth he makes
his own instruments great, either through uncommon natural endowments, assisted by
a series of propitious providence; or by a supernatural aid evidencing their
commission and the presence of GOD with them in discharging some important
trust, or in both of those ways at the same time. MOSES, the Father, Lawgiver,
and Commander of Israel was great, in the fight of Israel his people, and in
the fight of Pharaoh and his servants their enemies, both by uncommon natural
endowments and by supernatural aid. The FATHER of his Country, for whose
decease we mourn before the LORD this day, was made great in the fight of his
people, and of all their enemies, by his eminent natural endowments, which GOD
was pleased to aid by a series of propitious providence, for the salvation and
good government of his country.

When we see remarkable instruments of providence coming into action, it
indicates an interesting period in that scheme of divine counsel, which will be
forever unfolding; and when such instruments of blessing to mankind are
withdrawn by the power which raised them up, it becomes cause for public
mourning and fear; cause for mourning, for every good man will regret the
departure of virtue from the earth; cause of fear, for we are told that the
righteous are taken from the evil to come, and that while they live, GOD will
spare an ungrateful people from judgments, for their sakes.

When a MOSES, a CYRUS, and a WASHINGTON were brought on the stage of action,
it was to effect changes in the state of mankind, favorable to religion and
civil rights, which could not have been done, in the manner that divine counsel
chose to execute, under the auspices of common characters, nor even of great
men, as greatness is usually estimated in this imperfect world. These actors in
the scenes of the world, were specially raised up, and guided by an infinite
GOD, to atchieve things which will ever make them celebrated in the history of
mankind and of the church.

Much honor is due to them as instruments of Almighty goodness. Let their
virtues -- their love and friendship to human nature -- their justice -- their
firmness in holding the sword of the LORD -- and their political eminence as
rulers and lawgivers; let these be admired and remain perpetual examples to
such as wish to be on GOD's side; but let the glory of fashioning them from the
womb, of girding them to lead his armies, of inspiring them to give laws to
nations or creating new commonwealths, and of enabling them to die great as
they had lived; let the glory of these things be given to GOD.

It can be no glory to a man, either living or departed, to say that the great
things he has done for his country, either by his sword or scepter, were done
without a divine aid; for all considerate persons would know it to be a false
eulogy. Even infidels, in the midst of their vain pretensions, know there is a
divine providence; and in the profane words they utter on this subject, they
speak the wishes of their hearts* and not the dictates of their consciences and
of their better understandings. Such men are like actors in a farce, saying
that which they know to be untrue, and it is a false complaisance to suppose
they may be honest; for it is very evident they dare not trust their own
honesty, when danger and death approach them.

The highest honor which we can give to mortals, is to say, that the infinite
Author of life, power and wisdom, made them greater and more virtuous than
other men, inspired them with talents above their brethren, and filled them
with a rare understanding, to do things for the glory of GOD and the good of
mankind, which were not permitted to others. -- Many have made a conspicuous
figure for a short season and within national limits, who were neither great
nor good; but death is written on the glory of such, by the pen of future
historians, nor is it their privilege to live in the affections of mankind, or
to be held up as examples for forming the morals of the world. Their praise
rested in adventitious circumstances found in the corruption of courts, and an
era of false opinions, and was never spoken by plain and good men, who were not
poisoned by sensuality and the expectations of unprincipled ambition; but the
merits of great and good men, are seen by persons of every description. The
peasant descries them as soon as the man of letters. -- They are more admired
by the virtuous yeomanry of a country, than by the gay circle who bow and
flatter to make themselves noticed.

Such instruments of GOD's goodness to men, have a divine impression on their
character, seen by all virtuous people -- all look to them as being, under GOD,
fathers, defenders in war, and rulers in peace. Such was MOSES to the Hebrews,
and such was WASHINGTON to us. If any expect me this day to draw his character
with precision, let me beg such to recollect that they are expecting an
impossibility, and that it is as much beyond me to do this as it is to be such
a man as he was. All will allow, that he was formed by the providence of GOD,
to walk in a path where other men cannot guide their steps, and to be an
eminent agent in the formation of a new empire, which is to be conspicuous in
the future history of mankind; but what it is to be such an instrument of the
infinite Ruler, what divine energies meet in originally forming and
providentially guiding, and how those energies were consciously felt and
exerted by the recipient, certainly is not for me to tell and for but few of
mankind to conceive.

MOSES was formed to rescue the ancient and eastern Israel from bondage, and
after they were rescued to form their civil, military and religious state, and
be an instrument of delivering the moral law to mankind in a new manner; and he
was, in every respect, perfected for the office to which heaven designed him.

WASHINGTON was formed to rescue from bondage the modern and western Israel of
the LORD, and after they were saved from foreign enemies by his sword, to save
them, a second time, from destruction by themselves; from the miseries of
anarchy; and to bring them into a state of government, whereby they might be
preserved from devouring one another, and being devoured by the whole earth.
These were great objects in the divine government, and worthy of that display
of his sufficiency, which was made in the provision of instruments. The glory
of furnishing protectors must belong to GOD, and if the people who have been
saved are pious, they will praise him for the means of executing his most
gracious counsel. The formation of great characters, for the good of mankind,
is really an exhibition of GOD's providential efficiency, and is observed by
the pious as a display of himself, through the instrumentality of means made for
his own glory. Their progress and their works through life are the unfolding of
his gracious counsels, and their exit from time is to be marked as a temporary
withdrawment of the remarkable energies of divine providence, in favor of those
who have been his care. For this reason, the whole congregation of Israel
mourned thirty days when MOSES died; and for the same reason the American
Israel mourn when WASHINGTON dies.

We are not to think, that the LORD can give counsel and preserve, only by
those who have been great instruments of salvation; nor are we to distrust a
future divine care; or to suppose that he will not raise up instruments
according to the day and exigencies in which they have to act; but still the
withdrawment of so great a benefactor, under existing circumstances, is to be
devoutly and penitentially noticed as a divine frown; especially when we
consider the evidence that he was remarkably formed to be the father and
deliverer of his country. None who have considered the American revolution with
its subsequent events and the state of our country, can deny this; nor can they
doubt the evidence of a most wonderful interposition of heaven, in the
formation and continuance of one so fitted to supply our great national wants.

2. There are two kinds of evidence by which great and good men are clearly
commissioned from on high, to act a conspicuous part, under GOD, in his
government of the world. The first is, supernatural works which evidence them
to be immediate organs of divine power and truth speaking to men. The second,
is uncommon natural talents and moral integrity, accompanied with fit
opportunities for their exertion. In the case of MOSES, both these evidences
were united to answer particular purposes in the divine government of the
world, at that period of time.

His natural abilities and moral seize were great, and continued to the
end of his life; for when he died an old man, his eye was not dim, nor his
natural force abated. He was skilled in the learning of the world, and
especially in the wisdom of that people, whom he was designed by the power of
GOD to overcome. By a special providence, he was brought into a state of power
and riches, and reputedly the son of Pharaoh's daughter, that having had an
experimental taste of worldly wealth and pleasure, and found its vanity
compared with the delights of moral and pious integrity, he might not be bribed
from his duty by any worldly overture, when he came to a state of confidential
trust.

Whoever reads his history as a lawgiver and military leader, considering the
condition of the world in those ages when he acted, must be convinced that he
was a great and good man, even apart from those supernatural aids, which he
received to evidence his appointment and authority from heaven, and that he had
that uncommon genius and self-command which all can see and admire, but only a
rare few can imitate in the science and practice of legislation and government.

Also, he was a good man, fearing the providence and adoring the holiness of
the GOD of Israel. If he had not been possessed of religious rectitude; neither
great natural talents, nor acquired seize, nor supernatural aid could
have given him so venerable an appearance in the eyes of his people, and
sanctified their judgment in the opinion of all posterity. At the head of the
LORD's Israel he was a meek man, and humble in the midst of greatness. He
esteemed himself one among many brethren and citizens, and relying on a divine
providence to lead him and the people to whom his life was consecrated, he was
never forsaken, but witnessed a gracious presence through his whole administration.

To the evidence that he was divinely commissioned, which arose from great
natural talents and uncommon piety, we may add the supernatural works he was
enabled to perform, and the revelations which were made to him. To learn the
reason, why these additional and great evidences of the divine presence were
given to MOSES, we must consider the extent of his commission. The flood had
once cleansed the world of idolatry, but at the time of this great prophet, the
nations in their new dispersion had forgotten the LORD, and the worship of
idols had become almost universal. The people of Israel, who were descendents
of Abraham, were designed to be depositaries of a written law of religion, and
the works of providence, which regarded them and their enemies, were intended
to show that their LORD JEHOVAH, was the GOD of the whole earth.

These intentions of heaven were foretold to their fathers, and to accomplish
the divine promise it was necessary a character like MOSES should be raised up,
who, being mighty in word and deed, should confound the idolizing nations, so
that the world might look upon him and see that his LORD was the true GOD.
Also, that no other ruler of men had been like unto him, in all the signs and
wonders which he was sent to do, and in all that mighty hand and all that
terror which he showed in the fight of Israel and their enemies. This was the
reason for a supernatural evidence of his divine commission being added to
those rare talents and piety, which he possessed in common with other great and
good men, who were made by GOD, in their respective times, to honor his name
and bless mankind.

3. At other times GOD has raised up his eminent servants and sent them abroad
into the world, without this supernatural evidence of their commission from
him; and indeed this has been his usual manner in providential government. But
in all such cases, there has been to the considerate observer, sufficient
notices of GOD's special providence, in forming his instruments and guiding and
making them successful in his hand, to execute the counsels of his will. The
production of rare talents at a time when they are needed to execute the
benevolent purposes of Providence, and preparing the way for their exertion, is
a sufficient evidence that GOD is with the actor. In this part of my discourse
I shall pass over many instances of the truth of this doctrine -- many eventful
epochs in the history of the world and the church -- many great characters in
the cabinet, in the temple of the LORD and in the field, who were raised by the
almighty providence of GOD, at fit times to execute his pre-determined counsels
for the benefit of men; and I shall come down to our own times and the occasion
which has gathered us before the LORD, the death of General WASHINGTON. Among
modern characters there has been none to whom the words of our text would more
pertinently apply. He was very great, both in the sight of his own people, and
in the sight of all their enemies; nor at the time of his death, was his eye
dim, nor his natural force abated. As through his life, so at the time of his
death, circumstances seem to have been specially ordered by divine providence
to hide human weakness, and make him an extraordinary example to men, in
fortitude and in all the moral virtues. The common age of man had not in him,
impaired a great understanding, nor any of those energies which decide in the
cabinet or execute in the field.

THIS GREAT MAN WAS AN AMERICAN BY BIRTH, and the country raised by his sword
into independence, and which he afterward governed as supreme magistrate, gave
him the political and moral sentiments, which made him illustrious in scenes of
action. He early commenced the life of a soldier, and while a young officer,
Monongahela witnessed, and Britons owned the talents of the young American, in
saving from slaughter the remains of an army sufficiently humbled by savage
fury and policy. Even, at that time, the talents of the youth caused a
prediction that he would be the savior of his country, but little was it
conjectured how the prediction would be fulfilled. In a note to a sermon
preached by that eminent servant of CHRIST, President DAVIES, before Capt.
Overton's independent company of volunteers, raised in Hanover county,
Virginia, Aug. 17, 1755, entitled, " Religion and Patriotism the constituents
of a good soldier," as an example of this character, the author says, As a
remarkable instance of this, I may point out to the public that heroic youth,
Col. WASHINGTON, whom I cannot but hope providence has hitherto preserved in so
signal a manner, for some important service to his country. Whoever reads this
must be convinced that there were early presages of that great and good
character, which General WASHINGTON has since displayed, and that his
greatness did not arise from a series of accidental events. The man WASHINGTON
was great in his youth, and prepared by almighty Providence to protect the
American state and church.


It certainly cannot be expected of me, on this occasion, particularly to
recite the events which have made him beloved by his country, and owned as
their preserver, under the providence of GOD, who girded him for the field, and
filled him with the spirit of understanding in all national concerns. To make
such a recital requires all the volumes, which have been, and the more numerous
ones which will be written on this great subject. -- It must suffice for me to
say, that General WASHINGTON was the point of strength around whom the
political fathers and the military defenders of this country have rallied, and
where they reposed their earthly confidence, from the moment a revolution was
contemplated, as the only possible means of avoiding foreign oppression, down
to the present time. In a period of almost thirty years, we have seen many
changes, many dangers from within and without, from foreign artifice and
internal folly and caprice; and during the whole of this term, WASHINGTON has
been the name, which would raise a martial spirit and point its energies by the
waving of his sword; or sooth the multitude to peace, quietetness and
subordination, as his voice and pen advised. -- These influential energies of
the man, were not confined to the uninformed multitude only; for they had as
much impression on deliberating senates, as on armed squadrons; -- he was as
much the angel of peace as of war; -- as much respected, as deeply reverenced
in the political cabinet for a luminous coolness of disposition, whereby party
jealousy became enlightened and ashamed of itself, as he was for a coolness of
command, in the dreadful moment, when empires hung suspended on the fate of
battle. -- His opinions became the opinions of the public body, and every man
was pleased with himself when he found he thought like WASHINGTON.

Our revolutionary war began suddenly, when the country was wholly unorganized
in every department, that was necessary to maintain and enjoy an independent
state among the nations. There was passion enough, among all orders of men; but
passion can endure only for a moment, and there is no safety in its dictates.

It was General WASHINGTON who came coolly to the scene of action, under a
mighty impression of the greatness of the labor to which he had permitted
himself to be proclaimed, and for which, through the assistance of GOD, he was
found able both in word and in deed. He ordained system -- induced regularity
-- was found capable of reducing a half-armed multitude to military bravery and
obedience, and for a long time had apparently to create the means, from day to
day, by which he defended his country.

It since appears, that while doing this in camp, his pen was the organ of
wisdom and of a persevering firmness to the councils of the union and of the
several states; and that the great men, who shone like stars of the first
magnitude, in the several parts of the American hemisphere where GOD had placed
them, shone brighter for their communication with him. -- His name soon became
reverenced by our enemies, and wherever they heard of him, they joined the
apprehension of a senate and host. His name and the fear of him, and of a few
tried men and soldiers, who were the heads of military departments and in the
line of actual service, often shielded the country against mighty hosts, and
finally saved the commonwealth and made it independent.

The fame even of historians will be eternized, in relating how he with the
band of his brother officers, and a patient, persevering, gallant army under
them, vindicated the foundation of American empire, and then retired into the
class of peaceful citizens, to eat the hard-earned, and in many instances,
scanty bread of repose.

General WASHINGTON was formed and placed, in every respect, by the hand of
Providence to perform the duty determined for him by infinite wisdom. He was
skilled, by an early education, in human science. He expressed on all fit
occasions, a reverence of GOD, and his governing providence in all the events
of individual life and of empire, and resorted to the throne of grace and
called on those around him to do the same when danger threatened, or when
success claimed his praise. He had a luminous understanding -- a mind above the
ruffle of passion -- was as far from the gasconade of mock heroism as he was
from a servile fear of men and danger. Nothing was too small to call his
attention, if it regarded the public good; at the same time he was naturally
formed to look on great objects, and survey in one comprehensive view, an
empire in all its civil and military interests. -- He seemed intuitively to
look through men, and know the extent of their capacities to understand, and their
abilities for exertion, and from this it came that the heads of departments
through his advice, were filled in general with such extraordinary integrity and
talents for exertion; and this was one circumstance which essentially conduced
to American triumph. -- If the created honors, which are given by crowns and
royal nations could have bribed him, many a time he would have been stolen from
us; but he esteemed it the greatest honor, to be the defense of a free people.
American freedom, and independence were written on his heart, and he
importunately breathed out a desire for them in all his devotions to heaven.
Under the auspices of this great warrior, who was formed by the providence of
GOD to defend his country, the war was ended, and America ranked among the
nations. He who might have been a monarch, retired to his own Vernon, unclothed
of all authority, to enjoy the bliss of being a free private citizen. This was
a strange sight, and gave a new triumph to human virtue -- a triumph that has
never been exceeded in the history of the world, except it was by his second
recess, which was from the presidency of the United States.

After the revolutionary war was ended, experience soon taught that freedom
cannot subsist without government. Anarchy became more dangerous than Britain
with all her hosts had been before, and we were near despair. The impressive
feelings of danger, again led the people to ask the aid of General WASHINGTON,
and he greatly assisted in forming a constitution which we hope will be
perpetual. By the voice of the people, he became once and again the President
of the union, and continued thus until, in his opinion, the complete
organization of the civil state, permitted him to retire a second time into
private life, giving in all respects a new example to men and the world, that a
virtuous mind finds its highest delights, in the enjoyments of solitude and in
beholding others happy.

A third time danger menaced his country -- a third time his country called --
he heard his fellow-citizens and his children and took his sword, and bid them
trust in GOD, and keep his laws, and the ordinances of a good government and
they should be safe. When lo! the experiment became too great for humanity to
exhibit any longer, and he who rules the universe, and has great men and
nations in his hand has removed him by death.

Do not all our civil rulers say, Know ye not that a great man and a prince
has died in Israel to day. -- Do not all the pious look after him heavenward,
and say, My father, my father, the chariots of Israel, and the horsemen
thereof. -- Ye rulers of the civil state, ye defenders of the land, know ye,
that it will be no evidence against the firmness of your minds to weep this
day. Ye young defenders of your country; ye virgins the offspring of those who
fought the American battles, weep with your parents.

Concerning the final exit of our great and departed friend, private
information thus says, That he died with one days illness, that his great and
good mind, remained unhurt and unclouded through the closing scene, that he
expressed his sense of its near approach, and said it had no terrors for him.
Thus may all who have served under him, and all the people of the LORD die.

I have only a word more to say to you my brethren, by way of improvement.

1st. Let us praise and adore the providence of GOD, for raising up such an
instrument to save this country from oppression. It was the work of GOD's most
gracious providence, and mavelous in our eyes; let us now with reverence
adore the sovereignty, which has withdrawn the gift. Let us remember to adore
that Providence which our departed FATHER adored, and taught us to trust. Let
us keep far away from those principles of infidelity and atheism which he
abhored, and which in the present era of nations, is both the cause and the
means, whereby a holy GOD is punishing an ungrateful world.

2ndly. Let us seek that public spirit in our feelings and practice, which
guided him, so honorably through life and brought him to so peaceful an end. You
my hearers, are the most of you private men, but if you fear GOD; if you honor
his government, and keep his precepts; if you love the state and continue to
maintain a righteous government, you may die unclouded, and say death has no
terrors for you.

3dly. Under this bereaving event, there are but two grounds of consolation
remain for us; the LORD who has been our GOD, and the defender of our country
is still on the throne; and he has prepared an ADAMS to succeed our
WASHINGTON; for we already see the spirit of ELIJAH resting on ELISHA.

4thly. Let us ever remember the political opinions of our deceased father. He
was an American both in principle and feeling, as well as by birth. While he
loved all men, and respected the rights of all nations, his most ardent
affection was for the household of his country. And as his enlightened life
drew toward a close, he had a most deep sense, that the people whom he had
saved by his sword, could be preserved in future prosperity, only by a firm
adherence to the principles of their own government, and the religion of their
fathers.

May the LORD be with the American states to preserve them. AMEN.

SKETCHES OF THE LIFE OF GENERAL WASHINGTON.
GEORGE WASHINGTON was born on the 11th of February A. D. 1732 O. S. His person
was considerably above the middle size, but of a dignified and graceful form.
His countenance exhibited strong marks of that fortitude and wisdom which
always shone in his character; and at once spoke the hero and the man. At an
early period of life, he was thought worthy of the confidence of his native
state, and while only twenty-one years of age was, at his own request, sent on
a difficult and important mission. During the dispute which originated the war
which concluded in 1763, the French, pretending to claim the territory in the
vicinity of the river Ohio* committed many acts of hostility and violence upon
the British subjects by erecting forts in their dominions, and seizing their
persons and sending them prisoners to Canada. Complaints being made to the
governor of Virginia of these outrages, he determined to send some suitable
person to the French commandant near the Ohio, to demand of him the reason of
his conduct* and insist upon his evacuating the fort lately built in that
quarter. General WASHINGTON, then being a major, offered his service, which was
thankfully accepted. The distance to be traveled was more than 400 miles, and
one half of the rout lay through a wilderness, inhabited only by savages.
Taking provision on his back, he sat out, attended by a single companion. When
he arrived and delivered his message, the officer refused to comply with the
demand, and claimed the whole country as belonging to the king his master.

The Ohio company could not brook this disappointment of their hopes, and
prevailed on the British government to instruct the colonies to oppose with
arms these encroachments on their territory. In the year 1754 Virginia sent
Col. WASHINGTON with the command of 300 men toward the Ohio. An engagement
between them and a party of the French took place, in which the latter were
defeated. In consequence of this event, the commandant of the French marched
against Col. WASHINGTON with 900 men, partly Indians, and attacked him. He made
a brave defense, behind a small unfinished entrenchment, which he called fort
Necessity, and obliged the French officer to grant him honorable terms of
capitulation.

The hostile conduct of the French produced, both in England and America, the
resolution of driving them out of the whole territory claimed by the English.
General Braddock was accordingly ordered from Ireland to Virginia with two
regiments, and was there joined by as many Americans as made in the whole 2200
men. General Braddock was a brave man, but with a supercilious contempt of the
Americans, he greatly slighted the Virginia officers and men. Col. WASHINGTON
who then commanded the Virginia troops, begged his permission to march before
him and with the Americans, who were acquainted with that kind of service,
scour the woods; but was refused. The General pushed on incautiously with 1400
men, and fell into an ambuscade of French and Indians, by whom he was defeated
and mortally wounded on the 9th day of June 1755. The British were thrown into
confusion, but the Americans more accustomed to savage warfare, were not much
disconcerted. They continued unbroken under Col. WASHINGTON, and by covering
the retreat of the British, prevented their being entirely cut off. Ever since
this battle was fought, General WASHINGTON has had the credit of saving the
remains of that unfortunate corpse by his masterly address and good conduct.

After the peace of Paris, in 1763, Genesis WASHINGTON retired to his estate,
where with great industry and success he pursued the arts of peace. Since this
time there seems to be no historical monument of his public life until he was
returned a delegate from the state of Virginia to the memorable congress of
1774. This venerable band of patriots and statesmen might glory in reckoning
among their number the sage and hero of America.

On the 15th day of June 1775, he was unanimously chosen, by the continental
congress, to fill the important and dangerous station of commander in chief of
the forces raised, or to be raised for the defense of American Liberty. His
election presented the uncommon spectacle of a man raised to the highest honors
his country could bestow, without exciting either competition or envy. On the
day following, the President of Congress announced to General WASHINGTON his
appointment; to which he, standing in his place, replied --

Mr. President,
Though I am truly sensible of the high honor done me in this appointment, yet
I feel great distress from a consciousness, that my abilities and military
experience may not be equal to the extensive and important trust: however, as
the Congress desire it, I will enter upon the momentous duty, and exert every
power I possess in their service, and for support of the glorious cause. I beg
they will accept my most cordial thanks for this distinguished testimony of
their approbation.

But lest some unlucky event should happen unfavorable to my reputation, I beg
it may be remembered by every gentleman in the room, that I this day declare
with the utmost sincerity, I do not think myself equal to the command I am
honored with.

As to pay, sir, I beg leave to assure the Congress, that as no pecuniary
consideration could have tempted me to accept this arduous employment, at the
expense of my domestic ease and happiness, I do not wish to make any profit
from it. I will keep an exact account of my expenses. Those I doubt not they
will discharge, and that is all I desire.


To do justice to that part of the life of General WASHINGTON which is included
within the time of the American war, would require a detail of all the
principal events which took place in that hard struggle for liberty, and would
greatly exceed the limits of these sketches. The evacuation of Boston, the
masterly retreat from Long Island and New York, crossing the North river and
the retreat through New Jersey, the brilliant coup-de-main at Trenton, the more
splendid affair at Prince-town, the battle of Germantown, the battle of
Monmouth, the capture of Stoney-point, these are a few of the events which were
directed by his wisdom, or effected by his arm; and are but resting places in
his glorious career through this bloody conflict. During the progress of the
war the confidence of the Congress was, on many occasions, manifested to him,
by votes of thanks and applause, and by medals ordered to be presented to him
in commemoration of particular instances of heroism and generalship. So great
indeed was their trust in his abilities and virtue, that from time to time they
increased his powers as commander in chief until he was little less than
universal dictator. -- In no instance can he be accused of abusing those
powers; and the time arriving when they were no longer necessary for the public
good, he cheerfully resigned them.

The event which finished the American war and added the last wreath to the
brow of WASHINGTON, was the capture of Lord Cornwallis with 7000 British
troops, at Yorktown in the month of October 1781. This success was gained by
the immediate valor of the combined troops of America and France; but the
wisdom of the plan and energy of the execution must be attributed to him. On
this triumphant occasion his heart was filled with joy and gratitude to heaven
for his wonderful success. A short extract from his orders on this great day,
will evince that amidst all his prosperity, he was not unmindful of that GOD
whose directing hand had pointed out to him the path of glory. "Divine service
shall be performed tomorrow in all the brigades and divisions. The commander
in chief, recommends that all the troops that are not upon duty, do assist at
it with a serious deportment and that sensibility of heart, which the
recollection of the surprising and particular interposition of Divine
Providence in our favor claims."

Every one knows that toward the close of the war our troops were unpaid and
the credit of the United States at its lowest ebb. At this period an attempt
was made to inflame the minds of the officers and soldiers, by a seditious and
artful publication, inviting them while they had arms in their hands, to
redress their own grievances. Perhaps in no period of the war was the conduct
of the commander in chief, so politic, so magnanimous, so worthy of himself, as
at this interesting and alarming crisis. No sooner were these mutinous and
inflammatory papers scattered through the camp; than the General convened the
officers together, and in a speech well calculated to calm their minds, he
pledged himself to use all his faculties and influence in their favor, and
urged them to rely on the future justice of their country. He conjured them "as
they valued their honor, as they respected the rights of humanity and as they
regarded the military and national character of America, to express their
utmost detestation of the man, who was attempting to open the floodgates of
civil discord, and deluge their rising empire with blood." His attempt was
successful; and the officers and soldiers returned to their duty and consented
to wait for the tardy justice of their country.

At the return of peace, General WASHINGTON repaired to Annapolis, where
Congress was in session, for the purpose of resigning his command. The ^3d day
of December 1783, was fixed for the ceremony of his resignation. He attended
Congress on the day with many distinguished persons, where he addressed the
president in the following speech:

Mr. President,
The great events on which my resignation depended, having at length taken
place, I have now the honor of offering my sincere congratulations to Congress,
and of presenting myself before them to surrender into their hands, the trust
committed to me, and to claim the indulgence of retiring from the service of my
country.

Happy in the confirmation of our independence and sovereignty, and pleased
with the opportunity afforded the United States of becoming a respectable
nation, I resign with satisfaction the appointment* I accepted with diffidence;
a diffidence in my abilities to accomplish so arduous a task, which however was
superseded by a confidence in the rectitude of our cause, the support of the
supreme power of the Union, and the patronage of Heaven.

The successful termination of the war has verified the most sanguine
expectations, and my gratitude for the interposition of Providence, and the
assistance I have received from my countrymen, increases with every review of
the momentous contest.

While I repeat my obligations to the army in general, I should do injustice to
my own feelings not to acknowledge, in this place, the peculiar services, and
distinguished merits of the persons who have been attached to my person during
the war: it was impossible the choice of confidential officers to compose my
family should have been more fortunate; permit me, Sir, to recommend in
particular those who have continued in the service to the present moment, as
worthy of the favorable notice and patronage of Congress.

I consider it as an indispensable duty to close this last solemn act of my
official life, by commending the interests of our dearest country to the
protection of Almighty GOD, and those who have the superintendence of them, to
His holy keeping.

Having now finished the work assigned me, I retire from the great theater of
action; and bidding an affectionate farewell to this august body, under whose
orders I have ^ong acted, I here offer my commission, and take my leave of all
the employments of public life.

From this time General WASHINGTON resided at his retreat at Mount Vernon,
until the deranged state of our public affairs, and the total inefficiency of
our confederation, had convinced the leading characters of our nation that a
new form of government was necessary. At this time a convention was called,
which met in Philadelphia in the year 1787. To this convention General
WASHINGTON was sen^ as a delegate from the state of Virginia, and was chosen
their President during the term of th^i^ session.

In the year 1789, he was unanimously chosen President of the United States. No
sooner was he informed that he was again called to exchange his happy
retirement for the stormy scenes of public life, than he prepared to meet the
wishes of his country; and in a few days arrived at New York. Here he accepted
his appointment of President of the United States, and informed both houses of
Congress, that he should recline any compensation for his services -- in the
following manner; "When I was first honored with a call into the service of my
country, then on the eve of an arduous struggle for its liberties, the light in
which I contemplated my duty required that I should renounce every pecuniary
compensation. From this resolution I have in no instance departed. And being
still under the impressions which produced it, I must decline as inapplicable
to myself, any share in the personal emoluments which may be indispensably
included in a permanent provision for the executive department; and must
accordingly pray that pecuniary estimates for the station in which I am placed,
may, during my continuance in it, be limited to such actual expenditures, as
the public good may be thought to require."

In the year 1793 the time for which his first appointment was made being
expired, he was again elected; and having a second time officiated in the
character of President of the United States, he chose to retire from the public
scene and spend the remainder of his days in rural quiet and domestic
tranquillity. He published his intention in an address to the people of the
United States, which, while it breathes the pure spirit of benevolence and
patriotism, recommends to them in the most winning and impressive language the
cause of virtue and religion.

After his farewell for a second time, to all public honors, he retired to his
favorite seat at Mount Vernon, where he resided in the character of a private
citizen, until the prospect of a rupture with France turned the eyes of the
government toward him as their only refuge during the impending storm. His
cheerful acquiescence in accepting the office of Lieutenant General of the
American forces, at a time when his age and former services might have
justified a refusal, will long be remembered with sentiments of affection and
gratitude, by a generous people.


